                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERiES




                         THE LABOR MARKET EFFECTS OF
                        INTRODUCING NATIONAL HEALTH
                      INSURANCE: EVIDENCE FROM CANADA




                                    Jonathan Gniber
                                    Maria Hanratty




                                Working Paper No. 4589




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachuset Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                December, 1993




This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Health Care, Labor Swdies and Public
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                 NBER Working Paper #4589
                                                                           December 1993


                           THE LABOR MARKET EFFECFS OF
                          INTRODUCING NATIONAL HEALTH
                        INSURANCE: EVIDENCE FROM CANADA


                                        ABSTRACF

       While National Health Insurance (NH!) plans in the U.S. are often opposed on the basis
of their potential disemployment effects, there is no existing evidence on the effects of NW on
employment We provide such evidence by examining the employment consequences of NH!
in Canada, using the fact that NiH was introduced on a staggered basis across the Canadian
provinces. We examine monthly data on employment, wages, and hours across 8 industries and
10 provinces over the 1961-1975 period. We fmd that employment actually rose after the
introduction of NIH; wages increased as well, while average hours were unchanged.



Jonathan Gruber                                           Maria Hanratly
Department of Economics                                   Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                     Princeton University
Cambridge, MA 02139                                       Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                                  and NBER
         Health insurance reform in the U.S. appears inevitable. The rapid growth of medical costs,

which have tripled as a share of GNP since 1950 (Newbouse, 1992), and the large fraction of the

population without insurance has caused policy makers to consider substantial changes our health care

system. One option which has received considerable support is national health insurance (NH!),
which offers publicly financed health insurance to all citizens. Such a system is in place in Canada.

and it has been widely commended as one which provides universal health insurance coverage while

spending only 75% as much, per capita, as the U.S. on health care (Government Accounting Office,

1991). However, a major objection to this approach is that it would increase government taxation,

with resultant deadweight loss and reduced economic activity. Indeed, the specter of large scale

disemployment has been a major impediment to the serious consideration of this program at a policy

level.

         Despite concern over the disemployment effects of NH!. we currently have little empirical

evidence on the effects of NH! on employment. Most analyses of the impact of NH! consider only

the effects of increasing taxes to finance the program (Browning and Johnson, 1980); not

surprisingly, such analyses produce estimates of sizeable disemployment effects. However, the

introduction of national health insurance differs from the introduction of a new tax in at least two

ways. First, the program is replacing a primarily employer-provided benefitwith a publicly provided

one, which can have additional effects on both the composition and the level of employment.    Recent


research has highlighted the key differences between pure tax policies, and policies which interact

with the provision of employee benefits; see Summers (1989) for a general discussion, and Gruber

and Krueger (1990), Gruber (1993), Viscusi and Moore (1987), or Moore md Viscusi (1990) for

empirical results. Second, increased health insurance coverage may have important implications for

the functioning of the labor market, such as through increases in job mobility or the health of the
                                                 3

workforce.

       We therefore propose an alternative to studies which rely on preexisting evidence on tax

incidence to impute the effects of national health insurance on the labor market: an examination of

the transition to NH! in Canada. This approach has two distinct advantages. First, since    Canada

is similar to the U.S. in both demographic and economic structure, its experience may be

representative of what might happen if the U.S. moved to a public insurance program. Second, the

Canadian provinces implemented NH! at different points in time; national health insurance was first

introduced in Saskatchewan in 1962, then in the remainder of the provinces in the 1968-1971 period.

Thus, we can identi& its effect by comparing provinces which have implemented NH! with those

which have not implemented NH! at a point in time. In this way, the Canadian experience serves

as a natural experiment" from which lessons for the U.S. can be drawn.

       To estimate the impact of NH!, we use monthly data on employment, wages, and hours of

work for the years 1961-1975 for S industries in 10 Canadian provinces. We first model these labor

market variables as a function of whether NH! was in place in a given province/industry/month/year.

We then explore a variety of dynamic specifications, and allow the impact of NH! to vary across

provinces and industries.

       Contrary to expectations, we find that NHI did      cause a significant fail in employment in

Canada. In fact, implementation of NH! was associated with a rise in both employment and the

nominal wage rate. This conclusion is robust to a variety of specifications which control for the

potential endogeneity of the timing of implementation of NHI. Our evidence further suggests that

the Increase in employment reflects 'permanent" increases, rather than short run adjustments in

employment and wages; and that wages appear to adjust more rapidly than employment to

implementation of NH!.
                                                  4

        Finally, our analysis suggests that NH! is associated with larger decreases in employment in

provinces which use general revenues (rather than lump-sum premiums) to finance NHI. We find

some evidence that NH! is associated with a relative increase in employment in sectors with high

initial private health insurance coverage rates, although this result is not very robust,



                          1.   BACKGROUND ON CANADA AND NH!

        NH! was implemented in two steps: introduction of public insurance for hospital expenses

in the 1950s, and introduction of public insurance for medical services in the 1960s. In both cases,

a few provinces initiated programs which served as     a model for federal legislation. The federal

government then passed legislation which promised federal matching funding to approved provincial

                                           public plans which confonned to federal guidelines.
plans. Finaily, the remaining provinces added

       The implementationof public insurance for hospital expenses in Canada spanned the period

from 1947 to 1961.       The federal government passed legislation supporting provincial hospital

insurance programs in 1957. By January, 1961 all provinces had implemented a hospital insurance

program. Because our data are not available prior to 1961, our paper will not focus on the impact

of extending hospital insurance coverage.

        The implementation of public insurance for medical expenses began in Saskatchewan in 1962.

precipitating a prolonged doctors strike (Taylor, 1987). Alberta, Ontario, and British Columbia then

introduced voluntary public insurance programs which offered subsidized rates to the poor. On July

1, 1968, the federal government introduced legislation which promised 50% federal funding to

qualified provincial programs. Both Saskatchewan and BC automatically qualified at passage of

federal legislation. Five other provinces enrolled during 1969, followed by Quebec and Prince

Edwards Island in 1970, and New Brunswick in January, 1971.            These dates of enrollment   are
                                                  5

presented in Table I.

        While provincial medical insurance programs offered similar services and conditions for

enrollment, their financing mechanisms differed substantially. Half of the provinces financed part

of provincial costs with premiums assessed on individuals; the remaining provinces (as well as the

federal government) relied exclusively on general or earmarked tax revenues. These premiums

approximated lump sum' taxes for moderate and upper income individuals, since the total

contribution did not vary with employment or hours of work (they only varied between individual

and family coverage). For low-income individuals, premium contributions were subsidized; but these

individuals typically received health insurance subsidies prior to NH! in premium financed provinces

(Aiberta, British Columbia, Ontario, Saskatchewan), so that there was no net change in their

incentives for labor supply.

        In Table I, we present estimates of the percent of the provincial share of program

contributions funded by premiums for the first year of each program, and for the last year for which

we have data (1975). The data are from Provincial Government Finances (various years). Estimates

prior to 1970 are based on medical expenses only. After 1970, we can not separate hospital from

other medical expenses. Thus, we use trends in hospital        medical spending to adjust the 1969

figure forward through time. As shown, even the premium provinces relied to some extent on

general revenues, and by 1975 Manitoba and Saskatchewan had removed premium financing

altogether.

        At the time of implementation of NH!. the scope and sources of insurance coverage in

Canada was quite similar to that in the U.S. today. Most of the Canadian population was covered

by private health insurance, and that insurance was provided primarily through their employers.

Using estimates based on private insurance enrollments, Berry (1965) reports that 53% of the
                                                   6

population had medical insurance in 1961. while Shillington (1972) reports that 70% hadprivate

insurance in 1966 (this figure excludes Saskatchewan, which already had a public insurance
                                                                                               program
at this point). In the U.S. in 1991, 70% of the nonelderly population was covered by
                                                                                     private
insurance (based on authors' tabulations from the March 1992 Current Population Survey).

        However, the structure of the Canadian insurance market differed in two key ways from the

current structure of the U.S. market. The first is the extent of 'experiencerating'; that is, the extent

to which a firm's insurance costs reflects its own claims experience. There were two types of private

medical insurance coverage in Canada in the mid-1960s. The 'Medical Prepayment Plans', run by

the provincial medical associations, were community rated; premiums were not based on a group's

own experience, but on the experience of all groups (or some subset of groups) using that insurer.

On the other hand, Commercial insurance plans were experience rated. These two types of insurers

each occupied about one-half of the market in the mid 1960s (Shitlington, 1972). In contrast, in the.

U.S. in 1991, there was much less use of community rating. Commercial insurance companies,

which have 60% of the market for traditional private insurance (Health Insurance Association of

America, 1991), ftilly experience rate their customers. Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans, which control

the remaining 40% of the market, only community rate the smallest firms in most states

(Congressional Research Service, 1988).

       The second major difference is the cost of health insurajice. Several sources of data for this

era suggest that the cost of private medical insurance was relatively modest, ranging from 3-4% of

average wage levels. The Royal Commission on Health Services (RCHS, 1965) reported that the

cost of a medical insurance plan in Alberta was $159 for a family, or 3.8% of the average wage in

that province in 1963. In Manitoba, family coverage cost only $138 per year. which was 3.5% of

the average wage. And Berty (1965) reports costs from a large insurance company in Manitoba of
                                                    7

$108 per year for a family in 1961, which was 2.9.% of wages in that province/year. in the US in

1989, a typical employer-provided family insurance policy cost $262 per month (based on

unpublished Health insurance Association of America data), or approximately 16.6% of average

wages as compared to the 3-4% estimate for Canada. This comparison overstates the difference in

costs, since the U.S. estimate includes both medical and hospital insurance costs, while the Canadian

figure covers only medical insurance. However, since Canada's medical insurance costs in this

period represented about one-hail of total expenses, U.S. insurance costs as a fraction of wages are

at least twice as large as they were in Canada in the 1960s.

         Finally, there are important differences in labor market institutions in both countries. In

Canada in 1965, 39% of workers in firms with 15 or more employees were in firms where the

majority of workers were covered by collective bargaining agreements. In contrast, in the U.S. in

1991, 18%    of all wage and salary workers were represented by unions (US Dept of Commerce,

1992).   As Summers, Cruber, and Vergara (1993) highlight, differing labor market institutions may

inhibit comparisons of the effects of public policies across countries.



                              2. THEORY OF NH! FINANCING

         In this section, we present a heuristic discussion of the labor market effects   of NIB. For this

analysis, we ignore changes in the demand for labor induced by changes in product demand, and

focus only on changes in the firm's total labor costs. While this omission could be critical for

understanding changes in the health case sector, our labor force data excludes health care workers,

and does not permit   us to identify the effect of NHI   on the health care sector. We also ignore any

effects from increasing government employment and decreasing private sector employment as the

administration of health insurance was moved to the public sector.
                                                   8

        We assume that NHI is financed by one of two methods: lump sum premiums or general

revenue financing. We assume that all general revenues are financed through proportional income

taxes, and that all premium and income taxes are levied on the worker and not on the finn.. This

assumption is not unrealistic: nearly three-quarters of provincial general tax revenue in 1967 was

raised by taxes on income or sales (Canadian Tax Foundation, 1967), although the income taxes were

steeply progressive.

        Consider first the case where no finns offer health insurance. In this case, NH! will have

no impact on the firm's labor costs, and the demand for labor will be unaffected. There may,

however, be an income effect of the premium levy on labor supply. The net change in income for

the worker is the difference between their value of the health insurance which they are being

provided and the premium cost which they must pay. !f health insurance is valued less than this

premium, then income will be falling, and labor supply (and thereby employment) will increase.

        !n contrast, a program financed by taxing workers should cause a decrease in labor supply

(assuming substitution effects dominate income effects), since it decreases the value of work relative

to leisure. In this case, NH! will lead to a decrease in employment and an increase in wages. This

is the standard result from tax incidence analysis, as used in Browning and Johnson's (!980) analysis

of NH!.

        We next consider the role of employer provided health insurance before the introduction of

NH!. The theory of compensating differentials (Rosen, 1986) suggests that the firm will provide

health insurance until the marginal cost to the firm is set equal to the marginal worker's valuation

of that insurance. Under a particular form of this model, with equal costs across employers, a

continuous distribution of health insurance policies by generosity, a continuous distribution of worker

preferences for health insurance, perfect information on worker preferences, and the ability to set
                                                   9                                   -


worker-specific compensation packages. workers willeach be paid their marginal product minus their

valuation of health insurance. In that case, the introduction of NH! (ignoring for the moment

financing considerations) will have no effect on employment. Each workers wage will rise by the

amount of their valuation of health insurance, and the employer's total compensation costs will be

unchanged.

        If these assumptions are violated, however, NH! may have ftirther employment effects

through supply side responses. One of these assumptions that is violated in reality is that the costs

of health insurance are equal for all employers. Discontinuities in firm costs may result, for

example, from differences in the loading factors on insurance policies across firms of different sizes;

alternatively, a system of experience rating may impose discrete jumps in health insurance costs

across firms in response to underlying risk. In the US. today, the loading factor on group health

insurance policies for small finns is almost 40% higher than that for large firms (Congressional

Research Service, 1988). Deny (1965) documents wide variation in loading factors between group

and individual insurance (a proxy for the cost to the small finn) even for Canada in the 1960s.

Furthermore, in our experience rated system many firms have been redlined' and cannot purchase

insurance at any price; this imposes an infinite discontinuity in the price of insurance to the firm.

It is not clear whether this sort of unavailability was a problem in Canada in the 1960s.

        With discontinuities across firms in the cost of health insurance, the low cost firms will be

able to both offer insurance and pay low wages, by attracting those workers who most value that

insurance. Other firms will have to have a higher total marginal product to keep the marginal

worker indifferent between working for them and for the firm that offers health insurance.

       In this type of situation, NHI can have major supply side consequences on the labor market.

When NH! is introduced, it causes a relative decline in the real compensation in the highly-insured
                                                   10


sector, and cause a shift in employment towards the sector with low insurance coverage. That is,

the low cost finns loses the advantage that they incurred from the cheap availability of employer

provided health insurance; NH! taxes away that advantage by making insurance available to all,

equally cheaply. If these high cost/low insurance sectors are labor intensive, it could cause increases

in the overall level of employment.

        There are at least two other complications to the employment predictions of the basic tax

incidence model. First, in the case where firms offer health insurance, labor market rigidities can

cause a rise in employment. That is. if firms are unable to adjust wages upwards when NHI was

put in place, then their total Labor costs would drop, leading to a rise in labor demanded. Such

rigidities could arise from collectively bargained contracts, given the high raze of unionization in

Canada.

        Second, we do not consider the effects of NH! on the productivity and health of the

workforce. Recent research (Madrian. 1993) has uncovered strong evidence for insurance-induced

immobilities in the labor market, or "Job lock". White the welfare imptications of job lock are

unclear cx ante, it is at least possible that increasing mobility can raise the productivity of the

workforce by increasing the efficiency of job matches. Similarly, investments in health care may

improve the health and productivity of the work force; since the gains are to general productivity,

it may not have been in the interest of individual firms cx ante to invest in health insurance to

capture these gains. Hanratty (1992) finds strong evidence of the effects of NH! on at least one

indicator of health outcomes, infant mortaiity. These productivity increases may lead to a long run

rise in employment with the implementation of Hill.
                                                 11

                                 3. DATA AND SPECIFICATION

3.! The Dwa

       Our data for this analysis contains information on wages, employment and hours for eight

industries in ten provinces for each month from 1961 to 1975. The eight industries are forestry.

mining, manufacturing, transportation, construction, trade, FIRE, and some service industries (hotel,

restaurants, laundry and dry cleaning, recreation and business services). Health care services are

   included in this survey. Data are missing for forestry, mining, construction, and services for

some provinces, so that our total sample has 12,240 observations. Table II provides a description

along with means and standard deviations of each variable.

       We have drawn our information on employment, wages and hours from published data based

on Statistics Canada's Monthly Survey of Employment and Weekly Payrolls. Prior to 1966, this was

a survey of all Canadian firms which "usually employed 15 or more workers; starting in 1966 it

includes all firms which have employed 20 or more employees in at least one month during the

preceding year. The change in the firm size restriction had little impact on the scope of the survey:

aggregate data for Canadian industries by year shows that the average percentage of employees in

each industry represented in the survey did not change by more than 3% from 1964 to 1966. This

incomplete coverage means that our employment results will not account for movements of workers

from very small to larger firms or vice versa; however, the high overall coverage of the survey

(approximately 75% of employment) implies that this may not be an important problem.

        Our primary labor market outcome masures are total employment and average weekly

earnings. Total employment includes all workers on the payroll during the last week of the month;

it includes both Ml and part-time workers. Average weekly earnings includes base wages plus

overtime or bonus payments. It includes employee contributions and excludes employer contributions
                                                  12

to workers compensation, pensions, unemployment insurance or medical insurance plans.

        We aiso have information for a restricted sample of industries (mining, manufacturing,

construction) on weekly hours and average hours per week for employees paid by the hour for the

years 1965 to 1975. We impute weekly hours for all salaried employees by assigning them a value

of 37.5 hours.

       Our basic measure of the effect of introducing NH! is a dummy variable which equals zero

prior to the month of implementation of national health insurance in each province and which equals

one afterwards. These dates are shown in Table I. For Saskatchewan, we assume that NH! equals

I from July 1962. the date that this province implemented universal health insurance program (rather

than the date it entered the federal program).

        We also interact the NH! dummy with a variable, %Tax, which is equal to one minus the

share of provincial contributions to NH! which are financed by premiums. As shown in Table 1,

there is substantial variation in this variable both across provinces at a point in time, and within

provinces over time.

        Finally, we interact NH! with H!COV, a measure of the share of the wàrkforce covered by

private health plans prior to national health insurance. This measure comes from a survey of

working conditions among firms in Canada in 1965. This source has the natural advantage for our

analysis that it focuses on employer-provided insurance coverage. In addition, it uses the same

sampling frame as our labor market data (firms with 15 employees or more). The main disadvantage

of this data source is that it is not very precise: the figures are for the fraction of workers who are

in firms where the majority of employees were covered by a health insurance plan.

       Unfortunately, the published data from the survey provides information by province and by

industry, but not by industry within province. We have therefore imputed rates of insurance
                                                   13

coverage for each industry by province "cell" in two steps. First, we calculate the "excess" coverage

rate in a given province as the actuai coverage rate relative to that which would have been expected

given the industrial mix of the province   and   the average rates of insurance coverage (nationwide)

across industries. For each industry in each province, we then adjust the nationwide coverage rate

for that industry by the 'excess' coverage rate for that province.

       The only control variables in the model are the log, or change in log, annual GD? by

province, and monthly GD? by industry (nationally); the former is from Canada, Dominion Bureau

of Statistics (Selected Years), while the latter is from Statistics Canada (1988). In earlier work, we

also controlled for population levels and changes; these variables never entered significantly and did

not effect the coefficients of interest, so we excluded them from this analysis.



3.2 The Model

       Our basic regression specification for the employment equations is:

(1)    E,_ =     a   + $r,, + $# +               ÷ $.NH! + {$,DLGDP + /36DLGD?,, +

                 $7TRENDr,y1}
       where p indexes provinces
                i indexes industries
                y indexes years
                m indexes months
                E_, is log employment in an industry/province/month/year
                NH! is a dummy for having NH! in a province/month/year
                DLGDP,, is change in log GDP in a province/year
                DLGDPb.,U, is change in log GDP in an industry/month/year
                ç. 7. r,, p_ are province, industry, year, and month dummies, respectively
                TREND is a monthly time trend

       The unit of observation, as described above, is an industry within a province in a given

month and year. Our key variable of interest,. NH!, varies by province, month, and year. The goal

of our regression specification is to control for factors which might be correlated with the passage
                                                  14

of NHI and thereby confound our interpretation of        For example, we control for year effects to

capture nationwide time series shocks to employment or wages which might be correlated with NHI.

We control for month effects to capture cyclicaJity in the output of these different industries. We

include dummies for every industry/province cell in order to pick up any fixed differences across

these cells which may be correlated with the likelihood of NIH passage. Thus, we identi& the

effects of NH! by deviations of log employment from its industry/province cell mean.

        This specification may not control for all factors which are associated with the passage of

NH!. For example, if NEIl is more likely to be implemented in provinces with rapid growth in

output and employment, then our estimate of the impact of NH! on employment will be biased

upward. To control for this effect, we add two controls for output: the (year to year) change in log

annual GD? by province and in log monthly GD? by (national) industry. We control for the change

rather than the level of log GD?, because it is likely that wage and employment deviations from

province/industry means are caused by deviations in output from its expected province/industry

growth path. These measures are themselves potentially endogenous, since NH! may ca changes

in productivity across provinces or industries. Thus, this provides a conservative test of the impact

of NH!. In order to measure the growth itt GDP, we drop the first year (1961) from our sample in

all specifications.

        As an alternative approach, we include not only province/industry fixed effects, but

province/industry trends as well. That is, following Lalonde, Jacobson, and Sullivan (1993), we

include in the basic model a monthly trend, and interact that trend with each province/industry fixed

effect. This specification captures the effect of NH! on deviations of employment and wages from

their province/industry growth paths, rather than deviations from their average levels. In this

specification, we control for the log of output, rather than the growth rate. This is because we want
                                                    I5
to retain the consistent interpretation of a control for deviations of GD? from its expected growth

path; since we control for the growth path here, the levelof GD? picks up the deviation. The results

are not sensitive to the use of GD? changes in this specification.

        Finally, in order to further assess the possibility of reverse causality or other spurious

correlation, we perform a specification check. We add to specification (1) an additional dummy

which is equal to one if NEll will be passed in the next year, and zero otherwise. If NEll is having

a causal effect on wages and employment, then this term should have a coefficient of zero. If,

instead, the passage of NEll is an endogenous response to other changes in the environment, or is

even simply correlated with other changes, then this term will be non-zero.

        The province/industry cells which make up our data set are of varying sizes; employment

ranges from $70 to over 850,000. This may induce heteroskedasticity in our error terms. In order

to correct for this heteroskedasticity in a robust manner, we use the standard errors corrected

according to the formula of White (1980).



                                            4. RESULTS

4.1 Basic Findings

        Table   Ill   presents estimates of the impact of NEll on log employment and log wages.

Surprisingly, there is a significant rise in employment with the passage of NEll; it is associated with

a 2% rise in employment. This may suggest that it is important to extend the basic theory outlined

in Part IL Alternatively, it may simply be an artifact of the fact that provinces with rapid

employment growth are more likely to pass NEIl. The remainder of the top half of Table          ill is
devoted to assessing this alternative hypothesis.

        In the second column, we include the controls for the growth in provincial and industrial
                                                  16

GD?. Both variables indicate a strong positive correlation between output growth and employment

growth. However, the coefficient on NIH increases with the inclusion of these controls, and now

indicates that NHI is associated with a 2.6% rise in employment.

        In the third and fourth columns, we include a lead value of NH! (NH! next year) to test for

the endogeneity of passage of NH!. As shown, both with and without controls for GDP, the

coefficient on NH! next year is small and statistically insignificant. The coefficient on NH! remains

strong and significant, indicating employment growth in excess of 2%.

        The final four columns include province/industry wends; columns (5) and (7) exclude GD?

controls, while columns (6) and (8) include them. As shown, adding controls for province/industry

trends reduces the estimated magnitude of the impact of NH! to l.3%-1.7%, and NH! remains at

least weakly significant in all specifications. As before, controls for GD? are positive and

significant, but do not substantially affect the measured impact of NHI.            Furthermorà, the

specification check discussed above once again provides no evidence of reverse causality; the

coefficient on NH! next year is always substantively and statistically insignificant.

       The bottom panel of Table II! examines the effect of NH! on wages, using the same set of

specifications discussed above. As shown, NH! is associated with a very strong and significant rise

in wages, on the order of 3% of wages (column I). This finding is robust to the inclusion of GD?

controls (column 2). The lead value of NH! is significant and positive (columns 3 and 4), suggesting

potential endogeneity between the passage of NHI and wage growth. However, the contemporaneous

effect of NH! is significantly larger than the lead value of NH! (4% vs 2%), suggesting that at least

part of the impact of NH! is not due to the greater growth rates of provinces which pass NH!.

       With the inclusion of province/industry trends (columns 4-8), the impact of NH! decreases

in magnitude to 1.5%, although it remains highly significant in all specifications. This specification
                                                    17

is not sensitive to the inclusion of controls for GD? or for the lead value of NH!. In addition, the

coefficient on NH! next year is not significant, suggesting that there may be no endogeneity between

NH! and deviation of wages from trend. This is therefore our preferred estimate for the wage

effects.



4.2 Hours Effects
           One explanation for the positive correlation between NH! and employment may be that

national health insurance caused an increase in part-time employment. Since publicly provided health

insurance reduces the fixed costs of employment, it may encourage firms to hire part-time workers.

Gruber (1993) finds evidence that mandating employment benefits increases hours and decreases

employment. If the reverse of this effect holds true when Canada implements NH! (since employers

no longer offer health insurance), then NHI may increase employment, even while it has no effect

on total hours of work.

           Table IV tests this hypothesis by estimating the impact of NH! separately on log total weekly

hours, log employment, and log average hours per week per worker for the subset of the sample
which includes information on hours of work. For each ofthesevariables, the first column uses the

model without province/industry trends, and the second column includes these trends; both columns

are estimated with GD? controls (the results are not sensitive to their inclusion). Note that this is

not a perfect test for the impact of NH! on part-time work, since it mixes together both changes in

over-time and changes in pan-time employment. !f NH! reduced the fixed costs of employment, it

might both decrease over-time work and increase part-time work, thus resulting in little aggregate

change in average hours per week. Unfortunately, we do not have more detailed measures of the

changes in hours of work per week.
                                                 18


       As shown, the positive impact of NHI on employment is not explained by an decrease in

average hours per worker. The estimates of the impact of NI-Il from the log total hours equation are

quite similar in magnitude to those in the log employment equation for this subsample, while the

estimated impact of NH! on average hours are small and insignificant. This indicates that most of

the adjustment occurred through changes in employment rather than through changes in average

hours of work per week. This result is similar whether or not province/industry trends are included.



4.3 lime Panent 0/Effects

        In Table 5, we trace out the time pattern of effects. We include dummies for: NI-Il

implemented 4, 3, 2. and 1 quarter from now, NH! implemented 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 6, 7. and S quarters

ago, and NH! implemented more than S quarters ago. This speciflcation allows for a more detailed

test of the endogeneity of NH!; it also enables us to discern how rapidly the effect of NH! on

employment and wages is realized.

       Both specifications suggest a slow adjustment of employment to NH!: there is little effect in

the first two quarters, then a rise of approximately 2% over the next four quarters, followed by a

larger rise from quarters 7-8 and continuing onwards.

       As before, the lead values of NHL are all insignificant in the basic employment equation

(column 1). However, with the inclusion of province/industry trends (column 2), the coefficient on

NH! in 1 quarter becomes significant at the 11 % confidence level suggesting some eridogeneity in

the NH! variable. This effect is still smaller in magnitude than the measured impact of NHI after

implementation of the program, however; it is approximately 1/2 of the steady state employment

increase. This suggests that all of the measured impact is not due to endogeneity.

       The estimates suggest a somewhat faster adjustment to NH! for wages than for employment:
                                                  19

after NHI is passed, the effects are small for three quarters, then rise to a significant 2.5-3% level

from quarter 4 onwards. We once again see strong evidence of NH! endogeneity in the basic

specification (column 3), since all lead values of NHI are highly significant. After controlling for

province/industry trends (column 4), there is stilt a significant rise in the quarter immediately

preceding NH!, although the other lead values are insignificant. The magnitude of this lead term

is only about 1/3 of the size of the steady state wage increase.




4.4 Effea of NH! across Province/Industries
       As noted in Part I!, we anticipate that the impact of NH! should vary both with the

mechanism of financing NH! used in each province, and with the relative cost of private health

insurance in each industry/province prior to NH!. Thus, in Table VI, we allow the impact of NUt

to vary across province/industry, by adding two interaction variables: NHl%Tax is an interaction

of NH! with the percent of provincial NIH expenditures financed by general revenue taxation; while

NHH!COV is an interaction with the share of private insurance coverage in each province/industry

prior to NH!. To the extent that high cost sectors had lower rates of private insurance coverage

prior to NH!, this measure is a proxy for variations in health insurance costs.

       In Table VI, we present estimates for both employment and wages, using the same

specifications as in previous tables. Since information on health insurance coverage is not available

for the forestry or construction industries, this data contain a more limited sample of observations

(n=90'72).

       In the employment equations, Nl-fl%Tax is negative and highly significant in the basic

specifications (columns 1-2); when province/industry trends are added, it declines in magnitude but

remains significant. The estimates from the base specification suggest that shifting from a 100%
                                                  20

premium-financed to a 100% general revenue financed program would decrease employment by

20%, while the specification with trends suggests a decline of 4—5%, which is more reasonable. The

results therefore imply that the finding of an overall rise in employment masks substantial

heterogeneity by financing source; as predicted by tax incidence analyses, employment does fail

where NH! is financed from general revenues.

       The measured effect of NHIHICOV on employment is less robust to the inclusion of trend

variables. In the baseline specification, NHIHICOV is negative and highly significant, suggesting

a substantial shift in employment from high coverage to low coverage industries: for example, it

suggest an employment decline of 7% for every 10% increase in initial private insurance coverage.

Once province/industry trends are included, this variable becomes positive and insignificant,

suggesting little change in employment across sectors.

        The estimates of the impact of both NHI%Tax and NHIHICOV on wages are highly

sensitive to the inclusion of trend variables. In the baseline specification, NHI"%Tax is positive and

weakly significant, consistent with the hypothesized decrease in labor supply with general revenue

financing. Similarly, NHIHICOV is positive and significant, as one would expect if relative labor

supply were decreasing in sectors with high initial private insurance coverage rates. However, both

of these variables become negative and highly significant with the inclusion of trend variables. Thus,

it is not possible from these tables to conclusively determine the impact of these variables on wages.




                             5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

        While there is a vigorous debate over the merits of national health insurance for access to

health services and the cost of medical care, there has been little attention paid to the consequences

of financing NHI. This is unfortunate, because misgivings about the labor market impact of NH!
                                                 21

may prove to be a major impediment to its implementation. These misgivings, moreover, are based

on the simple application of tax incidence models to the complicated question of what happens when

a largely privately provided benefit is replaced with a publicly provided one. In this paper, we have

suggested an alternative approach: an examination of the "natural experiment presented by Canada's

transition to Mill.

        Contrary to expectations, we find no evidence that implementation of Nil resulted in a

decrease in employment. In fact, we find that both employment and wages increased with

implementation of NH!. This result is robust to a number of specifications which control for the

potential. endogeneity of NH!. and it does not appear to be an artifact of a change in the average

number of hours per employee.

        In Part II, we suggested several hypotheses which would be consistent with this paradoxical

result. While we are notable to structurally test these competing hypotheses, our findings do offer

us some ability to distinguish between them. The fact that the employment adjustment appears to

have occurred with a substantial lag casts some doubts on explanations based on the income effects

of the premiums levied on workers. Furthermore, the faster rate of adjustment of wages than

employment, along with the effects on employment in the long run ànly, suggests that our finding

is not due to labor market rigidities which prevent nominal wages from adjusting upwards after

passage of NH!.

        A ftirther possibility is that NHI caused an employment shift to high-cost, labor-intensive

sectors, such as the set-vice industry. Our evidence on this point is mixed: while we find some

evidence of a relative increase in employment in sectors with initially low rates of private insurance

coverage, this result is sensitive to the inclusion of trend controls. The hypothesis which is most

consistent with our findings is that NH! caused a systematic increase in labor demand across all
                                                 22

sectors. This may have arisen due to increases in labor productivity which followed increased job

mobility or improvements in the health of the labor force. Distinguishing between these remaining

hypotheses remains a task for future research.

       Prior to implementation of NHI, Canada was similar to the U.S. in its reliance on employer-

provided health insurance, and in its mixture of commercial experience-rated and non-profit

community rated plans. Thus, it is plausible that our results can generalize to the U.S. case.

However, several factors may cause the impact of NH! to differ in the U.S.       First, the cost of

private hospital and medical insurance now represents a much larger share of U.S. wages than did

rnedicaj insurance in Canada. If the necessary revenues are raised bydistortionary general revenue

taxes, the U.S. may well experience a decline in employment. On the other hand, the U.S.

insurance market is more highly segmented than was the market in Canada, with many firms unable

to purchase insurance at all. This may lead to larger sectoral shifts when NH! is put in place; if

these shifts are into labor intensive sectors, the increase in employment will be larger than in

Canada.




We are grateful to Josh Angrist, Janet Cutrie, Richard Freeman, Jim Poterba, George Tauchen. and
two referees for helpful comments; to Man Barmack, Sharieff Mansour, Cory Rattelman and Michael
Cooper for research assistance; and to the Canadian Employment Research Forum for financial
support.
                                               23

                                           References

Berry, Charles H. (1965), "Voluntary Medical Insurance and Prepayment, Ottawa: Queen's
       Printer.

Browning, Edgar K., and William It Johnson. (1980). 'Taxation and the Cost of National
     Health Insurance, 'National Health Insurance: What Now, What Later, What Never?
     Mark V. Pauly, ed.

Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Labour and Prices Division, Employment Section,
        Review of Man-Hours and Hourly Earnings, Catalogue 72-202, Selected Years.

Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Labour and Prices Division, Employment Section,
      Man-Hours and Hourly Earnings, Catalogue 72-003, Selected Years.

Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Provincial Government Finance, Selected Years.

Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Population Estimates by Marital Status Age and Sex
     for Canada and Provinces, Selected Years.

Canada Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Wational Income and E.xpendimre Accounts: Annual
      Estimates," Selected Years.

Canada, Department of Labour, Economics and Research Branch, Working Conditions in
      Canadian Industry, Selected Years.

Canadian Tax Foundation, Provincial Finances, Toronto: CTF, Selected Years.

Card, David. (1990). "Unexpected Inflation, Real Wages, and Employment Determination in
       Union Contracts, American Economic Review, 80:669-638,

Congressionai Research Service (1988). Costs and Effects of E.uertding Health Insurance
      Coverage, Washington, D.C.: CRS.

Government Accounting Office. (1991), Canadian Health Insurance: Lessons for the United
       States, Washington, D.C.

Gruber, Jonathan. (1992), "The Incidence of a Group-Speciric Mandated Benefit: Evidence from
       Health Insurance Benefits for Maternity". National Bureau of Economic Research
       Working Paper #4157.

Gruber, Jonathan and Alan Krueger. (1991). 'The Incidence of Mandated Employer-Provided
       Insurance: Lessons from Worker's Compensation Insurance,' Tax Policy and the
      Economy 5, David Bradford, ed., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hanrauy, Maria. (1992). "Canadian National Health Insurance and Infant Health,' mimeo,
      Cornell University.

Health Insurance Association of America (1990), Source Book of Health Insurance Data,
                                              24

       Washington,D.C. :HIAA.

Keeley, Michael. (1981). Labor Supply and Public Policy: A Critical Review (New York, NY:
       Academic Press).

LeClair, Maurice. (1973), 'The Canadian Health Care System," in Spyros Andreopoulos, ed.,
       National Health Insurance: Gin We Learn from Canada?, New York: John Wiley

Malrian, Brigitte C. (1993). "Employment-Based Heaith Insurance and Job Mobility: Is There
       Evidence of Job-Lock?" FIBER Working Paper N4476, September, 1993.

Moore, Michael, and. W. Kip Viscusi (1990), Cornoensation Mechanisms for Job Risks,
       Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Newbouse, Joseph P. (1992). "Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?," Journalof
       Economic Perspectives 6:3-21.

Rosen, Sherwin. (1986)., "The Theory of Equalizing Differences," in 0. Ashenfelter and R.
       Layard, eds. .Handbook of Labor Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishers.

Royal Commission on Health Services, (1965), Repon c/the Royal Commission on Health
       Services, Ottawa: Queen's Printer.

Royal Commission on Taxation, (1966) Report of the Royal Commission on Taxation, Volume 3,
       Ottan Queen's Printer, 1966
Shillington, Howard. (1972). The Road to Medicare In Canada, Toronto: Del Graphics.

Statistics Canada, Labour Division, Employment and Payrolls Section, E'rploymemEarnings and
         Hours, Catalogue 72-002, Selected Years.

Statistics Canada (1988), industrial &oduction. 1960-1987.

Summers, Lawrence, (1989) "Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits," American
     Economic Review,79:177-184.

Summers, Lawrence, Jonathan Gnzber, and Rodrigo Vergara. (1993). 'Taxation and the
       Sncwre of Labor Markets: The Case of Corporatism," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       108: 385-412.

Taylor, Malcolm G. (1987), Yea/rn Insurance and Canadian Public Policy, MontreaL Mc-Gill,
       Queen's University Press.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau Qf Census, Statistical Abstract of The United States,
       Washington DC: General Printing Office, 1992, Table 672.

Viscusi, W. Kip, and Michael 1. Moore (1987), "Workers' Compensation: Wage Effects, Benetit
       Inadequacies, and the Value of Health Losses," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol
       LXIX, No. 2,249-261.
                                            25

White, Halbert (1980), WA Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
       Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity, &onome:rica, 48, 817-838.
                                      26

                                   Table I:

                          Data of Entry Into Canadian
                       National Health Insurance Program


                                                           %         To
                                                      PREMIUM     PREMIUM
PROVINCE                        DATE OF ENTRY          IN FIRST    IN LAST
                                                         YEAR       YEAR

Newfoundland                   April 1, 1969               0         0
Prince Edward Island           December 1, 1970            0         0
Nova Scotia                    April 1, 1969               0         0
New Brunswick                 January 1, 1971              0         0
Quebec                         November 1. 1970            0         0
Ontario                        October I • 1969            97        47

Manitoba                       April 1, 1969               36        0

Saskatchewan                   July I, 1968                22        0

Alberta                        July 1. 1969                96        53

British Columbia               July 1, 1968                77        35
                                                    27

                                               Table 11:
                             Means and Standard Deviations or Data Set




 Variable         Description of Variable                                         Mean       S. Dev.


 LEMP             Log total employment.                                            9.947      1.309

                  Log total hours per week.
                  Houn (Hourly Employees * Avg Hrs of Hourly
 LHOURS           Workers) + (Nonhourly Workers * 37.5)                           13.774      1.301

                  Log average hours    per week.
                  Avg Hours = Hours I Total Employment.
 LAVGHOUR         Hours    are computed as above.                                  3.694     0.072
 S


 LWAGE            Log of average weekly earnings.                                  4.673     0.407

                      I if province has passed National Health Insurance, = 0
 NRI              otherwise.                                                       0.465      0.499
                   = NH! • % Provincial NH! Contributions financed by
 NH1'%Tax          General Revenues.                                               0.333      0.419

                   Share of employees in firms which provide health
 HICOV             insurance to a majority (> 50%) of their employees in
                   1965.                                                           0.889      0.131


 LGDP              Log of Provincial GD? (annual).                                 8.314      1.379


 LGDPI             Log of Industry GDP (monthly).                                  9.714      0.753


 DLGDP             Change In log Provincial GDP (year to year)                     0.103      0.053


 DLODPI            Change in log Industry GD? (month to month)                     0.047      0.063

Sample consists of monthly data for 10 Canadian provinces %r eight industries from 1961 to 1975
(Nn 12,240), except tbr hours data, which only exists for 3 industries for 10 provinces ftr the years
1965-1975 (N=3250).
                                                           28

                                                     Table III:
                                      The Impact o( NW oa Empbymet and Wage


  Linplcymene

  NHI                0.0197        0.0257      0.0216      0.0248     0.0138     0.0131        0.0171      0.0141
                   (0.0061)       (0.0063)    (0.0074)    (0.0076)    (0.0060)   (0.0060)    (0.0082)    (0.0083)
  NW ncg                                       0.0037     -0.0018                              0.0044      0.0014
  year                                        (0.0065)     (0.0065)                          (0.0067)     (0.0067)

  Log Pray                                                                        0.0829                   0.0*20
  GDP                                                                            (0.0249)                 (0.0252)

  Log lad                                                                         0.2156                   0.2155
  GDP                                                                            (0.0289)                 (0.0290)

  Change in log                    0.2378                  0.2388
  Pray GDP                        (0.0436)                (0.0436)

  Change La log                    0.3027                  0.3021
  lad GDP                         (0.0480)                (0.0480)
  Pity/lad              No           No         No           No         Yea        Ye.          Yes         Yes
  Iraid?




  Wage
  NHI                   0.0325      0.03fl      0.0421     0.0411      0.0146      0.0141      0.0167      0.0156
                       (0.0023)    (0.0023)    (0.0027)   (0.0027)    (0.0024)    (0.0024)    (0.0031)    (0.0031)
  NHI next year                                 0.OIU      0.0193                              0.0029      0.0020
                                               (0.0026)   (0.0026)                            (0.0028)    (0.0028)
  Log Pity GDP                                                                     0.0332                  0.0319
                                                                                  (0.0103)                (0.0108)

  Log tad                                                                         -0.0362                 .0.030
  GOP                                                                             (0.0124)                (0.0124)

  Change in log                     -0.0134               -0.0241
  pity GDP                         (0.0134)               (0.0150)

  Dange in log     ,                4.0136                .0.0144
                   •
  14 QDP                           (0.0162)               (0.0262)
  Proy/ladIraid?         No           No         No          No         Yea         Ye.         Yea         Ye.

: Standard aeon in p.mtaa. All rtgrvuioua inc lade year, month, and piovinoeflndudq effects. trvnd'
rcpcaaion. also include tread, and trend interacted wh piovinceSustay effect.. Number or obacnaxion. it 11,424;
Dcpcudcnt variables arc all in lop.
                                                       29

                                                   Table IV:
                       Impact of NW on Enpiojinad, Hours and Avenge Hours/Week

                     Total Noun      Total Noun    Employment       Employment      As'. Noun     Av. Hours
       NHI              0.0601          0.037!        0.0607           0.0346         0.0006        0.0025
                       (0.0120)        (0.0118)      (0.0106)         (0.0097)       (0.0034)      (0.0042)

  Change in Log         0.2367                        0.2194                         0.0173
  Province GDP         (0.0910)                      (0.0809)                       (0.0236)
  Change in Log         0.0662                        0.0453                         0.0208
  Industry GDP         (0.0408)                      (0.0353)                       (0.0123)
   Log Province                         0.0611                        0.0800                       O.0189
      (3DP                             (0.0575)                      (0.0471)                      (0.0193)
   Log Industry                        0.4480                         0.3865                        0.06 IS
      GDP                              (0.0424)                      (0.0354)                      (0.0135)
   Prov/Ind               No             Yes           No              Yes             No            Yes
    Trend?

Standard mon are reporttd in parentheses. Represents nibsa of the sample which baa informazion on hours;
this includes 3 industries for 10 provinces for the years 1965-1975. 11—3250. Regressions also include year.
month, and pnwinceindustry effects. Trend regressions also include trend and tnudprovinceindusuy
effects. Dependent variables are all in logs.
                                                          30
                                       Table V:   Dyuaaia .1 Hill implemeataSa

                                   Employment             Employment              Wage.                  Wage.
   NH! in 4 quancn                     -0.0192             -0.0098                0.0164               0.0057
                                      (0.0203)             (0.0098)              (0.0047)             (0.0948)
   NHI in 3 quaaen                     0.0106              .0.0031                0.0137               0.0012
                                      (0.0109)             (0.0102)              (0.0040)             (0.0041)
   NHI in 2 quanta                     0.0025               0.0135                0.0171               .0.0009
                                      (0.0093)             (0.0096)              (0.0044)             (0.0043)
   NHI in 1 quana                      0.0070               0.0159               0.0290                  0.0093
                                      (0.0098)             (0.0097)              (0.0040)             (0.0039)
   NH! I quancr ago                   4.009*               4.0034                 0.0235                 0.0061
                                      (0.0130)             (0.0*10)              (0.0946)             (0.0046)
      NH! 2 quanta ago                 0.0067               0.010*               0.0264                0.0079
                                      (0.0233)             (0.01 16)            (0.0043)              (0.0041)
      NH! 3 quanta ago                 0.0247               0.0281               0.0248                0.0018
                                      (0.0102)             (0.0106)             (0.0044)              (0.0045)
      NUt 4 quanta ago               0.0209                 0.0251               0.0484                0.0234
                                    (0.0104)               (0.0102)             (0.0043)              (0.0408)
      NH! 5 quanta ago               0.0910                 0.0105               0.0540                0.0280
                                    (0.0134)               (0.0122)             (0.0043)              (0.0043)
      NH! 6 quanta ago               0.0172                 0.0205               0.049*                  0.0234
                                    (0.0141)               (0.0129)             (0.0043)              (0.0042)
      NH! 7 quanta ago               0.0435                 0.0373               0.0500                0.0240
                                    (0.0*15)               (0.0114)             (0.0043)              (0.0042)
      NH! $ quanta ago               0.0417                 0.0275               0.0519                  0.0261
                                    (0.01W)                (0.01 14)            (0.0057)              (0.0054)
  NH! more than                      0.0435                 0.0316               0.0543                0.0294
  $ quanta ago                      (0.0104)               (0.0104).            (0.0033)              (0.0036)
  Change in Log                       0.2*97                                    -0.0190                0.0419
  Province GDP                      (0.0454)                                    (0.0135)              (0.0110)
  Change i. Log                      0.3006                                     -0.0160               4.072
  Indudry GDP                .      (0.0479)                                    (0.0162)              (0.0124)
                                                           0.0928                                nfl?
  Log Province ODP                                         (0.0258)

                                                            0.2150                               7717?
  Log Indualay GDP                                         (0.0289)
  Pray/md Tread?                 No                          Ye.                  No                      Yes

Standard alan I parentheses. All regemsious include yiar. .noath, and piuviaoe°indümay dummies. Trend regressions
also include monthly nod and nndprovbrceindatq coatnis. Al! regresajons hays l1424 obarvasions. Dqnadena
variables arc all ii logi.
                                                   31

                        Table VI: The Impau at NH] on Employment and Wages
                               by flnandng Method & Iiurance Coverage

   Employment
  NH!                            0.7405             0.7215             0.0049              0.0177
                                (0.0202)           (0.0201)           (0.0230)            (0.0232)
                                4.6788              -0.6563            0.0271               0.0200
  NH! * % }UCOV                (0.0199)            (0.0193)           (0.0239)             (0.0240)
                                4.2013             4.1963              4.0419              O.0547
  NiB • % Ta                   (0.0061)            (0.0061)           (0.0057)             (0.0060)
  Lcg Province COP                                                                          0.1224
                                       .

                                                                                           (0.0161)
  Log Industry                                                                              0.0726
  GDP                                                                                      (0.0132)

  change in log                                     0.1231
  province CDP                                     (0.0325)

  Change in log                                     0.2865
  industry GDP                                     (0.0328)
  Pray/lad bead?                  No                 No                 Yes                  Yes



  Wages

                                 -0.0059             -0.0022            0.1075              0.1076
  NH!                           (0.0079)            (0.0079)           (0.0128)            (0.0129)
                                 0.0321              0.0286             -0.0914            -0.0873
  NH! • mcov                    (0.0080)            (0.0019)           (0.0133)            (0.0133)
                                 0.0038              0.0034             -0.0322            -0.0403
  NH! • % Ta                    (0.0025)            (0.0025)           (0.0032)            (0.0033)
  Log Province GDP                                                                          0.0837
                                                                                          (0.0097)
  Log Industry                                                                             -0.0545
  CD?                                                                                     (0.0081)
  Change in log                                     -0.0013
  province CD?                                      (0.0131)
  Change in log                                     -0.0432
  industry CD?                                      (0.0112)
  Pray/lad bend?                      No                  No                 Yea                Yea
 tandard cnthi in parentheses. All regreasacca include year dummies maclb dummies, and provinceindustry
efftcts. Trend' regressions include treed, and trend intended with provinceindustry effects. Sample
excludes coestnjction and Ibrestry industries. N - 9072. Dependent variables are in logs.
