                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PRICE VOLATILITY AND VOLUME
                          SPILLOVERS BETWEEN ThE TOKYO
                          AND NEW YORK STOCK MARKETS




                                       Takatoshi Ito
                                       Wen-Ling Lin




                                  Working Paper No. 4592




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December, 1993



We are grateful to Jeffrey Frankel, Allan Kleidon, Bruce Lchmann, George von Furstenberg,
Campbell Harvey, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute and the NBER Conference on
the Internationalization of Equity Markets. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4592
                                                                                  December 1993


                            PRICE VOLATIUTY AND VOLUME
                           SPILLOVERS BETWEEN THE TOKYO
                           AND NEW YORK STOCK MARKETS


                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper presents a comprehensive study of the mtcractions among returns, volatility,
and trading volume between the U.S. and Japanese stock markets by using intradaily data from
October 1985 to December 1991. By examining the effect of foreign price volatility and trading
volume on correlations between foreign and domestic stock returns, the paper aims to distinguish
between the market contagion and informational efficiency hypotheses in order to explain the
cause of international transmission of stock returns and volatility. Major findings are three-fold:
(1) contemporaneous correlations of stock returns across these two markets axe significant and
tend to increase during a high volatility period, which support the informational efficiency
hypothesis; (2) lagged volatility and volume spillovers are not found across the two markets; (3)
the effect of the New York stock returns on the Tokyo returns exhibits a structural change in
October 1987.


Takatoshi Ito                                               Wen-Ling Lin
John F. Kennedy School of Government                        Department of Economics
79 John F. Kennedy Street                                   University of Wisconsin-Madison
Harvard University                                          1180 Observatory Drive
Cambridge, MA 02138                                         Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
1. Introduction
          Since the stock market crash of October 1987 there has been substantial interest in research

on why stock returns and volatility are propagated across world markets. One possible interpretation

for such interdependence of stock returns and volatility is an informational link across markets: news

revealed in one country is perceived as informative to fundamentals of stock prices in another

country.        This view can be attributed to real and financial linkage of economies.2 Another

possible interpretation for this issue is market contagion: stock prices in one country are affected by

changes in another country beyond what is conceivable by connections through economic fundamentals.

According to this view, overreaction, speculation, andior noise trading (e.g., Delong, Shleifer,
Summers, and Waldman (1990)) are transmissible across borders.

       This paper studies the interdependent relationship between the Tokyo and New York stock

markets by focusing on interactions of intradaily returns, volatility, and trading volume from October

1985 to December 1991. The principal objective of this paper is to disentangle the two possible

interpretations by using the following three approaches. First, unlike other papers which analyzes'
only price changes and volatility, this paper examines the effect of trading volume on intermarket
dependence in stock returns. Second, unlike several papers which study a causal relationship between

price volatility and trading volume using one (domestic) market (usually the New York market), this

paper is an international extension of volatility and volume studies. Third, unlike many academic and

journalistic papers on the world-wide transmission of the price declines after Black Monday of 1987

in New York, this paper attempts to extend the literature of crashes by encompassing different
episodes in the international transmission of large shocks in prices and volume, including the periods

before and after Black Monday and the periods of the forming and bursting of the bubble of the Tokyo

market.
       The focus on trading volume in this paper is owing to the view that trading volume is a good

proxy for the degree of heterogeneity in investors' opinions and beliefs. (See the model built by Epps

and Epps (1976) and Tauchen and Pitt (1983).) Most studies have reported a positive relationship


                                                   1
between volatility and trading volume in the (domestic) stock market (see Karpoff (1987) for an
excellent survey and Gallant, Rossi, and Tauchen (1992) for the empirical regularities). According

to the mixture-of-distribution hypothesis, this positive relation is often attributed to the rate of
information which drives both volatility and volume.

        Another line of research on the price and volume relationship (in the domestic market)
attempts to explain why correlations in stock returns depend on volume and price volatility. Morse
(1980) found a positive effect of trading volume on the degree of autocorrelations in domestic stock

returns. He interpreted this evidence as traders' revisions of prior beliefs of shocks. (See also Harris

and Raviv (1991) for a theoretical model.) By contrast, Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993)
uncovered a negative effect of trading volume on the autocorrelation of stock returns. They associated

this phenomenon with the increased expected returns that compensate for informed traders'
accommodation of liquidity traders' sales, which induce higher trading volume.

        This paper extends these two views of autocorrelations of stock returns to an international

context. In particular, the following two hypotheses for explaining the cause of international
transmission of stock returns and volatility will be examined. First, if correlations between
international stock returns are caused by international contagion of liquidity traders' sentiments or

by resolution of heterogenous interpretations of foreign news, such correlations will be positively
influenced by foreign trading volume. We call this the market contagion hypothesis. Second, if
international return correlations are associated with the informativeness of stock price changes in one

market to another market, these correlations are likely to be positively influenced by foreign price

volatility, but not by foreign trading volume. For instance, the domestic traders' extraction of a global

factor from the observed foreign price change (e.g., King and Wadhwani (1990), and Un, Ito, and Engle

(1993)) implies such a relation. The reason is that volatility is a better measure of the rate of
information flow than volume. We call this the informational efficiency hypothesis. The use of
trading volume enables us to assess the two possible channels of international transmission of
international stock returns and volatility by examining the causal relation between the correlations


                                                   2
 of international stock returns, trading volume, and volatility.

         To carry out the above analysis, we follow Lin, Engle, and Ito (1993) and Hamao, Masulis, and

Ng (1991) in using the intradaily data of stock returns for both markets in order to clearly define the

daytime and overnight returns for the two markets. Since the opening time of the Tokyo market is
ahead of that of the New York market by either 14 hours or 13 hours, the daytime return ui one
market is a subset of the overnight return in the other market. Hence, the two daytime returns are

not overlapped in real time. Unlike the daily analysis by von Furstenberg and Jeon (1989) and Eun
and Shim (1989), our framework is able to identify the origination of shocks, so a clean test of how fast
news from one market is transmitted to the other can be implemented. Suppose that a piece of news

is revealed in the foreign market such as a trade balance or GNP announcement. This news is likely

to affect the earning of domestic export or import firms. According to the informational efficiency

hypothesis, the domestic market is efficient in processing the foreign information, then such foreign

information is incorporated into the domestic opening price. Lagged spillovers from foreign prices,
volatility, or trading volume to their domestic counterparts after the domestic market opens should

not arise.3 In other words, the opening prices should reflect overnight information relevant to the
domestic country. If the domestic market is inefficient in the sense that domestic investors overreact

or underreact to such information, spillovers are likely to arise, in particular, when the domestic
investors attempt to revise their prior beliefs about the value of stock returns or the domestic market

gropes for the equilibrium price in resolving heterogenous beliefs of traders. The dependence of
volatility correlations on the dispersion of expectations about the fundamental value of asset prices

is suggested in a two-period noisy rational expectations model of Shalen (1993). Tests for no spillovers

of return, volatility, or volume (as in Engle, Ito, and Lin (1990), and Lin, Engle, and Ito (1993)) provide

a rigorous method to test for the informational efficiency hypothesis.

        One may argue that volatility spillover is not necessarily against the informational efficiency
hypothesis because an informational link between two markets implies that price innovations in one

market can predict the arrival of information in the other market (as predicted by Roll's (1989) model).


                                                    3
Similarly, volume spillover does not necessarily contradict the informational efficiency hypothesis
because cross-border trading induces dissemination of information across markets. However, many

studies in the literature have reported that cross-border trading is very light (Kleidon and Werner
(1993)), and that the arrival rate of market-wide information is not correlated due to infrequent policy

coordination and competition between Japan and the United States (see Ito, Engle, and Lin (1992) for

evidence). We believe that the possibility of either dependence on the arrival of information or cross-

border trading exists, but that their effect on the stock prices may be very weak.
       The test for volume spillovers is also motivated by the volume behavior on Black Monday,

October 19, 1987. On that day, the S&P 500 composite index plunged 22.9 percent, setting off
international repercussions. On the next day, the Nikkei 225 index declined 16.1% and other world

stock markets experienced similar sharp price declines. This well-known fact is still fresh in our
memories. However, little attention has been paid to the volume behavior during the Crash period.

The price declined on Black Monday in New York in heavy trading of 604 million shares, whereas

Tokyo, the next day, traded only 618 million shares, which is rather light for the Tokyo market. As

shown in Figures 1 and 2, which plot the number of shares traded before and after the crash, the New

York volume remained high for several days before and after Black Monday, while there was no such

volume surge in Tokyo. This extended lack of volume surge cannot be explained by the trading halts

of several individual stocks in Tokyo on the day after Black Monday.4 This phenomenon motivates

us to seek an alternative way to examine the informational efficiency hypothesis by testing for no

return, volatility, volume spillovers when a large foreign price (volume) shock occurs. Since price
changes contain information and noise, under either one of the above two circumstances there is an
increase in uncertainties in interpreting the effect of foreign price changes on the domestic stock price

through connection of fundamental information. Hence, the domestic market may take more time to

digest the foreign price changes. Return, volatility, or volume spillovers are likely to appear. We will
take a close look at the effect of the Crash of October 19, 1987, on the international transmission of

stock returns. In particular, we will use hourly data to examine whether the correlation of stock


                                                   4
returns in the United States and Japan increased during the Crash period and whether spillovers of

international stock returns, volatility, and volume are likely to prevail when a large foreign price
(volume) shock occurs during the other periods.

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the empirical framework;
Section 3 presents an analysis of the correlation of stock returns between the New York and Tokyo

markets; Section 4 reports empirical results for the causal relationship of volatility and trading
volume between New York and Tokyo; Section 5 examines the effect of the Crash on correlations

between the New York and Tokyo stock markets; Section 6 concludes the paper by summarizing our

main findings.




2. Model and Econometric Specification
2.1 Return Process
       To analyze the international transmission of stock returns and volatility, King and Wadhwani

(1990) set out a simple autoregressive and moving average process implied by a time-invariance
extraction process; Hamao, Masulis, and Ng (1990) employed the GARCH-in-mean process; and Lin,
Engle, and Ito (1993) used a signal extraction (Kalman filter) model with time-varying variances. This

paper examines the issue along this line.
       Following Lin, Engle, and Ito (1993), a daily (close-to-close) return is divided into a daytime

(open-to-close) return and an overnight (close(t-1)-to-open) return for both Tokyo and New York:

       NK = NKNLI + NKD,

       SP, = SPN, + SPD,
where NK and SP denote returns for the Nikkei 225 (NK225) and     Standard and Poor 500's (S&P   500)

price indices, respectively, and suffixes D and N denote daytime and overnight, respectively.. See

Figure 3 for detailed information about the timing of the markets.5

   <Insert Figure 3 here>

                                                  5
        Let HR be the domestic stock return and FR be the foreign return. Allowing for possible

autocorrelations from the preceding overnight return, for Monday or post-holiday effects through a
dummy variable, DM, and for the influence from abroad, we can write the domestic overnight return

as:'
        HRN =      a,, + b,, HRD11 + c,,   DM + rn.,1 FRD, + e,,1                (1)

where (HRN1, HRD11, FRD,) E ((NKN1, NKD1.1, SPD1), (SPN,, SPD1.3, NKD1)}.7 The (contemporaneous)

effect of foreign information is rn,,, FRD1. A shock (news) revealed after the close of the foreign market

but before the opening of the domestic market is denoted as e,,,. We also assume that the daytime
return follows a process similar to that of the overnight return:

        HRD1 =   a + b HRN1 + c DM1 +          mdl FRD1    -s e,                 (2)

where (HRD,, HRN1, FRD1) a {(NKD1, N}.1, SPD), (SPD1, SPN1, NKD1)} and edl is the unexpected

part of the return. Since the information about the foreign market movement has become available

to domestic investors at the open, m HRF1 is the spillover effect from the foreign market to the
domestic daytime returns. If the market is efficient, foreign news should be fully reflected in the
opening price of the domestic market and m, will be equal to zero.

       As mentioned in the above section, the objective of this analysis is to disentangle the
informational efficiency vs. market contagion hypotheses for the cause of international transmission
of stock returns. Therefore, we allow mdl and rn,1, to vary with dummy variables for big volume, a big

shock, and the sign of price changes in the foreign market. The effect of a big shock using absolute

returns as a proxy for volatility incorporates the implication of the informational efficiency hypothesis

(such as predicted by the signal extraction model), whereas the effect of foreign trading volume
incorporates the implication of the market contagion hypothesis. Specifically, ma, (or rn,,1) follows:
            =      +     I(FRD1 < 0) +     ji 1(1 FRD, > a(FRD))
                 + 13 I(FRV1 > a(FRV)),             k=n,and d           (3)

where I(A} is an indicator function whose value is equal to one if statement A is true, c(X) is the
sample standard deviation of variable X, and FRV is the foreign trading volume after detrending and


                                                       6
removing the day-of-week effect. For simplicity, we denote I(FRD, < 0) as I, If I FRD, I > a(FRD)) as

Ib,   and III FRVL >    (FRV)} as I in Tables 3 to 5.


2.2 Volatility and Volume Processes
           It has long been recognized that the volatility of stock prices is time-varying and clustered (see

Bollerslev, Chou, and Kroner (1992) for a survey article). To examine the cross-market dependence

on trading volume and volatility, we extend the specification of the GARCH process to account for

possible variations in the effect of volatility spillovers across markets and the effect of the foreign
trading volume on the domestic conditional variances. The volatility processes of ed, and eb follow:

               1)(j) — N(0,   h)   je   (TKC, NYCJ

           eI(j)   —
                       N(0, hd,)   j E (TKO, NYOJ                          (4)

where Mj) denotes the information set containing domestic and foreign daytime and overnight stock

returns up to time j, and N(.,.) denotes a normal distribution with the first element being the mean
and the second element being the variance conditional on fl(j). The conditional variance, h, or h,
follows:

           hk, = o + ak (e,.1)2 + )k hk.l + y   DM1

                     ö (FRV)2 + p (r,)2               for k = n, and d     (5)

In equation (5), we allow squared changes in shocks from the foreign daytime returns and trading
volume (denoted as r and FRV, respectively) to influence the conditional variances of overnight
returns. r is the unexpected part of stock returns (i.e., residuals from OLS regression), whereas FRy

is the foreign trading volume after removal of a trend component and the day-of-week effect. This
setup enables us to test for contemporaneous correlations and lagged spilloves of price volatility
between the international stock markets as studied by Lin et al. (1993) and Hamao et al. (1990). A
notable difference from the previous studies is that we allow the impact of the squared foreign return

shock on the domestic variance to vary. Accounting for the effects of the sign of returns, a big shock,

and high volume, we write p, for k = n and d, as:


                                                         7
              Po + p,1 I(r<0} + Pk.2 1(1 r, I >(r)I +   1IFRV1>(FRV)) (6)

The specification of p, is motivated by the idea of Engle et al. (1991) for intermarket dependence in

volatility and of Black (1976) and Christie (1982) for the leverage effect. In particular, when a big

shock (due to a large rate of information flow) or big volume (due to the increased heterogeneity in

investors' beliefs or sentiments) occurs in the foreign market, it may take more time for the market
to resolve heterogenous interpretations or to disseminate information. In this situation, the market
is not efficient in digesting new information and lagged spillovers will occur.

        It is the well-known stylized fact that trading volume and volatility are positively correlated.

Lamoureux and Lastrapes (1990) found that trading volume, a proxy for information arrival time, can

affect the conditional variances (contemporaneously). The interpretation of this phenomenon is along

the line of the mixture-of-distribution hypothesis--the rate of information flows is a driving force for

both volatility and volume. In contrast with the mixture-of- distribution hypothesis, we explore

whether the trading volume, a proxy for heterogeneity in foreign investors' beliefs, has explanatory
power for the conditional variance of domestic returns.

       The number of shares traded is used to measure trading volume, which usually exhibits

nonstationanty. Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) argued that a one-year backward moving
average of past volume seems to be a better measure of market making capacity. We use a similar

procedure to remove the nonstationarity by obtaining the deviation from the 100-day backward
movrng average of past volume.8 Trading volume strongly exhibits the day-of-week effect as reported

by Jam and Joh (1988) and Gallant, Rossi, and Tauchen (1992). We also remove the day-of-week and

holiday effects from the 100-day backward moving average of past volume.             This daily volume
variable, after removal of nonstationanty and the day-of-week and holiday effects, is denoted as HRV

or FRY. To test our hypothesis of cross-market volume-price relation, we specify the volume process
as

       HRV = E,t1 HRV,., +    E 9 FRV1, + E c, HRD1 I + E, A1 I FRD.I I
               +   I(HRD1<0})IHRD1I        + XIIFRID,<0))IFRD,I +   v          (7)


                                                    8
 In equation (7), like many studies in the volume and vo'atility relation (e.g., Jam and Joh (1988)), we
use the absolute returns as a proxy for the rate of information to examine whether new information

increases investors' heterogeneity and increases the incentive to trade. Unlike those studies, we allow

both foreign and domestic absolute returns to affect the domestic trading volume. Similarly, the

decrease in prices often suppresses the incentive to trade because of the increased in risk aversions,
a short-sale constraint, or other market frictions. We also specify this effect in a cross-market
framework.




3. Cross-Market Dependence of U.S. and Japanese Stock Returns
3.1. Data Summary
        The Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) and the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) are the two

largest equity markets in the world. We adopt the Nikkei 225 and S&P 500 as the stock price indices

for our analysis.9 The NYSE opens its trading at 9:30 a.m. and continues trading until 4:00 p.m.
The TSE opens at 9:00 a.m. and trades until 11:00 am. when it breaks for lunch. Prior to spring

1991, the afternoon session began at 1:00 p.m. and continued until 3:00 p.m. Since the spring of 1991

the afternoon session has started at 12:30 p.m. Tokyo is ahead of New York by either 14 hours (in
the winter) or 13 hours (in the summer), so these trading hours do not overlap in real time.

       Since we use the stock price indices, we have to worry about the problem of stale quotes in the

opening of the market. As analyzed by Stoll and Whaley (1990), the average time to open a NYSE

stock was 15 minutes during 1982-1988. Consequently, the opening index defined only a minute after

trading begins may not reflect all the relevant information. Lin et al. (1993) reported a wide range

of correlation analyses between S&P500 and NK225 daytime and overnight returns and found that
30(15) minutes after the official opening of the New York (Tokyo) Stock Exchange is a good proxy for

opening quotes which can mitigate the effect of stale quotes or nonsynchronous trading.

       To analyze whether interdependence in international stock returns depend on the regimes of


                                                  9
bull or bear markets, we divide our sample from October 1985 to December 1991 into four subperiods:

the first period runs from October 1, 1985 to September 30, 1987; the second from October 1, 1987 to

December 31, 1987; the third from January 1, 1988 to December 31, 1989; and the last from January

1, 1990 to December 31, 1991. The first period was a bull-market period in which the Nikkei index

moved from 12685 to 26010; the second a bear-market period which experienced a crash and the

Nikkei index dropped from 26010 to 21564; the third started tranquilly and then turned into a bull
market in which the Nikkei index went from 21564 to 38915; and the last was a bear market period

for the TSE during which the Nikkei decreased to 22983.

        The data summary for overnight and daytime returns, and volume after removal of a trend
component and the day-of-week and holiday effects for these four subperiods is presented in Table 1.

Standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasti city and serial correlations (e.g., Newey and West (1987))

are reported in parentheses. Panel A of Table 1 shows the results for the Tokyo stock market. The
stock returns became more volatile in both the Crash and the fourth periods, while trading volume

decreased. The stability test for the null hypothesis of equality of mean returns and their variances
is rejected. Panel B of Table 1 shows that the standard deviation of stock returns in the NYSE was

higher in the Crash period, and trading volume was lower in the third and the fourth regimes. The
stability test also shows a rejection of the equality of the variances of stock returns and trading volume
across the four regimes.



3.2 Cross-Market Dependence

       We begin by presenting evidence concerning the time-varying dependence of international stock

returns. This dependence of international stock returns may result from traders' extraction of foreign

news (e.g., King and Wadhwani (1990), and Lin, Engle, and Ito (1993)), which depends on price
volatility. A related study by Neumark, Tinsley, and Tosini (1991) assessed the dependence of
volatility on correlations of international stock returns by sorting data during several weeks of the

Crash period according to high or low-volatility periods.'0 Gauging this volatility dependence

                                                   10
hypothesis is a first step toward understanding the informational efficiency vs. market contagion

hypotheses. We use the above four data periods from 1985 to 1991 covering the Crash and the bull

and bear periods of the Tokyo stock market to examine whether correlations (spillovers) between

international stock returns depend upon the regimes of bull and bear markets and exhibit a structural

break, whether the correlations dominated during the Crash period, and whether the Crash increased

the international transmission of stock returns and volatility afterwards.

       Table 2 shows the estimated regression results for cross-market dependence in stock returns

across the New York and Tokyo stock markets. The results are obtained by using the ordinary least

squared (OLS) estimation of equations (1) and (2) and by fixing m1 or m, as a constant. The
coefficient in,, measures the impact of the foreign daytime return on the domestic overnight returns

(i.e., the contemporaneous correlations of stock returns), while the coefficient m measures the impact

of the foreign daytime return on the domestic daytime returns (i.e., the lagged spillover effect). Panel

A presents the results for the impact of the New York daytime returns on the Tokyo daytime and
overnight returns, whereas Panel B presents the results for the effect of the NK225 daytime return

to the S&P500 daytime and overnight returns. White's (1980) heteroskedasticity consistent standard

errors are reported in the parentheses. Several conclusions emerge from Table 2.
        First, the first column in Table 2 shows the coefficient of S&P500 daytime returns (SPD) on
the regression of NK225 overnight returns (NKN). The hours defining SPD are a subset of those
defining NKN, as shown in Figure 3. Similarly, the third column shows the coefficient of NKD on the

regression of SPN, where the hours of NKD are a subset of those of SPN. In general, the two
contemporaneous effects of the foreign daytime return on the domestic overnight return, coefficient
m, are statistically significant in all regimes when the lagged effects of the home market and various

weekend and holiday effects are controlled. The second and fourth columns, using equation (2), show

the estimated coefficients of (lagged) spillovers from SPD1 to NKD and NKL) to SPD. These.
estimates and student t statistics show that (lagged) international spillovers are generally
insignificant. Combining the results of significant contemporaneous dependence in stock returns but


                                                  11
 nsigniflcant spillovers, we can assert that any news revealed in the foreign market overnight are
 completely incorporated into the opening prices of the home market as we allow some minutes to avoid

a stale quote problem (see Lin, Engle, and Ito (1993) for further discussion of this issue).

        Second, the contemporaneous correlation of international stock returns measured as rn, in
equation (1) for Regime 2, the Crash period, are smaller than those for other periods, while the
coefficients for the lagged spillovers of the Crash period are greater than those of other periods. A
comparison of the magnitude of coefficients in Regime 2 to those in other regimes suggests that during

the Crash period, news revealed in the foreign markets could not be incorporated into the opening

price due to the increased uncertainty and breakdown in interpretation of large shocks. Hence,
because the Crash period is so different, we will not use it in our subsequent analysis.

        Third, a comparison of the magnitudes of the two coefficients for contemporaneous correlations

shows both the effect of SPD on NKN and the effect of NKD on SPN. The former effect (Column )

is greater than the latter effect (Column 3). In addition, the impact of foreign stock returns on
domestic overnight stock returns increased in the fourth period but declined in the Crash period.

Tests for structural breaks, given these three break points, show a rejection of the null hypothesis of
no structural breaks in the Tokyo market, but not in the New York market. Finding a positive and

larger coefficient for contemporaneous correlations in international stock returns may not imply the
increased integration of the international financial markets. One explanation for this argument is
that the correlation of the stock returns depends on the nature of the shocks. Some shocks affect the

stock returns in the same direction but others affect them oppositely. Thus, the sign of the
contemporaneous correlations of the international stock returns depends on the combined effects of

these two types of shocks. Moreover, the evidence that the impact of SPD on NKN is larger than that

of NKD on SPN does not imply that New York news is more important for the Tokyo market, because

the effect of a third country is ignored in our analysis."


3.3 Asymmetric Effects on Cross-Market Correlations and Spillovers

                                                  12
     In the above analysis, we have shown that domestic overnight returns are significantly affected

by foreign daytime returns. In this section, we extend our previous analysis by examining the

following asymmetric effects on the international transmission of stock returns and volatility: i)

volatility effect--the cross-market dependence on stock returns (contemporaneous correlations or lagged

spillovers) will be greater when the volatility increases; (ii) volume effect--the cross-market
dependence on stock returns will be greater when international stock return correlations or spillovers

are associated with trading volume; (iii) sign of price changes--a decline in prices, as opposed to an

increase, will increase the effect of international transmission on stock returns and volatility.

        In the context of the international transmission of stock returns, King and Wadhwani (1990)

Lin et al. (1993), and Neumark, Tinsley, and Tosini (1991) have highlighted the importance of the

increase in correlations of international stock returns during the period of high volatility. The purpose

of examining the first and second effects is to disentangle the informational efficiency hypothesis from

the market contagion hypothesis. As for the third effect, Nelson (1991) argued that a decline in prices

is associated with higher future price variability. This asymmetry has been attributed to a leverage

effect (e.g., Black (1976) and Christie (1982)) in which a decline in equity prices decreases the equity

to debt ratio and increases the riskiness of the firms. From an international perspective, a leverage

effect may increase domestic price volatility and hence increase the international correlation coefficient

as investors extract the information from overseas price changes.

        In Table 3, we present the empirical results for various asymmetric effects on cross-market

dependence in stock returns, which can be viewed as an extension of correlations of stock returns in

the home market (e.g., Antoniewicz (1992), Campbell et al., and LeBaron (1992)) to an international

context. Our interacting variables include dummies for a negative return, a big price shock (i.e.,

absolute returns greater than one standard deviation of returns in the sample), and big volume. Since

the Crash period spans only three months (the number of observations is less than 70), we report the

results only for the other three periods in the followings and Section 4.

        These empirical results are not strongly supportive of asymmetric effects on cross-market


                                                    13
 correlations. A big shock from S&P500 returns significantly increased the influence of S&P500
 daytime returns on NK225 overnight returns in Regimes 1 and 3 and negative S&P500 daytime

 returns also increased such an impact in Regime 1. However, a big volume has no impact on the
 contemporaneous correlation of stock returns across markets. The result.s for the asymmetric effect

 of NK225 daytime returns on the S&P500 returns are also weak. There is no evidence of a significant

 effect of either Tokyo volume or price volatility on New York stock returns, which can be repeatedly

shown across all three regimes.

        The aim of the above analysis in Tables 2 and 3 is to shed light on the market contagion and

informational efficiency hypotheses. Under the market contagion hypothesis, applying the idea of
Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993), the informed traders in the home market would be likely to

accommodate the sale of uninformed traders who, observing a price drop in the foreign market, may

become more risk averse. As a result, the expected returns would increase, the current price would

drop, and the effect of foreign daytime returns on domestic overnight (daytime) returns would increase

(decrease) when the volume increased. Under the informational efficiency hypothesis, the foreign price

changes are informative to the fundamentals of the domestic stock returns. As a result, a higher rate
of information in the foreign market will increase (contemporaneous) correlations of stock returns

between the home and foreign markets as investors extract this information from the observed foreign

price change. Our findings of contemporaneous correlations of stock returns across markets in Tables

2 and 3 dispute the market contagion scenario. Moreover, the findings of no significant spillover from

the foreign daytime return to the domestic overnight return are supportive to the informational
efficiency hypothesis in that the domestic market can very quickly process the foreign information.




4. Evidence on the Volatility and Volume Processes
       The cause of correlations and spillovers in volatility and volume across markets is another
focus of this paper. In this section, we apply a two-stage GARCH estimation method to specify the


                                                 14
processes of time-varying conditional vanances: first, we employ an OLS regression for equations (1)

and (2) and obtain OLS residuals; second, we fit a GARCH process for conditional variances of

unexpected returns. After fitting the GARCH model, we calculate the skewness and the kurtosis of

standardized residuals. These statistics are still too large to accept the null hypothesis of a normal
distribution. Therefore, we report the robust standard errors as calculated by Bollerslev and
Wooldridge (1992). The volume process is estimated by OLS with White's (1980) heteroskedasticity

consistent covariance matrix.




4.1 Volatility Process
   One line of research on intermarket dependence of financial markets examines volatility
correlations and spillovers across markets. For instance, Engle, Ito, and Lin (1990), and Ito, Lin, and

Engle (1992) investigated this issue for the foreign exchange markets. Chan, Chan, and Karolyi (1991)
examined intermarket dependence across the stock index and the stock index future markets. Since
volatility is related to the rate of information flows (e.g., Ross (1989)), the intermarket dependence in

volatility of both markets can be attributed to dissemination of information flow between the two

markets. Volatility is also partly related to the dispersion of prior beliefs (e.g., Shalen (1993)). As
predicted by Shalen's (1993) model, an increase in the dispersion of beliefs may induce volatility

correlations (spillovers). In this section, the test for no volatility spillovers is used to gauge the second

hypothesis by examining how fast the market gropes for the equilibrium price and resolves
heterogenous beliefs.

        Following the procedure described in the beginning of Section 4, we report the empirical results

in Table 4. A big shock or a big volume dummy interacting with the square of foreign price volatility

does not have explanatory power for the domestic price volatility. Furthermore, we found that there
is no causal relation between lagged foreign trading volume and domestic conditional variances.
Overall, our results are consistent with Lin et al. (1993) who showed a lack of volatility correlation


                                                    15
or spillover effects. The findings suggest that the domestic market may adjust to foreign information

very quickly in resolving domestic investors' dispersion of beliefs about foreign information. Hence,

there are no volatility spillovers. Some attention may be given to the asymmetric effect of the sign

of the foreign price change on the volatility spillovers.



4.2. Volume Processes
       Why may trading volume be correlated across markets? Several possible factors may
contribute to this phenomenon. The first is cross-market trading. Chowdhry and Nanda (1991)
developed a theoretical framework to explain the practice of multimarket trading. They showed that

when a security trades at multiple locations simultaneously, an informed trader has several ways to

exploit his private information. As the proportion of liquidity trading by large traders who can split
their trades across markets increases, the correlation between volume in different markets will
increase. A second factor is the increase in dispersion of beliefs about the information revealed in

other markets.
       Table 5 reports the estimated processes for trading volume and shows that trading volume in

one market cannot significantly Granger cause trading volume in he other market. The behavior of

trading volume across markets has not received great attention in the literature. French and Poterba
(1990> showed that cross-border trading accounts for less than 1% of trading in the Tokyo and New

York markets (Kieidon and Werner (1993) also show limited cross-border trading for the London and

New York markets). Due to the limited cross-border trading, it is not surprising that there is no
significant evidence of interrnarket dependence on the trading volume (except in the case of the Tokyo

stock market in the fourth period).
       We also test whether absolute returns, used as a proxy for the arrival rate of information, will

affect trading volume across markets. By evaluating Wald statistics having a chi-squared distribution

with the degree of freedom of six, we find that the null hypothesis of no effect of foreign absolute
returns on domestic trading volume cannot be rejected except for the effect of SPD on NKV in the first


                                                   16
period. This result suggests that foreign information may not change domestic investors' incentive to

trade. This result, along with the result of no evidence of cross-market interdependence in trading

volume, suggests that the dissemination of foreign information does not increase the heterogeneity in

domestic investors' beliefs about foreign news nor increase incentives to trade. These results also

suggest that the market may be efficient in processing foreign news and that opening prices

incorporate such overnight news.

         We also examine the asymmetric effects on trading volume and report the results on the left

side of Table 5. Literature has documented that volume becomes lower when returns drop than when

returns rise. Studies attribute this phenomenon to the cost of short selling, borrowing, or an increase

in risk aversion (see the survey by Karpoff(1987fl. The results reported in the middle part of Table

5 show evidence of the asymmetric effect of returns on trading volume not only in the domestic

market, but also across markets. 12



5.   Return Spillovers during the Crash Period
         The stock market crash of October 19, 1987 has inspired several studies of its causes, although
consensus has not yet been reached. Roll (1989) suggested downward revised expectations for world-

wide economic activity, while Seyhun (1990) argued for the overreaction of uninformed traders by

using positive feedback strategies.      Evidence of the abnormally higher autocorrelations of high

frequency (cash) stock index returns is also reported in Harris (1989) and Kleidon (1992). Harris

suggested that this was due to nonsynchronous trading, whereas Kleidon (1992) argued that it was

caused by stale quotes attributable to the physical limitations in the processing of automated orders

on the NYSE during the crash period.

         In section 3.2, we found that there is a significant increase in return spillovers from SPD to

NKD. Hence, we further investigate how fast such spillovers can die out. In contrast to the analysis

of correlations in domestic (cash and future) stock returns by Harris (1989) and Kleidon (1992), this

analysis is an examination of cross correlations of New York and Tokyo stock returns during the Crash


                                                   17
period. Table 6 reported an OLS regression, similar to equation (2), for hourly stock returns. The

standard errors are also adjusted for heteroskedasticity. We found a significant spiflover effect of

SPD on NK225 hourly returns. The significant impact of SPD on hourly NK225 returns appears

during all business hours in the Tokyo market except for the lunch break, while the impact of NKD

on S&P500 hourly stock returns is significant only from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. Since we did not observe

abnormal trading volume in Tokyo during the Crash period, we conjecture that the Crash was

informative to Tokyo traders but they became more skeptical about the causes of the Crash. Thus,

uncertainties about the cause of the Crash may lead to a lag adjustment of this information and a

significant return spillover.




6. Conclusion

        The world scope of the stock market crash in October 1987 raised concerns about how financial

disturbances transmit from one market to another. In this paper, we extend the previous work in this

area (e.g., King and Wadhwani (1990), Lin et al. (1993), and Hamao et al. (1990)) by accounting for

the interactions of trading volume, returns, and volatility across markets. Trading volume is used

because it can serve as a proxy for the degree of heterogeneity in investors' beliefs. We approach this

issue by using a simple regression model with a GARCH process and by considering the asymmetric

effects of the sign and magnitude of stock returns and the magnitude of trading volume.

        Using this framework, we test whether the transmission of international financial disturbances

is due to liquidity traders' sentiments or to the informativeness of stock returns. On one hand, if the

transmission of international financial disturbances results from the first source, as the model of

Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) predict, the impact of foreign daytime returns on domestic

overnight (daytime) returns is likely to increase (decrease) when the volume is higher. On the other

hand, if the transmission results from the second source, the correlation will increase with the

volatility of shocks as domestic investors extract the foreign information, as described by King and


                                                  18
\Vadhwani (1990) and Lin et al. (1993).

        Our general finding is supportive of the second hypothesis for the transmission of shocks from

the New York market to the Tokyo market. We uncovered evidence that the regression coefficient of

the S&P500 daytime returns on the NK225 overnight returns increases when a big shock occurs. In
addition, we found no evidence on volume, volatility, or return spillovers for four regimes except the

Crash period, so opening prices, after allowing some time for clearing stale quotes, reflect all world

news revealed overnight. Thus, both markets adjust foreign information efficiently.




                                                 19
                                               ENDNOTES

1.   See, for example, Chan, Cha.n, and Karolyi (1991), Dravid,
                                                           Richardson, and Craig(1993), and Lin,

Engle, and Ito (1993).

2.   An international asset pricing model (e.g., Adler and Dumas (1983) and Solnik (1974)) can
incorporate correlations between stock returns in different countries.

3. In this paper, we define correlations of stock returns between the New York and Tokyo markets as

the cross-correlation between the daytime returns in one market and the overnight returns in the
other market, where the time span of both returns overlaps in real time. By contrast, we define
spillovers of stock returns between the two markets as correlations between the daytime returns in

one market and the subsequent daytime returns in the other market, where the time span of the two

returns does not overlaps. A similar definition is also applied to trading volume and price volatility.

4. On October 21, 1987, Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported:
           "The limit on price changes in a day is as follows: 50 yen for stocks with prices between 100

and 200; 80 yen for stocks with prices between 200 and 500; 100 yen for stocks between 500 and 1,000,

etc. . . Theoretically, if all listed stocks on the Tokyo Stock Exchange were at the bottom of the price
       .




change limit, it would be -4059.75 in the Nikkei 225 index, while the actual change on October 20 was

-3,386.48. On October 20, trading occurred on 753 stocks out of 1,100 listed stocks. Of the 753 stocks,

569 were at the bottom of the price limit (translated by the authors)."

In sum, on October 20, there were many stocks which were not traded because of the price change

limit. During several weeks after October 20, there was little evidence that the price limit prevented

trading from taking place.
5. According to analyses by Stoll and Whaley (1990 and Lin et al. (1993), the 9:15 quotes for the TSE

and the 10:00 quotes for the NYSE are chosen to avoid the nonsynchronous trading problem.

6. The Monday dummy for SPN is equal to one for returns from Friday close to Monday pen and
returns during holidays, and is equal to zero otherwise. The Monday dummy for NKN is equal to one

for returns from Friday close to Monday open in the absence of Saturday trading, returns from

                                                   20
Saturday close to Monday open in the presence of Saturday trading, and returns during holidays, and

is equal to zero otherwise. See Gibbons and Hess (1981) for the evidence on the day-of-week effect

7. Note the time difference: Tokyo is ahead of New York by either 14 hours or 13 hours (when New

York is observing daylight saving time). Hence, the past foreign daytime returns, FRD, on the right-

hand-side of equation (1) should be day t, S&P500 in the Tokyo equation, and               Nikkei in the
New York equation.

8. We denote the deviation of the trading volume from a 100-day backward moving average as

HRMAV. To remove the day-of-week effect and holiday effect, we obtain HRV from the OLS residuals

of the regression of HRMAV on several dummy variables as follows:

    HRMAV, = c + d0MON, + d1TUE, + d2THR, + d3FR!, + d4SAT,

            + b1 PRH, + b9 PSH1 + b3 CHRS,   + HRV,

where MON, TUE, THR, FR!, and SAT are the dummy variables for Monday, Tuesday, Thursday,

Friday, and Saturday; and PRH, PSH, and CHRS are dummy variables for the day before holidays,

the day after holidays, and the Christmas season from December 20 to January 10.

9. The Standard and Poor's 500 (S&P 500) is the equity-value weighted arithmetic mean of 500 stocks

selected by Standard and Poor. The hourly data for the S&P 500 are kindly provided to us by Dr. J.

Harold Muherlin. The Nikkei 225 (NK225) is a price-weighted simple average of 225 stock prices

selected by Nihon Keizai Shimbun.

10. They assert that when volatility is high, the cross border transaction is likely to be profitable and

the correlations of international stocks will increase.

11. We   thank for George von Furstenberg for this comments to us about these phenomena.
12. We   also test for the asymmetric effect of a large shock and a high volume from the domestic and

foreign markets on the trading volume in the domestic markets. We find insignificant results.

Therefore, the results are not reported.




                                                  21
                                           References
Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas. 1983. "International Portfolio Choice and Corporation Finance:
       A Synthesis," Journal of Finance. pp. 925-84.

Antoniewicz, Rochelle. 1992, "An Empirical Analysis of Stock Returns and Volume," University of
       Wisconsin-Madison, Ph.D. Dissertation.

Black, Fischer. 1976. 'Studies of Stock Market Volatility Changes," Proceedings of the American
       Statistical Association, Business and Economic Statistics Section. pp. 177-181.

Bollerslev, Tim, Ray Y. Chou, and Kenneth F. Kroner. 1992. "ARCH Modeling in Finance: A Review
        of the Theory and Empirical Evidence," Journal of Econometrics. pp. 5-60.

Bollerslev, Tim and Jeffrey Wooldridge. 1992. "Quasi Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Dynamic
       Models with Time Varying Covariances," Econometric Reviews. pp. 143-172.

Campbell, John, Sanford J. Grossman, and Jiang Wang. 1993. "Trading Volume and Serial Correlation
     in Stock Returns," forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Chan, Kalok, K. C. Chan, and G. Andrew Karolyi, 1991. 'Intraday Volatility in the Stock Index and
       Stock Index Futures Markets," Review of Financial Studies. pp. 657-684.

Chowdry, Bhagwan and Vikram Nanda. 1991. "Multimarket Trading and Market Liquidity," Review
      of Financial Studies. pp. 453-5 11.

Christie, Andrew A.. 1982. "The Stochastic Behavior of Common Stock Variances: Value, Leverage and
        Interest Rate Effects." Journal of Financial Economics. pp. 407-432.

Delong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert J. Waldman. 1990. "Noise
      Trader Risk in Financial Markets," Journal of Political Economics. pp. 703-738.

Dravid, A, Matthew Richardson, and Andrew Craig. 1993. "Explaining Overnight Variation in
       Japanese Stock Returns: The Information Content of Derivative Securities," working paper,
       The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.

Engle, Robert F,, Tatatoshi Ito, and Wen-Ling Lin. 1990. 'Meteor Showers or Heat Waves?
       Heteroskedasticity Intra-daily Volatility in the Foreign Exchange Market," Econometrica. pp.
       525-542.

Epps, Thomas SV,, and Mary L. Epps, 1976. "The Stochastic Dependence of Security Price Changes and
       Transaction Volumes: Implications for the Mixture-of-Distributions Hypotheses," Econometrica.
       pp. 305-321.

Eun, Cheol S. and Sangdal Shim, 1989. "International Transmission of Stock Market Movements,"
      Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. pp. 241-256.
French, Kenneth R., and James M. Poterba, 1990, "Japanese and U.S. Cross-Border Common Stock
       Investment," Journal of the Japanese and International Economy. pp. 476-93,
Gallant, A. Ronald, Peter E, Rossi, and George Tauchen, 1992. "Stock Prices and Volume," Review
        of Financial Studies, pp. 199-242,
 Gibbons, Michael and P. Hess, 1981, Day of the Week Effect and Asset Returns, Journal of Business
        pp. 579-596.

 Harnao,    Yasushi, Ronald W. Masulis, and Victor Ng. 1990. " Correlations in Price Changes and
           Volatility Across International Stock Markets, Review of Financial Studies. pp. 281-308.

Harris, Lawrence. 1989. The October 1987 S&P 500 Stock-Futures Basis," Journal of Finance pp. 77-
        99.

Harris, Milton, and Arthur Raviv. 1991. 'Differences of Opinion Make a Race Horse,' forthcoming in
        Review of Financial Studies.

Ito, Takatoshi, Robert F. Engle, and Wen-Ling Lin. 1992. "Where Does the Meteor Shower Come
        From? The Role of Stochastic Policy Coordination," Journal of International Economics. pp
        221-240.

Jam, Prem J. and Gunho Joh, 1988, 'The Dependence Between Hourly Prices and Trading Volume,
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 23, 269-283.

Karpoff, Jonathan M.. 1987, 'The Relation between Price Changes and Trading Volume: A Survey,
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 22, 109-126.

King, Mervyn and Sushi! Wadhwani. 1990. 'Transmission of Volatility Between Stock markets,'
       Review of Financial Studies. pp. 5-33.

Kleidon, Allan \V.. 1992. "Arbitrage, Nontrading, and Stale Prices: October 1987, forthcoming in
      Journal of Business,

Kleidon, Allan W. and Ingrid M. Werner. 1993. "Round-the-Clock Trading: Evidence from U.K. Cross-
       Listed Securities, NBER working paper No. 4410.

Lamoureu.x, Christopher G., and William D. Lastrapes. 1990. "Heteroskedasticity in Stock Return
     Data: Volume versus GARCH Effects," Journal of Finance. pp. 221-229.

LeBaron, Blake. 1992. "Some Relations Between Volatility and Serial Correlation in Stock Market
      Returns," Journal of Business. pp. 199-220.

Lin, Wen-Ling, Robert F. Engle, arid Takatoshi Ito. 1993. "Do Bulls and Bears Move Across Borders?
      International Transmission of Stock Returns and Volatility," unpublished working paper.

Morse, Dale. 1980. "Asymmetric Information in Securities Markets and Trading Volume," Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis. pp. 1129-1148.

Nelson, Daniel B.. 1991. "Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New Approach,"
       Econometrica. pp. 347-370.

Neumark, David, Peter A. Tinsley, and Suzanne Tosini. 1991, "After-Hours Stock Prices and Post-
     Crash Hangovers," Journal of Finance, pp. 159-178.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West. 1987. "A Simple Positive Semi-Definite Heteroskedasticity
       and Autocorrelation Consistent Covanance Matrix," Econometrica. pp. 703-708.


                                                 23
Roll, Richard. 1989. "Pi-ice Volatility, International Market Links, and Their Implications for
        Regulatory Policies," Journal of Financial Services Research. pp. 211-246.

Ross, Stephen A.. 1989 "Information and Volatility: The No-Arbitrage Martingale Approach to Timing
        and Resolution Irrelevancy," Journal of Finance. pp. 1-17.

Seyhun, Nejat N.. 1990. "Overreaction or Fundamentals: Some Lessons From Insiders' Response to
      the Market Crash of 1987, Journal of Finance. pp. 1368-88.

Shalen, Catherine T., 1993, "Volume, Volatility, and the Dispersion of Beliefs," Review of Financial
       Studj. 6, 405-434.
Shiller, Robert J., F. Konya, and Y. Tsutsui. 1991. "Investor Behavior in the October 1987 Stock
         Market Crash: The Case of Japan," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies. pp.
       1-13.

Solnik, Bruno. 1974. "An Equilibrium Model of the International Capital Market," Journal of Economic
        Theory. pp. 500-24.
Stoll, Hans R. and Robert E. Whaley. 1990. "Stock Market Structure and Volatility,' Review of
        Financial Studies. pp. 37-7 1.

Tauchen, George E. and Mark Pitts. 1983. "The Price Variability-Volume Relationship on Speculative
       Markets,' Econometnca. pp. 485-505.
von Furstenberg, George and Bang N. Jeon. 1989. "International Stock Price Movements: Links and
       Messages," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. pp. 125-67.

White, Halbert, 1980, "A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix and A Direct Test for
       Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica. pp. 421-448.




                                                 24
                                          Table 1: Data Summary
 Panel A: Nikkei 225
                    NKMAV'                        NKN                           NKD
                    meanb          std.           mean           std.          mean         ] stcj.
   Regime 1            0.175          0.531          0.181         0.385          -0.052          0.776
                      (0.069)        (0.024)        (0.016)       (0.019)         (0.033)        (0.056)
  Regime 2            -0.422          0.507          0.078         0.733          -0.353          2.523
                      (0.123)        (0.046)        (0.094)       (0.056)         (0.211)        (0.820)
  Regime 3             0.010          0.472          0.150         0.384         -0.037           0.505
                      (0.053)        (0.030)        (0.015)       (0.022)        (0.022)         (0.034)
  Regime 4            -0.231          0.373          0.050         0.786         -0.157           1.360
                      (0.046)        (0.033)        (0.032)       (0.039)        (0.057)         (0.144)
  Test               34.556          10.910         13.926        76.627          5.874         31.500
                     (0.000)         (0.001)        (0.003)       (0.000)        (0.118)        (0.000)

Panel B: Standard and Poor 500
                   SPMAVd                        SPN                            SPD
                   meanb          std.           mean            std.         mean            std.
  Regime 1            0.141           0.201          0.026         0.466          0.086          0.795
                     (0.020)         (0.015)        (0.021)       (0.027)        (0.034)        (0.037)
  Regime 2            0.107           0.363         -0.076         1.831         -0.337          2.888
                     (0.090)         (0.073)        (0.140)       (0.383)        (0.388)        (0.988)
  Regime 3           -0.036           0.211          0.024         0.446          0.047          0.826
                     (0.019)         (0.011)        (0.020)       (0.030)        (0.028)        (0.093)
  Regime 4            0.020          0.213          -0.010         0.513          0.043          0.803
                     (0.020)        (0.015)         (0.022)       (0.046)        (0.034)        (0.034)
  Test               43.335          3.204          2.185          6.422          2.061          1.916
                     (0.000)        (0.36U         (0.535)        (0.093)        (0.560)        (0.590)

Notes:
(a) The number of observations in Panel A is 556, 64, 522, and 499; in Panel B, 506, 64, 504, and 506.
(b) The sample mean and standard deviations are reported in this Table. The standard errors
computed from the Newey and West (1987) autocorrelation- and heteroskedasticity-consist.ent
covariance matrix for the sample mean and standard deviations are reported in the parentheses.
(c) Wald test statistics are for the null hypothesis that all coefficients of Regimes 1 to 4 for the column
are identical.
(d) NKMAV or SPMAV denotes the deviation of the log of trading volume from its 100-day backward
moving average of past volume.



                                                   25
                      Table 2 Cross-Market Dependence in Stock Returns

OLS Regression:
           HRN, = ar + b HRD1. + c DM       +   m FRD + e,                          (1)

where (HRN, HRDL, FRD) E {(NKNL, NKD1.1, SPD), (SPN1, SPD1.1, NKD)}.
       HRD = ad + bd HRN, ÷ cd DM + md FRD1 + edl                                                 (2)
where (HRD, HRN, F'RD) E I(NKD, NKNI, SPD), (SPD, SPN1, NKDI)}.

  Equation #              (1)                   (2)                 (1)                     (2)
  LHS var.                NKN                   NKD                 SPN                    SPD
  Coeff.                   m                      md                m                       md
                        (T-stat)                (T-stat)           (T-stat)               (T-stat)

  Regime 1                        0.194                  -0.061                0.083                 0.020
                                 (9.955)                (-1.172)              (2.312)              (0.443)
  Regime 2                        0.085                  0.547                 0.214                0.109
                                 (2.376)                (2.764)               (1.987)              (1.456)
  Regime 3                        0.217                  -0.068                0.099                0.037
                                (11.103)                (-1.510)              (2.096)              (0.649)

  Regime 4                        0.388                  -0.033                0.156                -0.009
                                 (9.803)                (-0.307)              (6.323)              (-0.275)
 Test                           33.296                   9.317                 3.612                2.285
                                (0.000)                 (0.025)               (0.307)              (0.515)

Notes:
(a) Wald test statistics are for the null hypothesis that all coefficients of Regimes ito 4 for the column
are identical. P-values are reported in parentheses.




                                                       26
          Table 3 Asymmetric Effect on Cross-Market Dependence in Stock Returns
OLS Regression:
 HRN =     a + b HRD1.1 + c DM1 +           + p1   +      + p,I)FRD +           en,t

where (HRNL,           FRD) e ((N}, NKDLI,                (SPN, SPD11, NI1)}. (3)
 HRD = ad + bd HRN, + Cd DM + d.O + Pdj'r + Pd.2'b + Pd.3IVD + ed,t
where (HRDL, HRN1, FRDC) E {(NKDI, NKN11, SPD1), (SPDL, SPNL, NKD1)}.                     (4)

Pane] A: from SPD to NKN or NKD

 Eq. #                    (3)                                          (4)
 LHS                       NKN                                         NKD
 Coeff.        p,                           '-.3          d.1                11d.2              I1d.3
               (T-stat)         (T-stat)    (T-stat)      (T-stat)           (T-stat)           (T-stat)
 Regime 1          0.125           0.115         0.027       0.037               0.029                   0.018
                  (2.364)         (2.439)       (0.493)     (0.250)             (0.287)                 (0.140)
 Regime 3          -0.028          0.096         0.026       -0.050              0.061                   -0.051
                  (-0.621)        (2.120)       (0.693)     (-0.703)            (0.874)                 (-0.736)
 Regime 4          -0.071         -0.009        0.145        0.017               0.008                   0.166
                  (-0.599)       (-0.095)      (1.630)      (0.056)             (0.045)                 (0.502)

Panel B: from NED to SPN or SPD


 Eq. #                    (3)                                          (4)
 LHS                      SPN                                          SPD
 Coeff.        L1I                                        PL1                d,2            Pd.3
               (T-stat)         (T-stat)    (T-stat)      (T-stat)           (T-stat)       (T-stat)
 Regime 1          0.101           0.028        -0.078      -0.048             -0.158                    -0.254
                  (1.042)         (0.382)      (-1.131)    (-0.346)           (-1.357)                  (-2.209)
 Regime 3          -0.035          0.067        0.025       -0.096             -0.051                    0.170
                  (-0.234)        (0.731)      (0.242)     (-0.617)           (-0.282)                  (0.959)
 Regime 4          0.022          -0.0 12      -0.022        0.005             -0.23 1                   -0.004
                  (0.306)        (-0.255)     (-0.416)      (0.073)           (-3.357)                  (-0.051)




                                                   27
                 Table 4 Cross-Market Dependence in Volatility of Stock Returns
Model:

e,, 11(j) .- N(O,   h,        j e (TKC,, NYC,)

h = co, + a (e,1)2 +        3,,   h,1 + y0 DM% +      (FRVL)2 +

          Pno + PnjIn+    Pn.' + p31) (r1)2                                    (5)
or

ed ,l 11(j) — N(O, hd,)       j E {TKO,, NYOJ
hd, =      + ad (ed,1)2 + 3d h,1 + Yd DM, + 5d (FRV1)2 +

          Pa.o + Pd.1'n Pd.21b + Pd3') (r1)2                                   (6)


where lXj) denotes the information set containing domestic and foreign daytime and overnight stock
returns up to time j, e denotes the OLS residuals from the last regression, r is the most recent foreign
unexpected returns (OLS residuals), and FRV, is the foreign trading volume after removal of the day-
of-week and holiday effects and nonstationarity.


Panel A: NKN

     LHS.(eq.)                                                  NKN (5)
 Coeff.                     pn.o
                          (T-stat)
                                                 P,
                                               (T-stat)
                                                                    P
                                                                  (T-stat)
                                                                                P
                                                                              (T-stat)
                                                                                             6,
                                                                                          (T-stat)
 Regime 1                    -0.021               0.011              0.023      -0.002       -0.006
                            (-1.418)             (1.300)            (1.662)    (-0.274)     (-0.138)
 Regime 3                    -0.033               0.026              0.015      -0.003        0.135
                            (-0.505)             (5.007)            (0.227)    (-0.523)      (1.469)
 Regime 4                    -0.049               0.048              0.007      -0.006       -0.040
                            (-1.247)             (2.249)            (0.211)     (0.354)     (-0.415)




                                                           28
Panel B: NKJ)


   LHS.(eq.)                                   NKD (6)
  Coeff.           Pd.o         Pd.L              Pa,2          Pa..i
                (T-stat)     (T-stat)           (T-stat)      (T-stat)      (T-stat)
  Regime 1          0.115        0.027             -0.101        0.014         0.002
                   (1.082)      (0.938)           (-0.976)      (0.327)       (0.011)
  Regime 3          0.064        0.035             -0.088        -0.010        0.344
                   (0.413)      (3.315)           (-0.566)      (-0.847)      (1.555;
  Regime 4         -0.200        0.013              0.087        0.035         1.146
                  (-2.393)      (0.482)            (1.386)      (1.376)       (1.735;
Panel C: SPN

  LHS.(eq.)                                    SPN (5)
 Coeff.           p0           p1                 Pn,2         Po.3           &
                (T-stat)     (T-stat)           (T-stat)     (T-st.at)     (T-stat)
 Regime 1           0.011        0.011             -0.005        0.022        -0.036
                   (0.213)      (0.623)           (-0.101)      (1.139)      (-1.778)
 Regime 3          -0.145        0.033             0.137        -0.074         0.019
                  (-3.132)      (1.301)           (3.069)      (-3.820)       (1.117)
 Regime 4           0.016        0.013             0.004        -0.022         0.013
                   (0.488)      (1.067)           (0.129)      (-1.897)       (0.396)

Panel D: SPD


  LHS.(eq.)                                    SPD (6)
 Coeff.           Pd.o         Pa.t              Pa.2          Pd,3           6d
                (T-stat)     (T-stat)          (T-stat)      (T-stat)      (T-stat)
 Regime 1          -0.247       -0.061             0.261        0.094         0.025
                  (-4.954)     (-6.032)           (5.461)      (4.387)       (1.315)
 Regime 3          0.702        -0.136            -0.554        0.018         0.035
                  (1.756)      (-0.955)          (-1.538)      (0.182)       (0.369)
 Regime 4          0.027        0.052             -0.041       -0.010         0.029
                  (0.398)      (2.581)           (-0.587)     (-0.475)       (0.418)




                                          29
                    Table 5 Cross-Market Dependence in Trading Volume
Model:

 HRV, =     it, HRV, + E, 9, FRy,., + E,   , HRD I +          X I FRI)1. I

                  + c' I{HRD,<O})IHRD,.1I + XIIFRD,<O})IFRD,I + v,                                       (7)


Panel A: NKV
                     HRV=NKV                  FRV=SPV
                    Causality      Test1                                     Asymmetric Effectb

 Coeff.           8,, i= 1,6        q,i= 1,5               X, i=1,6           p'
                  (p-value)        (p-value)               (p-va'ue)         (T-stat)         CT-stat)

 Regime 1                4.268              11.510               24.807            -0.136          -0.119
                        (0.640)             (0.042)              (0.000)           (4.257)        (-4.185)

 Regime 3                3.155               1.534                 6.585            -0.253         -0.061
                        (0.789)             (0.909)               (0.361)          (-5.462)       (-2.060)

 Regime 4               21.863              10. 199              10.378             -0.029         -0.029
                        (0.001)             (0.070)               (0.110)          (-1.105)       (-1.743)

Panel B: SPV

                     HRV=SPV                 FRV=NKV
                    Causality      Test1                                     Asymmetric Effectb

 Coeff.           0, i= 0,5         ,i= 1,5                X,, i=0,5          4                V
                  (p-value)        (p-value)               (p-value)         (T-stat)         (T-stat)
 Regime 1                6.554             33.539                  7.789            -0.061         -0.035
                        (0.364)            (0.000)                (0.254)          (-3.367)       (-1.657)

 Regime 3                4.271             38.071                  6.975            -0.008          0.043
                        (0.640)            (0.000)                (0.323)          (-0.290)        (1.396)

 Regime 4               10.530              11.303                 7.693            -0.049          0.008
                        (0.104)             (0.046)               (0.261)          (-2.598)        (0.550)

Notes:

(a) The causality test is a Wald test using White's (1980) heteroskedasticity- consistent covariance
matrix, which is distributed as a chi-squared distribution with the degree of freedom of 5 or6. P-
values are reported in the regression.

(b) The estimated coefficients and corresponding t statistics are in parentheses.




                                                      30
 The Number of Shares Traded on NYSE
                during the Crash

    700

    600

    500

    400
0
• 300

    200

    100

     0=   111m1iHnn
            -
          -10
                __ —
                   -2
                      ———
                       2
                          _-L___
                           6     10
                Days after the Crash




                 Figure   1
    The Number of Shares Traded on TSE
                during the Crash




0
E




                    -2        2
                Days after the Crash




                Figure 2
                                Figure       3
                                                    Figure   1   Timing and Notation


Date                <                        Date                                                              t               >

Local Time



GMT                     24:00       6:00            14:30            21 00             24:00        6:00   14:30        21:00


Tokyo                   9 00       is   00          23 30             6   00            9   00     15 00   23 00         6:   00



New York                19 00       1 00             9: 30           16   00           19   00        00   9       30   16    00


Definition                o.        T   c,                                              T KU         c                   N




Variable                                                                  <                  SPN           >




Notation:

        TKO       opening time in the   Tokyo market
        TKC       closing time in the   Tokyo market
        NYO       opening time in the   New York market
        NYC   =   closing time in the   New York market

        NKD       Nikkei 225 daytime (open—to—close) return
        NKN       Nikkei 225 overnight (previous close—to-open) return
        SPD       S&P 500 daytime (open—to—close) return
        SPN =     S&P 500 overnight (previous close-to-open) return
