                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        JUMPS AND STOCHASTIC VOLATIUTY:
                        EXCHANGE RATE PROCESSES IMPLICIT
                          IN PHLX DEUTSCE-IEMARK OPTIONS




                                        David S. Bates




                                  Working Paper No. 4596




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December, 1993



Financial support from the Geewax-Terker Research Program in Financial Instruments and from
the Weiss Center for International Financial Research is gratefully acknowledged. I am indebted
to Sandy Grossman for helpful comments on ah earlier draft of this paper, and for provision of
some of the data used in this study. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset
Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4596
                                                                               December 1993


                         JUMPS AND STOCHASTIC VOLATILITY:
                         EXCHANGE RATE PROCESSES IMPLICIT
                           IN PHLX DEUTSCHEMARK OPTIONS


                                           ABSTRACT

       An efficient method is developed for pricing American options on combination stochastic
volatility/jump-diffusion processes when jump risk and volatility, risk are systematic and
nondiversifiable, thereby nesting two major option pricing models. The parameters implicit in
PHLX-tradcd Deutschemark options of the stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion model and various
submodelsare estimated over 1984-91, and are tested for consistency with the $/DM futures
process and the implicit volatility sample path. The parameters implicit in options are found to
be inconsistent with the time series properties of implicit volatilities, but qualitatively consistent
with log-differenced futures prices. No economically significant implicit expectations of
exchange rate jumps were found in full-sample estimation, which is consistent with the reduced
leptokurtosis of $/DM weekly exchange rate changes over 1984-91 relative to earlier periods.


David S. Bates
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NEER
          A considerable amount of evidence has been amassed regarding the conditional and

   unconditional moments of exchange rate processes, from time series studies and from option prices.

   It is undisputed that volatility is time-varying, as evinced in plots of implicit volatiities over time

   and in the extensive literature on ARCH and GARCH models. Time series studies also indicate

   that the unconditional distribution of log-differenced exchange rates is leptokurtic, and that there

   is an inverse relationship between excess kurtosis and the length of the holding period! Conditional

   leptokurtosis has also been found, in time series studies (fat-tailed residuals from ARCH/OARCH
   models) and implicit in option prices.' The evidence regarding unconditional and conditional

   skewness is more ambiguous, with time series estimates sensitive to the currency and period used.

   Studies of option prices have found evidence of substantial positive implicit skewness in options on

   foreign currencies during 1983-85, but less evidence during more recent periods.'




   'For instance, I-lsieh (1988) estimated unconditional kurtosis of 12.8 for daily changes in the $/DM
exchange rates, while Meese (1986) estimated kurtosis of 4.2 for monthly returns.

    'The U-shaped pattern in implicit volatijities across different strike prices documented in Shastri and
Wethyavivorn (1987) and Ben Khelifa (1991) is evidence of a conditionally leptokurtic distribution implicit
in foreign currency options. Model-specific daily estimates of the implicit distribution in Bates (1988a)
found excess kurtosis in options on 1DM futures over 1984-87.

    'Bodurtha and Courtadon (1987) document the tendency of an American option version of the Black-
Scholes model to overprice in- and at-the-money calls and underprice out-of-the-money calls on foreign
currencies during 1983-85, indicating an implicit distribution more positively skewed than the lognormal.
Bates (1988a), using a jump-diffusion model, found substantial positive implicit skewness in options on
Deutschemark futures during 1984-85 but not during 1986 and 1987.
           Different time series models have been employed to capture these salient features. Assorted

   stationary fat-tailed distributions such as the stable Paretian (Westerfield 1977), Student-t (Rogalski

   and Vinso 1978) and jump-diffusions (Akgiray and Booth 1988) have improved on the unconditional

   distribution relative to a Gaussian benchmark. Stochastic volatility/ARCH models have been used

   to capture the time-varying variances and some -- though not all -- of the leptokurtosis.' More

   recent approaches in the time series literature have tended to combine fat-tailed distributions and

   time-varying variances; for instance the Student.tJGARCH model of Baillie and Botlerslev (1989)

   and the jump-diffusion/ARCH model of Jorion (1989).



           Option theory has developed in parallel with the various time series models of exchange

   rates. Stochastic volatility models have been used by Melino and Turnbull (1990) and Chesney and

   Scott (1989) to price foreign currency options, while Bates (198Sa) and Jorion (1989) have used

   Merton's (1976) jump-diffusion model to capture the conditional leptokurtosis. Given substantial

   computing costs in pricing options, a standard approach when testing option pricing models has

   been to take time series estimates and to examine their implications for the resulting option prices.'



          The objective of this study is to proceed in the opposite direction, and to examine the
   evidence from option prices regarding the conditional distribution of log-differenced exchange rates.

   Given that foreign currency options involve direct bets on the distribution of exchange rate changes.

   option prices offer valuable insights into the perceived conditional distribution that are not
   necessarily available from time series studies. For instance, implied volatiities from option prices



    'Bollerslev, Chou, and Kroner (1992) provide an excellent survey of the ARCH/GARCI-1 literature,
including the applications to foreign exchange rates.

   'Examples include Chesney and Scott (1989), Jorion (1989), Melino and Turnbull (1990), and Cao
(1992).

                                                     2
could theoretically summarize all relevant information regarding expected futurevolatilities, whereas

univariate ARCH and GARCH approaches can exploit only the subset of that information

embodied in the past history of asset prices. Equally, option prices should reflect any perceptions

of tow-frequency large-amplitude jump risk, whereas time series studies lack the power in the small

samples typically availabLe to reliably pick up any low-frequency jump component.



        Extending the Fourier inversion option pricing methodology of Stein and Stein (1991) and

Heston (1993), a tractable and efficient model for pricingAmerican options on combined stochastic

volatility/jump-diffusion processes in the presence of systematic volatility and jump risk is developed
in Section   1.   The model    and   various submodels are then fitted to transactions datafor
Deutschemark currency options traded on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange. in Section II.



        The paper also develops Fourier inversion techniques for evaluating the likelihood of

observed sample paths given specific implicit parameter estimates. Using these, the consistency of

the distributions implicit in option prices with the time series properties of implicit volatilities and

the $/DM futures price is tested in Section II. Given an internally consistent stochastic

volatility/jump-diffusion model, it is possible to examine rigorously some of the option pricing
anomalies discovered by others using an ad hoc Black-Scholes model. For instance: whether the

term structure of implicit volatiities is consistent with the time series properties of implicit

volatilities (Stein 1991), and whether implicit volatilities are unbiased predictors of future volatility.

Joint estimation and likelihood ratio tests are used, in contrast to the two-stage estimation approach

of previous studies.     Furthermore, a careful distinction is drawn between the 'risk-neutral"

distributions implicit in option prices and the actual distributions relevant for time series analysis.

Section IJI concludes.




                                                    3
I. A proposed stochastic volatllity/jump-dilfusion model

        The following assumptions will be maintained throughout this paper:

  Al) Markets are frictionless: there are no transactions costs or differential taxes, trading can
        take place continuously, there are no restrictions on borrowing or selling short.

  A2) The instantaneous risk-free interest rate r and domestic/foreign interest differential
        1, = r - rs are known and constant.

  AS) The exchange rate S ($/DM) follows a geometric jump-diffusion with the instantaneous
      conditional variance V, following a mean-reverting square root process:


                       dS/S   - (-Ak)d             +                + kdq
                       dY — (a — V)dz ... o,JVdZ,,
                                                                                                    (1)
                       Cov(dZ, dZ,,)       - pdt
                       Prob(dq —1)     —
                                           Adt, In(1+k)    — N(   ln(1.k) —   62)

where
        i is the instantaneous rate of appreciation of the foreign currency;
        X is the annual frequency of jumps;

        k is the random percentage jump conditional on a jump occurring; and

        dq is a Poisson counter with intensity X.


        The above process for volatility has been used for pricing options under two polar

assumptions about interest rate processes. Bailey and Stuiz (1989) and Bossaerts and Hillion (1993)

price stock index and stock options using the Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1984) general equilibrium

production economy, which implies instantaneous conditional variances and interest rates are

proportional and follow the square root process above. On the other hand, Hull and White (1988)

and Heston (1993) price options off the above stochastic volatility process under the more tractable

assumption of constant interest rates. Since Scott (1993) shows that interest rate volatility has little

impact on short-term option prices such as those examined in this study, the latter assumption of

constant domestic and foreign interest rates will be maintained in this study.


                                                       4
       The stochastic voLatility process behaves fairly similarly to the alternate popular specification

of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process in the log of the variance,

                            dln(V)     - (a' - 'ln(V)Jdt       +
                                                                   adZ                            (2)


used by Hull and White (1987) and Scott (1987), and which is the continuous-time limit of Nelson's

(1990) EGARCH model. There are two major differences, however. First, the instantaneous

variance conditional on no jumps under the former specification can hit a reflecting barrier of zero

if 2a c a, whereas under (2) it can never reach zero (although it can get arbitrarily close). Second,

the volatility of variance increases at a lower power of variance under (1) than under (2). Whether

these differences are empirically important is an open issue.



       The major advantages to the former specification for the variance process are twofold. First,

the model can allow [or systematic volatility risk, whereas Hull and White (1987) had to impose the

assumption of nonsystematic volatility risk to generate a tractable option pricing model. The issue

is that if the true process is given by (1), then in a representative agent production econom? the

'risk-neutral" processes used in pricing options that incorporate the appropriate compensation for

jump risk and volatility risk are given by

                         dSfS -      (1,   - A'k')dt + JVdZ + k"4
                         dv' — (a - pV+ C'(Vfldt + o,flvdz"

                          Cov(dZ".   dz;) - p&
                          Prob(dq' - 1) - ldx, ,c - (I', Var(k"))




6See Bates (1988b).

                                                   5
   where his the continuously compounded domestic/foreign interest differential, and starred variables

   represent the risk-adjusted versions of the true variables, taking into account the pricing of jump

   risk and volatility risk. In particular:

                                                       di
                                      iii
                                            V
                                                - CovdV,_!.

                                       A' - AEII +L!                                                 (4)
                                                        t       iw

                                                -           Cov(k, AJ/i_)
                                                    +
                                                            EEl + ,SJ_/J,,,}



   where 4 is the marginal utility of dollar wealth of the world-average representative investor, á113

   is the random percentage jump conditional on a jump occurring, and dJJJ,, is the percentage shock

   in the absence of jumps.'' As usual, isoelastic utility is a convenient assumption to make at this

   stage, and implies that the volatility risk premium 'I', = f(V) depends only on V, ln(l+k) is
   normally distributed with the same variance 62 as the actual jumps, and X and k       are constant.9




           A no-arbitrage constraint on the functional form of the volatility risk premium 'L,(V) is that


   'Issues of heterogenous international investors and deviations from purchasing power parity, which
would involve including additional state variables for the distribution of wealth across heterogeneous agents.
are being ignored here. More precisely, such effects are assumed here to affect only the foreign currency
risk premium E(dS/S) (r -      r)  =      - b, and therefore to have no effect upon options prices. The
potential general equilibrium effects of the omitted state variables on interest rates and upon volatility are
ruled out by the imposed distributional assumptions. For an illustration of the (limited) general equilibrium
impact of investor heterogeneity upon interest rates, see Dumas (1989).

    'The specification of the risk-neutral process depends upon the choice of numeraire. The above
specification (3) is the risk-neutral process for $/FC to be used in generating dollar-denominated prices
of foreign currency options. For foreign-currency denominated options prices it is necessary to use the
marginal utility offoreign-currency denominated wealth J, when computing 1, X and k. An Ito's lemma-
based transformation of variables of the process (3) using z — S4 is not correct.

   9The additional restriction that the process for optimally invested wealth follow a geometric stochastic
volattlity/jumpdiffusion process with constant parameters is also required here.

                                                            6
          = 0.10 This restriction precludes modelling the volatility risk premium as proportional to

   lri(V) when the log of volatility follows an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, and necessitated Hull and

   White's (1987) assumption of nonsystematic volatility risk (4, — 0) for analytic tractability. In the

   case of the square root volatility process, however, the volatility risk premium can plausibly be

   modelled as proportional to the conditional variance V1

                                                      -   V.                                       (5)


   The result is that the riskneutralN process for the instantaneous conditional variance resembles the

   true process in form:

                                dv -     (a   - V+ V)dt t        aVVdz.
                                                                                                   (6)
                                     —
                                          (a—flV)di             a,,JVdZ.


   Note, however, that the steady-state level (a/$) towards which variance tends to revert implicit in

   option prices is ti the true steady-state level, but rather differs by an amount that depends on the

   volatility risk premium.



           The second major advantage to the square root process for variance is that the process

   generates an analytically tractable method of pricing options without sacrificing accuracy or




    '°See Ingersoll (1987, Chapter 18) for a discussion of a similar issue with regard to the term structure
of interest rates.

    "Strict linearity of the volatility risk premium can be supported under log utility when exchange rate
volatility and market risk have a common component of a particular form. The linear specification will not
typically emerge under more general preferences (e.g., time-separable power utility) and should be viewed
for such preferences as an approximation to the true functional form. Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1984) use
a similar approximation when modelling the risk premium on interest rates.

                                                     7
    requiring undesirable restrictions (such asp =0) on parameter values." European options that can
    be exercised only at maturity are priced as the expected value of their terminal payoffs under the

    "risk-neutral" probability measure:


                               - CIT E"rnax(SX. 0)
                               - eT{fSTP'(ST)4Sr - xf P"(ST)dSir]                                  (7)
                                  e'T (EP, — XP2)

    where
                    E" is the expectation with respect to the risk-neutral probability measure;

                   F E"(S) = S0?' is the forward price on foreign currency;
                   P, = Prob"(Sr > X) is one minus the risk-neutral distribution function; and

                   P = J; (S/E"(Sa] p"(S) dS is also a probability (since the integrand is
                                                nonnegative, and the integral over [0,oo) is one).


    For instance, the Garman-Kohlhagen version of the Black-Scholes formula for foreign currency

   options under the assumption of constant-volatility geometric Brownian motion for the exchange
   rate is


                                      c — C'T (FW(d,) — XN(d2)]                                    (8)

   where

             4, = [ln(FIX) +              and 4, = 4, -




     '2}-!uil and White (1988) give an analytical approximation for pricing European options on the square
root stochastic volatility process that is quite accurate for small (and plausible) values of a,. A jump-
diffusion extension of this approximation was developed and used as an independent check on the option
pricing formulas given below.

       'lie foreign-currency options traded on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange trade up through the
   Friday preceding the third Wednesday of the contract month -- that Wednesday being the delivery
   date for the underlying currency. Given the delay between the last trading day and the delivery day,
   the correct Black-Scholes formula for PJ-ILX European calls is

                                                     8
        The European option evaluation problem is to evaluate P, and P, under the distributional

assumptions embedded in the risk-neutral probability measure. The difficulty is that the cumulative

distribution function for most distributions is messy and, in many cases, we do not have any idea

of what it looks like. Even the Black-Scholes model has a distribution related to the error function,

which is nontrivial to evaluate. When it comes to stochastic volatility models, the distribution

function is unknown. The difficulty in evaluating P1 and P2 is responsible for a bias towards series

solutions for pricing options."



        Heston (1993) pointed out that it is much easier to solve for the moment generating
functions associated with P1 and P2. Essentially, one can view the moment generating function as

a contingent claim to be solved using the standard contingent claims' partial differential equation

under relatively easy boundary conditions; details are in Appendix I. (The P's also solve the

equation -- subject, however, to discontinuous boundary conditions that preclude easy solutions.)

Once one has the moment generating function, there exist fast numerical procedures for evaluating

F, and P2. The resulting moment generating functions of ln(Sr/So) for the two probabilities P1 and

P2 when exchange rates follow a combination stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion process are given

by




                                        -t(T+SI,) (FN(d,) —
                                   —
                                                              XN(d2)]
where
        T is the time until the Friday preceding the third Wednesday;
            = 5/365 is the time between the last trading day and the delivery day;
        F is the forward price for currency delivered on the third Wednesday;
           = [ln(FiX) +              and d[ = d, - oJT.


    'Examples include Cox and Rubinstein's (1985) constant elasticity of variance option pricing
model, Merton's (1976) formula for options on jump-diffusions processes and Hull and White's
(1988) analytic approximation for options on square root stochastic volatility processes.
                                                  9
     F1(tIV, 7') • E*[eSTS) PJ                   (j - 1, 2)
                                                                                                    (9)

                   — exp( C1(T;      G) + D(T; t) V + VT [(1+F)e6"                             —




       where

                  C,(T;   cD) - (b -                  -           (pa,t — P, -
                                                                                                   (10)
                                 -
                                        i4i +
                                                                               i_ti]
                                                              +
                                      — —2                                          '
                                                                +
                                                                      1+e iT
                                                                           /                       (11)
                                                                          —
                                                                                T
                                                                      1



                            - /(pa'I' —               - 2a(t +                                     (12)



                             =   +½,g, =             = ft-po,and$1 =

       Given the above solutions for the moment generating functions, the relevant tail probabilities

P,($1S0,T) = Prob(S7eM">x        I) for evaluating P1-ILX options can be determined numerically
via Fourier inversion of the complex-valued characteristic function F(i4'IS,,T):


                Prob'(Se" > XIF)                                     F"'t'              dt ,
                                             —
                                                 2
                                                       + —1—.
                                                          2x -—               it                   (13)



where x — ln(Xe'/S0) and t1 = 5/365 is the lag between the last trading day .and the delivery

day on PHLX options. By the properties of characteristic functions," the integral is real-valued
and the probability can also be written as


   "The real pan of F(it) is an even function of 4', the imaginarypart is an odd function (Feller
(1971), vii, p.499).

                                                     10
              Prob'(ST e"" > X IF) —              +
                                                       !  1mg[(iuIi)e'J                          (14)
                                             2         xo

The probability density function of ln(ST/So) under the risk-neutral probability measure has a similar

form:


                            p(z)    —   L f F2(icI)e' d
                                             -—
                                                                                                 (15)
                                    — 3 J Rea1[F1(iV)e"] dc'


where z     1n(S/S6).



        The integrals in (14) or (15) can be evaluated efficiently via Gaussian quadrature. A Gauss-

Kronrod rule based upon IMSL subroutine DQDNG that evaluated FQ4') at up to 87 points over

a truncated domain was found to be accurate to iO times the spot exchange rate (4 orders of

magnitude less than the minimum price change), except for extreme and implausible jump

parameters.'6 Since pricing call and put options of a common maturity require the same values

of F(it) regardless of the strike price/spot price ratio, enormous efficiency gains can be realized

by evaluating such all options simultaneously."




    '6Extreme values of k (e.g., 30,000%) made F(i(') highly oscillatory, and reduced accuracy to lO
x 5, which is still an order of magnitude less than the minimum tick size. Accuracy was measured
by comparing option prices with those evaluated to iO-'° accuracy using IMSL's adaptive Gaussian
quadrature subroutine DQDAGI for integrating functions over a semi-infinite domain.

     "An earlier version of this paper used a Fast Fourier Transform (FF1') approach, which
intrinsically involves trapezoidal integration. However, the relative efficiency of Gaussian
quadrature in requiring fewer function evaluations appears to dominate the computational
advantages with regard to multiplication of the FF1

                                                  11
        The above procedure gives the price of a European option as a function of state variables

and parameters:


                                 c(S, V,   T; X, 0) — eT(rI1) [FP1               —
                                                                                      Xe'2]                    (16)


for 0 =      CX', Ic', 5,   a,    a, p> However,               since the PHLX options on foreign currency are

American in nature, it is in principle important to take into account the extra value accruing from

the ability to exercise the options prior to maturity. This study uses the constant-volatility analytic

approximation from Bates (1991) for jump-diffusions, modified for the 4 business day lag between

early exercise of a PHLX option and delivery of the underlying currency:


                                                                             s1x q,
                                               c(S,V,1X)             + XA2—t—-          forS/X<y
                   C(S, V. T; X) -                                                                             (17)

                                                                    —
                                                                        X)              for SIX

where
        &2 is the delivery lag (4/365 if Monday, 6/365 otherwise);

        A,   = e'' &:e' -1) - c(y', V. T 1);
        q, is the positive root to
                                                           T
                  4 (b — Ak' —                 —
                                                                    + A' [(I +k')9e½9(Ct)M — 1]      —   a •   (18)
                                                   1   —
                                                           eT
        i is the expected average variance over the lifetime of the option conditional on no jumps:

                            v - lEf
                            —

                                 T 0
                                    Vdt - —s- + °(V - ) 1t -Er
                                           T
                                                                                                               (19)
                                                               p'                p'      pJ'

        and the critical spot price/exercise price ratio y?                  I    above which the call is exercised

        immediately is given implicitly by




                                                               12
                       - 1)   -         V. i 1) + f.te(boL½ - c(Y:. V,r; 1)]                      (20)
                                                         q2



A similar approximation exists for the put early-exercise premium.



        Strictly speaking, the approximation for the early-exercise premium was derived for constant-

volatility jump-diffusions. A comparison with option prices computed via finite-difference methods

revealed a maximal approximation error of around 0.01 e/DM for 6-month in-the-money put

options. The approximation error is substantially smaller for shorter-maturity put options and for

puts with different strike prices, and is negligible for call options of all maturities considered (given
U.S. interest rates substantially higher than German rates over most of the data sample). Given

that the data set considered below consists predominantly of short-maturity out-of-the-money

options and contains relatively few in-the-money puts, the approximation error in the early-exercise

premium was not felt to be of major concerm




                                                    13
II. EstImation
A. Data

        Transactions data for Deutschemark foreign currency options were obtained for January

1984 to June 1991 from the Philadelphia Stock Exchange." Prior to September 26, 1987, only

options maturing in March, June, September or December were traded, with contract specifications

geared to the corresponding 1MM foreign currency futures contracts in size (62,500 Deutschemarks,

half the size of the 1MM futures contracts) and maturity (third Wednesday of the contract month).

Trading in contracts maturing the nearest other two months began on September 27, 1987. The

options are American, and could be exercised at any time up to and including the Saturday
preceding the third Wednesday of the contract month.



        Roughly 1% of the records mildly violated early-exercise constraints, presumably due to

measurement error in matching up the underlying futures price. Since discarding these data would

bias upward average in-the-money option prices, influencing the implicit parameter estimation, these

data were retained. There was also no attempt to weed out thinly traded option contracts, apart

from the fact that those contracts by their nature received a low weighting in the regressions. A

few obviously erroneous data (01% of the total data) were discarded.



        Only a subset of the full data set was used in this study. First, only trades on Wednesdays

were considered, yielding a weekly frequency panel data set. Daily sampling would place extreme

demands on computer memory and time, and would involve issues of modelling day-of-the-week

volatility effects that I do not wish to explore at this time. Second, only morning trades (9-12 EST)




    "Data were also available for options on British pounds, Canadian dollars, Japanese yen and
Swiss francs, and will be examined at a later stage. Options on French francs, though also available,
are too thinly traded to merit scrutiny.

                                                 14
were considered --    a   tradeoff between shortening the interval for greater synchronicity, and

lengthening it to get more observations19 Third, only options with March/June/September/
December maturities and with 6 months or less to maturity were used -- for a maximum of two

option maturities per day. The resulting data set consists of 19,689 transactions (11,952 calls; 7,737

puts) on 372 Wednesday mornings over January 4, 1984 - June 19, 1991; an average of 53 trades

per morning. Not      all Wednesdays are included, owing       to   data   collection problems at the
Philadelphia Stock Exchange during February 1985, November 1985, and September 1988.



        Other data needed in pricing foreign currency options include the underlying asset price, a

risk-free discount rate, and the domestic/foreign interest rate differential. Transactions prices for

1MM foreign currency futures were obtained from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, and the

nearest preceding futures price of comparable or shorter maturity was used as the underlying asset

price -- provided the lapsed time was less than 5 minutes. Otherwise, the option record was

discarded. The futures data were of higher quality than the Telerate time-stamped spot exchange

rate quotes provided by the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, which were occasionally egregiously
wrong. Daily 3-month Treasury bill yields were used for the risk-free discount rate. The daily

domestic/foreign interest rate differential was inferred from synchronously recorded spot rates and

1- and 3-month forward rates, using covered interest parity and adjusting for weekend and end-of-

month effects on the maturity of the forward contract.




   '°50% of the daily trades over 1984-1991 took place between 9 and 12. The greatest activity was
between 9 and 10:30, when U.S. and European markets were open simultaneously.

   'Another oddity of the Philadelphia Stock Exchange data base is that prior to September 28,
1984, every record appears twice. The duplicate data were discarded.

                                                  15
B. Unconstrained Implicit Parameter Estimation

      Implicit parameters were initially estimated via nonlinear equal-weighted least squares on the

panel data set of call and put prices for all observed strike prices and (quarterly cycle) maturities

on Wednesday mornings over January 4, 1984 - June 19, 1991:


                  miii SSE((V,J,O) —                       -        F',;   T; (4), o)]             (21)
                (V),O

where

        I is an index over Wednesday mornings within the specified period;
        m is an index over at most 2 maturities on a given Wednesday morning;

        i is an index over transactions (calls and puts of assorted strike prices) for a given day and
        maturity;

        (O/S),,, is the observed call or put option price/spot price ratio for a given transaction, using
        an implicit spot from a synchronous futures transaction;

        O(-) is the theoretical American option price given the contractual terms of the option
        (call/put, time to maturity T,,,, strike price/spot price ratio (X/S) ) and given that day's
        instantaneous variance I',, other parameters e of the model, and that day's interest rate i
        and interest differential I', = -


For the full stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion model, 0 was the set ofjump and stochastic volatility

parameters:
                                    0 = <X, 1', & a, fl, a,, p>.

The following subcases of the general model were also estimated:




                                                   16
         Model                                                  Estimated Parameters

     1. "Black-Scholes" model (American option version), {V,}
        with the same implicit volatility for all maturities
         on a given day

    2. Deterministic volatility model, allowing daily an        {Vj, a, $
       downward or upward sloping term structure
       of implicit volatiities (depending on whether
         V,

    3.   Stochastic voLatility model                            { V}, a, 15*, a, p

    4. Stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion model               {V,}, a,    ,, , X, k 5

Note that the average Wednesday morning realizations of the instantaneous variance { } must also

be estimated. Intradaily movements in instantaneous variance were ignored in the estimation

procedure.



         Two points should be made regarding the above regression. First, the usual time series

objection to estimating the set of instantaneous variance realizations (VJ and thereby having an

additional free parameter for each new day does not arise when options are used. In essence, the

daily realization of V is observable from option prices, whereas it is not under time series

estimation.



         Second, the restriction that the process {} actually be drawn from its postulated

distribution -- in particular, that volatility follow a diffusion -- has not been imposed at this stage.

Non-zero parameter estimates are being generated cross-sectionally off the observed moneyness and

maturity biases of the option prices relative to the benchmark Black-Scholes model, and not off the

time series properties of {VJ. The regression is in essence a "method of moments" estimator in

which transformations of the moments -- the option prices -- are observed with almost no noise.



                                                  17
The separate case in which V, estimates are constrained by the postulated diffusion will be examined

below.



         Parameters were estimated using 000PT quadratic hill-climbing software, methods
GRADX and DFP, with multiple starting values. First and second derivatives of the loss function

were computed numerically, coded to eliminate irrelevant computations.21 Estimates of implicit

parameters on the full data set took between 8 hours and 3 days on a dedicated Hewlett-Packard

Apollo 720 workstation, depending upon which model was used.



         For full sample estimation over 1984-91, allowing for stochastic volatility and for jumps

reduced standard errors only by about 0.006% of the spot rate relative to the adhoc Black-Scholes

procedure of estimating a different implicit volatility for every day in the sample (see Table 1).
With an average exchange rate around 50 /DM over the sample, this represents a reduction in
standard errors of about 0.003 e/DM -- less than        price tick. Over half of this improvement was

attributable to relaxing the daily constraint of a flat term structure of volatilities, and instead

allowing for a monotonically decreasing or increasing term structure (depending on whether V1

cx/$) under the deterministic volatility model. Reduction of remaining moneyness and maturity
biases using the stochastic volatility and stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion models reduced standard

errors by a further 1/10 of a price tick. Allowing for jumps created a statistically but not
economically siiificant increase in the model's ability to match option prices relative to the
stochastic volatility model.




   211n particular, .3SSE/aV 82SSE/a(v,)2, and 82SSE/(8V,      80) were computed numerically using
date-t options only, while 825sE/(ov, 81',) = 0 for s     t.



                                                  18
       Estimates of implicit parameters for two-year subsamples revealed substantial and

statistically significant subsample instability. Root mean squared error for the stochastic volatility

and stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion models fell 0.06% of the spot price (¾ price tick) relative

to the full-sample parameters, ending up 0.012% (½ price tick) below the ad hoc "Black-Scholes"
estimates. Three-quarters of the improvement relative to Black-Scholes was again attributable to

a better modelling of the term structure of implicit volatilities. The stochastic volatility model's

ability to explain residual moneyness and maturity biases was of secondary importance, reducing
standard errors only by a further ¼ price tick. The combined stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion

model had a substantially identical performance in subsamples to the stochastic volatility model.

Allowing for jumps increased explanatory power during the strong-dollar early years of the sample
-- particularly 1984-85.




        Full-sample estimation of the general model yields a high-frequency low-amplitude jump
component that is observationally equivalent to geometric Brownian motion?2 In effect, a

geometric Brownian motion/stochastic volatility process is being estimated. The instantaneous

variance process consists of a constant plus a mean-reverting component:


                Var(dS/S) =          +   V1



where V_ =      Xt {   (ln(l+P) -          52), the variance attributable to jumps, was estimated at

(6.6%)2 per year. The mean-reverting component V1 under the SVJD model had generally plausible

parameters: a steady-state level of (13.4%)2 per year, a hall-life to volatility shocks of 7.5 months.

The estimated mean reversion reflected the tendency of the term structure of implicit volatilities

to be upward sloping for low short-term volatilities, and to be inverted for high values. Parameters


    9nspection of the moment generating function (9) for small values of 6 reveals the equivalence
of low-amplitude jumps and geometric Brownian motion, except at intradaily frequencies.
                                                  19
for the stochastic volatility model were comparable. The estimated instantaneous conditional

variances were indistinguishable for both models (Figure 1). However, the sample path for
Var(dS/S) estimated under the SVJD model involved a reflection off the minimum value of

whereas the path estimated under the SV model never approached the reflecting barrier at V1 = 0.



       Full-sample parameter estimates from the SVJD model indicate a distribution slightly more

positively skewed than the lognormal distribution underlying the Black-Scholes and deterministic

volatility option pricing models (Figure 2), at all but extremely short horizons. Implicit skewness

did not appear to be stable over time, however, with positive implicit skewness in the first half of

the sample relative to the lognormal distribution, and predominantly negative implicit skewness in

the second half. A substantial volatility of variance implied moderate leptokurtosis at longer

horizons relative to the lognornal distribution. The excess kurtosis is present in all biannual

subsamples. No evidence of substantial excess kurtosis for daily or weekly holding horizons was

found, contrary to the evidence from time series studies cited in Bollerslev, Chou, and Kroner

(1992). Instead, the profile of kurtosis across maturities was almost entirely driven by the stochastic

volatility process, with a direct rather than inverse relationship evident.



       Decomposition of the residuals of the stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion model estimated

over 1984-1991 in Table Ill reveals that the model tended to overprice out-of-the-money call and

put options of all maturities and underprice in-the-money put options of all maturities. At first

glance, it appears surprising that the pricing errors for calls and puts of comparable strike prices

should diverge in sign, given that put-call parity (for the European portion of the option prices)
implies that the pricing errors should be comparable in sign and magnitude. Further scrutiny of the

residuals reveals that the divergent moneyness biases for calls versus puts was attributable to the

parameter instability noted above, combined with the fact that calls were relatively heavily traded

                                                 20
in the first half of the 1984-9 1 period while puts were more heavily traded in the second half.



C. Consistency with the time series properties of implicit volatilities

       As noted by Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1984), the transition density of y =            conditional

on 1', is noncentral chi-suared x2(4a/a, 2cV,e"), where c —              (1- e)/fl and fi is the actual

rate of mean reversion of the volatility process (as distinct from the risk-adjusted parameter

implicit in option prices):


                        p(yIV) — £
                                           —½(y.A)

                                               2
                                                            —
                                                                    i tj)jl
                                                                 I'(½v
                                                                                                  (22)




where v      4cr/at, A 2cIe', and I'() is the gamma function. However, the non-central clii-

squared density function has infinite value at 2cV,44, = 0 when the reflecting barrier is attainable

(Vip c 1). yielding nonsensical results when the sample path {VJ is among the parameters to be
estimated.    Consequently, the applications below use the transition density of the monotonic

transformation ln(V,,,), which has finite density everywhere:


                                               (e' • A)
                    p( lnV"" I V ) —                                    ('/4e'A)'                  (23)
                                     1
                                                                M I'(½v i-f) fT


where & =



        Maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters {a, fi, a,} estimated from the time series

of implicit instantaneous conditional volatilities {V,} diverge substantially from the parameters {a,

fl, a} estimated cross-sectionally from option prices, as is shown in Table IV. In particular, the

volatility of variance a implicit in option prices is substantially higher than the supposedly identical

parameter estimated off the time series properties of {VL}. The parameters a and fi affecting the

                                                     21
drift are estimated with less precision; nevertheless, there is a significant deviation in estimated a's.



        Given measurement error in option prices, however, the above two-step estimation
procedure does not constitute a formal test of the hypothesis of identical {a, } parameters for

option prices and time series. Under the assumptions that the cross-sectional measurement error

in option prices is homoskedastic Gaussian white nois&' and is independent of volatility
realizations, the appropriate loss function for testing hypotheses is

                       =
                           L,,,,, +
where
                = 'ANOBS ÷        'ANOBS laf 2w SSE({ V4}, 0)] is   a function of the sum of squared
        errors in option prices from equation (21),
and
            = E, lnp(ln(2cV,) a, fi, c;V,) is the log-likelihood of an estimated {V,} sample path
        given p() from equation (23).



        The joint hypothesis of identical {a, a,} parameters for options and time series was tested

using a likelihood ratio test:


        Unconstrained parameter estimates: c (V,}, X, t, .5, a, fl, a,,              (a,   fi. a,},, .._   >

        Constrained parameter estimates:        <        X,P, 6, a, a. a, ,, p}o,,&n.&umn.nt. >




    t'The assumption that measurement error is homoskedastic regardless of strike price, maturity,
and whether the option is a call or a put is clearly a strong and implausible assumption. However,
the parameter estimates are consistent under the null hypothesis of correct model specification.
Increasing efficiency by adjusting for heteroskedastic measurement error would just increase the
already substantial weight given to options prices relative to time series observations, and is unlikely
to change the conclusions below. Serial correlation in measurement errors is a more relevant
concern — and more difficult to resolve given the varying maturity structure of the options data.

                                                    22
         Table V reports the results of unconstrained versus constrained estimation for the stochastic

volatility (SV) and stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion (SVJD) models. Constraining the volatility

process brought the volatility of variance parameter a more in line with the time series behavior

of {V,}, and smoothed somewhat the estimated sample path of {V,}.       In fact, constrained estimation

actually increas&! the joint log-likelihood of the SVJD model, given that the estimated unconstrained

 V,}   sample path was highly implausible. Nevertheless, both the SV and SVJD models are internally

inconsistent.   The constraint of identical {u, a} parameters in the options and resulting {1} time
series data for the SV model is strongly rejected, based on two criteria:

       1) the worsening of the joint log-likelihood (110,308 versus 110,369 -- P-value   C


       2) the inconsistency of the constrained {V,}
                                                 implicit parameters {a, o} and the constrained

         sample path { V,} (log-likelihood 97 versus 158 -- P-value <    11116).

The    latter criterion also yields rejection of the SVJD model, at a P-value less than l0. A
comparison of the constrained SV and SVJD models indicates that the hypothesis of no jumps
cannot be rejected.



         The rejections are predominantly attributable to inconsistencies in the volatility of variance

parameter r The implausibiLity of the high c implicit in option prices is particularly evident when
one compares the unconditional gamma distribution of {V,} implicit in the SV parameter estimates

with the sample distribution of {1} (Figure 4). A high volatility of variance implies frequent
reflections off zero and substantial clustering of implicit instantaneous variances near 0, contrary

to what is observed. The SVJD model erroneously predicts an even greater degree of clustering

near zero.



         Previous studies have argued that the term structure of implicit volatilities is inconsistent

with the time series properties of implicit volatilities .- in particular, that the term structure is too

                                                   23
flat given observed mean reversion of implicit volatiities?4 In this model, the term structure of

implicit expected average variances for 0-3 month versus 3-6 month options depends upon the

parameters a and :

   V(T)                       - w(flV0 + [1 -w(fl)J-5—, w(T) • 1_•P                         E [0,1)

                                                                                                   (24)


Since   the expected average variance is roughly the implicit variance from the Black-Scholes

mode1,' the issue is equivalent to the issue of whether the <a, fl> parameters implicit in option

prices are consistent with the <a, fi> parameters derived from the AR(l) time series properties
of implicit variances.



        The two sets of parameters do in fact diverge in unconstrained parameter estimation.

However, the parameters can in principle diverge because of a volatility risk premium.
Furthermore, the standard errors suggest that the divergence is predominantly attributable to

diverging a's rather than to diverging a's. In fact one cannot reject the no volatility risk premium

hypothesis H0: fl =      at standard significance levels for either the SV or the SVJD model when

the a's (and a,'s) are constrained to be identical. Consequehtly, it is the mean variance level a/fl

implicit in option prices (ecuivalently, the level of long-maturity implicit variances) that is primarily

incompatible with the time series properties of impticit variances, rather than the rate oi mean
reversion towards that average level.



   "Stein (1989) makes this argument with regard to implicit volatiities from S&P 100 options,
while Campa and Chang (1993) make a similar point with regard to interbank foreign currency
options.

   '51n principle, there are Jensen's inequality biases relevant to the choice of implicit volatilities
versus implicit variances and to the choice of the moneyness of the options used in computing
implicit volatilities. These biases do not appear empirically important.

                                                  24
E. Consistency with the time series properties of futures prices

       A further test of the stochastic volatility and stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion models is

their consistency or inconsistency with observed realizations of exchange rates and foreign currency

futures prices. To examine this, the actual (as opposed to "risk-neutral) futures price process was

parameterized as follows:


                    dPIF -    [c0 + c1(r,—r') +
                                                             -        + /PdZ      +   kdq

                    dv — ( — pv)dz + a,/VdZ
                                                                                                (25)
                    Cov(dZ. dZ,,)   - pdi
                    Frob(dq — 1)    —
                                            Adt, ln(1+k) — N(In(l+k)—½62,      62).


The inclusion of interest differentials in the instantaneous conditional mean nests two alternative

hypotheses: that the futures price follows a martingale (c0 =           = = 0) and that the underlying
spot exchange rate follows a martingate (c0 = ç = 0, c1 = -1). The inclusion of the instantaneous
variance allows for instantaneous "GARCH-in-mearf-type interactions between volatility and the

futures price, although higher moments are also affected in discrete time. The resulting probability

density of the log-differenced futures price conditional upon instantaneous variance % is


                I         —
                                             tip (C(ii), Ac) + 0(1G. Ac) V.4                     (26)
                    v1]
                                                 + AAç((1 +k)e'"14 1] — iln(F/F,1) I dG
                                                                          —




        where


             CO!; At) — (c0 + c1(r,—r1') — Xkj$At                 —
                                                                      .54! (poC' —
                                                                                        —




                                                                                                 (27)
                              —
                                    2a       In 1 +
                                        2




                                                        25
                                                    -2(c -               —

                            D('Z',   at) —
                                                         —     +
                                                                         i .e'4'                         (28)
                                                                         1—e'

                         — J(po,t -                - 2o2J½G2         +    (c—'h)'I']                     (29)


The tog-likelihood function is therefore

                                                             F
                                 L(} —             ID                                                    (30)
                                                        P[tn(y_)I !...].


       The stochastic volatility parameters {a, c, p}              and       the set of instantaneous variance
realizations {V,} should theoretically be common to both the option prices and the futures price

process. To test for bias in implicit variance forecasts, however, the conditional instantaneous

variance was modelled as a linear transform of the instantaneous variance realization implicit in

option prices:


                                V, -    cit0   +
                                                   cv,V,°"', cv0O                                        (31)


where the coeFficients cv0 and cv, were estimated. The actual (as opposed to risk-neutral) jump

parameters were also estimated, as were the influences of interest differentials and instantaneous

volatility. Since option prices provide no direct information about the true rate of variance mean
reversion, fi was initially treated as a free parameter to be estimated.



       The futures data were short-maturity (0 to 3 months) noon quotes on Wednesdays for which

there were options data available. The typical time interval was therefore one week, although there

were rwe occasions in which missing options data resulted in a longer time interval. Weeks in which

the maturity of the short-maturity futures contract jumped were excluded.


                                                    26
        Maximum-likelihood estimates of the parameters are presented in Table VIA. As has been

found elsewhere, estimates of the conditional mean suggest that it is the spot exchange rate rather

than the futures price that follows a martingale, although neither hypothesis can be rejected in this

single-currency regression?6 No statistically or economically significant jump component was

found. The hypothesis that impLicit volatilities provide no useful information in forecasting future

volatilities was strongly rejected for {V7""} sample paths estimated from both the stochastic

volatility (SV) and stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion (SVJD) models. The hypothesis that the
implicit volatility is a linearly unbiased forecast of future volatility (typically over a one-week holding

period) was rejected at the 10% level but not the 5% level for the SV model, and not at all for the

SVJD model.



        The inability to reject unbiasedness in the variance forecasts was in part attributable to the

existence of a free parameter 5          Consequently, the future price process was re-estimated

conditional on the constrained C (Vj, a, fi, a,. p> stochastic volatility parameter estimates from

Table V -- i.e., taking into account the Lane series properties of implicit volatilities. The result

(Table VIB) is borderline rejections of unbiasedness for the SV and SVJD models. With an

average implicit instantaneous variance of (.13)2 from the SV model, the average optimal linear

transform of (.12)2 indicates that implicit instantaneous variances were typically biased upwards

relative to subsequent weekly futures price volatility, but not substantially. The bias in variance

forecasts is most pronounced in the early part of the 1984-91 sample, and appears to decline

somewhat over time.




    2LSee Hodrick (1987) and Froot and Thaler (1990) for surveys of the extensive literature on
rejections of uncovered interest parity, which is equivalent to rejection of the hypothesis that the
futures price follows a martingale. The strongest rejections of uncovered interest parity have been
within a multi-currency framework; e.g., Hsieh (1984).

                                                    27
Section F. Consistency with the joint futures and volatility processes

        The above evidence regarding the futures price process was of course based upon two-stage

estimation, taking the implicit variance and stochastic volatility parameters as given. It is, however,

possible to compute the joins transition density pQn            In       IF,, V,) using Fourier inversion

techniques; details are in Appendix TI. Using the associated log-likelihood function


      In L1,,1( I F',), A, k, 6, a, j3. a, 8, c0, C1, c,) — , lnp(lnF,, In V, I F,_1,          V) (32)

the hypothesis that the distributions implicit in option prices are consistent with the joint futures

and variance series can be examined using the methodolo' of section TIC. In particular, whether

the implicit correlation p between futures price innovations and variance innovations is consistent

with the time series properties of the two series can be tested.



        The parameter estimates in Table VII indicate that futures and implicit volatility innovations

typically have a small negative correlation that is not statistically significant, in contrast to the small

positive correlation implicit in option prices. The hypothesis of consistent processes is again

strongly rejected for the stochastic volatility, given the criteria of unconstrained versus constrained

joint options/time series estimation (log-likelihood of 111,225 versus 111298; P-value C l016) and

the comparison of the constrained (F, V} implicit time series parameters (a, as., p} with the

constrained {F, V} sample path (1010 versus 1077: P-value c 10.16). The latter but not the former

criterion also leads to rejection of the stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion model.



        Parameter estimates indicate that the conditional futures and implicit variance processes are

approximately independent:




                                                    28
              p(ln F,467, In k,6, F,,
                                 I       ?) —   p(1iiF461 I F,,   V) p(lnV,8, IF,, V)         (33)

The parameter estimates essentially reflect the variance-constrained estimates of Table IV,
combined with the futures process estimated in Table VIB conditional on those variance-constrained

estimates. Consequently, the inconsistency of the {F, V} parameters implicit in option prices with

the time series properties of the futures and implicit variance processes can again be attributed

primarily to the implicit variance parameters. There is no evidence in support of the existence of

a fat-tailed jump component.



        Table VIB also presents stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion parameters estimated under the

additional constraints X =           =   . While in principle the parameters can deviate because of

a jump risk premium, calibrations such as in Bates (1991) suggest that it is implausible that the

parameters should deviate substantially even when jump risk is fully systematic. Again, no evidence

of jumps is found in estimation under these additional constraints.



       The absence of a statistically significant jump component in the $/DM futures price and

implicit in the DM option prices over 1984-91 is inconsistent with previous time series studies of

the $/DM exchange rate. Akgiray and Booth (1988) and Jorion (1989) both found statistically

significant jump components, while Bollarslev, Chou and Kroner (1992) cite other studies that have

found fat-tailed residuals in the $/DM exchange rate even after adjusting for ARCH/GARCH

effects. However, Table VIII indicates that the distribution of the $/DM exchange rate has changed.

with less excess kurtosis for weekly returns over 1984-9 1 than was the case over 1974-85.
Consequently, the distributions implicit in DM/$ option prices are in fact qualitatively consistent
with the time series with respect to the lack of abnormalities.




                                                  29
III. Conclusions

        Overall, the Deutschemark options traded on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange appear

substantially consistent with the time series properties of the underlying exchange rates. Based on

estimation over the full 1984-1991 period, there is no evidence of a leptokurtic jump component

implicit in option prices -- which accords with the absence of such components in weekly futures

price changes over that period. Implicit variances are definitely useful in predicting future volatility

and are not strongly biased on average, although the hypothesis of unbiased forecasts is rejected.



        The major discrepancy between 1DM options and time series data is that the implicit
parameters of the variance process are sharply inconsistent with the time series of implicit
variances. The major divergence is in the volatility of variance. This originates in a residual
implicit leptokurtosis directly rather than inversely related to option maturity, and therefore cannot

be explained away by jumps. The mean variance level implicit in option prices has also been too

high relative to the mean of the time series of implicit variances. This latter divergence is primarily

relevant for long-term rather than short-term exchange rate volatility forecasting.



        A further concern is that the parameters of the time series process are not stable over time.

In particular, the steady-state variance level implicit in option prices trended downward over 1984-

1991, while implicit skewness changed sign from positive to negative. Of course, the assumption

of stability is driven by econometric necessity rather than a priori reasoning. Nevertheless, the

evidence of parameter instability suggests that option pricing models based solely on more and more

complicated descriptions of the underlying asset price process may ultimately face the same
limitations as their corresponding discrete-time ARCH/GARCFI counterparts. The research

agenda of the future may be to identify those omitted "fundamentals' that are showing up as

parameter shifts in current option pricing models.

                                                   30
 Appendix I: Analytical solutions for moment generating functions

        As noted above, the price of a European call can be written as


                                           c — C'T (FP1 — XI',)                                             (Al)
where

                 F = E(S7) = S0 ebT is the forward price on the asset

                    = Prob'(57>X) is one minus the risk-neutral distribution function

                 P = J ; [ST/E(ST)] p(S,-) dST is also a probability (since the integrand is
                                                   nonnegative, and the integral over (O,oo) is one).

The moment generating function F:(tlso. V0 T) associated with the log of the terminal asset price

ST — ln(S) under the risk-neutral probability measure,


                              F1(C'1s0, V0. 7) —                   — erT E [e' e'TJ                        (A2)


can be viewed as the current price of a contingent claim that pays off c"' ' at time I The price of a

related contingent claim G(s0. V0, 7 4) that pays off?' must satisfy the standard condition [or contingent

claims prices:


                                              E'dG - rGdz.                                                 (A3)


Since G ETF, a simple transformation of variables indicates that F, must solve the related condition

E dF, = O For the stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion process considered above, this implies that F. solves

                     +   (b   —        —
                                                     (a    —
                                                               I3V)FV
                     +             t 2paF,,, +                 +    AE[F(s   +   y.   I') —   F]   —   0   (A4)
                                   —
                                       In(1 + k) —N( ln(l+k)—½8', 62)




                                                      31
subject to the moment generating function boundary condition                                -.




                                                        F2IT_o —           -                                              (AS)


         A related problem is discussed in LngersoU (1987, Chapter 18) with regard to pricing bonds. Using

a siziiilar methodology, the solution is

                                 —
          F2(4; s,     V0, 1')
                                                                                                                          (A6)
                  exp( •s0 + C2(T; G)                D2(T; 'I') V0 +           AT((I+k)e½oI('l                   —
                                                                                                                     11




C. and   1),   solve two ordinary differential     equations,



                        Dr    - lkolD2 + (pa,$ — ')D +                                  —
                                                                                                     Dl1_0 — 0            (Al)


                                      CT
                                            — (b —                    + aD     ,   CIT_o - 0                              (AS)

and have the solutions

                             C2(T;   tt) — (b - Ak')Gr                —
                                                                          !I(po,4J - V -
                                               -         in it                                       Ie                    (A9)

                                                   op                                                 Ti



                                                   - ______________
                                                                                    I +                                   (AlO)
                                                                           +
                                                                                                 T
                                                                                    I   —




where                                          -




                                           —               — )2 + 02(111 — t)2)                                           (All)




                                                                 32
         Solving for P1 = J [Sr/E(ST)] p(Sr) dSr is slightly trickier because it is not the probability function

of the risk-neutral probability measure. However


                                           G    —
                                                     eTPP — Se9MTP1                                            (AU)


is   the price of a contingent claim that pays off S at time T conditional on S,.>X, and 0 otherwise.

Consequently, G solves the standard condition (A3). Since


                              aG - -(b -ruiz              +
                                                               S     P +kS))
                                                                         (.4fl(4

and (dS/S) = hSdr, P. must satisfy


                                               E[dF + SdP] - 0.                                                (A14)



Writing P = P(s, V. T) as a function of the log of the asset price and using (A14) yields the integro-

differential equation


                   + (b - 1k       +                   (a — flV+ po,V)P,,
                   +
                                   2paP,         +
                                                     a,P,,,,) + AE{ e" [P(s + y,       I')   —
                                                                                                 P1   }
                                                                                                          —0   (A15)

                                       — ln(l + k)    —
                                                          N( luG + F) -          ô1)




         The moment generating function F1($; s0. V0. T) underlying P, = Prob( Ln(S) > ln(X)) must of

course also solve the same equation subject to the moment generating function boundary condition (AS).

Using the properties of normal distributions, the equation can be written as




                                                              33
            —F,- +       (b    —
                                           + '/2V)F,    +    [a       —
                                                                          (— po)V)F1,
                         1,4   V(F +       2poF +                          -. AE( [F(x + y, V)           —
                                                                                                             F] } — 0   (A16)

                                                     — N(   In(1 +     F)   +   l/262, 62)



which is 01 the same form as (A4), with modified parameters. The resulting solution for the moment

generating function is


   F1(t;s0,T)      —
                         cxp{       s0 +         C1(T;e)      +
                                                                      D1(T;     c')V +

where

                  C1(T;        t) —        (1'   —                -                     —
                                                                                                  + pa   —




                                           -                +a-                     + pap—       y)   1- e]
                                                                                                                        (AlS)




                                   01(T;
                                                             - .i2
                                           4') - _____________________
                                                                   I+
                                                                           -                                            (A19)
                                                 p0./I' - + po +
                                                                                                 —
                                                                                             1



and

                                      —
                                                       — r + p032 — o,(' + G2)                                          (A20)




                                                                      34
Appendix Ii: Joint transition densities
        The generalized joint processes estimatedin Section 11$ are of the form


                         ds   —
                                  Iii   —   Ak   • (ç—'/a)V)d        +   /PdW     +   ln(I+k)dq              (RI)


                                            dv - (a - IIV)&          +
                                                                         a,,/VdW                            (82)


where s is the log of the asset price, Cov(dW, dWj = p di and In( I + Ic) is normally distributed. The joint

moment generating function underlying the transition density ,4sT V,.                 s,   V3)   is


                                      F(G,        2) — E(eJTh"1150,           F,J ,                         (83)


which solves the partial differential equation

                  FT —   [p   —
                                        + (c—½)V]F, + (a — V)F,
                                                                                                            (B4)
                         +
                                             2pa,F,+         atF) +       AE[F(s+in(1+k), V) - F]


subject to the boundary condition


                                                 F(C', 4'; 0)    - e'°'                                     (U)

The solution is


 F1(, 4'; T) —       exp(     •s0 +      C(T;    4', 4,) + D(T; 4'. 4') I' +          AT   Ui +i)e'"'tt'E — I]
                                                                                                            (86)
       where

         C(T; 4', 4') — [p        —
                                        Ak]4'T     —   .51 (pa,$ —         — y)
                                                        a,
                                                                                                            (B7)
                              —    — In! +                                t—c         —
                                                                                          2a Infi
                                                                                          —-          —

                                                                                           a'



                                                                35
                          It               -2(c V—½)G —
                                                                       1+ey'
                                                                                  +         -'
                                                                                          j —t(sI)ip       (B8)
                                                    —
                                                               7
                                            -
                                                                       I_err

                         y—                     — )2 - 2o[1A4II2 + (c,                —                    (139)




                                                              e+_i)          —

                                                                        i1
                                                —
                                                                                                           (810)
                                                        e'T+l           fl—pa,t 2
                                                                   +
                                                                             7


                                                                        2
                                                                       DV
                                                         e,T+1                                             (811)
                                                                   • p - pop.
                                                         C'   —1



The moment generating functions underlying the marginal transition densities of ST and /,.are of course

given by F($, 0; T) and F(O,     T). respectively."



       In principle, thejoint transition densities can be evaluated via Fourier inversion of thejoint moment

generating function:


               p(s, V7150.     V0)
                                     —
                                         ----!-—— f f F(1, ii; T) e43T
                                                                                           - '' d$ d'D .   (812)
                                         (2it

However ii is more efficient to integrate out with respect to :




           -L:u _xit)° ex[''t _Etvr]at                                           - 2p(2Vr;4IS2AV0)
                                                                                                           (B13)




       "For t=0, A eT and =                 (1-
                                                              36
where

                                   v, C) - 1he¼(10                                                   (814)



and l,,L(') is the complex-valued modified Bessel function of the first kind of real order    I. Expression

(B 14) is the complex-valued generalization (given complex-valued 'O) and A(,i) and real-valued u =

4/a) of the non-central chi-suared density, and has the series representation



                            I     v C) - __________
                                                   2'          ,       (1/iyQ/
                                                                      I'(Vv tj)j!
                                                                                                     (1315)




where I'(-) is the gamma



        The joint transition density POT - V. s0, V) can therefore be evaluated by univariate numerical

integration:


               POp V.Is0, ?) —

                    2it --
                           F(1V, 0; 7)
                                             2    2T
                                       x(i't') I KOZ)
                                                                4a
                                                                  2
                                                                      2A(i$) e'                      (1116)




The result is real-valued, given a symmetric real component and anti-symmetric imaginary component. The

joint transition density P(ST. In V s0, V0) used in the estimations is related to (B17) by




        'IMSL's rout'me DCBIS can evaluate the complex-valued Bessel function in (813), but
    unfortunately is not accurate for aLl parameter values. The applications above consequently evaluate
   (B 15) using two-sided summation, starting at the nth term where ii is approximately the positive
   root of
                                      + n(½v — 1) — r/4yAI — 0 ,                                           (1)

   and z U is the modulus of z.

                                                     37
                                 In V,.I s0, 1'G — V7 p(s7,   V71   s0, V0)                   (817)


which has Imite density everywhere even when the reflecting barrier at V 0 is attainable (2a<a).




                                                 38
                                                References

       V and 0. 0. Booth (1988). Mixed Diffusion-Jump Process Modeling of Exchange Rate
Akgii-ay,
Movements," Review of Economics and Statistics 70:4, Nov. 631-637.

Bailey, Warren and René M. Stu!z (1989). "The Pricing of Stock Index Options in a General Equilibrium
Mode!," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 24:1, March, 1-12.

Baillie, Richard T., and Tim Bol!erslev (1989). The Message in Daily Exchange Rates: A Conditiona!
Variance Tale, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 7, 297-305.

Bates, David S. (1988a). "The Crash Premium: Option Pricing Under Asymmetric Processes, With
Applications to Options on Deutschemark Futures,' Rodney L. White Center working paper 36-88, October.
-—
          (1988b). "Pricing Options Under Jump-Diffusion Processes," Rodney L. White Center working
paper 37-88, October.

            (1991). "The Crash of '87: Was It Expected? The Evidence from Options Markets," Journal
of Finance 46:3, July, 1009-1044.

Ben Khelifa, Zhouhaeir (1991). 'Essays in International Finance," Chapter 1, Wharton Schoo! dissertation.

Bodurtha, James N., Jr.. and Georges R. Courtadon (1987). "Tests of art American Option Pricing Mode!
on the Foreign Currency Options Market," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22:2, June, 153-167.

Bollerslev, Tim, Ray Y. Chou, and Kenneth F. Kroner (1992). "ARCH Modeling in Finance: A Review
of the Theory and Empirical Evidence," Journal of Econometrics 52, 5-59.

Bossaerts, Peter and Pierre Hillion (1993). "A Test of a Genera! Equilibrium Stock Option Pricing Mode!,"
Matlzemati cat Finance, forthcoming.

Campa, Jose M. and P.H.Kevin Chang (1993). "Testing the Expectations Hypothesis on the Term Structure
of Imp!ied Vo!atilities in Foreign Exchange Options,' New York University working paper. March.

Cao, Char!es (1992). "Pricing Foreign Currency Options with Stochastic Volatility,' University of Chicago
working paper. November.

Chesney, Marc and Louis Scott (1989). 'Pricing European Currency Options: A Comparison of the
Modified Black-Scholes Model and a Random Variance Mode!,' Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 24:3, Sept., 267-284.

Cox, John C, Jonathan E. Ingersoll, and Stephen A. Ross (1985). "A Theory of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates," Economerrica 53:2, March, 385-407.

Cox, John C. and Mark Rubinstein (1985). Options Markets. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Dumas, Bernard (1989). "Two-Person Dynamic Equilibrium in the Capital Market," Review of Financial
Studies 2:2, 157-188.

                                                      39
Feller, William (1971). An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, volume II, 2nd edition.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Richard H. Thaler (1990). "Anomalies: Foreign Exchange," Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4, 179-192.

Garman & Kohlhagan (1983)- "Foreign Currency Option Values," Journal of International Money and
Finance 2, 231-237.

Heston, Steve (1993)- "A Closed-Form Solution for Options With Stochastic Volatility," Review of Financial
Studies 6, 327-344.

Hodrick, Robert J. The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Fontv.rd and Futures Foreign Exchange
Markets. New York: Harwood Academic Publishers.

Hsieh, David A. (1984). "Tests of Rational Expectations and No Risk Premium in Forward Exchange
Markets," Journal of International Economics 17, 173-184,

           (t988). "The Statistical Properties of Daily Foreign Exchange Rates: 1974-1983." Journal of
IraernatiorsaJ Economics 24, 129-145.

Hull, John and Alan White (1987). 'The Pricing of Options on Assets with Stochastic Volatility," Journal
of Finance 42:2, June, 28 1-300.

           (1988). "An Analysis of the Bias in Option Pricing Caused by Stochastic Volatility," Advances in
Futures and Options Research 3, 29-6 1.

Ingersoll, Jonathan E. (1987). Theory of Financial Decision Making. Savage, MD: Rowman & Litttefield.

Jorion, Philippe (1988). 'On Jump Processes in the Foreign Exchange and Stock Markets,' Review of
Financial Studies 1:4, 427-445.

Knoch, Hans-Jurgen (1990). "The Pricing of Foreign Currency Options with Stochastic Volatility,' Yale
School of Organization and Management working paper, April.
Meese, Richard A. (1986). "Testing for Bubbles in Exchange Markets: A Case of Sparkling Rates!' Journal
of Political Economy 94:2, April, 345-373.

Melino, Angelo and Stuart Turnbull (1990). 'Pricing Foreign Currency Options with Stochastic Volatility,"
Journal of Econometrics 45, 239-265.

Merton, Robert C. (1976). "Option Pricing when Underlying Stock Returns are Discontinuous,' Journal
of Firgancial Economics 3:1/2, Jan/March, 125-144.
Nelson, Daniel 8., 1990, "ARCH Models as Diffusion Approximations,' Journal of Econometrics 45,
July/Aug., 7-38.

Rogalski, R.J. and JO. Vinso (1978). 'Empirical Properties of Foreign Exchange Rates,' Journal of
International Business Studies 9:2, 69-79.

                                                     40
Scott, Louis 0. (1987) "Option Pricing When the Variance Changes Randomly: Theory, Estimation, and
       an Application,' Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 419-438.

         (1993) Pricing Stock Options in a Jump-Diffusion Model with Stochastic Volatility and Interest
Rates: Applications of Fourier Inversion Methods," University of Georgia working paper, May.

Shastri. Kuldeep and Kulpatra Wethyavivorn (1987). "The Valuation of Currency Options for Alternate
Stochastic Processes," Journal of Financial Research 10:4, Winter, 283-293.

Stein, Etias M and Jeremy C. Stein (1991). "Stock Price Distributions with Stochastic Volatility: An
Analytic Approach.' Review of Financial Studies 4, 727-752.

Stein, Jeremy C. (1989). 'Overreactions in the Options Market," Journal of Finance 44, 101 -1O23.

Westerfield, 3M. (1977). "Empirical Properties of Foreign Exchange Rates Under Fixed and Floating Rate
Regimes," Journal of International Economics 7, 18 1-200.




                                                    41
                                                    Table I

                               Performance of various models and submodels

                                                     Root mean squared error (as
                                                    a percentage of the underlying
           Model                   Parameters             spot exchange rate)        H0:
                                                                                     Subsample
                                                                                     stability
                                                     Parameters     Parameters       (F-stat)
                                                    estimated on    estimated on
                                                     full sample     2-year sub-
                                                      (1984-91)       samples
  Elack-Scholes'           { V,}                       .0955%          .0955%
  Deterministic vola-      {}, a,                      .0916%          .0867%        F, = 357*t
  tility
  Stochastic volatility    {}, a, $, a,, p             .0896%          .0838%        F17,, = 225"
 Stochastic volatility/    (V,}, a, fi', a,, p.        .0893%          .0832%        Fm,, = 136"
   jump-diffusion                  A',   k, ö
              H: no jumps (F-stat)                  F,,. = 40.1    F1, = 21.4"
"Statistically significant at all standard significance levels.

       Parameters were estimated using nonlinear least squares on a panel data set of 19,689 call and put
transactions for different strike prices and maturities on 372 Wednesday mornings over January 4, 1984 -
June 19, 1991. Implicit instantaneous variances { VJ were estimated daily for all models. Other parameters
9 were estimated in two fashions:
        1) Constant over the lull 1984-91 sample
       2) DifFerent estimates e.,               O
                                               for biannual subsample&

With an exchange rate of 50 c/DM, a reduction in RMSE 01.01% represents an improvement in standard
errors ol 0.005 c/DM, or price tick.
                                                                                Table II
          Implicit parameter estimates     For (he     deterministic volatility, stochasticvolatility and stochasticvolatility/Jump-dilmston models

       "Risk-neutrar process:
       dS/S  = (h - Xk) di +     (V,)TM   dZ +        k' dq                  Regression on pane! data set of call and put prices with quarterly
       dv, =  (a - fi V) di +        r    dZ,                                maturities observed on Wednesdays within the specified period.
                                                                             Parameterestimates for three models:
       Cov(dZ, dZ,) = p di                                                          I. Deterministicvolatility:              (V,}, a, fl
       Prob(dq = 1) = X di                                                          2. Stochastic volatility:                (1',), a,      $, u, p
       J+k' lognormally distributed, in(I+kt) — N(y*_HM. 2)                         3. Stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion: {V,}, X,           k, 6,   a,   fl, a, p

 Period       Model                  Jump Parameters                                                    Stochastic volatility parameters
                                            .                                                                                                                           RMSE
                           M                k             6        ,/V_'            a        fi               a,          p          (a/fl)'4           half-life
                       (gumps/yr)                                                                                                                   (months)
1984-85       DV                 0                0           0                     .024      1.01                 0             0        .154                8.2       .1130%
   .                                                                              (.001)      (.06)                                     (.002)               (0.5)

              SV                 0                0           0                    .029           .96         .252        .141            .175                8.7       .1088%
                                                                                  (.001)      (.06)          (.011)      (.010)         (.003)               (0.5)

              SVJD           .032            .335         .023        .051         .019       1.02             .086      -.067            .137                8.2       .1082%
                            (.001)         (.003)        (NO)                     (.001)      (.05)          (.020)      (.025)         (.002)               (0.1)
1986-87       DV                0                 0           0                    .049      3.22                  0          0          .123                 2.6       .0795%
                                                                                  (.001)     (.09)                                     (.000)                (0.1)

              SV                0                 0           0                    .052      3.00              .302       .107          .132                  2.8       .0772%
                                                                                  (.001)     (.09)           (.010)      (.006)        (.001)                (0.1)

              SVJD           12.2          .001           .019        .066         .035      2.72              .355        .117         .113                  3.1       .0769%
                             (3.0)         (.001)        (.003)                   (.002)     (.10)           (.018)      (.012)        (.002)                (0.1)
                                                                  Table II (conilnued)


  Period        Model                   Jump Parameters                                   Stochastic volatility parameters
                                                                                                                                                   RMSE
                               x           k         5                      a        fl         a,           p           (a/)M         half-life
                                                              .JV_,'
                         (jumps/yr)                                                                                                   (months)
                                   0           I)         0                .103       7.92           0           0           .114           1.0    .0691%
 1988-89        DV
                                                                          (.002)      (.14)                                (.000)          (0.0)

                                   0           0          0                .102       7.13        .440      -.016           .118            1.2    .0655%
                SV
                                                                          (.002)      (.20)     (.013)      (.004)         (.000)          (0.0)

                            7.7e-29         3.9      .362         .000      .102      7.22        .440      -.015           .119            1.2    .0651%
                SVJD
                             (.2e-29)      (1,0)    (.014)                (.003)      (.21)     (.016)      (.006)         (.000)          (0.0)

 1990-91        DV                 0           0          0                 .089      6.86           0               0       .114           1.2    .0565%
                                                                          (.004)      (.31)                                (.000)          (0.1)
                                                              •

                                   (1          0          0                 .100      7.22        .403       -.051           .118           1.2    .0537%
                SV
                                                                          (.004)      (.31)     (.018)      (.007)         (.000)          (0.0)

                SVJD            Se-4      -.132      .002         .003      .102      7.32        .405       -.051           .118            1.2   .0537%
                              (20e-4)     (.145)                          (.005)      (.32)     (.018)      (.007)         (.000)          (0.0)



                                    0          0                            .023      1.42           0               0        .128          5.9    .0916%
 1984-91        DV
                                                                           (.001)     (.04)                                  (.001)        (0.2)

                                               0                            .028      1.35       156          .082             .145         6.2    .0896%
                SV                  0
                                                                           (.001)     (.04)     (.005)      (.004)           (.001)        (02)

                                2024'     -.00!'      .001'       .066'     .020      1.11        331         .111             .135         1.5    .0893%
                SVjDt
                               (3823)     (.000)    (.002)                 (.001)     (.03)     (.007)      (.009)           (.001)        (02)

Notes:          — X [(y*_½62)2 + 52] is the instantaneous conditional variance per year attributable to jumps in the risk-neutral distribution
         'V_,
         b(a/$*) is the steady-state level per year towards which stochastic variance V1 tends to revert
         'Estimates converged to a high-frequency low-amplitudejump component observationally equivalent to geometric Brownian motion
Table Ill
Average pricing errors of the stochastic volatility/jump diffusion model,
as a function of the option's moneyness (F/X) and the time to expiration, in weeks.

Pricing error defined as actual - Utted value, in U.S. cents per DM. Minimum price tick is .01 c/DM.
Data set consisted of 11,952 call transactions and 7,737 put transactions.


   call options                                   Moneyness (F/X ratio)
        Maturity           <.94       .94-98     .98-1.02   1.02-1.06     >1.06       all strike prices
        4 weeks             0.008      0.017       0.007      -0.016      -0.017              0.004
       5-8 weeks            0.0 16     0.006      -0.002      -0.007      -0035              -0.001
      9-12 weeks            o.oii      0.001       0.00!      -0.008      -0.031             -0.001
      13-16 weeks          -o.ooo      -0.007     -0.003      -0.011      -0.025             -0.007
      17-20 weeks          -0.003       0.002      0.006      -0.031      -0.038             -41004
      21-24 weeks          -o.ois      -0.009      0.007      -0.011      -0.042             -0004
       >24 weeks           -0.008      -0.002      0.015      -0.001      -0.043              0.004
    all maturities         0.002       0.003       0.002      -0.013      -0.029             -0.001


  put options
       4 weeks          -0.033        -0.013       0.018       0.019       0.013              0.016
       5-8 weeks        o.oio         -0.016      -0.003       0.013       0.022              0.006
      9-12 weeks        -0.027        -0.005      -0.002       0.0 12      0.020              0.007
      13-16 weeks       -0.062        -0.034      -0.001       0.007       0.016              0.002
      17-20 weeks       -0.063        -0.061      -0.008       0.007       0.0 12             0.003
      21-24 weeks       -0.074        -0.032      -0.008       0.001       0.002             -41003
       >24 weeks        -0.112        -0.143      -0.008       0.002      -0.020             -0.014
   all maturities          -0.038     -0.020       0.004       0.012      0.014              0.007
Table IV
Cornparlson   of
    I) the stochasticvolatility parameters Implicit in option prices and
    2) the parameters estimated from the resulting time series
       of implicit Instantaneous conditional volalilities (V}.

Actual process:             JV = (a - fi   V)   di + a, -JV d4
Risk-neutral process:     dv = (a -     fl'     dt + c-.JVdZ


              Model                a                        fi           o          (a/fl').   hall-life
                      .                                                              (a/flY    (months)
 Stochastic volatility
   Option prices:                      .028         1.35                   .256        .145      6.2
                                    (.00!)          (.04)                (.005)       (.001)     (0.2)
   time series:
   (slit errors)                       .070                      4.22        .154      .129       2.0
                                    (.017)                    (LII)      (.006)       (.007)     (0.5)
 Stochastic   volatility!
 jump-diffusion model
                                      .020          1.11                  .331         .35        7.5
   option prices:
                                    (.001)          (.03)                (.007)       (.001)     ( .2)
   tine series:
                                     .005                        .35         .185      .123      23.8
   (std. errors)
                                    (.003)                       (.65)   (.007)       (.106)    (44.2)
!N



       Vi
       00
       —




              2
                                '
                                  C0
                                'tc;'




                                        C4
                                        'fl-
                                        'a—




                                               0E C
                                                           oRo',R
                                                                °1N




                                                                    No
                                                                    0'0




                                                                         0
                                                                         °.0




                                                                               t-S
                                                                               '-S


                                                                                               ii                       -
                                                                                                                      ogjg


                                                                                                                             ..8.
                                                                                                                                 .—,
                                                                                                                                               •0




                                                                                                                                                          -z
                                                                                                                                                                   00 I—
                                                                                                                                                                    mm   v-
                                                                                                                                                                         cc




                                                                                                                                                                              .-.-.-.:--
                                                                                                                                                                                 —--_-




                                                                                                                                                                                         t.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   NG co
                                                                                                                                                                                                   co    rio

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        —            c P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      —




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '   PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ——




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               00>-O0
              22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                   ——                                                                                                                                                        C—                                  '—'
        'N
mcmc                            oo                         m'—NC                                                      tnR                                          Vikn                           vnCccc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                g                             .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                              —S                                                    t.-S                                                                         %—'                                                                                   ——'
CtC' N         —                vi Nd                               mc'C                                              —R                                            —m .-o     ,—--.--            o'        pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                         c-Ic                        '0'C P                                          °.Q                 mNN000Nm                              00>-,O
                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                    t_0                                                  —-S
00 vi                           r-i2                                NO                                                't'                                          O'oc—cm—                       m''O-qo
                                                                                                                  -              -                    C                                                                                                                                   -   :
              2                                                                                                                                                :
                                't
                                                                              '—
   00
P-00                                    vir1               —RRvit   mr..OOj                                                                                        mvio      '—'-->
                                                                                                                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                      ...        -_>
                                                                                                                                                                                                   o co  rio
——      N                       vi;'o                               oO                                                                      —                   Ncc          —--—>                                      —                                                                                                                      00>L)
               I
              '2   ——
                                c
                                                                              -'
                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                         —                       '-S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
        'IC                             N,                 ReNo       0                                               -t3'                                      N—N—                              oR' N'- qo
                                                                                                                                 -
              9                 r                                                                                                                                                                                —-S
                                                                 '
   c, N                                                    v-'0                                                       c'                                        vflro                             oc'NCp0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                   —                                                                                                                                                           .—-_--                                                                                                                                                          U')>
                                                                                                                                 C                                             .Q:t                             t
            --
                                                                                                                  -- .
                                 O.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0<
                                                             g                0%
                          =                                                                                                                                                                                                                            =
                          —


                                                                                                                                                CC
                                                                                                                                                     -C         ç                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                E            -                                                                                                                     -                            o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                i
                                                —                                    -t    C-                                              —                   C                 C                                     -.               CO                 V
                                                                 0                        II         —0
                                                                                                           c
                                                                                                          •0)
                                                                                                                 —    C                                   _CC
                                                                                                                                                                —
                                                                                                                                                                              -          C-—                                  C---        COO.             V        COO   CAZ   o   to-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   V                       C    0          N
                    VU0    I-                   C-         C                                    00                                         C                          C-                 C                             C-.—           VCC        .to           t—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E       U                   Cuo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               00   '->>
                                                     "-I       E                          C      to   —
                                                                                                           £
                                                                                                          .v_   —o.—=
                                                                                                                                               sc5o       —.
                                                                                                                                                                                           — -E   cjCU                 .,° .C.-       =   -       E                       E ., £    —   CC    E                   C10          C
                                                                                      Table   VI
Maximum likelihood estimates or $/DM futures price process
using volatility pnwess paranielers and inslanlaneousvariances implicit In options prices

dF/F =           + c,(r,-r') +    ej - Ak] ill      +    JV,dZ + kdq

dV = (a - fifld: + a,JV d4 Cov(dF/F, dY) = aVpdt.

   =   cv0   +    cv,V,',        cv,,   0.

                                                            with 0-3 month maturities, January      4. 1984   - July   9, 1991. Weeks    with maturity shifts not used.
Wednesday noon quotes of futures coniracts


VIA: Estimation using unconstrained implicit <(V,'°}, a, a, and p> from Table It, with fi estimaled as a free parameter.


                           Jump parameters                                         Other parameters                                               P-values
                                                                                                                                mt
   Model            A                        6                     fi      C,,        c,       c,         cv0          cv                  cv,,=0,       cv,=0
                                                        ,jV                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                           cv,       I
                                                                   .98    -.143     -1.23      15.0       .005          .54     915.02           .077        .001
 SV
                                                                 (1.17)   (.156)    (1.75)     (9.5)     (.003)        (.18)
                                                                  5.40    -.048     -1.77       8.4           0          1      912.46
  SV
                                                                 (4.33)   (.096)    (1.28)     (5.2)
  SVJD             616.0     .001        .003            .089     3.34    -.027       -.99     14.5       .000          .53     915.30           .811        .003
                            (.002)      (.007)          (.022)    (49)    (.116)    (2.22)    (14.3)     (.000)        (.28)
                                             .004         .091    78.8    -.018     -.900      13.8           0             1   91109
  SVJD             461.2      .001
                                                                          'l'able VI (continued)

Viii: Estimation using c*rnstralaed implicit <(V7},            a, fi,   u and gi> From Table V.
(fi = 154   for SV   model, 1.21   for SVJD model.)


                        Jump parameters                                 Other parameters                              P-values
   Model         A         I          ô       /V        c0          c,         c,       cit0       cv,             cv0=O,   cv,=0
                                                                                                                   cv,=1
 SVC                                                  -.138      -1.21         14.6    .005        .556   915.00     .075        .001
                                                      (196)      (2.17)      (13.6)   (.003)   (.182)
 SVC                                                  -.065      -1.50         9.0        0          I    912.41
                                                      (.128)     (2.22)       (7.5)
 SVJDC          .160      .069        .000    .027    -.116      -1.28         13.8    .007        .442   915.54     .046        .006

 SVJDC           1.5       .016       .000     020    -.065      -lAo          9.0       0                912.47
               (11.5)    (.062)     (.049)   (.023)   (.128)     (2.24)       (7.6)
Table VII: Maximum likelihood estimates of join! futures price/volatility processes


                       Jump parameters                            Stochasticvolatility parameters                  Other parameters
                                                                                                                                            inL
             X,X                    6                    a                 c          p        ratio    half
    sv                 ,I                                        j                                               . ,               ,
  options:                                               .028     1.35      .256       .082     .145      6.2                               110234
                                                        (.001)    (.04)    (.005)     (.004)   (.001)    ( .2)

   (F,V:                                                  .069    3.81      .145      -.062     .135      2,2    -.034    -1.91       7.7     1063
                                                                           (.006)     (.057)   (.008)    ( .6)   (.129)   (2.22)   (7.5)    111298
                                                        (.016)   (1.07)
  options:                                                        1.32                          .142      6.3                               110215
                                                         .027     (.04)     .223       .087    (.000)     (.2)
                                                        (.001)
                                                             •
                                                                           (.006)     (.005)
   (F,V}:                                                         1.23                          .147      6.7    .003     -1.92       5.3     1010
                                                                  (.67)                        (.040)    (3.7)   (.127)   (2.22)   (7.4)    111225

 resulting                                                .066    3.64      .135      -.052     .135      2.3    -.027    -1.84     7.0          1077
   {F,V):                                               (.016)   (1.06)    (.008)     (.058)   (.008)     (.7)   (.130)   (2.22)   (7.6)
                                                                                                                                             .

SVJD model
               2024      -.001      .001       .066       .020    1.11      .331       .111     .135      7.5                               110299
  options:
              (3823)     (.000)    (.002)               (.001)    (.03)    (.007)     (.009)   (.001)     (.2)

   {F,V}:       151       .005      .002                 .005      .22      .177      -.101     .148     37.1    -.069    .1.26    13.5          904
                                                                                                                                            11120-4

               .049      -.060                 .014               1.31                          .141      6.3                               110218
  options:
              (.052)     (.024)     .:g;     (.004)      .026     (.04)     .223       .099    (.001)     (.2)
                                   (.000)               (.001)             (.007)     (.010)
               2e-9       .005                 .000               1.21                          .147      6,8    .005     -1.94       5.3     1007
   {F,V}:
              (5e-7)     (.889)              (.029)               (.67)                        (.040)    (3.8)   (.126)   (2.20)   (7.4)    111225

               .055       .023      .000       .005      .065     3.62      .139      -.052     .134      2.3    -.028    -1.83     7.2          1073
 resulting
   (F,V}:
                                                                  1.31                          .241      6.3                               110218
  options:
               .042      -.062      .000      .013       .026     (.04)     .223      .098     (.001)     (.2)
              (.047)     (.026)    (.003)    (.005)     (.001)             (.007)     (.010)
   {F,V):                                                         1.22                          .147      6.8    .003     -1.98       5.4     1008
                                                                  (.67)                        (.040)    (3.8)   (.126)   (2.22)   (7.4)    111225

 resulting     .037       .023      .000       .004      .065     3,63      .139      -.052     .134      2.3    .028     -1.84     7.2          1074
   {F,V}:
Table VIII

Summary statistics ror log-differenced weeldy exchange rates



 Period:                                            January 1974       January 1984 -
                                                    December 1985      June 1991
 Series:                                            $/DM exchange      $/DM futures price
                                                    rate
                                                    (Jorion    1989)
 Number of observations                              626                359

 Mean (percent per annum)                            .7%               3.8%
 Standard deviation (percent, annualized)           10.3%              12.0%
 Skewness                                           .251               .388
 Kurtosis                                           6.29               3.96
 HO: no jumps                                       rejecLed @: 1%     not rejected
                                                    level
 Significant at the 1 percent levet.
FIgure 1

                                      Implicit instantaneous volatilities
                          Stochastic volatility and stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion models
              20%
               18%

               16%
               14%
               12%

               10%
               8%
               6%
               4%

               2%    -1



                  840104              850821        870422     881207                900620
                           (Steady-state variancer -- SV model
                —          (Steady-state variancer — svm model


Graph shows
    1) the instantaneous implicit volatilities fV from the stochastic volatility (SV) model

   2) the instantaneous implicit volatilities [V,_, + 'ç]' from the stochastic volatility/jump-diffusion
        (SVJD)
        model

The two impLicit instantaneous volatiities are indistinguishable.

The steady-state level:
                                for the SV model,
           [V_ + (a/$')] for the SVJD model.

 The expected average volatility, which corresponds closely to the Black-Scholes implicit volatility, is
 intermediate between the instantaneous and steady-state levels.
Figure 2

                                   Implicit skewness of S(t+T)/S(t), by maturity
                   0.7
                   0.6- Stochastic volatility/                                      xfti
                   0.5- jump-diffusion
                   0.4-                                                         wx*
                                                                                K
                                                                            *
                                                                      +t•*
                   0.3-
                   0.2-
                                                       1
                                                       I

                   0.1-                            t
                               I                       Detenninistic volatility (lognonnal)
                     0
                   -0A-
                           I
                   -0.2-
                   -0.3-

                         0          20   40     60         80   100   120    140 160 180
               Detaministic volatility
              Stochastic voladUty/jmnp-diffusion
                                                                          Days to maturity

Figure 3

                                   Implicit kurtosis of S(t+T)/S(t), by maturity
                   5.6 -
                   5.4
                   5.2                        Stochastic volatility!
                                              jump-diffusion                        5
                    54
                   4.8
                   46
                         1                                            A


           :       4.2


           I
                    4
                   3.8
                   3.6
                   3.4                                 Detenninistic volatility (lognormal)
                   3.2 - 11<
                    3-i S1.                                                     I       8

                       0       20    40       60           80   100   120 140 160           180
           Deterministic volatility
           Stochastic volatility/jump-difflision                          Days to maturity
Figure 4
                     Unconditional distribution of instantaneous variances
                       SV model: sample and theoretical histograms
           18%

           16%

           14%


           12%-
           10%

           8%

           6%

           4%

           2%

           0%
                 0               0.01            0.02           (LOS
                       Distribution given <a,,;> implicit in options prices
                       Distribution given <c,,cx> esthnated from (V1 I time series
