                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        TESTS OF CAPM ON AN INTERNATIONAL
                          PORTFOLIO OF BONDS AND STOCKS




                                         Charles Engel




                                   Working Paper No. 4598




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December, 1993




Helpful comments were supplied by Geert Bekaert, Bernard Dumas, Jeff Frankel and Bill
Schwert. I would like to thank Anthony Rodrigues for preparing the bond data for this paper,
and for many useful discussions. I would also like to thank John McConnell for excellent
research assistance, This paper is part of NBER's researchprogram in International Finance and
Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4598
                                                                                  December 1993


                        TESTS OF CAPM ON AN INTERNATIONAL
                          PORTFOLIO OF BONDS AND STOCKS


                                         ABSTRACT

       This paper estimates and tests an internationai version of the Capital Asset Pricing Model.
Investors from the U.S., Germany and Japan choose a portfolio that includes bonds and equities
from each of these countries to maximize a function of the mean and variance of returns.
Investors in each country evaluate returns in terms of their home cunency. The CAPM does
have some power in explaining ex ante returns. It predicts fairly large risk premia on the
equities, but small ones on bonds. The model is rejected, however, when tested against a more
general alternative that allows for more investor heterogeneity than the CAPM.



Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
and NBER
 I.       Introduction


          Portfol jo—balance models of international asset markets
                                                                           have enjoyed
 little success empiricay.1 These studies frequ          investigate a very
 limited menu of assets, and often impose the assumption of a representative
 investor.2 This study takes a step toward dealing with
                                                          those problems by
 allowing some investor heterogeneity, and by allowing investors to choose from
 a menu of assets that includes bonds and stocks in a
 framework.                                           mean—variance optimizing


      The model consists of U.S., German and Japanese residents who can invest
 in equities and bonds from each of these countries.   Investors can be
different because they have different degrees of aversion to risk. More
importantly, within each country nominal prices paid by consumers (denominated
in the home currency) are assumed to be known with certainty. This Is the key
assumption in Solnik's (1974) capital asset pricing model (CAPM).    Investors
in each country are concerned with maximizing a function of the mean and
variance of the returns on their portfolios, where the returns are expressed
in the currency of the Investors' residence. Thus, U.S. Investors hold the
portfolio that is efficient in terms of the mean and variance of dollar
returns; Germans in terms of mark returns; and, Japanese in terms of yen
returns.

     The estimation technique is closely related to the CASE" (Constrained
Asset Share Efficiency) method introduced by Frankel (1982) and elaborated by
Engel, Frarikel, Froot and Rodrigues (1993). The mean-variance
                                                               optimizing
model expresses equilibrium asset returns as a function of asset supplies and
the covariance of returns. Hence, there is a constraint relating the mean of
returns and the variance of returns. The CASE method estimates the mean-
variance model imposing this constraint. The covariance of returns is modeled
to follow a multivai-jate GARCH process.

     One of the difficulties in taking such a model to the data is that there
is scanty time—series evidence on the portfolio holdings of investors in each
country. We do not know, for example, what proportion of Germans' portfolios
are held in Japanese equities, or U.S. bonds.3 We do have data on the total
value of equities and bonds from each country held in the market, but not a

      1
            See Frankel (1989) or Glassman and Riddlck (1993) for recent
      2
                                                                       surveys.
            Although,
                   notably, Frankel (1982) does allow heterogeneity of
investors. Recent papers by Thomas and Wickens (1993) and Clare, O'Brien,
Smith and Thomas (1993) test international CAPM with stocks and bonds, but
with representative investors.
           Tesar and Werner (1993) have a limited collection of such data.
  breakdown of who holds these assets. Section II shows how we can estimate all
  the parameters of the equilibrium model using only the data on asset supplies
 and data that measures the wealth of residents of the U.S. relative to that of
 Germans and Japanese. The data used in this paper have been available and
 used In previous studies. The supplies of bonds from each country Is
 constructed as In Frankel (1982). The supply of nominal dollar assets from
 the U.S., for example, increases as the government runs budget deficits.
 These numbers are adjusted for foreign exchange intervention by central banks,
 and for Issues of Treasury bonds denominated in foreign currencies. The
 international equity data has been used In Engel and Rodrigues (1993). The
 value of U.S. equities is represented by the total capitalization on the major
 stock exchanges as calculated by Morgan Stanley's Capital International
 Perspectives. The shares of wealth are calculated as in Frankel (1982) -- the
 value of financial assets issued In a country, adjusted by the accumulated
 current account balance of the country.

      The Solnik model implies that investors' portfolios differ only in terms
 of their holdings of bonds. If we had data on portfolios from different
 countries, we would undoubtedly reject this Implication of the Solnik model.
However, we might still hope that the equilibrium model was useful in
explaining risk premia. In fact, our test of the equilibrium model rejects
CAPM relative to an alternative that allows diversity in equity as well as
bond holdings. Probably the greatest advantage of the CASE method is that it
allows CAPM to be tested against a variety of plausible alternative models
based on asset demand functions. Models need only require that asset demands
be functions of expected returns and nest CAPM to serve as alternatives.    In
section VI, CAPH is tested against several alternatives. CAPM holds up well
against alternative models In which investors' portfolios differ only in their
holdings of bonds. But, when we build an alternative model based on asset
demands which differ across countries in bond and equity shares, CAPM is
strongly rejected. While our CAPM model allows Investor heterogeneity,
apparently it does not allow enough.

      There are many severe limitations to the study undertaken here, both
 theoretical and empirical. While the estimation undertaken here involves some
 significant advances over previous literature, it still Imposes strong
restrictions, On the theory side, the model assumes investors look only one
period into the future to maximize a function of the mean and variance of
their wealth.
                It is a partial equilibrium model, in the classification of
Duinas (1993). Investors In different countries are assumed to face perfect
international capital markets with no Informational asymmetries. The data
used In the study are crude. The measurement of bonds and equities entail
some leaps of faith, and the supplies of other assets —— real
consumer durables, etc. -— are                                 property,
                                not even considered. Furthermore, there is a
high degree of aggregation Involved in measuring both the supplies of assets
and their returns.

     Section II describes the theoretical model, and derives a form of the
model that can be estimated.   It also contains a brief discussion relating the
mean—variance framework to a more general intertemporal approach. Section III
discusses the actual empirical implementation of the model. Section IV
presents the results of the estimation, and displays time—series of the risk

                                      2
 premia implied for the various assets.

      The portfolio balance model is an alternative to the
                                                            popular model of
 interest parity, In which domestic and foreign assets are considered perfect
 substitutes. This presents some inherent difficulties of interpretation in
 the context of our model with heterogeneous investors, which
                                                               are discussed in
 Section V. These problems are discussed, and some representations of the
 risk—neutral model are derived to serve as null hypotheses
                                                             against the CAPH of
 risk—averse agents.

      Section VI presents the test of CAPM against alternative models of asset
 demand. The concluding section attempts to summarize what this study
 accomplishes, and what would be the most fruitful directions to
                                                                 proceed in
 future research.


 II. The theoretical model


     The model that is estimated in this paper assumes that investors in each
country face nominal consumer prices that are fixed In terms of their home
currency. While that may not be a description that accords exactly with
reality, Engel (1993) shows that this assumption is a much more justifiable
than the alternative assumption that is usually Incorporated in International
financial models -- that
                         the domestic currency price of any good is equal to
the exchange rate times the foreign currency price of that good.

     Dumas, in his 1993 survey, refers to this approach as the 'Solnik special
case', because Solnik (1974) derives his model of international asset
                                                                      pricing
under this assumption. Indeed, the presentation in this section is very
similar to Dumas' presentation of the Solnik model. The models are not
identical because of a slightly differing assumptions about the distribution
of asset returns.

     There are six assets -- dollar
                                    bonds, U.S. equities, deutschemark bonds,
German equities, Japanese bonds and Japanese equities. Time is discrete.

     Table 1 lists the variables used in the derivations below.

     The own currency returns on bonds between time t and time t+1 are assumed
to be known with certainty at time t. but the returns on equities are not in
the time t Information set.

     U.S. Investors are assumed to have a one—period horizon, and maximize a
function of the mean and variance of the real value of their wealth.  However,
since prices are assumed to be fixed in dollar terms for U.S. residents, this
is equivalent to maximizing a function of the dollar value of their wealth.

    Let W4 equal dollar wealth of U.S. investors in period t+1. At time t,

investors in the U.S. maximize F(E (W' ),V (W' )).
                                   t t+i   t t+1
                                                      In   this expressIon, E
                                                                                t


                                      3
 refers to expectations formed conditional on time t information. V is the

 variance conditional on time t information. We assume the derivative of FUS
 with respect to Its first argument, FUS, Is greater than zero, and that the

 derivative of FUS with respect to its second argument, FUS Is negative.
      Following Frankel and Engel (1984). we can write the result of the
 maximization problem as


 (1) Au
          t
              = US
                pt.EZS
                   t t t+1
      In      equation (1) we have


                                            — (1+1u
                                  t+1                    t+1


                             t+1
                                                   —
                                                       (1+iut+1
                                        t
                                             t+1
                       (1+1            )—.—— —           (1+1
                                 t+1                              t+1
                  =
      t+1                                     I.


                                   Si
                             4         t+1                    u
                         R                             (l+i
                             t+1                              t+1
                                        t

                                        Si
                         .1
                       (1+i
                          t+1
                              )— — (1+i
                                                                  t+1

                                             t


              a   V (2           ) = E             [(2   -EZ   )(Zt+i-EZ    )')
      t               t t+1                  t       t+i  t t+1        t. t+1



     pUS = _2FW/FUS
              2


     and      A'1 is the colwp.r% vector that has In the first position the share of

wealth invested by U.s. investors in u.s. equities, the share invested in
German equities In the second position, the share In mark bonds in the third
position, the share in Japanese equities In the fourth position and the share
In Japanese bonds in the fifth position.

    We will assume, as In Frankel (1982), that                                    (and p and Pj defined


                                                                        4
later) are constant. These correspond to whatDumas (1993) calls the market
average degree of risk aversion, and can be considered a taste parameter.
The degree of risk aversion can be different across countries.

       Let r
                       t+1
                                E ln(R
                                                   t+1
                                                         ),   so that R     = exp(r ).        Now, we assume that r
                                                                        t+1        t+1                                t+1
 is distributed normally, conditional on the time t information. So, we have
that

       E R              = E exp(r     ) = exp(E r
               t t+1       t      t+1          t t+i t


       where                     =   V (r                ).
                            t          t           t+1

       Then, note that for small values of Er and c"/2, we can approximate

       E R
           t t+1
                        =       exp(E tr e+i
                                          +o /2) a l+E r
                                             t         t t+1 t

     Using similar approximations, and using lower case letters to denote the
natural logs of the variables In upper cases, we have

       E Z
                 t+1
                        a E z
                                 t t+1
                                                   + D ,      where
           t.                                            t


                                           U         .U
                                       r      —1
                                           t+1 t+1
                                r gt+l +qt+1 g .u
                                           —s —1
                                             t t+1
                                .q         g              g.u
           t+1                   t+i           t+1        t t+1
                                rt+1       t+1            t t+1
                                U
                                1    +S —sJ 1.uJ
                                  t+1 t+1 t t+1



                = V
           t           t (Zt+i )           a V (z
                                                     t t+1
       and
       D = diag(c2)/2,                               where dlag() refers to the diagonal elements of a
matrix.

       So, we can rewrite equation (1) as

           U         —1 —1
                   p us t (Ez
(2)    A
           t                           t t+i+D).
                                              t
       Now, assume Germans maximize FG(E (49 ),V                                                    where
                                                                          t       t+t   t t+1 )),           represents
the mark value of wealth held by Germans. After a bit of algebraic
manipulation, the vector of asset demands by Germans can be expressed as:

                                                                              S
 (3)
        t
            =   p1c(E
                 Ct
                      z +D )
                     tt+1  t
                               +   (1-p1)e
                                       C  3

where e is a vector of length five that has a one in the Jth position and
zeros elsewhere.

     Japanese investors, who maximize a function of wealth expressed in yen
terms, have asset demands given by:


 (4)        =   p1c 1(Ez ÷D) + (l_p1)e.
     Note that in the Solnik model, if the degree of risk aversion is the same
across investors, they all hold identical shares of equities. Their
portfolios differ only in their holdings of bonds. Even if they have
different degrees of risk aversion, there is no bias toward domestic equities
in the investors' portfolios. This contradicts the evidence we have on
international equity holdings (see Tesar and Werner (1993), for example), so
this model is not the most useful one for explaining the portfolio holdings of
individuals in each country. Still, it may be useful in explaining the
aggregate behavior of asset returns.

       Then, taking a weighted average, using the wealth shares as weights, we
have

                   J —l g —l U —1 —1
                                                              i(l—p—l )e5.
                                                    —l
            =   (tip  +jLp +ip )(7 (Ez+D) +
                                               g
                                              .L(l—p )e   +    j




       The vector A contains the aggregate shares of the assets. While we do
not have time series data on the shares for each country, we have data on A
and so it Is possible to estimate equation (5). This equation can be
interpreted as a relation between the aggregate supplies of the assets and
their expected returns and variances.




I!.' A note on the generality of the mean-variance model

     The model that we estimate in this paper is a version of the popular
mean-variance optimizing model. This model rests on some assumptions that are
not very general. The strongest of the assumptions is that investors'
horizons are only one period into the future.

     It is interesting to compare our model with that of Campbell (1993), who
derives a log-linear approximation for a very general intertemporal asset
pricing model. Campbell assumes that all investors evaluate real returns in
the same way -- as opposed to our model in which real returns are different
for U.S. Investors, Japanese investors and German investors.

                                          6
     In order to focus on the effects of assuming a one—period horizon, we
shall follow Campbell and examine a version of the model In which all
consumers evaluate returns in the same real terms. This would be equivalent
to assuming that all investors evaluate returns In terms of the same currency
and nominal goods prices are constant in terms of that currency.

     So, we will assume investors evaluate returns in dollars. In that case,
we can derive from equation (2) that

(6) Ez
    t t+1
          =pclA
              t t
                                  -D.t


       Let z represent the excess return on the ith asset. The expected return
can be written

      E z.     = pQ A               — var       (z           )/2.
       t 1,t+1     It t                     t        I,t+1


       In this equation, var refers to the conditional variance, and                                              Is the
ith   row of
                     t


      We can write

                         n                                                          n
           A
          It t
                 =
                         Cov(z I,t+1 ,z
                              t             j,t+1
                                                       )A =Cov(z
                                                         J    t            1,1+1
                                                                                 ,Ezj,t+1 A)
                     j=1                                                           J=1

                         Cov(z
                            t I,t1 ,z            ).
                                    m,t.l

      Coy        refers to the conditional covariance, and z                                     ,   which is defined
            I.
                                                                                         m,t+i

to equal EzA, is the excess return on the market portfolio.

      So, we can write

(7) E z
          t l,t+i
                         = pCov (z
                               t
                                          ,z     ) -           var t (z           )/2.
                                     I,t+1 m,t+1                          I•t+1


     Compare this to Campbell's equation (25) for the general Intertemporal
model:

(8) E z              = pCov (z                        ) -     var t (z           )/2 + (p—1)V
      t   1,t+i            t       I,t+1 ,z
                                          m,t+1                          I,t+1                   th,t
      where




                                                                    7
         lh,t aCov(z       ,(E
                             t+1-E)E1z
     V                                        ).
                  t  i,t+1       t    m,t+J+1
                                      J=1

       is the discount factor for consumers' utility. Campbell's equation is
derived assuming that    is constant over time, but Restoy (1992) has shown
that equation (8) holds even when variances follow a GARCH process.

     Clearly the only difference between the mean—variance model of equation
(7) and the intertemporal model is the term (p_l)Vth    This term does not
appear in the simple mean-variance model because it Involves an evaluation of
the distribution of returns more than one period Into the future. Extending
the empirical model to include the Intertemporal term is potentially
important, but difficult and left to future research. However, note that
Restoy (1992) finds that the mean—variance model is able to "explain the
overwhelming majority of the mean and the variability of the equilibrium
portfolio weights" In a simulation exercise.4


III. The empirical model

     The easiest way to understand the CASE method of estimating CAPM is to
rewrite equation (5) so that it is expressed as a model that determines
expected returns:

                      j —1    q —l          —l
                                                     — M(lP—1 )Qe — i(l—p —1 )Qe)
                                     U —1
(9) Ez =       —D÷   (ip     +pp                                     j




     Under rational expectations, the actual value of z            isequal to its
expected value plus a random error term:

     z =Ez
      t+1t t+1
               +c      t+1


     The CASE method maximizes the likelihood of the observed z                .   Note that
                                                                         t+1
when equation (9) is estimated, the system of five equations incorporates
cross—equation constraints between the mean and the variance.

     There are four versions of the model estimated here:

MODEL 1

     This version estImates all of the parameters of equation (9) —— the three
values of p, and the parameters of the variance matrix,      It is the most
general version of the model estimated. It allows Investors across countries
to differ not only in the currency of denomination that they evaluate returns


        I would like to tharlj( Geert Bekaert for pointing out an error in this
section in the version of the paper presented at the conference.

                                                 8
in, but also their degree of risk aversion.

MODEL 2

     Here we constrain p to be equal across countries. Then, using equation
(9), we can write


(10) Ez          —D + pç2A + (_p)Q3 +

MODEL 3

     Here we assume             is constant over time for each of the three countries.
We do not use data on     and Instead treat the wealth shares as parameters.
Since our measures of wealth shares may be unreliable, this is a simple
alternative way of measuring" the shares of wealth. However, in this case,
neither the        nor the p1 are identified. We can write equation (24) as

(11) Ez
      t   t+1
                = —D+
                   t
                        aflA —
                          t t
                                  'Oe
                                   I t 3
                                           —
                                               2 t. 5


     The parameters to be estimated are a, ,                 and the parameters of 0.
                                                        '2
In the case in which the degree of risk aversion is the same across countries.
a is a measure of the degree of risk aversion.

Model 4

     The last model we consider abandons the assumption of investor
heterogeneity and assumes that all investors are concerned only with dollar
returns. So we can use equation (2) to derive the equation determining
equilibrium expected returns under these assumptions. We have presented this
model in section II' as equation (6), repeated here for convenience:

(12) tEz
       t+1
           =pQX
              t t
                  —D.
                    t



     The mean-variance optimizing framework yields an equilibrium relation
between the expected returns and the variance of returns, such as in equation
(9). However, the model is not completely closed. While the relation between
means and variances is determined, the level of the returns or the variances
is not determined within the model. For example, Harvey (1989) posits that
the expected returns are linear functions of data in investors' information
set. The equilibrium condition for expected returns would then determine the
behavior of the covariance matrix of returns. Our approach takes the opposite
tack. We specify a model for the covariance matrix, and then the equilibrium
condition determines the expected returns.

     Since the mean—variance framework does not specify what model of
variances Is appropriate, we are free to choose among competing models of


                                                   9
variances. Bollerslev's (1986) GARCH model appears to describe the behavior
of the variances of returns on financial assets remarkably well in a number of
settings, so we estimate a version of that model.

      Our GARCH model for       follows the positive—definite specification in
Engel and Rodrigues (1989):

 (13) c   P'P +   Gcc'G   +   H2H,

     In this equation, P Is an upper triangular matrix, and G and H are
diagonal matrices.

     This is an example of a multivariate GARCH(l,1) model: the covariance
matrix at time t depends on one lag of the cross—product matrix of error terms
and one lag of the covariance matrix. In general, (2 could be made to depend
on m lags of cc' and n lags of (].     Furthermore, the dependence on cc' and
     is restrictive. Each element of (2 could more generally depend
independently on each element of cc' and each element of            However, such
a model would involve an extremely large number of parameters. The model
described in equation (27) Involves estimation of 25 parameters —— 15 in the P
matrix and 5 each In the G and H matrices.


IV. Results of Estimation


     The estimates of the models are presented in Tables 2—5.

     The first set of parameters reported in each table are the estimates of
the risk aversion parameter. Model I allows the degree of risk aversion to be
different across countries. The estimates for          and p reported in
                                                  p05.
Table 2 are not very sensible economically. Two of the estimates are
negative. The mean—variance model assumes that higher variance is less
desirable, which implies that p should be positive.

     Furthermore, we can test the hypothesis that the p coefficients are equal
for all investors against the alternative of Table 2 that they are different.
This can be easily done with a likelihood ratio test, since Table 3 estimates
the Constrained model. The value of the x2 test with 2 degrees of freedom is
4.056. The 5% critical value is 5.91, so we cannot reject the null hypothesis
of equal values of p at this level.

     In fact, the likelihood value for Model 1 is not as dependent on the
actual values of the p's as it Is on their relative values.   If we let p be
different across countries, we are unable to reject some extremely implausible
values. For example, we cannot reject p    = 1414,    = 126 and p    1.6.




                                         10
      Based both on the statistical test and the economic plausibility of the
 estimates, the restricted model —- Model 2 —— is preferred to Model 1.
                                                                           Table
 3 shows that the estimate of p in Model 2 is 4.65. This Is not an
 unreasonable estimate for the degree of relative risk aversion of Investors.
 It falls within the range usually considered plausible.    It is also consistent
 with the estimates from Models 3 and 4. Model 3 —— the model which treats the
 wealth shares as unobserved constants —- estimates
                                                     the degree of risk aversion
 to equal 4.03.   (Recall when reading Table 4 that the coefficient of risk
 aversion in Model 3 Is the parameter .) When we assume all Investors
 consider returns in dollar terms —- as in Model 4 —— the
                                                           estimate of p Is
 4.09, as reported in Table 5.

      Inspection of Tables 1—4 shows that the parameters of the variance
 matrix,    are not very different across the models. The matrix P from
 equation (13) Is what was actually estimated by the maximum likelihood
 procedure, but we report P'P in the tables because it is more easily
 interpreted. P'P is the constant part of C?.

     The GARCH specification seems to be plausible in this model. Most of the
elements of the H matrix were close to one, which indicates
                                                             a high degree of
persistence in the variance. One way to test GARCH is to perform a likelihood
ratio test relative to a more restrictive model of the variance.   Table S
reports the results of testing the GARCH specification against a simple ARCH
specification in which the matrix H in equation (13) is constrained to be
zero. This imposes 5 restrictions on the GARCH model. As table 5 indicates,
the restricted null hypothesis is rejected at the 1/ level for each of Models
1-4.


       Figures 1 and 2 plot the diagonal elements of the C? matrix for Model 2.
The time series of the variances for the other models are very similar to the
ones for Model 2.   In Figure 1 the variances of the returns on U.S. , German
and Japanese equities relative to U.S. bonds are plotted. As can be seen, the
variance of U.S. equities is much more stable that the variances for the other
equities. In the GARCH model, the 1-1 element in both the G and H matrices
are small in absolute value. This leads to the fact that the variance does not
respond much to past shocks and changes in the variance are not persistent.
On the other hand, figure 1 shows us that toward the end of the sample the
variance of Japanese equities fluctuated a lot and at times got relatively
large. Recall that in measuring returns on Japanese and German equities
relative to U.S. bonds a correction for exchange rate changes is made, while
that is not needed when measuring the return on U.S. equities relative to U.S.
bonds.

     The variances of returns on German and Japanese bonds relative to the
returns on U.S. bonds are plotted in Figure 2.   InterestIngly, the variance of
Japanese bonds fluctuates much more than the variance of German bonds. The
variance is much more unstable near the beginning of the sample period (while
the variance of returns on Japanese equities gyrated the most at the end of
the sample).



                                        11
     Figures 3 and 4 plot the point estimates of the risk premia. These risk
premla are calculated from the point of view of U.S. investors. The risk
premia are the difference between the expected returns from equation (9) and
the risk neutral expected return for U.S. investors, which is obtained from
equation (6) settIng p equal to zero.

     In some cases the risk premia are very large.   (The numbers on the graph
are the risk premla on a monthly basis. Multiplying them by 1200 gives the
risk premla in percentage terms at annual rates.) The risk premia on equities
are much larger than the risk premia on bonds. Furthermore, the risk premia
vary a great deal over time. Comparing Figure 3 to Figure 1, It Is clear that
the risk premia track the variance of returns, particularly for the Japanese
equity markets. The risk premla reached extremely high levels In 1990 on
Japanese equities, which reflects the fact that the estimated variance was
large in that year. The average risk premium on Japanese equities (in
annualized rates or return) is 6.07 per cent. For U.S. equities it is 5.01
per cent, and 3.36 per cent is the average risk premium for German equities.

     The risk premla on equities is always positive, but in a few time periods
the risk premia on the bonds are actually negative. The risk premia on bonds
in this model are simply the foreign exchange risk premia. They also show
much time variation. At times they are fairly large, reaching a maximum of
approximately 4 percentage points on the yen in 1990. Note, however, that the
average risk premia -— 0.18 per cent for German bonds and 0.79 per cent for
Japanese bonds —- are an order of magnitude smaller than the equity risk
premia.

     However, Figures 3 and 4 present only the point estimates of the risk
premla, and do not include confidence intervals. The evidence in Section V
suggests that these risk premia are only marginally statistically significant..



V. Tests of the null hypothesis of interest parity


     If investors perceive foreign and domestic assets to be perfect
substitutes, then a change in the composition of asset supplies (as opposed to
a change in the total supply of assets) will have no effect on the asset
returns. Suppose investors choose their portfolio only on the basis of
expected return. In equilibrium, the assets must have the same expected rate
of return. Thus, in equilibrium, investors are indifferent between the assets
(the assets are perfect substitutes), and the composition of their optimal
portfolio is indeterminate. A change In the composition does not affect their
welfare, and does not affect their asset demands. Thus, sterilized
intervention In foreign exchange markets, which has the effect of changing the
composition of the asset supplies, would have no effect on expected returns.

     In our model, Investors In general are concerned with both the mean and
the variance of returns on their portfolio. The case in which they are
concerned only with expected returns is the case in which p equals zero. We
shall test the null hypothesis that consumers care only about expected return

                                      12
 and not risk.

       Consider first the version of the model in which all Investors have the
 same degree of risk aversion —— Model 2. That is, p is the same across all
 three countries. Then, the mean—variance equilibrium is given by equation
 (10).   If we constrain p to equal zero in that equation, then we have the null
 hypothesis of

 (14)Ez
      t t+1
                     —Dt +i2e
                           t t 3           t. t S


     Since the version of the model in which p Is the same across all
countries is a constrained version of the most general mean—variance model,
then equation (14) also represents the null hypothesis for the general model
(given in equation (9)).

     We estimate two other versions of the mean—variance model. Model 3, as
mentioned in above, treats the shares of wealth as constant but unobserved.
The model is given by equation (11).   If p is the same for investors in all
countries, then   = p. So, the null hypothesis of risk neutrality can be
written as:

(15) E z
      t t+1
                 =   —D       +      e +    2e
                          t       1 t 3    2 t 5

     The final version of the mean-variance model that we estimate is the one
in which all investors evaluate returns in dollar terms -— Model 4. Equation
(12) shows the equation for equilibrium expected returns in this case. The
null hypothesis then, is simply

(16) E z         =   -D
      t    t+1         t

     So, equation (14) is the null hypothesis for Model 1 and Model 2,
equation (15) is the null for Model 3 and equation (16) is the null for Model
4.


     However, we have finessed a serious issue for the models in which
investors assess asset returns In terms of different currencies.   If investors
are risk neutral, they require that expected returns expressed In terms of
their domestic currency be equal. However, If expected returns are equal in
dollar terms, then they will not be equal in yen terms or mark terms unless
the exchange rates are constant. This is simply a consequence of Siegel's
(1972) paradox (see Engel (1984, 1992) for a discussion).

     The derivation of equation (9) does not go through when investors in one
or more countries are risk neutral. The derivation proceeded by calculating
the asset demands, adding these across countries and equating asset demands to
asset supplies. However, when investors are risk neutral, their asset demands
are indeterminate. If expected returns on the assets (in terms of their home
currency) are different from each other, they would want to take an Infinite
negative position in assets with lower expected returns and infinite positive
position in assets that have higher expected returns. If all assets have the

                                                    13
same expected returns, then they are perfect substitutes, so the investor will
not care about the composition of his portfolio. Hence, the derivation that
uses the determinate asset demands when p   0 does not work when p = 0.

     If investors in different countries are risk neutral, then there is no
equilibrium in the model presented here. Since it is not possible for
expected returns to be equalized in more than one currency, then investors in
at least one country would end up taking Infinite positions.

     So, we will consider three separate null hypotheses for our mean-variance
model. One is that U.S. residents are risk neutral, so that expected returns
are equalized In dollar terms. The other two null hypotheses are that
expected returns are equalized in mark terms and in yen terms. The first of
three hypotheses is given by equation (16), which was explicitly the null
hypothesis when all investors considered returns in dollar terms. The second
two null hypotheses can be expressed as:

(17) E z
       t   t+1
                 = -D
                          t   +   1t e3
and

(18) E z         =            +   2te5
       t   t+i       —D
                          t
So, equations (16), (17) and (18) can represent alternative versions of the
null hypothesis for Models 1 and 3 (expressed in equations (9) and (11).
Model 4 —— the one in which investors consider returns in dollar terms -—
admits only equation (16) as a restriction.

     The foregoing discussion suggests that the model in which p Is restricted
to be equal across countries will not have an equilibrium in which p = 0.
However, we will still treat equation (14) as the null hypothesis for this
model. Note that equation (14) is a weighted average of equations (16), (17)
and (18) where the weights are given by the wealth shares. Equation (14)
should be considered the limit as p goes to zero across investors. It is
approximately correct when p is approximately zero, The same argument can be
used to Justify equation (15) as a null hypothesis for the model expressed in
equation (11).

      To sum up:

Model 1) The general mean—variance model given by equation (9) will be tested
against the null hypotheses of equations (14), (16), (17) and (18).

Model 2) The mean-variance model in which p is restricted to be equal across
countries, equation (10), will be tested against the null hypothesis of
equation (14).

Model 3) The version of the mean-variance model In which the wealth shares
are treated as constant —— equation (11) ——    will
                                                  be tested against the null
hypotheses of equations (15), (16). (17) and (18).

Model 4) The version of the mean—variance model in which investors evaluate

                                          14
assets in dollar terms, given by equation (12), will be tested against the
null hypothesis of equation (16).


     The results of these tests are reported in Table 7.    The null hypothesis
of perfect substitutability of assets is riot rejected at the 57. level for any
model.

     All but equation (18) can be rejected as null hypotheses at the 107. level
when Model 1 is the alternative hypothesis. The p-value in all cases is close
to 0.10, so there is some weak support for Model I against the null of risk
neutrality.

     For Model 2, the p—value is about 0.12. Since we were unable to reject
the null that the coefficient of risk aversion was equal across countries, it
is riot surprising that Models 1 and 2 have about equal strength against the
null of risk neutrality.

     It is something of a success that the estimated value of p is so close to
being significant at the 10% level. There are many tests which reject the
perfect substitutability, interest parity model. But, none of these tests
that reject perfect substitutability are nested in a mean—variance portfolio
balance framework. For example, Frankel (1982), who does estimate a mean-
variance model, finds that if he restricts his estimate of p to be non-
negative that the maximum likelihood estimate of p is zero. Clearly, then. he
would not reject a null hypothesis of p = 0 at any level of significance.

     Our model performs better than Frankel's because we include both equities
and bonds, and because we allow a more general model of cl.5


     Model 3 is unable to reject the null of perfect substitutability at
standard levels of significance.

     Model 4 rejects perfect substitutability at the 10% level.   It might seem
interesting to test the assumptions underlying Model 4.   That is, does Model
4, which assumes Investors assess returns in dollar terms outperform Model 2
which assumes investors evaluate returns in their home currency?
Unfortunately, Model 4 is not nested in Model 1 or Model 2, so such a test is
not possible.

     Model 4 is nested in Model 3, the model which treats the wealth shares as
constant and unobserved. Comparing equation (11) to equation (12), the
restrictions that Model 4 place on Model 3 are that    = 0 and      0. The LR
test statistic for this restriction is distributed x2 with 2 degrees of
freedom. The value of the test statistic is 0.200, which means that the null
hypothesis is not rejected. So, we cannot reject the hypothesis that all
investors evaluate returns in dollar terms. However, equation (11) is not a


       Frankel assumes 0 is constant.
                         t


                                        15
very strong version of the model in which investors evaluate returns in terms
of different currencies.   It does not use the data on shares of wealth, and
treats those shares as constants.   It performs the worst of all the models
against the null of perfect substitutability. So, we really cannot decisively
evaluate the merits of allowing investor heterogeneity.



VI. Tests of CAPM Against Alternative Models of the Risk Prernia


     The CASE method of estimating the CAPM is formulated in such a way that
it is natural to compare the asset demand functions from CAPH to more general
asset demand functions. Unlike many other tests of CAPM, the alternative
models have a natural Interpretation and can provide some guidance to the
nature of the failure of the mean—variance model if CAPM is rejected.

     Any asset demand function that nests the asset demand functions derived
above —- equatIons (2), (3) and (4) —— can serve as the alternative model to
CAPM. That means, practically speaking, that the only requirement is that
asset demands depend on expected returns with time—varying coefficients.
Thus, in principle, we could use the CASE method to test CAPM against a wide
variety of alternatives —— models based more directly on intertemporal
optimization, models based on noise traders, etc.

     In practice, because of limitations on the number of observations of
returns and asset supplies, it is useful to consider alternative models that
do not have too many parameters. This can be accomplished by considering
models which are similar in form to CAPM, but do not impose all of the CAPM
restrictions.

     Thus, initially, we consider models in which the asset demand equations
in the three countries take exactly the form of equations (2), (3), and (4),
except that the coefficients on expected returns need not be proportional to
the variance of returns. We will only test the version of CAPM in which the
degree of risk aversion is assumed to be equal across countries. For that
version, we can write the alternative model as:

(19) A' =
        t
              A1(E
               t t zt+1÷Dt
(20)   A' =   A1(E
               t tt+i
                   z +D ) + a e
        t               t    G3

(21)   A1 =   A1(E    +D ) + a e
        t      t tt+1
                   z
                        t     ,.75

In   the alternative mode]., asset demands are functions of expected returns, but
the coefficients, A1 are not constrained to be proportional to the inverse of
the variance of returns. As with the Solnik model, we assume in the
alternative that the portfolios of investors in different countries differ

                                        16
only in their holdings of nominal bonds.

        Aggregating across countries gives us:

        A = A1(E
             t       +D t) + t Ce3
                t zt+1
                                                   +
                                                       t J eS
         t


        This          can be rewritten as



(22)Ez
   tt+1
        =-D +AA -aAe -aaAe.   t.       tt tGt3 tJtS
        The matrix of coefficients, A, is unconstrained. However, for formal
hypothesis testing, it is useful if model (10) is nested in model (22). So,
we hypothesize that A evolves according to:


(23) A = Q'Q + Jc tc'J
                    I + KAI—IK.
     t


We will assume that the variance of the error terms in the alternative model
follows a GARCH process as in equation (13).

Thus, the CAPH described in equations (10) and (13) imposes the following
restrictions on the alternative model described by equations (22), (23) and
(13):

            1/2
        p         P =Q
            1/2
        p         G =J
            1/2
        p         H      K, and
            —1
        p        -1

So, CAPH          places           26 restrictions on the alternative model.

     The alternative model was estimated by maximum likelihood methods. The
value of the log of the likelihood is 2481.9026. Thus, comparing this
likelihood value with the one given in Table 3, the test statistic for the
CAPM is 28.89. This statistic has a cM—square distribution with 26 degrees
of freedom. The p—value for this statistic is 0.316, which means we would not
reject CAPH at conventional levels of confidence.

     We now consider two generalizations of equation (22).   In the first, we
posit that the asset demands do not depend simply on the expected excess
returns, E z +0 .    Instead there may be a vector of constant risk premia,
                      t 1+1        1
c,   so that we replace equation (22) with


(24) E z
      tt+1
           = c                -D + A A —
                                I        It tCt3  A
                                                   titS
                                              e - ia            A e




                                                           17
CAPM places 31 restrictIons on this alternative —- those listed above, and the
restriction that c = 0. This test of CAPH is directly analogous to the tests
for significant 'pricing errors" In, for example, Gibbons, Ross and Shankeri
(1989) and Ferson and Harvey (1993).

     This model was also estimated by maximum likelihood methods. The value
of the log of the likelihood is 2482.6712. The chi-square statistic with 31
degrees of freedom Is 30.428, which has a p—value of 0.495. So, again, we
would not reject CAPM.

     Another alternative is to retain equation (19) to describe asset demand
by U.S. residents, but to replace equations (20) and (21) with

            =   A1(E z ÷D )                     aC
(25)
        t        t tt+1  t                  +




(26) At = A1(E z +D ) + aJ
           t tt+1   t
In these equations, ac and a are vectors. These equations differ from (20)
and (21) by allowing more investor heterogeneity across countries. Each of
the portfolio shares may differ between investors across countries —— rather
than just the bond-holdings as In the Solnik model and In the alternative
given by equation (22). Thus, aggregating equations (19). (25) and (26), and
rewriting In terms of expected returns, we get:

                  =            + A    A —                -
(27) E z
        t   t+1
                      —D
                           t         t. t       t t aC        ttJ
                                                             !1A a

     The CAPM model places 34 restrictions on equation (27). The model of
equation (27) was estimated using maximum likelihood techniques. When the
vectors a and a were left unconstrained, the point estimates of the
portfolio shares were implausible. So, the model was estimated constraining
the elements of a and a to lie between -1 and 1.   This restriction is
                               C            J
arbitrary, and Is not incorporated in the optimization problems of agents, but
It yields somewhat more plausible estimates of the optimal portfolio shares.

     The value of the log of the likelihood In this case was 2499.8842. This
gives us a chi-square statistic (34 d.f.) of 64.854. The p—value for this
statistic is .0011. We reject CAPM at the one per cent level.

     So, we reject CAPH precisely because the Solnik model does not allow
enough diversity across investors in their holdings of equities. However, it
would not be correct to conclude that a model that has home country bias In
both equities and bonds outperforms the Solnik model. That is because our
estimates of a and a3 are not consistent with home—country bias.


       The vectors aG and a represent the constant difference between the
shares held by Americans on the one hand, and Germans and Japanese,

                                                                 18
 respectively, on the other. Our estimate of a shows that Germans would hold
the fraction 0.23857      of their portfolio In U.S. equities than Americans.
Furthermore, they would hold -1.0 less of German equities, and —1.0 less of
Japanese equities than Americans. On the other hand, there would be home bias
in bond holdings —- they would hold 1.0 more of German bonds. They would hold
-0.31843 less of Japanese bonds, but they would hold 2.07988 more of U.S.
bonds. (Recall that U.S. bonds are the residual asset. So, while the
estimation constrained the elements of a to lie between -1 and 1, the
difference between the share of U.S. bonds held by Germans and Americans is
not so constrained.)

     Likewise, the estimated difference between the Japanese and American
portfolio Is not indicative of home-country bias in equity holdings. While we
do estimate that Japanese hold —1.0 less of U.S. equities than Americans, they
also hold less of both German and Japanese equities. The difference between
the American and Japanese share of German equities is very small: —0.00047,
and of Japanese equities, -0.06301. But Japanese are also estimated to hold
smaller shares of German bonds and Japanese bonds, the differences being
—0.20343 and -0.12084, respectively. But, Japanese are estimated to hold much
more of American bonds. The difference in the portfolio shares is 2.38784.

     So, In fact, a general asset demand model that allows for diversity in
equity holdings can significantly outperform CAPH. But the failure of CAPH is
not due to the well-known problem of home-country bias In equity holdings.


VII. Conclusions

     There are three main conclusions to be drawn from this paper.

     First, the version of international CAPH presented here performs better
than many versions estimated previously. Section V shows that the model has
some weak power in predicting excess returns, whereas almost all previous
studies have found that international versions of CAPM have little or no
power. The models presented here differ from past models by allowing a
broader menu of assets —— equities and bonds —- and by allowing some investor
heterogeneity.

     Second, the version of CAPM estimated here -- the Solnik model —- does
not allow for enough Investor heterogeneity. Section VI presents a number of
tests of CAPM against alternative models of asset demand. The alternative
models do not Impose the constraint between means of returns and variances or
returns that Is the hallmark of the CAPM.

     Some of these alternative models do not significantly outperforM CAPH.
Specifically, CAPH cannot be rejected In favor of models which still Impose
the Solnik result —— that portfolios of Investors In different countries
differ in their bond shares but not their equity shares. But, the alternative
models need not impose the SolnIk result. So, when the alternative model is
generalized so that It does not Impose the CAPM constraint between means and

                                      19
variances, and does not impose the Solnik result, CAPH is rejected.

      The third major conclusion regards the usefulness of the CASE approach to
testing the CAPH.   In the CASE method, the alternative models are all built up
explicitly from asset demand functions. In section VI, we considered several
different models of asset demands.    In each case, we built an equilibrium
model from those asset demand functions that served as an alternative to CAPM.
In some of the cases, we were not able to reject CAPM. But, when we altered
our model of asset demand in a plausible way, we arrived at an equilibrium
model which rejects CAPH. The advantage of the CASE approach is that we know
very explicitly the economic behavior behind the alternative equilibrium
models. When we fail to reject CAPH, we realize that it is not because CAPH
is an acceptable model, but because the alternative model is as unacceptable
as CAPM. When we reject CAPM, we know precisely the nature of the alternative
model that is better able to explain expected asset returns. In this case, we
have learned that CAPM must be generalized In a way to allow cross—country
investor heterogeneity in equity demand. Perhaps incorporating capital
controls or asymmetric Information into the CAPH will prove helpful, but this
 is left for future work.




                                       20
                                      References


Bollerslev, Tim, 1986, Generalized Autoregressive Conditional
     Heteroskedasticity,' Journal of Econometrics 31, 307-327.

Campbell, John Y. , 1993, "Intertemporal Asset Pricing without Consumption
     Data, ' American Economic Review 83, 487—512.


Clare, Andrew; Raymond O'Brien; Peter N. Smith and Stephen Thomas, 1993,
     "Global Macroeconomic Shocks, Time—Varying Covariances and Tests of the
     ICAPM,' working paper, Department of Economics, University of West
     London.

Dumas, Bernard, 1993, "Partial Equilibrium vs. General Equilibrium Models of
     International Capital Market Equilibrium,' working paper 93-1, Wharton
     School.

Engel, Charles M. , 1984, "Testing for the Absence of Expected Real Profits
        from Forward Market Speculation," Journal of International Economics 17,
        299—308.

_____     1992, "On the Foreign Exchange Risk Premium In a General Equilibrium
        Model," Journal of International Economics 32, 305-19.

_____     1993, "Real Exchange Rates and Relative Prices: An Empirical
        Investigation," Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

_____     Jeffrey A. Frankel, Kenneth A. Froot, and Anthony P. Rodrigues. 1993.
        "The Constrained Asset Share Estimation (CASE) Method: Testing Mean-
        Variance Efficiency of the U.S. Stock Market," National Bureau of
        Economic Research working paper no. 4294.

_____ •  and Anthony P. Rodrlgues, 1989, "Tests of International CAPM with   Time-
        Varying Covariances," Journal of Applied Econometrics 4, 119-138.
____ and _____, 1993,        "Tests of Mean—Variance Efficiency of International
        Equity Markets," Oxford Economic Papers, forthcoming.

Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, "An Exploratory Investigation
     of the Fundamental Determinants of National Equity Market Returns," this
     volume.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. , 1982, "In Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A Six-
     Currency Test Assuming Mean—Variance Optimization," Journal of
     International Money arid Finance 1, 255—274.

_____ • 1988, "Recent Estimates of Time—Variation In the Conditional Variance
     and in the Exchange Risk Premium," Journal of International Money and
     Finance 7, 115-25.


                                         21
_____ and Charles N. Engel, 1984, "Do Asset Demand Functions Optimize over the
     Mean and Variance of Real Returns? A Six—Currency Test, Journal of
     International Economics 17, 309-323.

Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross and Jay Shanken, 1989, A Test of the
     Efficiency of a Given Portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121-1152.

Glassman, Debra A. and Leigh A. Riddick, 1993, Why Empirical International
     Portfolio Models Fail, manuscript, University of Washington.

Harvey, Campbell, 1989, "Time Varying Conditional Covariances in Tests of
     Asset Pricing Models,' Journal of Financial Economics 24, 289-317.

Restoy, Fernando, 1992, "Optimal Portfolio Policies under Time—Dependent
     Returns," manuscript. Research Department, Bank of Spain.

Siegel, Jeremy, 1972, "Risk, Interest Rates and the Forward Exchange,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 86, 303—309.

Solnik, Bruno, 1974, "An Equilibrium Model of the International Capital
     Market," Journal of Economic Theory 8, 500—524.

Tesar, Linda L. and Ingrid M. Werner, 1993, "International Securities
     Transactions and Portfolio Choice," NBER Conference on the
     Internationalization of Equity Markets.

Thomas, S.H. and H.R. Wickens, 1993, 'An International CAPM for Bonds and
     Equities," Journal of International Money and Finance 12, 390-412.




                                      22
</ref_section>
                                         Data Appendix

Foreign Exchange Rate

     The foreign exchange rates that were used in calculating rates of return,
and in converting local currency values into dollar values are taken from the
data base at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. They are the 9 AM. bid
rates from the last day of the month.

Equity Data

     The value of outstanding shares in each of the three markets comes from
monthly issues of Morgan Stanley's Capital International Perspectives. These
figures are provided In domestic currency terms.   I thank William Schwert for
pointing out that these numbers must be interpreted cautiously because they do
not correct adequately for cross-holding of shares, a particular problem in
Japan.

     The return on equities in local currency terms Is taken from the same
source. The returns are on the index for each country with dividends
reinvested.

Bond Data

     The construction of the data on bonds follows Frankel (1982) closely.
For each country, the cumulative foreign exchange rate Intervention is
computed, on a benchmark of foreign exchange holdings in March 1973. That
cumulative foreign exchange intervention is added to outstanding government
debt while foreign government holdings of the currency are subtracted.

     Germany:

     dmasst = dmdebt +       bblnt   -ndmcb

     dmdebt = German central government debt excluding social security
contributions. Bundesbank Monthly Report, Table VII.

     dbbint = (DM/S exchange rate, IFS lie ae) x (foreign exchange holdings,
IFS lime ldd + SDR holdings, IFS line lbd + Reserve position at IMF, IFS line
cd — (SDR Holdings + Reserve position at IMF)ti x                      IFS
                                                         ($/SDR)/($/SDR)i,
line sa — tSDR allocations, IFS line lbd x (S/SDR));

     bbint —    dbbint   +   32.324 x (DM/$)19733

    ndmcb is derived from the IMF Annual Report




                                              23
     Japan

     ynasst = yndebt +      bjint    —   njncb

     yndebt =      Japanese central government deficit interpolated monthly, Bank
of Japan, Economic Statistics Monthly, Table 82.

     dbjint = (Yen/S exchange rate, IFS lie ae) x (forelgn exchange holdings,
IFS line ldd + SDR holdings, IFS line lbd + Reserve position at IMF, IFS line
cd - (SDR Holdings + Reserve positlon at IMF)1 x (S/SDR)/($/SDR)_1, IFS
line sa — tSDR allocations, IFS line lbd x ($/SDR));


     bjint —      dbjint   + 18. 125 x
                                           (Yen/S)19733
     nyncb is derived from the 111F Annual Report

     U.S.

     doasst = dodebt +      fedint   -   ndolcb
     dodebt =    Federal debt, month end from Board of Governors Flow of Funds
—carter

     carter = 1.5952 in 78:12 and 1.3515 in 79:3, the Carter bonds

     dfedint. = Eforeign exchange holdings, IFS line ldd ÷ SDR holdings, IFS
line lbd ÷ Reserve position at IMF, IFS line cd    (SDR Holdings + Reserve
position at IMF)ti — £SDR allocations, IFS line lbd x (S/SDR));


     fedint        dfedint + 14.366


     ndolcb Is derived from the IMF Annual Report


Wealth Data

     Outside wealth is measured by adding government debt and the stock market
value to the cumulated current account surplus on Frankel's benchmark wealth.
     The monthly current account Is interpolated from IFS line 77ad


Interest Rates

     Interest rates are one month Eurocurrency rates obtained from the Bank
for International Settlements tape.



                                                 24
                                       TABLE 1



           the dollar return on dollar bonds between time t and t+l
 t+1

           the mark return on mark bonds
 t+1

           the yen return on yen bonds
 t+1

Ru         the gross dollar return on U.S. equities
 t+1


 t+1
           the   gross mark return on German equities

Rt+1     E the gross yen return on Japanese equities

              the dollar/mark exchange rate at time t

S             the dollar/yen exchange rate
 U
 t        t      tt tt t     share   of U.S. wealth In total world wealth

 gE
 t        tt tt tt t           share   of German wealth in total world wealth


 t
     C
          tt tt tt t           share of Japanese wealth in total world wealth




                                         25
                                             TABLE 2

                   GARCH—CAPM MODEL WITH RHO DIFFERENT ACROSS COUNTRIES
                                             (MODEL 1)



RHO     (U.S.,   GERMANY, JAPAN)

—1 .   3565e-07   —3. 2690e-O7 3. 7562e-08

P'P MATRIX

 0.00059049 0.00016524 —1.7010e—O5 0.00020655 —2.916Oe—05
 0.00016524 0.00031849 0.00016684 0.00026570 0.00016344
-1.7010e-05 0.00016684 0.00021890 0.00013559 0.00017095
 0.00020655 0.00026570 0.00013559 0.00068145 0.00029210
-2.9160e-05 0.00016344 0.00017095 0.00029210 0.00028625

DIAGONAL ELEMENTS OF G MATRIX

—0.024400         0.14830    0.19370     0.42910       0.35240

DIAGONAL ELEMENTS OF H MATRIX
 0.84760    0.95300    0.90130           0.82470       0.82200


LOG-LIKELIHOOD VALUE

       2469.47942




                                               26
                                         TABLE 3

                  GARCH-CAPM MODEL WITH RHO EQUAL ACROSS COUNTRIES
                                         (MODEL 2)


RHO

   4. 6540

P'P MATRIX

 0.00054260     0.00014092 -2.0086e—05     0. 00018704 -3. 4940e-05
 0.00014092     0.00028210 0.00016825      0. 00026609 0.00018164
-2. 0086e—05    0.00016825 0.00022854      0.00013989      0.00018902
 0.00018704     0. 00026609 0.00013989     0.00068100      0.00031419
-3. 4940e—05    0. 00018164 0.00018902     0.00031419      0.00031561


DIAGONAL ELEMENTS OF G MATRIX

-0.039763 0.087661       0.17620   0.40677       0.37041

DIAGONAL ELEMENTS OF H MATRIX

  0.86051      0.96511   0.90048   0.83463       0.80805


LOG-LIKELIHOOD VALUE
       2467.45718




                                            27
                                      TABLE 4

                  GARCH-CAPM MODEL WITH WEALTH SHARES CONSTANT
                                    (MODEL 3)


ALPHA

     4. 03400

GAMMA

    —1.11955       0.739053

P'P MATRIX

 0.000561370    0.000149152 -2.04214e-05 0.000190815 -3.82150e-O5
 0.000149152    0.000295907   0.000170993    0.000273723    0.000181881
—2.04214e—05    0.000170993   0.000232242    0.000145623    0.000192640
 0.000190815    0.000273723   0.000145623    0.000701762    0.000321168
—3.8215Oe—O5    0.000181881   0.000192640    0.000321168    0.000322825

DIAGONAL ELEMENTS OF G MATRIX

  -0.0363077       0.105138      0.179205        0.417467      0.366548

DIAGONAL ELEMENTS OF H MATRIX

    0.855632       0.961629      0.898721        0.826812      0.806122

LOG-LIKELIHOOD VALUE

        2467. 61284




                                            28
                                         TABLE 5

                            GARCH-CAPM MODEL IN DOLLAR TERMS
                                        (MODEL 4)

RHO

       4.09263

P'P MATRIX

0.000559210      0.000147301 -2. 12924e-O5 0.000190461 —3.82462e—05
 0.000147301     0.000292889     0.000170081   0,000272490    0.000181657
—2.12924e—05     0.000170081     0.000231566   0.000144383    0.000192179
 0.000190461     0.000272490     0.000144383   0.000698603    0.000320088
—3.82462e—05     0.000181657     0.000192179   0.000320088    0.000322144

DIAGONAL ELEMENTS OF G MATRIX

  —0.0374155          0.101296      0.177600       0.416692      0.367108

DIAGONAL ELEMENTS OF H MATRIX

      0.856192        0.962377      0.899183       0.827584      0.806167
LOG-LIKELIHOOD VALUE

         2467.51288




                                           29
                                    TABLE 6

                 Tests of Significance of GARCH Coefficients
                       (Likelihood Ratio Tests, 5 d.f.)


                         Model   Chi-Square Statistic
                         Model 1 26.740
                         Model 2 24. 174
                         Model 3 24.039
                         Model 4 24.050

All statistics significant at 1'/. level




                                      30
                            TABLE 7


LR Tests of Null Hypothesis of Perfect Substitutability


                 Chi — Square Statistics
                 (P—value in Parentheses)




   Model     Null 14 Null 15 Null 16      Null 17 Null 18
   Model 1   6.433                6.714    6.719   5.955
             (0.092)           (0.082)    (0.081) (0.114)
   Model 2   2.388
             (0.122)
   Model 3              I . 640  2.98 1   2.986   2.222
                       (0.200) (0.395)   (0.394) (0.528)
   Model 4                       2.781
                                (0.095))




                             31
      Ui
      z
      0
      w
      1)

                                                  (0
                                                  CO
      0
      -H
      P1

      -H
      >
      1                                           CO

      P-i

                                                        (1)
Fri   Ui                                                In
      z                                           cn    -H
                                                        >
      2J                                          co
C     C
      —1
•11   rn

      -<
      -H                                          CO
      C
      C
      P1
      '1
      0
      In
      C)
      z>
                                                  (.0
      >



            0.016   0.012    0.008     0.004   0.000

                            VARIANCE
      w
      0
      z0
       cD

      j)
                                                    cc
      0
      P1
      <
      -I
      >                                             cc
      P1
N.)
                                                           U)
P1    w                                                    rn
C
      z                                             cc
                                                           —
                                                           >
C)    C                                                    0
-n    -1
      rn

      o                                             (-,J
      z0                                            cc

       oJ

      0
      T1



      In                                            cc
      0
      z
      >


            0.0036   0.0028   0.0020   0.0012   0.0004
                         VARIANCE
                                    FIGURE 3

           RISK PREt1IA ON EQUITY RETURNS RELATIVE TO U.S. BONDS


      0
      0        US EQUITY
      c        GE EQUITY
      0       JA EQUITY
      (0

      0
w     (N
c
      P
      0
(fl   3D
a:    0
      P
      0
      0
      Q
      0
      0
      0                                                 -I
      Q
      0      79:1     81:1   83:1     85:   1   87:1   89:1   91:1
                                     DATES
                                        FIGURE 4

                RISK PREMIA OF BOND RETURNS RELATIVE TO U.S. BONDS

      0
      P                     I               I
      0
      r)
      0
      c     -——— CE
      0                 BOND1
                   JA BONDS
      c'J   L
      0
      P
      C)
LU
ci:   0
      P
      C
      0
      C)
      P
      C




      C)
      c
      C)
                 79:1     81:1   83:1     85:1     87:1   89:1   91:1
                                         DATES
