                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE ROLE OF JUDGMENT AND
                       DISCRETION IN THE CONDUC1 OF
                     MONETARY POLICY: CONSEQUENCES OF
                       CHANGING FINANCIAL MARKETS




                                 Benjamin M. Friedman




                                 Working Paper No. 4599




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December, 1993




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4599
                                                                             December 1993


                          THE ROLE OF JUDGMENT AND
                         DISCRETION IN THE CONDUCT OF
                       MONETARY POLICY: CONSEQUENCES OF
                         CHANGING FINANCIAL MARKETS


                                          ABSTRACT

       Conventional monetaiy policy rules based on intermediate targets, like the growth of
money or credit, rest on the presumption that relationships correcting these variables to key
measures of nonfinancial economic activity like income and prices are robust. \Vhen financial
markets change in such a way as to disrupt those relationships, rules based on intermediate
targets no longer provide useful guides for conducting monetary policy. Under those
circumstances, the central bank can instead exploit variables like money and credit as information
variables. Doing so, however, inevitably requires case-by-case judgments. The greater is the
impact of changing financial markets in this context, the stronger is the need for the central bank
to exploit information both inclusively, in the sense of drawing on multiple and diversified
sources of information rather than any one variable, and intensively, in the sense of allowing less
time between policy decisions.




Benjamin M. Friedman
Harvard University
Liu.auer Center 127
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
                                                                         Revised
                                                                         November, 1993


     THE   EQL QI      JUDGMENT   AND DISCRETION J flj   CONDUCT QE MONETARY POLICY:

                         CONSEQUENCES QE CHANGING FINANCIAL MARKETS


                                     Benjamin K. Friedman
                                      Harvard University



                                     There is no human affair which stands so
                                     constantly and so generally in close connection
                                     with chance as war .    .
                                                               Pity the poor warrior
                                     who is contented to crawl about in the beggardori
                                     of rules.

                                                            Karl von Clausewitz, On War




     It may be true that war is the human activity most vitally subject to

chance and happenstance, but monetary policy surely runs a close second. Making

decisions and taking action in a setting driven by the unknown and the

unknowable are a large part of what the making of monetary policy is all about.

The central thesis of this paper is that Clausewitz's warning against the

straight-jacket of predetermined rules in waging war is no less apt in the

conduct of monetary policy

     The more specific ocus of this paper's argument is the largely

unanticipated, indeed unanticipatable, changes that have occurred in recent

years -   - and   that continue to occur and, in all likelihood, will keep on

occurring --      in   the U.S. financial markets. Enumeration and description of

particular changes in market structure or practice is not the point, however.

Rather, the paper's object is to provide an overview, or more accurately a point

of view or perhaps even a                    in regard to the implications of such

changes for the design of monetary policy.
                                        -2-




     The central tenet of that point of view or philosophy of the matter, is

that such changes are, and for the foreseeable future will be, ever-present and

ongoing, to a sufficient extent as to vitiate any attempt to achieve a

successful monetary policy by following a rule based on a pretedermined

intermediate target. This view stands in specific contrast to the idea that a

distinct set of market changes has occurred but has also now concluded, so that

the financial and economic relationships most relevant to monetary policy will

soon "settle down" to reflect some newly prevailing equilibrium. This paper's

argument is that such an equilibrium may exist in some suitably fundamental

sense, but not at the level of workaday detail and operational explicitness

required to underpin a formal procedure, like that surrounding the use of an

intermediate target, capable of appropriately governing monetary policy.

     What too often seems forgotten in the endless debate over how to conduct

monetary policy is that the question crucially at issue is not whether a

sufficiently clever econometrician, surveying the reckage after the fact, can

devise some new specification, or invent some new variable, capable of restoring

order to a collapsed relationship. What matters is whether it is possible to

identify before     event a set of regularities of sufficient centrality and

robustness to provide the qualitative and quantitative basis for sound

policymaking. Even a careful reader of the voluminous literature of this

subject might well infer that a positive answer to the former question somehow

implied a favorable resolution of the latter. ?ut the two issues are distinct

and it is the latter that must carry the weight of actual policymaking.

     Section I provides the necessary context for what follows by briefly

reviewing the motivation and logic underlying the use of information variables

and intermediate targets in formulating and carrying out monetary policy. A

novel feature of this dfscussjon, compared to much of the usual literature of
                                       -3-




the subject, is the importance attached to the frequency in time over which a

central bank revisits its choice of target, both qualitatively and

quantitatively. When the time between such reconsiderations is lengthy, the use

of any intermediate target becomes indistinguishable from a fixed (that is,

no-feedback) rule. But when the time interval is short, what is formally the

same procedure amounts in substance to a quite different approach based on an

information variable. Section 1 also highlights the importance, under either an

intermediate target procedure or an information variable procedure, of empirical

links between the specific variable in question and nonfinancial economic

activity.

     Sections II and III turn to empirical evidence, documenting the collapse in

recent years of some of the familiar relationships that, if they were

sufficiently robust, could perhaps play a central role in guiding U.S. monetary

policy. As a way of making more explicit the connection between these changes

in empirical economic relationships and the changes that have taken place in the

U.S. financial markets, Section III focuses on three "case study" examples: the

narrow money stock (Ml), which was at the center of the Federal Reserve System's

most intensive effort to date to pursue monetary growth targets, during 1979-82;

a broad credit aggregate, which my own work of a decade ago showed was

comparable to most measures of money in its relationship to income; and the

broad money stock (M2), which in recent years seems to have attracted more

support as a target for U.s. monetary policy than any other such variable.      With

respect to M2 in particular, this paper argues that today the Federal Reserve

not only does not know the magnitude but does           kn th .j.gn of the
response of M2 to open market operations.
                                          -4-




     Finally, Section IV cakes up th. b'ird question of how to conduct monct.cv

policy In an environment "so constantly and so generally in close connection"

with chance and change. Even the traditional injunction to do less when matters

are uncertain, and in the limit do nothing at all when they are uncertain

enough, has no meaning when basic relationships are so subject to change that it

Is impossible to say what "doing nothing" means In operational terms. Yet the

federal Reserve must somehcw execute to the best of Its ability Its

responsibilities, both statutory and morn!, to further the common veal. The

approach suggested here involves the use of information variables that are

Inclusive rather than exclusive -- encompassing measures not only beyond th

conventional   monetary aggregates but, indeed, beyond the confines of the bankini'

system or even the financial markets more generally --   together   with a frequency

of decision making that for practical purposes renders even a single formal

Intermediate target substantially equivalent to an Information variable.

     Section V concludes by pointing to some valid and potentially Important

concerns, stemming from ongoing change in the U.S. financial markets, that

remain beyond the scope of the subject's treatment here.
                                           -5-




I.     Tarets, Instruments        Information    Variables

       In principle, the Federal Open Market Committee could conclude each of its

meetings by issuing a directive simply instructing the Committee's operating

arm,   the   securities trading desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to do

whatever is appropriate to make the U.S. economy grow at such-and-such percent

per annum, or to limit price inflation to no more than such-and-such percent.

The FOMC does not act in this way, presumably because the decisions thus taken

would not be sufficiently operational. In other words, they would leave to the

trading desk staff the entire matter of just what to do in order to achieve the

specified growth rate, or the designated inflation.

       One can, of course, imagine such a division of responsibility between staff

and principals. But the Open Market Committee has never (to my knowledge) even

come close to adopting that division, perhaps because the Federal Reserve System

itself, as an institution, already stands in roughly this kind of relationship

to the Congress. Moreover, economic growth and inflation are subject to many

influences besides monetary policy, and many of those are surrounded with great

uncertainty. Actual results may therefore differ from the corresponding

intended outcomes despite even the best actions cx ante by monetary policy.

Without at least some judgment about the plausible means to the designated ends,

made either before the fact or after, how could the principals on the Committee

ever determine whether their appointed staff had acted appropriately and

comptly?
       At the other extreme, the Open Market Committee can also make decisions

couched entirely in terms of quantities or prices that the trading desk's

actions alone are sufficient to establish, either because desk actions are all

that matters (as in the case of nonborrowed reserves) or in the sense that desk

actions can readily be made dominant over other market forces, at least for a
                                        -6-




while (as in the case of the federal funds rate). The Committee has pursued

approximately this kind of narrow focus on the instruments of monetary policy at

various times in the past, and such an interpretation, with the funds rate as

the designated instrument variable, seems not far off the mark as a description

of the most recent period. Once the Committee itself makes what amounts to the

choice of instrument -. meaning here not just the qualitative selection of which

instrument to set but also the quantitative magnitude to be implemented - -

responsibility   for whether that choice is the right one clearly rests with the

principals.

       Both the Federal Reserve System and many of its critics, however, have long

sought to frame the FOMC's decision making process in terms that are

intermediate between these two extremes. One often stated reason is external:

the desire, on the part of both the Congress and interested private citizens, to

monitor the Federal Reserve's intentions and competence along just the lines

suggested above in regard to the Open Market Committee's relationship to its

staff. If the economy performs in a patently undesirable way, is that the fault

of monetary policy? Or was monetary policy appropriate ex ante and the poor

outcome due to unforeseeable circumstances beyond Federal Reserve control -.

like   a surprise price increase imposed by the OPEC cartel, or a stock market

crash that dampened the public's spending, or credit stringency following large

loan losses taken by banks and other lenders?

       But much of the motivation for a more intermediate monetary policy decision

making framework has also been internal in the simple sense of enhancing the

likelihood of achieving more desirable ultimate outcomes. Regardless of whether

it is left to staff or carried out by principals, and regardless too of whether

the matter is drawn explicitly or merely left implicit, the process of

establishing the policy instrument that is most likely to lead to any desired
                                        -8-




central banks can and do observe.

     The specific aspect of intermediate behavior that has traditionally

received the most attention in this context is the accuisulation of money

balances. Given that the central bank's main form of policy action in a

fractional reserve banking system is the purchase or sale of securities in

exchange for bank reserves, even quite disparate accounts of the behavioral

process connecting monetary policy to economic activity provide at least a

potential role for fluctuations in some measure of "money" to anticipate

fluctuations in income, output and spending (either real or nominal). In the

most conventional rendering, open market purchases provide reserves that enable

banks to increase their lending and thereby create more deposits, thus reducing

interest rates (as long as the demand for deposits is negatively interest

elastic) and so stimulating spending. A closely related alternative version

places more emphasis on the importance of bank lending in financing either

business or household expenditures, so that movements in money anticipate

spending primarily because they reflect what is happening on the other side of

the banking system's balance sheet. A quite different view focuses initially on

the presumed link between money and prices, associating any effects on real

activity with the output decisions of producers unsure of how to interpret the

limited information they receive as prices change.

     In each of these representations, the behavior that ultimately generates

changes in real economic activity and/or prices also involves movements of

money," and if the timing is right the FOMC can exploit those movements as a

means of checking, and if warranted changing, its chosen level for the federal

funds rate or the quantity of nonborrowed reserves. The most straightforward

way to do so is simply to compare the observed level (or growth rate) of "the

money stock" to prior expectations, formulated in conjunction with the original
                                           -7-




economic outcome involves tracing backward a causal trail that leads (in the

forward direction) from what the central bank does to what happens to

nonfinancial economic activity. Along that causal trail, central bank action

and economic effect are separated .th by time          by behavioral process. A

change in the federal funds rate or in the quantity of nonborrowed reserves now

makes a difference for economic activity later on,         the economic behavior

that gives rise to that ultimate difference involves actions along the way that

are, at least in principle, observable. The concept of either an intermediate

target for monetary policy or an information variable rests on both the time lag

and the observability of steps along the way (and, of course, on the fundamental

presence of uncertainty in the first place).

       It is important to emphasize the joint and mutually reinforcing role played

in this context by both the passage of time and the occurrence of observable

intermediate behavioral actions. If the implementation of a new federal fund.s

rate   in the morning had its full effect on income and prices by lunch time,

there would be little practical interest (at least for policy purposes) in

monitoring what happened along the way. Confronted by undesirable economic

outcomes, the FOMC could change policy the same afternoon. similarly, if there

were no way to observe what was happening until the full economic impact of a

funds rate change had occurred, the Counnittee would have little choice but to

"wait it out" with whatever rat e level seemed appropriate ex ante, even if the

wait might be long indeed. In the world that confronts actual monetary policy,

however, it does take time for central bank actions to achieve their full effect

on economic activity. And, at least under most conceptions of how monetary

policy works, the underlying economic behavior does involve steps along      the way

-   - ranging   from financial actions like taking loans or making deposits, to

nonfinancial actions like placing orders or obtaining building permits -
                                                                             - that
                                         -9-




instrument choice. More money (or a faster growth rate) than expected might

mean that monetary policy is having a more stimulative effect on economic

activity than anticipated. Or it could mean that, while monetary policy is

having the anticipated effect, some independent influence -     - fiscal   expansion,

for example, or a stock market rally -   - is   providing more stimulus than

anticipated. Either way, the indicated response would be to tighten monetary

policy by raising the funds rate or reducing (the growth of) nonborrowed

reserves. Such a procedure amounts to using "money" as an information variable.

periodically exploiting its relationship to economic activity to make mid-course

corrections in the chosen policy instrument as needed, rather than simply wait

until the ultimate effect on income and prices has itself become fully evident.1

     Under most conceptions of how central bank actions affect the economy, of

course, movements in money are not always a sign of movements in income and

prices to come. More money (or a faster growth rate) than expected might

instead mean that bank customers are simply choosing to hold larger deposits in

place of alternative forms of wealth, for reasons unrelated to their spending or

production decisions. Or it could mean that banks have decided that a smaller

cushion of excess reserves is appropriate to newly prevailing market conditions.

Whenever the FOMC uses "money" (or any other observable quantity or price, for

that matter) as an information variable to help guide monetary policy, it must

inevitably make judgments about just such matters in order to decide whether,

and if so by how much, to react when the chosen information variable behaves

unexpectedly. When the Committee's judgments are right more often than not,

using an information variable in this way can help it to achieve more desirable

outcomes, although it does little to further the interest of those who seek to

monitor   monetary policy externally.

     y contrast,    the Committee could eschew making such judgments on a case by
                                        -10-




case basis and instead simply decide that it will always react to unexpected

movements in money as if they convey information about nonfinancial activity

that warrant a change in the funds rate or in nonborrowed reserves. The

limiting case of this manner of proceeding is not only to treat all unexpected

money fluctuations as informative in this sense but also, as a quantitative

matter, to react to any such unexpected movements by changing the policy

instrument in such a way as to offset them altogether (or to the maximum extent

possible). If the FOMC had initially thought such-and-such percent money growth

was consistent with achieving its objectives for income and prices, but incoming

data has shown faster growth, the Committee would thus respond by raising the

funds rate or withdrawing reserves to the extent now thought necessary to

restore money growth to just that originally designated rate. In this case, the

Committee would be using money not merely as art    information   variable but,
further, as an intermediate target --   in   the sense that it is, for some period

of time, conducting monetary policy as if its objective were not to influence

nonfinancial economic activity but to achieve a designated rate of money growth

(which, of course, is more straight forward for outsiders to monitor).

     But for what period of time is that? In the vast literature discussing

targets and instruments of monetary policy, analysis of this kind of

intermediate target procedure typically does not designate any specific time

interval for which the intermediate target is in force. For purposes of formal

analysis, doing so is perhaps beside the point. But the substantive force of an

intermediate target depends crucially on the length of time during which

achieving a particular target actually governs the conduct of policy.

     For example, suppose the FOMC determines that achieving its objectives for

nonfinancial economic activity is likely to be consistent with      money growth of

such-and-such percent, and further resolves not to revisit this matter for the
                                          -11-




next year. Instead, during that time it will conduct open market operations

solely with an eye to achieving its chosen rate of money growth. Such a

practice would clearly distinguish this use of money as an intermediate target,

not just as a formal matter but in substance as well. Throughout the year the

Committee would, in effect, be conducting policy under the presumption.

quantitative as well as qualitative, that the open market response appropriate

to offsetting any unexpected movements of money is also the response Appropriate

to offsetting any unwanted fluctuations in nonfinancial economic activity.

      By contrast, suppose the Committee adopts what is formally the same stance

but also resolves to revisit the matter, including making a fresh assessment of

whether the initially designated money growth rate is still consistent with the

desired nonfinancial outcomes, after just one month. Here money may still be

the intermediate target of monetary policy, in the sense that its movements

govern open market operations within that month. ut as a substantive matter

the Committee is addressing, regularly and frequently, the very same questions

 -   to   what extent does the latest movement in money say anything about income or

prices? and what rate of money growth            seems most consistent with achieving

whatever is now the desired path of income and/or prices? -.        that   arise when

money is just an information variable.

      As a substantive matter, therefore, whether the designation of a specific

intermediate target for monetary policy really amounts to what the literature

has associated with such a procedure depends importantly on the length of time

for which it is in force. In one direction, longer time intervals give the

intermediate target procedure substantive content. Indeed, as the interval

becomes long enough, pursuing an intermediate target becomes indistinguishable

from following a fixed money growth rule without feedback. In the other

direction, shorter time intervals render an intermediate target substantively
                                             -12-




equivalent to an information variable.

           Just where today's FOHC practice stands along this spectrum is ambiguous.

As a rhetorical matter, under the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation the Committee

reports targeted growth rates (actually ranges) to Congress for an entire year

at a time, with an opportunity to revise these targets at mid-year. A year is

presumably long enough to lend substantive content to an intermediate target

procedure in this context. As a practical matter, however, both the observed

outcomes and the Chairman's statements to Congress clearly show that the

Committee feels no imperative to meet its designated targets if it judges doing

so to be inappropriate. In this presumably more important sense, money is

clearly serving as (at most) an information variable, not an intermediate

target.

           Regardless of whether the Committee uses "money" - -   or   any other variable
-   - as   an intermediate target or just an information variable, however, two basic

requirements remain. The quantity or price in question must be observable               And

its movements must provide information about subsequent movements of income, or

output, or prices, or whatever aspect of nonfinancial economic activity monetary

policy seeks ultimately to affect. When changes in market structures or

practice render a variable unobservable (as implied, for example, by the

familiar claim that there is some concept of "money" that continues to be

closely related to income or prices, but whith does not correspond to any

measure that could be revealed by the available data), or when such changes

sever a variable's empirical relationship to nonfinancial economic activity so

that its movements are no longer predictive, that variable's usefulness for

purposes of monetary policy is ended. But on both counts, that is an empirical

matter.
                                      -13-




II.   Evolviriz Markets   Chanins Empirical   Relationships

      Financial markets, both in the United States and elsewhere have undergone

vast changes over time. In the United States during the past two decades, the

markets for deposits and deposit-like instruments have been a particularly

dramatic focus of change. Banks, thrifts and other competing institutions,

acting in response to relaxed government regulation as well as to new

opportunities opened by technological advances in communications and data

processing, have widely introduced new forms of wealth holding that either did

not exist at all, or at best were available only by special arrangement for very

large accounts, just a short time before. The deposit-holding public, including

businesses as well as household accounts both large and small, have responded in

turn by massively shifting their patterns of deposit ownership. All this is, by

now, highly familiar and well documented.2

      From the perspective of what matters for monetary policy, the single most

fundamental aspect of this sweeping change in deposit institutions has no doubt

been the abolition, virtually at a stroke, of the long-standing distinction

between saving balances and transactions balances. At least since the l880s

(Jevons, for example), economists have distinguished the desire to hold money as

a repository of wealth from the desire to hold money as a means of consummating

purchases. And at least since 1933, when the Class-Steagall Act prohibited

payment of interest on demand deposits, this conceptual distinction had

corresponded in the United States to a readily visible division between

different forms of deposits actually offered by banks. But in the new world of

money market mutual funds, money market deposit accounts, and other instruments

combining market-related interest rates and checking services, it is now

standard practice for depositors to make the same account balance serve both

functions
                                        .14-




    Nor has the scope of change within the last decade or two been limited to

institutions and practices affecting the public's asset holding behavior.

borrowing arrangements. too, have become sharply different. The change in this

regard that has probably been of greatest significance to links between monetary

policy and nonfinancial economic activity is the securitization of residential

mortgages and subsequent establishment of a highly liquid secondary market for

the resulting securities. This development has effectively severed the link

between mortgage financing and deposit flows, a link that had previously enabled

the Federal Reserve (acting in conjunction with other regulatory bodies) to

exert particular influence over the pace of homebuilding by setting market

interest rates either above or below the maximum interest rates legally payable

on deposits. The ceilings that used to limit deposit interest rates are now

mostly gone, but in all probability their presence today would make little

difference for the cyclical variability of homebuilding because securitization

has made available to mortgage borrowers virtually the entire market of saving

flows, not just those that pass through depositor)' intermediaries.

     The more general erosion of the position of depositary intermediaries, of

which mortgage securitization is just the most obvious example, is potentially

of paramount importance for the way in which the Federal Reserve System conducts

monetary policy. At   least   under current institutional arrangements, the Federal

Reserve's functional role in this context is as the monopoly provider of

reserves in a fractional reserve system encompassing banks and other depositary

intermediaries. But if the intermediary sector itself atrophies in relation to

the economy's overall systems for holding wealth, executing transactions and

mobilizing saving to finance expenditures, that functional role correspondingly

withers in its importance and effectiveness for the determination of

nonfinancial economic activity.
                                          -15-



       Figure   1 shows that the share of total wealth holding in the United States

represented by depository intermediaries' liabilities has recently declined

sharply (mostly because of the collapse of the savings and loan industry) after

well over a decade of relative stability. Even so, these institutions' share in

total wealth holding is approximately what it was two decades ago, and well

above what it was three decades ago. By contrast, Figure 2 shows that the share

of debt financing done by depository intermediaries has been declining for the

last two decades, and at a more rapid rate in recent years. These institutions'

share in total debt financing is well below any recent benchmark.

       No one knows just how small reservable (or potentially reservable) deposits

must become in relation to total wealth, or how small the assets of depository

institutions must become in relation to total credit, before the central bank's

ability to affect these institutions' behavior by providing reserves no longer

translates into an ability to affect broader aspects of economic activity. But

the limiting point is surely not zero, and it is implausible not to expect the

relevant associated relationships to change, perhaps subtly but perhaps more

dramatically, well before that point is reached.

       And change they have. Table 1 reports the results of standard empirical

exercises testing whether the respective growth of any of the usual money or

credit aggregates conveys information about nominal income growth in the United

States, apart from what is already known from past income growth itself and from

past movements of the federal funds rate. The table presents F-statistics       for

tests, based on quarterly data across different time periods, of the null

hypothesis that all of the coefficients on the lagged growth of the specific

aggregate indicated (that is, all of the ) are zero in autoregressions of the

form
     Figure 1: Depository institutions' liabilities
                     per cent of household wealth
45                                                                  45



40                                                                  40



35                                                                  35



30                                                                  30



25                                                                  25




20                                                                  20
     1959   1963   1967   1971   1975   1979   1983   1987   1991
                                   TABLE I


               F-STATISTICS fl NOMINAL INCOME EQuATIONS




ACGRECATE          1960:2-1979:3         1979:4-1992:4    1970:1-1992:4


   Ml                     4.98***               79              .56



   M2                     2.07*               1.67             1.14


   M3                     2.68**              1.07             2.31*


   Loans                  4.50***              .56             1.46


   Credit                 4.70***              .71              .22




   Note: Estimated regressions include four lags on each of
          nominal GD?, the federal funds rate and the aggregate
          shown. Nominal CDP and the aggregate are expressed in
          logarithms. All variables are in first differences.



            significant   at the .01 level
   **       significant   at the .05 level
   *        significant   at the .10 level
       Figure 2: Depository institutions' assets
                      per cent of ouststanding debt
55                                                                  55




50                                                                  50



45                                                                  45



40                                                                  40



35                                                                  35



      _____                I             I             I
30                                                                  30
     1959   1963   1967   1971   1975   1979   1983   1987   1991
                                                    -16-




                                                                   6y
                                                1              4
        (1)   y —a+                 -
                                        +           -vAr   +
                                                                      -
                           1.1              1.1




where   y and is   are,   respectively, the logarithms of nominal gross domestic

product and the aggregate indicated; r is the federal funds rate; u is a

disturbance term; and a and the             •        and 5 are all coefficients to be

estimated.3 The five aggregates considered are the narrow (Ml). broad (M2) and

broader (M3) money stocks, bank loans, and total debt of domestic nonfinancial

borrowers.

        The   first   time period considered in Table 1 is 1960:2-1979:3. that is. from

the earliest time for which the Federal Reserve provides data corresponding to

Its current definitions of the monetary aggregates until the point when it

introduced new operating procedures for monetary policy. The end of the 1970s

also marked the       approximate   onset, or the acceleration, of many of the changes

in private-sector financial markets that have distinguished the more recent

period. As the F-statistics presented in the tabit make clear, during 1960-79

.c.h of the five aggregates considered contained information about future

nominal income movements that was statistically significant at the .10 level or,

in most cases, better. By contrast, for the period since then (1979:4-1992:4)

flQ Qn. of the five aggregates does so. Further, this sharp difference                  is not

simply an artifact of the shortness of the second sample. Except for M3, which

Is just significant at the .10 level, the same result emerges when the time

period under consideration also includes the entirety of the l970s

(1970:1-1992:4).

        The scope and import for monetary policy of changes like those documented

in Table 1 should not be underestimated. For the FOMC to use any of these

aggregates even as an information variable, much less as an intermediate target,
                                        - 17-




it   must know qualitatively that a relationship between the aggregate and
nonfinancial economic activity exists           it   must know at least something

quantitatively about what that relationship is. If the F-statistics for 1979-92

(or even 1970-92) showed the existence of such relationships, then the relevant

questions for policy purposes would be whether they were the same as (or similar

to) the ones that had prevailed earlier on, end if not then whether (or how) the

Open Market Committee in the past could have inferred the new relationships once

they were established, and whether the Committee can now have sufficient

confidence in these relationships going forward to exploit them for policy

purposes. But since the F-statistics in fact show no such relationships in the

first place, none of these questions arises, and certainly not the issue of

exploitation for purposes of monetary policy. What could it mean to use an

information variable that provides no information? Or to have an intermediate

target that is not demonstrably intermediate? What is left of the familiar

argument that monetary policy should be conducted according to fixed rules in

order to render the economic environment more predictable for private economic

decision makers, if the economic outcomes that matter to private decision makers

bear no predictable relationship to the variable on which the monetary policy

rule is based?

      It is always possible, of course, that any or all of these aggregates may

bear a usefully informative relationship to the movement of either real income

or prices separately, but that that relationship is obscured here by combining

real income and prices into the single measure of nominal income.

Traditionally, the most fundamental theory of "money" in economics has

emphasized the link to prices, leaving implications for real activity to more

specific treatments embcdying impediments to Walrasian equilibrium that may be

realistic but rest on weaker foundations nonetheless.4 By contrast, much of the
                                           -18-



fluctuations     in money anticipate fluctuations in real output.5 Either kind of

relationship would potentially be useful for purposes of monetary policy, in

that the FOMC as a standard matter indicates its concern for both price

inflation and real outcomes.

    As Tables 2 and 3 show, however, such is not the case. Table 2 presents

F-statistics, analogous to those in Table 1, for the f3 coefficients in

autoregressions of the form




     (2)    Ax   —   m   +   m     +     Tr       +    6x     +      p
where x and p are the logarithms of real gross domestic product and the
corresponding price deflator, respectively, and all other variables are as in
(1). Table 3 presents analogous F-statistics for a further set of
autoregressions      that are identical to (2) except that p replaces x as the

dependent variable. As is well known, none of these aggregates conveys

statistically significant information about subsequent movements of real incore

once the relationship allows for the effects of interest rates (here represented

by the federal funds rate). That was true before 1980, and it has been true

since. Before 1980 most of these aggregates did convey such information about

subsequent movements of prices. (Interestingly, M2 is the exception.) In more

recent samples only M3 and (surprisingly) bank loans have done so.

     Changes of the scope and magnitude illustrated in Tables 1-3 are unlikely

to be mere accident. Instead, these changes in statistical relations have 'ore

likely resulted from changes in economic behavior, presuiiably including -       - and

perhaps especially including -     - just the kind of changes in   financial market

structure   and practice that are at issue here.
                                  TABLE


                F-STATISTICS fl REAL INCOME EQUATIONS




AGGREGATE          1960:2-1979:3          1979:4-1992:4   1970; 1-1992:4


  Ml                        .82                1.18            1.32


  M2                        .92                 .65             .14



  M3                      1.18                  .18              .10



  Loans                   1.18                  .55              .22



  Credit                    .55                 .59              .78




   Note: Estimated regressions include four lags on each of
          real COP, the COP price deflator, the federal funds
          rate and the aggregate shown. Real COP, the deflator
          and the aggregate are expressed in logarithms. All
          variables are in first differences.



   ***      significant   at the .01 level
   **       significant   at the .05 level
   *
            significant   at the .10 level
                                   TA8LE


                   F-STATISTICS flj PRICE EQUATIONS




AGGREGATE          1960:2-1979:3           1979:4-1992:4   1970:1-1992:1.


   Ml                     4.99***               1.06             .38



   M2                     1.44                  1.33            1.36


   M3                     2.22**                L13             2.96**


   Loans                  3.85***               2.73**          3.60***


   Credit                 4.32***                .55              .65




   Note: Estimated regressions include four lags on each of
          real CDP, the GDP price deflator, the federal funds
          rate and the aggregate shown. Real CD?, the deflator
          and the aggregate are expressed in logarithms. All
          variables are in first differences.



   ***      significant   at the .01 level
   **       significant   at the .05 level
   *        significant   at the .10 level
                                            -19-




III. Three        Studies
     As a means of illustrating the connection between the changing statistical

relationships documented in Section tI and specific changes in financial market

structure and practice, it is helpful to focus in more detail on three of these

aggregates in particular.

     Narrow money. Two      decades   or so ago, the center of attention among

economists   and others who advocated a greater role for monetary aggregates in

the making of U.S. monetary policy was the narrow money stock (Ml), consisting

essentially of currency and demand deposits. The reasons were theoretical,

practical and empirical. The theory of the demand for money for transactions

purposes seemed well worked out, especially in comparison to the more open-ended

issues involved in demand for money as a means of wealth holding. As a

practical matter, it was straight forward that currency and demand deposits were

the two main ways of effecting transactions in the United States. By contrast,

endless debate and ambiguity surrounded any attempt to draw a line separating

what was "money" from what wasn't for portfolio purposes. Finally, although

Friedman and Schwartz's (1963) historical work had used a broader aggregate also

including savings deposits at commercial banks (but not thrifts), widely

publicized studies by Andersen and Jordan (1968), Goldfeld (1973) and others

seemed to point to Ml as the measure exhibiting greatest stability in relation

to income In the United States during the post World War II period.

     As a result, Ml usually assumed pride of place in the FOMC's on-again

off-again attempts, beginning in 1970, to incorporate monetary aggregate targets

(or constraints, or provisos) in its regular directives to the trading desk.

When the Committee dramatically adopted new operating procedures in October

1979, much of what the change was all about was a heightened emphasis on

achieving targeted rates of money growth. Again Ml was the main focus of
                                          -20-




attention.

      At the same time, it was well understood that the then existing structure

of   reserve requirements,   under which banks held reserves against not only demand

deposits but also savings deposits, weakened the Federal Reserve's potential

control over Ml. The Federal Reserve in 1978 had proposed a new system of

reserve requirements focused more narrowly on "transactions" balances, and also

introducing reserves against such balances on account at noninember banks and
                                   6
even at nonbank intermediaries..       congress legislated approximately this system

as part of the Monetary Control Act of 1980.

       Ironically, just as the Federal Reserve was placing Ml at the center of its

monetary policymaking framework and the Congress was revamping reserve

requirements to make Ml more closely controllable, the relationship between Ml

and   nonfinancial economic activity had already begun to break do.rn.    Following a

widely   debated episode at the end of the 1973-75 recession, in which business

recovered sharply despite Ml growth that normally would have been consistent

with a much slower advance of nominal income (to the evident consternation of

the Federal Reserve's critics), Coldfeld (1976) added to his earlier paper a

postscript wondering where the "missing money" was. By the time the FOMC

formally abandoned its new operating procedures, Judd and Scadding (1982) were

already in print with a survey article citing more than eighty papers on the

apparent demise of the money demand function and the ongoing effort to

rescussitate it.

       As Figure 3 shows however, these events of the jd to late 1970s,

troublesome as they were at the time, now appear as mere blips compared to what

                                                                             of
has happened since. The reason, presumably, is the revolution in ways

effecting transactions that began with the introduction of NO accounts        (in New

 England only) and money market mutual funds, assumed full force followthg the
        1)        In
    0   0    0    0    d

                           C)
                           0)
                           I-
                           N-
C                          OD
                           0)



                           C)


                           C)
                           0)
C
                           LC)

                           C)




                           0)


                           N-
                           CD
                           C)


                           C,,
                           (0
                           0)


                           C)
             I    I
                           a)
        In   tN   U)
    0        d         0
        0         0
                                      -21-




Depository Institutions Deregulation Act of 1980, and has since continued with

the introduction of "debit cards."

     Few people would have expected the demand for any transactions centered

monetary aggregate to remain unaffected by these developments (the Federal

Reserve redefined Ml, together with the other standard aggregates, in 1980), but

many failed to anticipate the full extent of the collapse of Ml's relationship

to both income and prices. For example, well after the Federal Reserve had

publicly abandoned its close adherence to money growth targets, Milton Friedman

(1984) argued that the short-run relationship of Ml to nominal income remained

as reliable as before but had merely accelerated the time lag involved, and

moreover that the longer-run relationship of Ml to prices also remained

predictive. As Table 1 shows, however, there is no statistically significant

relationship between Ml and nominal income in the post-1979 data. Table 3 shows

the same for prices. Even the correlation between Ml growth and inflation,

computed in the way Friedman recommended to bring Out the longer-run

relationship (using two-year moving averages to smooth out transitory

fluctuations, and a two-year lag to allow for sluggish price responses), dropped

from .87 during 1959-78 to .10 during 1979-92.

     Beginning in 1983, the FOMC not only widened the Ml target range it

reported to Congress but also stated explicitly that it was placing less
                                                                   widened the Ml
emphasis on Ml than on broader aggregates. In 1986 the Committee

target range to five percentage points. In 1987 the Com.mittee gave up reporting

any Ml range at all.

     Broad credit. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, I wrote a series of

 papers showing that the total outstanding debt of all nonfinancial U.S. obligors

 bore a relationship to nominal income comparable to that for any of the standard

 monetary aggregates (see again the 1960-79 column of Table
                                                                   At   the most
                                      -22-




basic level, the motivation for this effort was the fact that skeletal

macroeconomic models like those of Tobin (1969) or Brunner and Meltzer (1972)

conveyed no a priori presumption that one side of any sector's balance sheet be

more intimately related than the other side to its nonfinancial activity.

Liabilities could be just as relevant as assets. At a more substantive level,

many of the disparate strands of what has since come to be called the "credit

view" of monetary policy at least had in common a focus on economic agents'

ability to borrow.

     Two aspects of this work were somewhat surprising, however, especially in

the context of "credit view" thinking. First, the debt aggregate that bore a

statistically significant relationship to income --   that   is, the aggregate whose

fluctuations tended to anticipate future movements of income -    - included   both

the debt of private-sector borrowers and government debt (unlike the

corresponding private-sector-only measure, a form of which had for some time

been an element of the standard index of leading indicators). Second, in

contrast to the usual "credit view" implication that there is something special

about the debt of banks, or perhaps of banks together with other credit granting

intermediaries, total credit consistently outperformed any bank-based measure in

statistical tests of a relationship to income. While these specifics raised

some puzzles to be explained, that did not take away from the fact that at least

one measure of the economy's liabilities was as closely related to nonfinancial

economic activity as any measure of its assets that could be labeled "money."

    When a central bank uses an explicit intermediate target as the focus of

monetary policy, there can be only one such target.8 But when the central bank

uses variables like money as information variables, there is no reason to limit

the procedure to just one. Given the roughly equivalent performance of total

credit with any of the standard M's in providing information about subsequent
                                      -23-




fluctuations of income, the conclusion I drew from these results was that if the

FOMC were going to use a monetary aggregate to guide monetary policy it should

     use total credit for this purpose. Not only were two sources of

information likely to be better than one, b't one monetary aggregate together

with one credit aggregate also seemed preferable to using two different monetary

aggregates in tandem (which some people at the time were suggesting). Using

both a monetary aggregate and a credit aggregate would broaden the range of

information thus brought to bear on the monetary policy process to encompass

nonfinancial agents' liability-issuing behavior as well as their asset-holding

behavior. In 1983 the FOMC began to include in its reports to Congress a

monitoring range for total credit (which it calls "domestic nonfinancial debt).

and it has done so ever since.

     As Table I shows, the collapse of the relationship between credit and

nonfinancial economic activity has been just as dramatic as that for any measure

of money. Figure 4 further illustrates the enormous break with prior

debt-issuing patterns that began not long after the 1981-82 recession ended.

Roughly one-third of the rise since then in total credit compared to income has

reflected the federal government's by-now chronic fiscal imbalance. The dozen

years since 1980 comprise the only sustained period since the founding of the

Republic in which the U.S. Government's outstanding debt has risen faster than

the national income. In 1980 the government's debt amounted to 26 cents for

every dollar of U.S. gross domestic product. By 1993 it was   53 cents.

     The other two-thirds of the increase in total debt in relation to income

reflects the borrowing of both businesses and households. While the

government's rising debt is a matter of fiscal policy (at least in the first

instance), the explosion of private-sector borrowing is very much the stuff of

changing financial market structures and practices. The most dramatic changes
    2
                     Figure 4: Credit to GDP ratio                        2


1.9                                                                       1.9



1.8                                                                       1.8


1   .7                                                                    1.7


1   .6                                                                    1.6


1   .5                                                                    1.5


1.4                                                                       1.4
                        V



1.3                                                                       1.3


          I      I          I           I      I      I      I
1.2                                                                       1.2
         1959   1963    1967    1971   1975   1979   1983   1987   1991
                                          -24-




in this regard have been in the business arena, where the wave of leveraged

buy-outs, debt-financed acquisitions and stock repurchases that dominated

corporate America during much of the 1980s clearly stands as an object of

interest in its own    right.   So too does the development of the "junk"   bond

market, which made so many of these transactions possible. Between 1984 and

1989 U.S. nonfinancial corporations borrowed (net of repayments) over $1

trillion. Roughly $600 billion of that went into transactions that extinguished

the equity either of the borrowing corporations themselves or of other companies

they were acquiring.

     Market structures and practices affecting household borrowing have changed

as well. The most obvious and presumably the most important example here is the

securitization of residential mortgages, already discussed above. The markets

have also securitized other household sector liabilities, however, including

automobile loans ("CARS") and credit card obligations ("CARDS"). These changes

have clearly increased households' ability to borrow. Examples of institutional

change that have plausibly increased households' willinEness to borrow include

the relaxation of bankruptcy requirements in various states. (By contrast,

changes in the tax code since 1980 have mostly reduced the attractiveness of

borrowing by individuals.)

     In light of these pervasive changes affecting government, business and

households, the collapse of the credit-to income relationship documented in

Table 1 and Figure 4 is hardly astonishing.

     broad money. To the extent that support exists today for the use of any of

the conventional monetary aggregates as an intermediate target for monetary

policy, the aggregate of choice seems to be the broad money stock      (M2).9 Within

the Federal Reserve System, Feinman and Porter (1992) have argued on empirical

grounds that M2 demand not only is more stable than the demand for other
                                        -25-



standard   M's but also that M2 outperforms potential new candidate measures (for

example, what others have called "liquid M2," consisting of currency plus all

deposits in M2 that can be redeemed at par on demand). Outside      the   Federal

Reserve, Ramey (1993) and Feldstein and Stock (1993) have argued that different

forms of error correction procedures render stable the ratio of M2 to money (or,

in recipriocal form, the mis-named M2 "velocity"). In recent years the Federal

Reserve's reports to Congress under the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation have also

attached more importance to M2 than to other aggregates, at times suggesting

that relationships based on M2 may now be settling into a new, more usefully

exploitable stability after a period of disequilibrium due to changing market

structures.

     The performance of M2 during the most recent business cycle has been

anything but reassuring, however. As Figure 5 shows, 142 growth peaked in late

1986 and by yesrend 1987 had slowed to rates that would normally represent a

strong prediction of recession. Growth of 142 revived in 1988, faltered again in

early 1989, but then revived even more strongly beginning in mid 1989 onward, so

that by the time the recession began at midyear 1990 M2 was giving the opposite

signal. Throughout this period 142 gave false signals broadly similar to those

given by other familiar business cycle indicators like the federal funds rate,

the slope of the yield curve, and the spread between the commercial paper rate

and the Treasury bill rate. As is evident in Figure 5, however, the difficulty

with 142 has also persisted well into the recovery, with slow 142 growth more

suggestive of renewed economic downturn than of even the modest recovery that

has taken place.

     Figure 6, updated from Feinman and Porter (1992), makes the 142 growth

puzzle more specific by plotting 142 "velocity" against the Federal Reserve's

standard measure of the opportunity Cost of holding 142 --   that   is, the
           Figure 5: M2 growth (annual rate)
            two-qtr mov.avg, on same period a year earlier
8


7


6


5


4


3


2


1




0
    1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991    1992
     Figure 6: M2 velocity and opportunity cost
    1.8                                       10



1.75                                                                        5



    1   .7                                                                  3


                                                                            2
1   .65


                                                                            1
    1   .6



1   .55                                                                     0.5


    1.5                                                                     0.3
             1959   1963   1967   1971   1975   1979   1983   1987   1991
                                       -26-




difference between the weighted-average return paid on the various components of

M2 and a weighted-average return on short-term market instruments not included

in M2. Clearly something has changed since 1988. Feininan and Porter showed

that expanding the set of market instruments considered to be alternatives to M2

(and, importantly, choosing weights on those instruments' returns that

retrospectively maximized their explanatory power) reduced the magnitude of the

recent discrepancy but did not eliminate it.

     Put in the simplest way, the point of Feinman and Porter's suggested

improvement in the analysis of 112 demand is that depositors may consider not

just short-term money market instruments but bonds too, and perhaps even

equities, as potential alternatives to the deposit components of M2. The

conceptual point is hardly new,'° but there is reason to believe that market

conditions as well as the institutional response to those conditions has given

it new practical relevance within just the past few years.

     As Figure 7 shows, the spread between long-term and short-term interest

rates has been extraordinarily wide during the latest recession and recovery

episode. Holders of maturing certificates of deposit therefore face a large gap

between the rates at which they can renew their deposits and the current yields

on bonds. (Whether those current yields correspond to plausible expectations of

the relevant expected holding returns is more difficult to say.) At the same

time that M2 has been puzzlingly weak, flows of household funds into bonds and

stocks, and especially into bond and stock mutual funds, have been unusually

large. Net purchases of bonds and other debt instruments by mutual funds

totaled $90 billion in 1991 and $132 billion in 1992, compared to $33 billion

per year on average during the previous decade. Net purchases of equities by

mutual funds were $45 billion in 1991 and $67 billion in 1992 versus a previous

annual average of just $8 billion)1 The increasing globalization of financial
16
       Figure 7 : Long and short interest rates                                                                                                       16

       Long rate                                                                          I
14                                                                                           I                                                        14
                                                                                         I
       Short rate
        S.   S   SSS
                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                      12
12

                                                                                   I.            I           I.                                       10
10                                                                                     III       I           .3
                                                                                                 I          •   I
                                                                                                        —I
                                                                                                     I Ip
                                                                                                                    I
                                                                              I                       I                                               8
 8
                                                                                                                        S.           I   *
                                                                                                                          I
                                                      I
                                                      •     PS            I                                                I    I.                    6
 6                                  I                 •                p
                                                                                                                            I
                                                           SIII                                                                              I
                                                                  p                                                                           I
                                                                      p
                                         pS                                                                                                   S
                                I    I
                           S.                 I                                                                                                       4
                           I.                                                                                                                     *
 4                                                I


                                                                                                                                                      2
 2


                                                                                                                                                      0
 0                                                                                                                        1987           1991
     1959          1963   1967      1971                  1975                1979               1983
                                        -27-




markets may also have been an influence in this regard, in that sales of mutual

funds investing in foreign bonds and stocks have grown particularly rapidly

(albeit from a small base).

     Not surprisingly, banks have responded to this competition by joining it.

A Federal Reserve survey of 56 large banks in March 1993 indicated that 52 of

them offered mutual fund products to their customers, presumably as a way of at

least keeping the depositor if not the deposit. Roughly one-third of these

banks had begun retail sales of mutual funds just since 1990. Three-fourths of

the banks marketing mutual funds as of March 1993 had sales representatives

located on site at their branches; before 1990 half of these had no sales

personnel available on a daily basis. The median percentage of branches with

available sales personnel has gone from 20% in 1990 to 90% in 1993. Among those

banks that could estimate the sources of mutual fund purchases, one-third to

two-thirds apparently came directly from their own deposits.12

     In addition to disrupting whatever relationships between M2 and

nonfinancial economic activity may previously have existed (which in itself

would be damaging enough), these latest changes in market structure and practice

have two implications that are especially subversive of any attempt by the FOMC

to use M2 as an intermediate target for monetary policy. First, the existence

of an active, quantitatively substantial margin of substitution beti..'een any

measure of "money" and long-term assets greatly complicates the Committee's task

of controlling that aggregate. Indeed, as long as the aggregate in question

consists mostly of short-term interest bearing instruments, it could even chanze

th direction   of the aggregate's response to open market operations.

     Suppose, for example, that the Open   Market   Committee seeks to increase the

rate of M2 growth (perhaps because, as in recent experience, actual growth has

fallen below the targeted range). The presumptive action by the trading desk is
                                         -28-




                                       nooborrowed reserves and lowering the
to buy securities, thereby adding to

federal funds rate and, via the market's response, other short-term interest

rates. The conventional expectation, based on the assumption of sluggish or

even fixed deposit rates in contrast to quick-moving market rates, is an

increase in money demand. ut if deposit rates decline roughly in step with

short-term market rates, and if substitution between deposits and longer-term

assets is quantitatively important, the demand for money may actually dcc' me

unless (or until) the fall in short-term rates induces a matching fall in

expected returns on the relevant long-term assets.

     As the Appendix to this section shows more formally, using     the illustration

                                                            determination and the
of a simple model of money demand, money supply, income

term structure of interest rates, whether "expansionary" open market operations

(that is, open market purchases) actually expand M2 or shrink it depends on

                                    importantly including interest elasticities,    the
relationships among   parameters,
estimation of which lies well beyond the scope of this paper.      How sharply the

FOMC's staff has estimated those parameters (and their variance-COvariance

structure) is an interesting matter about which to speculate.      I conjecture that

 in the currently prevailing circumstances the Committee does not know with

confidence even the .jgfl, not to mention the magnitude, of the short-run

 response of M2 to open market operations.

      The other seriously damaging implication of the new     substitutability

 between M2 and equity amd bond mutual funds is that flows     into or out of M2 may

 in the future assume the volatility that in the past has been more

 characteristic of securities markets. In the case of bond funds in particular,

 no one knows whether the individuals who have cashed in their certificates of
                                                    full appreciation of the risk
 deposit to buy these funds have done so with a
                                                            mutual funds are
 properties of these longer-term assets. Host open-end
                                        -29-




essentially as liquid as deposits, in that holders can cash in their shares on

notice. But liquidity is not the same as risk, and depending on the specific

assets in the fund, the      properties may differ sharply from guaranteed

redemption at par. If at some point the new holders of bond funds suddenly

discover that their shares are subject to downward price variation, redemptions

triggered by a rise in long-term interest rates could easily lead to a "noise'

surge in K2 demand sufficient to overwhelm any "signal' the Open   Market
Committee would hope to exploit by using M2 as an intermediate target.

     In its mid-year report to Congress under the Humphrey-Hawkins procedure, in

July 1993. the Federal Reserve "downgraded" the role of M2 in the monetary

policymaking process, acknowledging that 'relationships between money and
                                    -                                       13
income, and between money and the price level have largely broken down.'
                                      .30-




IV.   Jmplications     the Conduct j Monetary Policy

      The main lesson to be drawn from this survey of changing relationships

between familiar financial aggregates and income and prices is that there is

little basis for expecting the FOMC (or anyne else, for that matter) to

identify any time soon a new, stable relationship that can command the degree of

confidence that was once optimistically attached to any of a variety of such

aggregates, and that is required to place that relationship at the center of the

monetary policymaking process. The point is not just the now-familiar finding

that statistical exercises devoid of behavioral content show a breakdown in

prior relationships. It is that this breakdown, in one case   after another, has

plausibly had its origin in changing financial market structures    and practices

and in the response to those changes on the part of households and business.

      To be sure, jf the financial markets stopped changing, then in time

relationships of the kind that monetary policymakers can perhaps use to devise

 intermediate targets might well emerge. But why expect that to happen? A

decade ago, when attention in this context mostly focused on Ml, it was perhaps

plausible to attribute changing money-to-income relationships primarily to

 changes in government regulation, and from that assumption to infer that these

 relationships would again stabilize as the abrupt regulatory changes of the

 early 1980s receded into the past. But the point of the discussion above of

 credit and M2 is that further change, on about as great a scale, took place

 again in the mid to late l980s (in the case of credit) and again   in the late

 1980s to early 1990s (in the case of M2).

      Moreover, even if the financial markets did stop changing, and one or more

 newly stable relationships of this kind were to emerge, how long   would it then

 take to identify those relationships kh     itativelv        uantitativ1i? As

 the literature of the subject over the past two decades has amply demonstrated,
                                           -31-




 figuring out which definition of "money" (in other words, which collection of

 inherently quite different instruments) bears the most reliable relationship to

income or prices is already hard enough. But for such a relationship to be

genuinely useful for policy purposes, the Open Market Committee also needs to

know, at least to some reasonable approximation, its quantitative dimensions:

Does this aggregate grow in proportion to income, or more so or less So? How

sensitive is it to interest rates? (And which interest rates?) How different

are the comovements that occur over six months from those that prevail over two

years? For the foreseeable future, such difficult but absolutely essential

quantitative description is just not in the offing, at least not with any

serious level of confidence.

     What, then, is the FOMC to do? One possibility, of course. is simply to

fall back on whatever the Committee knows about the connections to income and

prices of the instrument the trading desk sets directly - - nonborrowed reserves

or the federal funds rate -   - and   make policy decisions on the basis of those

ultimate relationships without drawing on any other direct inputs to the policy

process, gut because the lags between Federal Reserve actions and their

ultimate economic consequences are fairly long (at least according to most

estimates), such a bare-bones framework is inherently unsatisfying. Simply to

wait it out until the full effects of any change in the funds rate have worked

their way through to nonfinancial activity, before determining whether the new

level is appropriate or not, is likely to be tantamount, in too many instances,

to letting the damage accumulate.

     The FOMC's central need in this situation is information: information

about the economy's current State and its future direction, as well as about the

effects of the Federal Reserve's own     actions.   And in an economic and financial

environment so dominated by ongoing change, that information is harder to come
                                      -32-




by than ever. One implication of this basic description of the problem is that

the monetary policymaking process needs to incorporate information inclusively,

rather than focusing narrowly on any one variable (which would amount to

discarding information from other sources). A   parallel   implication is that the

policymaking process needs to exploit information intensively, through frequent

re-examinations of just what the information provided by any one source is

saying.

     More specifically, the inclusive use of information presumably means using

as information variables (in the sense of Section 1 above) not just several

financial aggregates rather than only one but a broader, and potentially much

broader, range of measures with potential predictive context. For example,

several Federal Reserve researchers have analyzed the predictive properties of

the slope of the yield curve (that is, the term structure of interest rates)

with respect to real economic activity.14 and Mishkin (1990) has documented at

least modest predictive capacity of some parts of the yield curve with respect

to prices. Similarly, Kuttner and I have shown that the spread between the

coimercial paper rate and the Treasury bill rate contains substantial

information about subsequent movements of real activity, albeit not about

prices)5 Indeed, the paper-bill spread typically remains highly significant in

equations for real income even when other variables like money and credit are

introduced, and those other variables usually lose their significance altogether

in the presence of the paper-bill spread.

     No one would suggest using the yield curve slope or the paper-bill spread

as an intermediate target of monetary policy. But once the policymaking

procedure is framed in terms of information variables, rather than an

intermediate target, there is no reason why interest rate relationships are any

less suitable for this purpose than monetary aggregates. Just as wth a
                                            -33.




 monetary aggregate, the Open Market Committee can think through in advance how

 the yield curve and the paper-bill spread are likely to move over the coming

 months if its policy actions are having the intended effect and if nonfinancial

 activity is developing as expected. And just as with a monetary aggregate, a

 sufficiently large unanticipated movement of the yield curve or the paper-bill

 spread could be the occasion for questioning whether economic
                                                                    activity, either

 as affected by monetary policy or in other regards, is in fact      developing
 according to plan. That, in short, is what the information variable procedure

 for monetary policy is all about.

         There is also no analytical reason to restrict the Committee's   set of

formally exploited information variables to quantities or prices drawn

exclusively from the financial world. Many of the observable actions that are

intermediate between what monetary policy does and what it hopes ultimately to

achieve take place in the sphere of real activity. Conventional leading

indicator indices have always exploited the fact that goods orders, building

permits, ground breakings and the like typically precede the      corresponding final

sales and production that account for much of an economy's output and income

(although less so as the share of services in total output rises)     -   In   contrast

to the unstructured use of such variables as mere leading indicators, however,

for purposes of monetary policy the relevant question is also what information

they contain about how effects attributable to Federal Reserve actions

themselves are spreading through the economy. As is true in the case of

financial quantities and prices, therefore, there is room --      indeed, there is
need -   - to   choose such variables in part according to how they fit into the

Committee's conception of how monetary policy affects economic activity.

     As a practical matter, however, it is likely that much of the substantive

advantage to be gained from exploiting specific nonfinancial variables as formal
                                      -34-




information variables for monetary policy is already implicit in the FONC's

existing economic forecasting apparatus. If durable goods orders, or housing

starts, or container shipments move in ways seriously at odds with the

Committee's expectations for overall activity consistent with its policy stance.

under current procedures that fact is unlikely to escape attention and, if

warranted, close analysis. As a result, much of the concrete advantage of an

explicit information variable procedure probably lies in a more inclusive

exploitation of financial quantities and prices.

     It is important to emphasize, however, that broadening the array of

financial quantities and prices used as information variables does not guarantee

superior ex post policy actions and outcomes. As Figures 8 and 9 show, for

example, in the period leading up to the 1990-91 recession both the paper-bill

spread and the yield curve slope gave false signals similar to those documented

for ff2 in Figure 5. The paper-bill spread fluctuated at levels normally

predictive of a recession from mid 1987 to mid 1989, then narrowed sufficiently

to eliminate any indication of recession by the beginning of 1990 and did not

widen again until after the recession had begun. The yield curve was a somewhat

better predictor in this episode, flattening in 1988 and throughout 1989, but by

early 1990 it had begun to steepen again while the recession was still a half a

year away. (A widening paper-bill spread typically precedes recessions, as does

a flattening yield curve.)

     One interpretation of these events is simply that the paper-bill spread and

the yield curve slope are, not surprisingly, imperfect as predictors of future

economic activity.16 An alternative indication, suggested by the work of a

variety of recent researchers, is that these variables (like ff2, perhaps) are

not so much predictors of economic activity as indicators of the stance of

monetary policy, and that what their movements in this latest episode reveal is
            N   r   0   1•



                             0)
                             C)


                             N
                             OD
                             O)
                             I-
                             C')
                             OD
rJD                          C)
                             I—



                         C)
                         N
                         C)

I)
                         LU
                         N
                         C)

••
00                       0)
I)
                         N
                         (0
                         0)


                         C)
                         (0
                         O)



                         O)
                         LC)
                         a)
      C')           0
      (0   (N   0   (N




                          C)
                          r
                          0)




                          (I)
                          co
C,)
                          r
                          0)


0                         0)
                          N
                          C)
nj
                          It)
                          N
0                         C)



                          N
                          0)


'-4                       N
                          (0
                          C)



                          (0
                          C)



                          a.)
                          LU
                          0)
      (0            c'J
                                       -35-




 that the 1990-91 recession was due to causes other than monetary policy (for

 example, the widely discussed "capital crunch" at banks and other lending

 institutions17). Much useful research remains to be done in order to establish,

both for variables like these spreads and for more conventional variables like

M2, in which of these differing lights to construe them. The distinction is

central to their appropriate use in formulating and carrying out monetary

policy.

     Regardless of the outcome of that investigation, however, the demonstrable

fallibility of variables like the paper-bill spread and the yield curve as

predictors of economic activity illustrates in yet another context the advantage

of using any such measures as information variables, not intermediate targets.

Unlike as with an intermediate target, an unexpected movement of an information

variable does not automatically trigger a change In policy In the sense of a new

federal funds rate or altered growth of nonborrowed reserves. It instead

creates the presumption that there is an issue to be addressed. There remains.

always the need for a judgment. This central role of case-by-case discretion

in responding to the pertinent information that arises does not mean, of course,

that the FOMC should ignore the longer-run consequences of its actions.18 It

does mean, however, that ir carrying out whatever its appropriate long-run

strategy may be, the Committee needs to make judgments about whether or not the

movements of specific observed variables imply that it has gone off course and

needs to take corrective action.

     In principle, one could perhaps imagine a policy rile, based on some

sufficiently complex form of intermediate target, that would internally embody

just these kinds of judgments. After all, unless the FOMO acts in a purely

random way, its monetary policy decisions do systematically reflect the

Committee's economic objectives and its understanding of how any specific action
                                          -36-




that it may take or not will affect the economic behavior to which those

objectives relate. For practical purposes, however -- as Tobin (1983) and

others have emphasized --   "rules"   in this context inevitably mean simple rules,

not elaborate interrelationships involving large numbers of variables and

multiple contingencies. Given the complexity of the relationships involved, a

"rule" that fully reflected the Committee's decision making process would

probably be impossible to write down. By contrast, for practical purposes of

monetary policy a "rule" is not a rule unless it can be written down in one

paragraph and readily explained to audiences consisting of business executives

and Congressmen. Hence the need for case-by-case judgments, as new information

emerges, is real.

     Finally, it should also be clear that those judgments are best made

frequently. Even the most reliable information variable can begin to give false

signals, and changing financial market structures and practices can distort

(compared to prior experience) the content of even those signals that continue

to be informative. The experience of the last decade or so, as documented at

some length and in some detail in Sections 11 and III above, provides ample

evidence of just this phenomenon. Is it possible to know in advance that any

chosen variable will necessarily provide misleading information? Of course not.

But that does not cc,nstitute grounds for proceeding under a strict presumption

that it will not, as is inherent either in an intermediate target procedure or

in any procedure calling for automatic responses to unexpected movements of

selected information variables. The presumption, instead, is that there are

questions to be raised and responses to be undertaken or not in light of the

best available answers. Precisely because the financial market structures and

practices that matter in this regard are as subject to change as they have been

in this latest period, assuming that yesterday's answer is still right today is
                                  -37-




at best an invitation to error.
                                            -38-




V.         Fundamental Issues
     Finally, even if the Open Market Committee devises a successful system for

formulating monetary policy, based on a more inclusive explicit use of financial

price and quantity variables and a more intensive procedure for responding to

the information that these variables contain, the ongoing evolution of the U.S.

financial markets as discussed in Section II nonetheless raises a broader - -

indeed,   a more fundamental -   - issue   for monetary policymaking.

     The most straightforward way to frame that issue is simply to ask why what

the Federal Reserve System does matters in the first place. More specifically,

in a $6 trillion economy with more than $25 trillion of financial claims

outstanding in highly liquid markets where many of those claims change ownership

not just easily but frequently, why should it matter whether the Federal Reserve

buys $1 billion worth of securities or $10 billion worth in the course of an

entire year? How can such a small difference matter even for the pricing of

government securities, of which there are nearly $5 trillion outstanding, or,

all the more so, for the pricing of marketable debt securities more generally,

of which there are more than $12 trillion? How especially can such a small

difference in Federal Reserve transactions exert a meaningful influence on such

matters as how much people choose to work or spend, or how many houses people

build, or how many factories firms put up, or how much businesses produce and

how they price it?

     The answer, of course, is that the Federal Reserve is a monopolist. It and

it alone can create the reserves that, by law, banks and other depository

 institutions must hold. Its purchases of securities do just that. And relative

 to the existing amount of bank reserves ($57 billion at midyear 1993) , $1

billion versus $10 billion growth in a year is a major difference.

      But being a monopolist matters only if the item over which the monopoly
                                             -39.




applies is tself important. What        if   banks (and other depository institutions)

can just as easily carry Out their activities -       - extending   credit arid taking

deposits --   without    incremental reserves? Arid even if they can't, what if there

are other institutions, like finance companies that issue credit and money

market mutual funds that take deposits, to do so in their place?

      Questions like these have been the stuff of monetary policy economics

virtually since the subject's inception. The traditionally accepted answers

have been that, at least at some margin, banks cannot extend credit and take

deposits without incremental reserves on the same terms that they would

otherwise establish, and that, for at least some would-be borrowers and/or

depositors, other institutions cannot perform these functions on the same terms

that would otherwise be available from banks.19 Within that prevailing

understanding, the ongoing debate has then focused on such subsidiary questions

as whether it is the credit side of the story or the deposit side that primarily

matters, whether monetary policy actions (through whatever mechanism) affect

prices alone or real economic activity as well, and which specific institutions

and   instruments and aspects of nonfinancial activity are more central to the
process   than others.

      By contrast, if having reserves or not is no longer important to banks, or

if other lending and deposit creating institutions can readily take their place,

then the Federal Reserve's monopoly over bank reserves no longer matters. And

once it does not, no one can plausibly expect even an institution with a $350

billion portfolio (as of June 1993) to govern the evolution of prices and

quantities in a $26 trillion market, much less to exert a meaningful impact on

nonfinancial economic activity.

      In the United States over the last decade or so, the value of the Federal

Reserve System's monopoly has apparently eroded in two senses. One, noted in
                                      -40-




Section III, is that because the current system of reserve requirements dates to

the era (actually not so long ago) when advocates thought close control over Ml

was the key to a successful monetary policy, the majority of liabilities issued

by banks and other depository intermediaries are exempt from reserves. In the

absence of incremental reserves, banks can and regularly do fund incremental

credit creation by issuing certificates of deposit or other non-reserve-bearing

instruments. This situation is readily correctable, at least in principle,

although as a practical matter difficult questions of definition cong forms of

obligations (direct versus holding company, on-shore versus off-shore, insured

versus uninsured, senior versus subordinated, and so on) would inevitably arise.

So too would problems of the competitiveness of the depository intermediary

industry as a whole.
                                                             20
    The harder problem is the one discussed in Section II.         The role of

depository institutions collectively is shrinking in relation to the broader job

being done by the financial markets overall. Without substantial empirical

research that lies well beyond the scope of this paper, it is impossible to say

just how small the depository institution sector can become, relative to

economy-wide wealth holding or credit creation or saving and investment, before

the Federal Reserve's monopoly even over reserves that might be imposed against

the complete liability side of the entire sector's balance sheet would lose its

force in a broader market context. Still less is it possible to say how the

Federal Reserve should then seek to expand its powers -   - "reserves"      in some form

for financial institutions other than depository intermediaries? centralized

coordination of capital requirements for all lenders? -   - in   order to

re-establish its ability to influence market-wide financial and, ultimately,

nonfinancial outcomes. But the direction of the trends shown in Figure 1 and
especially Figure 2 is clear, and if they continue, then at some point more

fundanental questions like these will inevitably move to the forefront.
                                             -42-




       Avoendix to Section LU:    Th Response 21               to Qç Narket Operations



                                                                                         -
       The question at issue is whether an expansionary open market operation -

that    is, an increase in nonborrowed reserves -- causes M2 to increase or

decrease. As a simple illustration, consider the following compact. nondynamic

model of money, interest rates and nonfinancial economic activity:



        (Al) money demand:          Mt —     o   +        + a2r         -
                                                                            a3rL

        (A2) money supply:          M —          +        +



        (A3)   term structure:      rL —             + 7lrS       +
                                                                      72rS.

        (A4) aggregate demand:      ''
                                         —
                                                 - 6r         -




where M is the money stock, Y is nominal income, R is the quantity of

nonborrowed reserves, and r and rL are short- and long-term interest rates,

respectively.      (In the term structure equation, r t+i indicates the expectation

of short-term interest rates in the future.)              All coefficients are assun,ed to

be positive.

        If the impact on the short-term interest rate is seen as temporary, the

effect on money of a change in nonborrowed reserves in this model is given by




        (AS
                                     dN       ____


where
                                                       -63-




         (A6)                                      —
                                                                     + 'l3       +
                                                                                     0182)
                                                                                             -




 If the impact on the short-term rate is seen as permanent, the effect                                   on money
 is




                                              dM
                                                       ,q       Z*
                                                            1
        (A7)
                                                                +   z*


where



        (A8)                                       —
                                                       a8           +      + 12)      (03    + 0182)


        In   traditional models of money demand, in which money is assumed to bear                               a

fixed (perhaps zero) return and both r and rL represent competing returns on

non-money market assets, 2 would have the opposite sign (that is,                                   2 as written
would be negative), and so                > 0 unanibiguously ir. either (AS) or (A7). But for

the current situation of t12,         r is more plausibly the o return. In that case
        0 as a161 +           +             2 in the case of the temporary effect on
                      11(03       0162)
short-term rates (A5, A6) or, analogously                                0 as 0161 +             + 12)   (a3 +

0182)        a2 in the case of the permanent effect (A7, A8).

      This ambiguity prevails even in a short run sufficiently short that open

market operations do not yet affect nonfinancial economic activity, so that Y is

effectively predetermined with respect to M. Replacing (A4) above by



      (A4') aggregate demand:                  — S          -
                                                                61r          -
                                                                                     S2rLl
simplifies (A6) and (AS) to
                                             -44-



       (A6')                           Z —           - a2
       (A8')                            Z —          +
                                                            a3
                                                                 -




Here           0 as      a2 or as       +                   respectively.
                                                a3

       Needless to say, moving beyond this simple model, either by making these

four equations dynaiic    or   by adding further equations, makes the sign condition

on     more complicated rather than simpler.
                                     Footnotes



      This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve 8ank of Kansas City
      symposium on "Changing Capital Markets: Implications for Monetary Policy,"
      Jackson, Wyoming, August 19-21, 1993. I am grateful to en 8roadbent for
      research assistance; to Ernest Furgurson for assistance in identifying the
      quotation from Clausewftz; to Robert Hall, Donald Kohn, Reiner Konig,
      Kenneth Kuttner, Allan Meltzer, Richard Porter and David Wilcox for helpful
      discussions and comments on an earlier draft; and to the G.E. Foundation
      and the Harvard Program for Financial Research for research support.

 1.   In light of the long-standing debate over whether or not money "causes"
      income, a key feature of such an information variable procedure is that it
      involves no presumption of causality. All that is necessary is a lead in
      timing, whether causal or not. See Tobin (1970) for an early and concise
      discussion of this distinction.

2.    See, for example, Simpson (1984). See also the paper by Franklin Edwards
      in this volume.

3.    See Friedman and Kuttner (1992, l993b) for further details of the
      estimation and for the results of alternative specifications.

4.    It is useful to recall, however, that the connection between money and
      prices itself rests on "ad hoc" assumptions about the existence of money
      and its role in the economy, so that the familiar contrast to models
      involving "ad hoc" impediments to Walrasian equilibrium is, in reality,
      less than usually represented.

5.    See, for example, the exchange between Stock and Watson (1989) and Friedzran
      and Kuttner (1993a). Earlier on, see, for example, Sims (1980) and
      Eichenbaum and Singleton (1986).

6.
      See Federal Reserve ulleti, 64 (July, 1978), 605-610. The basic idea
      however, was not new then. The Commission on Money and Credit, for
      example, made a similar proposal in its 1961 report. A key motivation
      underlying this proposed change was to put non-member institutions of the
      Federal Reserve System on an equal competitive footing with Federal Reserve
      members.

7.    See, for example, Friedman (1983).

8.    The target can of course be an average, perhaps with unequal weights, of
      other variables. (Divisia aggregates, with optimally selected weights, are
      an obvious example.) Even a single money growth target is, after all, an
      average of growth targets for the composite elements of whatever is defined
      as "money," with weights on those elements in proportion to their size.

9.    McCallun, (1987, 1988) and others have advocated policy rules centered on
      the monetary base; but since the base is subject to direct Federal Reserve
      control (and that is a large part of HcCalluni's poi'-t), under such a
      procedure it would be the instrument of monetary policy, not an
      intermediate target.

10.   Early examples of arguments that bond and/or equity returns in principle
      affect money demand include Friedman (1956). Heltzer (1963) and Brainard
      and Tobin (1968). See also Friedman (1977) and Hamburger (1977).

11. Data are from the Flow-of-Funds accounts.

12. See Reid (1993).

13. Allan Greenspan, testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives.
     Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, Subcommittee on Economic
     Growth and Credit Formation, July 20, 1993, pp. 9-10.

16.   See, for example, Laurent (1988), Strongin (1990) and Estrella and
      Hardouvelis (1991).

15. See again Friedman and Kuttner (1992, 1993b).

16. For example, Friedman and Kuttner (l993b) found that movements in the
     relative outstanding supplies of commercial paper and Treasury bills exert
     a highly significant effect on the paper-bill spread, as is to be expected
     if investors regard paper and bills as imperfect substitutes in their
     portfolios. Depending upon the estimate of the elasticity of substitution,
     either a small or a large part of the movement of the paper-bill spread
     that was not predictive of real output during 1987-90 can be attributed to
     the fact that the Treasury sharply cut back its issuance of bills beginning
     in early 1987 and then resumed rapid bill issuance iii late 1989.

17.   See, for example, Syron (1991).

18. That is sometimes the meaning attached to "discretionary" monetary policy
     in the economic literature. See, for example, Barro and Gordon (1983).

19. In the absence of reserve requirements, banks would presumably hold reserve
     balances anyway as a means of clearing transactions. If a private transfer
     agent provided an alternative clearing system not ultimately resting on
     reserves transfers, however, the question of the central bank's potential
     ability to affect banks' behavior via open market operations would again
     arise. The crucial point is that the central bank maintain a monopoly over
     some necessary aspect of the banking system's activity.

20. Also see again the paper by Franklin Edward in this volume. For a more
     fundamental perspective on the role of banks in relation to other
     intermediaries, and on bank lending in relation to credit provided via open
     market securities, see Farna (1980, 1985) and Bernanke and Gertler (1989).
                                    References



Andersen, Leonall C., and Jordan, Jerry L. , "Monetary and Fiscal Actions:
     A Test of Their Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization," Federal
     Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, 50 (November, 1968). 11-24.

Barro, Robert .3., and Cordon, David B., "Rules, Discretion, and Reputation In
     A Model of Monetary Policy." Journal      Monetary Economics, 12 (July,
     1983), 101-121.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Certler, Mark, "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
     Fluctuations." American Economic Review, 79 (March, 1989), 14-31.

Brainard, William C., and Tobin, James, "Pitfalls in Financial Model Building."
     American Economic Review, 57 (May. 1968), 99-122.

Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H., "Money, Debt, and Economic Activity."
     Journal    Political Economy, 80 (September-October, 1972), 951-977.

Eichenbaum, Martin, and Singleton. Kenneth J., "Do Equilibrium Real Business
     Cycle Theories Explain Postwar Business Cycles?" Fischer (ed), XP
     Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986.

Estrella, Arturo, and Hardouvelis, Cikas A. ,    "The Term Structure as a Predictor
     of Real Economic Activity." Journal         Finance. 46 (June, 1991), 555-576.

Fama, Eugene F., "Banking In A Theory of Finance." Journal         Monetary
     Economics, 6 (January, 1980), 39-57.

Fama, Eugene F., "What's Different About Banks?" Journal .f Monetary Econorics,
     15 (January, 1985), 29-39.

Feinman, Joshua N., and Porter, Richard D. ,     "The Continuing Weakness of M2"
     Mimeo: Federal Reserve Board, 1992.

Feldstein, Martin, and Stock, James H. , "The Use of A Monetary Aggregate to
     Target Nominal CDP." Mimeo: National Bureau of Economic Research 1993.

Friedman, Benjamin M. ,"The Roles of Money and Credit in Macroeconomic
     Analysis." Tobin (ed.), Macroeconomics, Prices and Quantities: Essays in
     Memory i Arthur     Okun. Washington: The Erookings Institution (1983).

Friedman, Benjamin K., and Kuttner, Kenneth N., "Money, Income, Prices and
     Interest Rates." American Economic Review 82 (June 1992), 472-492.

Friedman, Benjamin H. •and Kuttner, Kenneth N., "Another Look at the Evidence on
     Money-Income Causality." Journal j Econometrics, 57 (May/June, 1993a),
     189-203.
Friedman, Benjamin M. , and Kuttner, Kenneth N. ,
                                                "Why Does the Paper-Bill Spread
     Predict Real Economic Activity?" Stock and Watson (eds.),      Research on
     Business Cycle Indicators     Forecasting. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press, l993b.

Friedman, Milton, "The Quantity Theory of Money -- A Restatement." Friedman
     (ed.), Studies in     Quantity Theory     Money. Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press. 1956.

Friedman, Milton, "Time Perspective in the Demand for Money." Scandinavian
     Journal    Economics, 79 (1977), 397-416.

Friedman, Milton, "Lessons from the 1979-82 Monetary Policy Experiment."
     American Economic Review, 74 (May, 1984), 397-400.

Friedman, Milton, and Schwartz, Anna J.,   Monetary History of the
     United States 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.

Coldfeld, Stephen H., "The Demand for Honey Revisited." Brookings Paoers
     Economic Activity (No.3, 1973), 577-638.

Goldfeld, Stephen M., "The Case of the Missing Money." rookings Paver Qn
     Economic Activity (No. 3, 1976), 683-730.

Hamburger, Michael J.., "Behavior of the Money Stock: Is There a Puzzle?"
     Journal .f Monetary Economics, 3 (July, 1977), 265-288.

Judd, John J., and Scadding, John L., "The Search for a Stable Money Demand
     Function: A Survey of the Post-1973 Literature." Journal ..[ Economic
     Literature, 20 (September 1982), 993-1023.

McCallum, Bennett T. , "The Case for Rules in the Conduct of Monetary Policy:
     A Concrete Example." Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Review
     (September/October, 1987), 10-18.

McCallum, Bennett T., "Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy."
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series     Public Policy, 29 (Autumn, 1988),
     173-204.

Meltzer, Allan H., "The Demand for Money: The Evidence from the Time Series."
     Journal    Political Economy, 71 (June, 1963), 219-246.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "Information in the Longer-Maturity Term Structure About
     Future Inflation." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 55 (August, 1990),
     815-828.

Ramey, Valerie, "How Important Is the Credit Channel in the Transmission of
     Monetary Policy? Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series 2fl Public Policy
     1993, forthcoming.

Reid, Brian, "Senior Financial Officer Survey on Retail Mutual Funds." Mimeo:
     Federal Reserve Board, 1993.
Simpson, Thomas 0., "Changes ri the   Financial System; Implications for Moneun-
     Policy "
                                      orIoc AcLty.j
                                                  (No. I ,    1984)   769- 265.

Sims, Christopher A., "A Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles-
     Monetarism Reconsidered" Miican              Rjcw, 70 (May, 1980),
     750- 267


Stock, James H., and Watson, Mark W.  "Inrerreting the Evidence on Money-Incoce
                                      ,


     Causality." xnii1 i.j E.cnonc'trics, 60 (January. 1989), 161-182.

Syron, Richard F., "Are We Experiencing a Credit Crunch?" Federal Reserve Bank
     of Boston      jj4 Ecpnpjc Rvic-w (July/August, 1991), 3-10.

     i          4j
Tobin, James, "A Ceneral Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory -
                          oning, 1 (February, 1969), 15-29.
                                                                      LQ!Jfli

Tohin, James, "Money and Income; Post Hoc Ergo   Propter Hoc." Q1Ljj L2EniJ
     gj Econcruics, 86 (May. 1970), 301-311.

Tohin, James, "Monetary Policy; Rules, Targets, and Shocks." Jovrn1
    Credit      banking, 15 (November, 1983), 506-518.
                                                                         I
</ref_section>
