                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE WEALTH OF COHORTS: RETIREMENT
                       SAVING AND THE CHANGING ASSETS
                             OF OLDER AMERICANS




                                      Steven F. Venti
                                      David A. Wise




                                  Working Paper No. 4600




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December, 1993




Funding was provided by the National Institute on Aging through grant number P01-AG05842.
This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Aging and Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                                                       1




                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4600
                                                                               December 1993


                        THE WEALTH OF COHORTS: RETIREMENT
                         SAVING AND THE CHANGING ASSETS
                               OF OLDER AMERICANS


                                           ABSTRACT

       Personal retirement accounts are becoming an increasingly important form of retirement
saving. Using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, the paper considers
the effect of this change on the assets of recent retirees and persons who are approaching
retirement. Much of the analysis is based on comparison of younger and older cohorts with
different lengths of exposure to personal retirement saving programs. The findings suggest that
personal retirement saving has already added substantially to the personal fmancial assets of older
families. Projections imply that the personal financial assets of the cohort that will attain age 76
in 28 years will be almost twice as large as the personal financial assets of the cohort that
attained age 76 in 1991. The results indicate also that to date there has been little replacement
of employer-provided pension saving with personal retirement saving. Together with evidence
that personal financial saving is unrelated to changes in home equity, the results suggest that
personal retirement saving will lead to an important increase in the overall wealth of the elderly.




Steven F. Venti                                                     David A. Wise
Department of Economics                                             Kennedy SChOOl of Government
Rockefeller Center                                                  Harvard University
Dartmouth College                                                   79 Kennedy Street
Hanover, NH 03755                                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                            and NBER
      Americans are changing the way they save for retirement.
Contributions to personal saving accounts are becoming an increasingly
large proportion of retirement saving while contributions to traditional
employer-provided pension plans are declining. The proportion of total
contributions accounted for by IRAs, 401(k), and Keogh plans
increased from about 7 to over 50 percent during the 1980s. We
consider the effect that this change has had on the assets of recent
retirees and on persons on the eve of retirement. We find that
contributions to personal plans have already added appreciably to the
personal retirement assets of older Americans and, by implication, that
the effect is likely to be much larger in the future.
      The paper emphasizes the changing assets of older Americans.
The change has been fueled by the rising popularity of personal
retirement saving and thus to evaluate its implications for the financial
status of the elderly it is necessary to understand the saving effect of
these programs. In a series of earlier papers we considered the saving
effects of IRAs.' Venti and Wise [1992] introduced analysis based on
comparison of "like families,"         a version of the cohort analysis
structure used in this paper. Poterba, Venti, and Wise [1992, 1993a]
considered the saving effect of 401(k) and IRA contributions based in
part on the comparison of like families and in part on the "quasi
experiment" presented by eligibility for 401(k) plans. This paper
contributes to that line of analysis, but with a different focus, a


    1Results using different data sets and different methodologies are presented
in Venti and Wise [1986, 1987, 1990b, 1992]. The findings of other
investigators of this issue—Gale and Scholz [1990], Feenberg and Skinner
[1989], and Joines and Manegold [1991]—are summarized in the last paper.
 different methodology, and a broader scope. We direct attention to
 families just before and just after retirement. We frame the analysis
 explicitly in terms of cohorts. The analysis rests primaxily on
 comparison of older and younger cohorts of respondents to the Survey
 of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) between 1984 and 1991.
 The cohorts had different lengths ofexposure to the personal retirement
 saving plans introduced in the 1980s. Persons who were already
 retired in the early 1980s had less opportunity to contribute than
 persons who were still working when these plans were introduced.
       We consider not only whether personal retirement saving
contributions substitute for other personal fmancial assets, as in our
previous papers, but also whether they substitute for employer-provided
pension assets. To understand the effect of pensions on saving, we
need to understand not only how personal retirement saving is related
to other personal financial assets, but also how each of these is related
to employer-provided pension assets.
      Traditional economic assumptions imply that if employers
increase saving for employees through employer-provided pension
entitlements then employees will save less. Or, if individuals choose
to save more through personal retirement saving plans then they will
save less in other personal financial assets. Or, if individual housing
equity is increased through unanticipated gains in housing prices, then
the individual will reduce saving in other forms. The net saving effect
of personal retirement saving depends on whether individuals make
economic financial decisions in accordance with these assumptions. We




                                  -2-
find that for the most part these assumptions are inconsistent with
observed individual behavior.
I.    BACKGROUND.
      A.     Data.
      The analysis is based primarily on 1984, 1987, and 1991 data
from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The
data are drawn from the 1984, 1985, 1986, and 1990 panels of the
survey, with data for the same year sometimes available from more
than one panel. The 1984 interview was conducted between September
and December 1984 and the 1987 interview between January and April
1987, with approximately 28 months between the two interview
periods. Thus in the cohort analysis described below we treat this
interval as a two-year period. The 1987 and 1991 surveys were
conducted almost exactly four years apart. The 1984 to 1991 period
is assumed to span six years.
      Each panel contains eight interview waves administered every
four months over a 32 month period. We use all the waves containing
supplemental topical modules requesting detailed information on assets
and liabilities and pension plan coverage. These waves are wave 4 of
the 1984 panel (administered between September and December 1984),
wave 7 of the 1985 panel and wave 4 of the 1986 panel (January to
April 1987), and wave 4 of the 1990 panel (February to May 1991).
The SIPP household is defined by a physical address. These were
reformatted into individual family units headed by either a
husband-wife pair or a single individual. Thus a single SIPP household
may yield several "families" for the present analysis.


                                 -3-
        We consider the following asset categories:
          • Personal Financial Assets
              • Total
              • Personal (Targeted) Retirement Assets
              • Other Personal Financial Assets
          • Employer-Provided Pension Assets
          • Social Security Assets
          • Home Equity
          • Other Non-Liquid Equity

The analysis deals primarily with personal financial assets and
employer-provided pension assets. The components of each of the
categories are listed in Appendix Table 1. The table pertains to
families aged 65 to 69 in 1991. It reports the proportion of families
owning each of the components, as well as the asset mean and median
values. The category "personal retirement assets" includes holdings in
IRAs, 401(k)s, Keoghs, and life insurance annuities.2 But the mean
(and median) family balance would have been quite small at that time.
These saving plans are grouped together because each narrowly targets
saving for retirement, as opposed to saving for other, presumably more
short-term, goals. The category "other personal financial assets"
encompasses conventional (non-tax advantaged) saving vehicles,
including saving accounts, money market depositaccounts, CDs, NOW
accounts, money market funds, U.S. government securities, municipal
and corporate bonds, stocks, mutual funds, U.S. Savings Bonds, and
other interest earning assets. The category "total personal financial
assets" is the sum of personal retirement assets and other personal



   2
       Respondents were not asked for a 401(k) balance for 1984.

                                   -4-
financial assets. Home equity is the current market value of the home
less the unpaid mortgage.
         As explained below, the data are used to create means and
medians by cohort—all persons who are the same age in a particular
calendar year. Thus the same cohort can be followed over successive
ages in 1984, 1987, and 1991.             However, Social Security and
employer-provided pension assets must be calculated from observed
benefit payments. Thus wealth in these forms is available only for
persons who are retired and we typically consider them only for
persons over 65. The present values are obtained by capitalizing the
stream of monthly income from each source using sex-specific survival
probabilities calculated from mortality tables.3
        B.      Family Wealth at Retirement.
        Social Security benefits provide the vast majority of the income
of a large fraction of retired Americans, and the present value of
expected future benefits is the major component of the wealth of most
elderly families. In 1991, the median Social Security wealth of families
with heads 65 to 69 was about $100,000. (See Figure la.) Median



   3A discount rate of 6 percent is used.        Social Security, Railroad
Retirement, federal employee, and military pensions are indexed by law.
About 75 percent of state and local public employees receive some post
retirement benefit increase; about half receive automatic COLAs (Phillips
(1992). Post-retirement benefit increases in the private, sector are less
common. Gustman and Steinmeier (1993) found that during the 17 year
period ending in 1987, that included a period of high inflation, about 45
percent of private sector defined benefit plans provided some post-retirement
cost of living increase, usually ad hoc. We have indexed Social Security,
Military pension, Railroad retirement, and all government employee pension
annuities at an annual rate of 4 percent. Other annuities are not indexed.

                                    -5-
 employer-provided pension wealth (including government and military
 pensions) was only $16,017. Pension wealth is distributed much more
 unevenly than Social Security wealth—44 percent of families 65 to 69
 have no pension income at all. The median level ofhousing equity was
 $50,000, but housing equity is typically not used to support
 consumption of the elderly, at least not until quite advanced ages.4 The
 median level of other non-liquid assets, such as cars and business
 equity was only $5,992.        Personal saving through conventional
 channels represents a very small proportion of the assets of most older
 families; the median level of (other) personal financial assets was only
 $7,428. Thus most families, if they spend the income provided by
Social Security and employer pension annuities, have almost no liquid
accessible assets to meet unexpected expenditures. More than half of
families had neither IRA nor 401(k) accounts so that the median wealth
in personal retirement assets was zero.
        Although the median is the best single measure of the assets of
the typical family, the components of wealth other than Social Security
are highly skewed so that the means are much larger than the medians.
The mean level of other personal financial assets in 1991 was $42,018,
more than five times the median. But even mean other personal




    4See Venti and Wise [1989,   1990a,   1991], Feinstein and McFadden
[1989], and Sheiner and Weil [1992].

    5The value for 1991 may be an anomaly. Medians in earlier years were
about $9,000 and mean values increased from about $34,365 in 1984 to
$42,018 in 1991.

                                  -6-
financial assets are a small fraction of combined Social Security and
employer-provided pension assets, as indicated in Figure lb.
        The means, however, reveal the increasing importance of IRA
and 401(k) assets as a fraction of total personal financial assets. For
families aged 65 to 69, personal retirement assets were only 6.6 percent
of total personal financial assets in 1984, they represented 20.6 percent
by 1991. Personal retirement assets increased over four fold between
1984 and 1991, much more than any other component of wealth, as
shown in Figure ic.
        C.      Aggregate IRA and 401(k) Saving.
        Total contributions to IRA and 401(k) accounts over the l980s
are shown in Figure 2. IRA contributions jumped enormously in 1982
as soon as they became available to all wage earners and then increased
to a peak of over $38 billion in 1985.          Contributions dropped
dramatically after the Tax Reform Act of 1986, that limited the tax-
deductibility of the contributions of families with incomes over $40,000
per year and single persons with incomes over $25,000. Even though
only 27 percent of contributors were affected by the legislation,6
contributions fell by over 60 percent, with a dramatic decline even in
the contributions of persons who were unaffected by the legislation.
The implications of this decline are discussed in detail in Poterba,
Venti, and Wise [1992, 1993a]. By 1990, less than $10 billion was
contributed to IRA accounts.




    6s EBRI [19861.
                                   -7-
          Contributions to 401(k) plans increased consistently from their
 introduction in 1982 to $46.1 billion in 1989, the most recent date for
 which data are available. Straight line extrapolation of past trends
 would suggest that contributions are now about 70 billion. Figure 2
 reveals no relationship between IRA and 401(k) contributions, with the
 annual increase in 401(k) contributions about the same after as before
 the 1987 decline in IRA contributions.
         The relationship between these contributions and contributions
 to other retirement saving plans (excluding Social Security) is shown
 in Figure 3a. Contributions to defined benefit pension plans declined
 almost 40 percent, from $48.4 billion in 1980 to $24.9 billion in 1989.
 This decline was apparently due primarily to the large unexpected
returns to pension fund assets over the 1980s, as described in Bernheim
and Shoven [1988]. The decline may have been induced also in part
by the funding limits imposed by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1987, as explained in Schieber and Shoven [1993]. Participants
in defined benefit plans declined only 9.3 percent and the number of
plans by 10.5 percent between 1980 and 1989.            Contributions to
defined contribution plans remained about the same over the entire
period.7
         Personal targeted retirement saving represented only 7.6
percent of the total in 1980 but had increased to over 50 percent of the
total by 1989. It seems apparent that if IRA contributions had not been



    7The data show an anomalous increase from 255 in 1988 to 34.0 in 1989.
Preliminary tabulations by the Department of Labor show a decline to below
25.5 in 1990.

                                   -8-
curtailed by the 1986 legislation, balances in these accounts would have
represented a much larger fraction of contributions to all retirement
plans and total contributions would have been substantially larger. The
trend in total contributions displayed in Figure 3a closely follows the
trend in IRA contributions.
        Total personal saving as measured by the Federal Reserve
Board's Flow of Funds (FOF) accounts, is shown in Figure 3b. These
data include contributions to targeted retirement saving plans, as well
as other components of saving. The FOF data are based on direct
measurement of the net acquisition of assets and are thus more
comparable to the targeted retirement saving components than the
National Income and Product Account (NIPA) data, the most often
cited measure of aggregate personal saving. The NIPA data estimate
saving as the residual between disposable income and personal
consumption expenditures. The FOF data include several assets not
incorporated in the NIPA defmition of saving.8 Thus, in addition to
the more inclusive FOF series, the Federal Reserve Board also
publishes a series that attempts to match the components of saving that
are in principle included in the NIPA measure—indicated by "FOF
NIPA Basis" in Figure 3b. But even after the adjustment, the NIPA
and FOF measures often differ by tens of billions of dollars. They are
discussed in some detail in Poterba, Venti, and Wise [1993b].




   8There are three principle conceptual differences between the FOF and the
NIPA definitions of savings. These involve treatment of non-housing durable
goods, state and local government pension reserves, and net saving of
corporate farms. For details see Wilson et al [1989].

                                    -9-
         Targeted retirement contributions represent a large fraction of
 FOP national saving.        In 1986, for example, retirement plan
 contributions accounted for 72.3 percent of FOF NIPA Basis data and
 30.9 percent of the unadjusted FOP series. Both measures tend to
 follow the pattern of targeted retirement saving in Figure 3a, which in
 turn follows the pattern of IRA contributions. In particular, both
 measures show a substantial increase in saving between 1980 and 1986,
 both show a noticeable fall in saving after the 1986 legislation, and then
 a recovery by 1989.
         The goal of the subsequent analysis is to assess the impact of
personal retirement saving on the financial status of older Americans
as they approach and enter retirement. Two issues are considered.
First, using cohort data, the relationship between personal retirement
saving and other personal financial assets is considered in this section
2. Second, the relationship between total personal financial assets and
employer-provided pension assets is considered in section 3. We direct
attention only briefly to the relationship between housing wealth and
personal financial assets, but that relationship has been analyzed
recently by Hoynes and McFadden [1993]. who find little relationship
between changes in housing equity and personal fmancial assets. We
rely on their results in making summary judgements about the net effect
of personal targeted retirement saving on the financial assets of older
Americans. In his review article on the relationship between housing
equity and wealth, Skinner [1991] also concludes that there is littleor
no relationship between housing equity and other financial asset saving.




                                  -10-
II.     PERSONAL RETIREMENT SAVING AND OThER
        ASSETS: COHORT ANALYSIS.
        A.      Cohorts and Cohort Data.
        We begin with a discussion of the principle elements of cohort
analysis. A cohort is typically a group of persons that are born in the
same year. Thus persons who are a given age in 1984 are also a
cohort. Cohort analysis usually means that the same cohort is followed
over time. That is, persons who are age 50 in 1984 can be observed
in 1985, 1986, and so forth. Panel data is designed to follow specific
individuals over time. For example, the mean wealth of persons who
are 50 in 1984 can be traced over time, considering the mean wealth
of these same persons in 1985, in 1986, and so forth. From panel
data, the cohort means are obtained directly by following the same
persons over time. But cohort means can also be obtained from
random samples of the population in successive years (a series of cross-
sections). We use the SIPP data in this way, although these data also
include a short panel component, following the same people for 32
months. Using these data, the mean assets of a random sample of
persons who are 50 in 1984 are compared to the mean assets of another
random sample of persons who are 51 in 1985, 52 in 1986, and so on.
        We have made calculations for 15 cohorts defined by age in
1984: C42, C44, ... , C70. For ease of exposition we usually show
data graphically for only a subset of the cohorts. In fact, each cohort
is defined by all persons within a 5-year age interval in 1984. For
example, C42 refers to the midpoint of the interval that includes people
between 40 and 44 in 1984, 41 and 45 in 1985, etc.



                                 —11—
        For illustration, mean personal retirement saving assets are
 graphed for five cohorts in Figure 4a. For each cohort, assets are
 reported for 1984, 1987, and 1991. For example, the mean of personaJ
 retirement assets of cohort C46 was about $1,800 in 1984, $4,500 in
 1986, and $11,700 by 1991. Increases for the C52 and C58 cohorts
are also large. But the increases for the older cohorts are much
smaller. The C70 cohort, that was past typical retirement age in the
early 1980s when the programs were introduced, accumulated very
little in personal retirement assets. That is, the relationship between
age and the accumulation of personal retirement assets depends strongly
on the cohort.
        Notice that the relationship between age and asset accumulation
judged by the cross-section profile is grossly misleading in this case.
For example, the difference between the assets of 46 and 52 year olds
in 1984 is much less than the assets actually accumulated by cohort
C46 between age 46 (in 1984) and age 52 (in 1991). In Figure 4athe
cross-section relationship between age and assets can be obtained by
linking the values reported for a given year. For example, 1991 values
are reported for ages 52, 58, 64, 70, and 76, highlighted by the small
circles. Similarly, the 1984 values—for ages 46, 52, 58, 64, and
70—are highlighted by the triangles. In both cases the cross-section
relationship gives a distorted view of the actual accumulation of
personal retirement assets with age. This is because the large "cohort
effects" are unrecognized in the cross-section relationship.
        The cohort effects can be judged directly by the difference in
assets of cohorts that attained a given age in different calendar years.


                                 -12-
At a given age, different cohorts had different lengths of exposure to
personal retirement saving programs, that were widely available
beginning in 1982. For example, cohort C46 that attained age 52 in
1991 accumulated much greater personal retirement assets by age 52
than cohort C52 that attained age 52 in 1984 and thus, by that age, had
had many fewer years to accumulate these assets. The same is true for
cohorts C52 and C58 at age 58, C58 and C64 at age 64, and C64 and
C70 at age 70.
        To facilitate exposition, we often fit the three data points for
each cohort and graph the fitted values, as shown in Figure 4b. In this
way it is possible to visualize many more cohorts on the same graph.
        Mean personal retirement assets for all 15 cohorts are shown
in Appendix Table 2. The data for each cohort is in a separate column
and the relationship between age and assets within a cohort is shown by
the asset values moving down the column. Cross-section relationships
for 1984 are shown in the "top" diagonal, for 1987 by the middle
diagonal, and for 1991 by the lower diagonal. As indicated in Figure
4, the differences are extremely large.
        In the subsequent analysis we will consider whether cohort
effects like those shown for personal retirement assets in Figure 4 are
offset by countervailing cohort effects with respect to other personal
financial assets. If they are, there will be no cohort effects in total
personal financial assets; it they are not, the personal retirement asset
cohort effects will be mirrored by similar cohort effects in total
personal financial assets. Equivalently, if there are no cohort effects
with respect to other personal financial assets, this implies that the


                                  -13-
 personal retirement asset cohort effects are not cancelled by offsetting
 cohort effects in other personal financial assets. To highlight the
 cohort effects, most of the evidence is presented graphically. We also
 use more formal estimates of cohort effects to project the future
 retirement assets of younger cohorts.

         B.      Personal Retirement Assets and Other Personal
                 Financial Assets
        We begin by considering the assets of all respondents to the
 SIPP. The basic assumption is that younger cohorts—that reached a
given age in later calendar years—had a longer period in which to
contribute to personal retirement accounts. But that in other respects
the cohorts are similar (after correcting for earnings). Thus differences
in asset accumulation can be attributed to the differential availability of
these programs. The implicit assumption is that the differences are not
due to a systematic trend in the "taste" for saving. Contributors to
personal targeted retirement saving programs and non-contributors are
then considered separately. In this case, the cohort differences among
contributors are assumed to result from the differences in exposure to
the special retirement saving programs. In addition, however, the
cohort effects of contributors can be compared to the cohort effects
among non-contributors. The non-contributor cohort effects might be
considered an indication of cohort effects that would have obtained in
the absence of the special retirement saving programs. The results will
show that for the most part there are no cohort effects among non-
contributors. For contributors, cohort effects are observed with respect



                                 -14-
to personal retirement assets but not with respect to other personal
financial assets.
         To simplify the graphical exposition, we sometimes show the
actual data for "non-overlapping cohorts," as in Figure 4a. Or, we
present fitted values like those in Figure 4b. We would like to
emphasize the assets of the typical family and thus would prefer to use
median values. In addition, the medians are less subject to random
fluctuation due to extreme outliers. As explained above, however, in
some instances the medians are not informative (when fewer than 50
percent of families own an asset) and we present only means.
        An issue that arises in the cohort analysis is the appropriate
comparison of the assets of persons who attained a given age in
different calendar years. If our goal were to compare the purchasing
power of different cohorts, a price index would be the most appropriate
measure by which to put different calendar year data on a common
basis. Here, however, the issue is not purchasing power but rather the
saving that would have occurred in the absence of the personal
retirement saving programs. There are at least two possibilities: One
is to assume that the increase (or decrease) in other personal financial
asset saving that would have occurred in the absence of the personal
retirement saving programs is the percent increase in this asset category
among non-contributors. Averaged over ages 48 to 68 the increase was
3.8 percent between 1984 and 1991. Another conceptual approach is
to base the correction on the nominal earnings of successive cohorts,
assuming that other personal financial asset saving is based on earnings,
and, that there would have been no real cohort effects in personal


                                  -15-
 financial asset saving in the absence of the personal retirement saving
 programs.       The closest empirical  approximation to this
 conceptualization may be an earnings index. For illustration, we
 present some results in nominal dollars, but most of the results are
 based on values converted to 1984 dollars using the wage and salary
 component of the Bureau of Labor Statistics Employment Cost Index.
         1.     All Respondents: Means.
        a.      Nominal Values.
      The mean personal targeted retirement assets of cohorts C46,
C52, C58, C64, and C70 are shown in Figure 5a. As described with
respect to the, illustrative figure above, younger cohorts, that attained
any specific age in a later calendar year and thus at that age had had
longer exposure to the special retirement saving plans introduced in the
early l980s—accumulated much larger personal retirement assets. For
example, cohort C58 accumulated the highest level of personal
retirement assets. Members of this cohort were age 56 when the IRA
and 401(k) programs were expanded in 1982 and were age 64 when last
surveyed in 1991. The C70 cohort accumulated the lowest level of
personal retirement assets. Members of this cohort were already age
68 and past retirement in 1982 and thus were in large part unable to
take advantage of the IRA and 401(k) programs.
        The corresponding means of other personal financial assets of
the same cohorts are shown in Figure Sb. The accumulation of
personal retirement assets—described above—differed greatly by cohort,
the corresponding accumulation of other personal financial assets also
shows a cohort effect, but not one that offsets the retirement asset


                                 -16-
cohort effect; younger cohorts also have higher levels of other financial
assets.    Because the rapid accumulation of retirement assets was not
offset by a reduction in the accumulation of other financial assets, the
accumulation of total personal financial assets also shows strong cohort
effect, with younger cohorts—who attained any age in a later
year—typically accumulating more personal financial assets, as shown
in Figure 5c. Both total and retirement assets for three cohort are
shown in Figure Sd. At age 58, for example, the difference in
retirement assets of cohorts 52 and 58 can be compared directly to the
difference in the total personal assets of these cohorts. The same
comparison can be made for cohorts 58 and 64 at age 64.
          b.      Indexed Values—Fitted.
          Fitted values of total and retirement assets for eight cohorts are
shown in Figure 5e. The vertical lines are to aid in comparing the
cohort differences in total and retirement assets at given ages. If there
were no reduction in the other financial assets of successive cohorts as
they increased their personal retirement assets, the difference in the
total would be equal to the difference in retirement assets. The average
of the ratios of the total to the retirement asset difference is 1.16.
There is of course some randomness in these ratios. But the data
suggest that the accumulation of personal retirement assets resulted for
the most part in a corresponding increase in total personal financial
assets. Fitted values for other personal financial assets are graphed in
Figure Sf. They reveal essentially no systematic cohort effect.




                                    -17-
         c.      Indexed Values—Actual And Projected.
         The results above show that each of the successively younger
 cohorts has greater personal financial assets than the preceding older
 cohort. What will be the personal financial asset levels of the younger
 cohorts when they reach the age of the oldest cohort? Although it is
 improbable that future asset levels can be precisely predicted, we
 believe that the data allow plausible projections of the future assets of
 the younger cohorts. We fit the actual cohort means with a
 specification of the form


              Ak=c +P+y1(Agej)+y2(Age,)2+y3(Age,)3+eft               (1)

 where A represents an asset category—personal retirement assets, other
personal financial assets, total personal financial assets—c indexes
cohort and i the ith cohort mean. The fl are cohort effects with
   = 0. Thus the individual estimates represent deviations from the
mean effect, which is set to zero. The specification is intended to fit
the age-asset accumulation pattern, allowing the differences in the
levels of the assets between successive cohorts to be maintained as the
cohorts age, and to cumulate. It is assumed, for example, that the
estimated difference between the assets of the two youngest cohorts,
C42 and C46, will be maintained as the cohorts age. Thus the
projected difference at age 76 in the asset levels of cohorts C42 and
C70, for example, is given by the difference between C42 and C44,
plus the difference between C44 and C46, plus the difference between
C46 and C48, and so forth. Indeed, it is convenient to think of the
estimated cohort effects as representing the projected cohort differences


                                  -18-
at age 76. It is likely that this assumption implies a conservative
estimate of the projected cohort differences.        Constant percentage
differences as the cohorts age, for example, imply much larger age 76
cohort differences.
        The estimates are shown in Table la. The projected personal
retirement assets (column 1) of the youngest cohort are $14,076 above
the mean while the projected assets of the oldest cohort are $13,105
below the mean, a difference of $27,181.              If there were no
counterbalancing cohort effects with respect to other personal financial
assets, the total personal financial asset cohort effects should
approximately parallel the retirement asset cohort effects.           The
estimates show that the projected total (column 2) for the youngest
cohort is $16,003 above the mean and $14,083 below the mean for the
oldest cohort, a difference of $30,086. The other personal financial
asset cohort effects are typically not statistically different from zero.
An F-test does not reject the hypothesis that there are no cohort effects,
that is, that all the individual effects are zero.
        The projections of total personal financial assets based on
equation (1) are graphed in Figure 5g. The age 76 personal financial
assets of the oldest cohort are $37,299; the projected age 76 assets of
the youngest cohort are $67,385, an increase of over 80 percent.
        2.       Contributors and Non-Contributors Separately:
                 Indexed Means.
        a.       Indexed Values—Fitted.
        Because only a minority of respondents contribute to a personal
retirement saving account—only about 40 percent of cohorts who were
younger than 65 in 1984 and a much smaller percent of older

                                    -19-
 cohorts—the total saving effect of the participants is diluted by the
 larger number of respondents that did not participate and were
 apparently unaffected by these saving programs. Thus we also present
data for contributors and non-contributors separately. The findings
based on means are shown in Figures 6a through 6c. Again, cohorts
who reached a given age in a later calendar year, had accumulated
much more in personal retirement accounts than cohorts who reached
that age in an earlier year. These differences are reflected, for the
most part, in corresponding differences in total personal financial
assets, as shown in Figure 6a. And, as with both contributors and non-
contributors together, the cohort data for other personal financial assets
of contributors show essentially no systematic cohort effects. (See
Figure 6b.)
        For comparison, the accumulation of personal financial assets
of non-contributors is shown in Figure 6c. There appear to be no
cohort effects among non-contributors at younger ages. At older ages,
older cohorts appear to have slightly higher personal financial asset
levels. This may be because a smaller proportion of older cohorts ever
contributed to a personal retirement plan, and thus the non-contributors
among the older cohorts disproportionately include "savers" that if they
were younger would have contributed to a personal retirement account.
This composition effect is discussed below with reference to Table 2.
        b.      Indexed Values—Actual and Projected.
        Projected means (indexed to 1984) of contributors are shown
in Figure 6d together with actual values for selected cohorts. The
projected age 76 total personal financial assets of cohort C70 (in 1991)


                                  -20-
is $93,151; the projected value of the C42 cohort at age 76—18 years
hence—is $160,175. As with both contributors and non-contributors,
the estimated cohort effects for total personal financial assets tend to
mirror the estimated effects for personal retirement assets, as shown in
Table lb. The estimated cohort effects for other personal financial
assets are not typically statistically different from zero. (The estimates,
however, reveal an apparent composition effect among older cohorts
and this is discussed below.) Thus for participating families the
cumulative effect of personal retirement account contributions is very
large. Assuming no cohort effect with respect to other personal
financial assets, personal retirement assets would increase over the next
18 years from 22 to 50 percent of the total personal financial assets of
age 76 families.
        3.      Contributors and Non-Contributors Separately:
                Indexed Medians.
        a.      Indexed Values—Fitted.
        As mentioned above, the distribution of financial assets is
highly skewed so that means are much larger than medians. Thus the
median is a much better indicator of the assets of the typical family.
Medians for all respondents are not informative, however, because the
median for personal targeted retirement assets is typically zero.
Median total and retirement assets for contributors are shown in Figure
7a. Like the means, the medians also show that younger cohorts
accumulated much larger levels of personal retirement assets than older
cohorts. The larger accumulation of retirement assets was not offset by
a corresponding reduction in the accumulation of other personal
financial assets (Figure 7b), that show no substantial off-setting cohort

                                  -21-
effects. Thus younger contributor cohorts are accumulating much
larger levels of total financial assets (Figure 7a) than their older
counterparts.
        The medians for non—contributors are shown in Figure 7c.
These data show extremely low levels of financial assets and essentially
no cohort effects at younger ages. As mentioned above, the "apparent"
cohort effect for the oldest cohort apparently reflects a composition
effect; most of the oldest respondents were non-contributors, and thus
had greater assets than younger cohort non-contributors.
        b.      Indexed Values—Actual and Projected.
        Like the means, the projected median values of total personal
financial assets show very large cohort effects that tend to mirror the
cohort effects for personal retirement assets, as shown in Table ic.
Recall that unlike means the sum of the medians if not the median of
the sum, and thus the estimated cohort effects cannot be "added" across
equations. Most of the estimated cohort effects for other personal
financial assets are not statistically different from zero, although an
apparent composition effect is reflected in the estimated cohort effects
among older cohorts. Nonetheless, it is clear that younger cohorts of
participating families are accumulating much more in total personal
financial assets than older cohorts. The projected median of current
age 76 families (cohort C70 in 1991) is $62,388; the projected
accumulation of the youngest cohort by age 76 is $107,138.
       4.       Summary of Age-Specific Cohort Effects: Medians.
       The graphs of the cohort data show the accumulation of assets
with age for successively older cohorts. The different levels of asset


                                 -22-
accumulation by different cohorts at specific ages provide the core data
to evaluate the net saving effect of personal retirement saving
contributions. The median data are summarized in Table 2. These
data are based on the same cohort data graphed in Figures 7a through
7c. But not all of the cohort data in the table are shown in the figures.
        Consider the age 60-64 data, for example. Median targeted
retirement saving increased from $6,477 for the oldest cohort (those
who were in this age interval in 1984) to $22,131 for the youngest
cohort (who were in this age interval in 1991). There was little
corresponding change in other personal financial assets by cohort,
however, from $17,617 for the oldest cohort to $20,100 for the
youngest cohort. Total personal fmancial assets increased by almost 90
percent, from $27,101 to $52,498. The table shows the assets of non-
contributors as well. They show no trend and are extremely small,
$600 in 1991. Similar trends are revealed for the other age groups.
        In addition, the table shows the proportion of each age group
that has a personal retirement saving account. The proportion with
retirement accounts does not vary much by age or cohort for persons
younger than 64. Nor does the proportion vary much for the oldest
age group, of which very few in any cohort had accounts. But older
cohorts, in the 65 to 69 and 70 to 74 age intervals in particular, were
much less likely than the younger cohorts to have personal retirement
accounts. Thus the data show a decrease in the total personal financial
assets of non-contributors in the 65 to 69 age interval as the proportion
in the non-contributor status declined (from .81 to .65).           This
composition effect is also reflected in the older cohort data graphed in


                                  -23-
Figures 6c and 7c and the data must be interpreted accordingly. But
the data for "pre-retirement" ages and for the oldest ages seem not to
be importantly affected by this changing composition.
ifi. PERSONAL RETIREMENT SAVING AND EMPLOYER-
       PROVII)ED PENSION ASSETS.
        Tradeoffs between personal retirement saving and other
personal financial asset saving may provide the most readily available
opportunity for substitution from one form of saving to the other. But
personal retirement saving could also substitute for employer provided
pension assets.     Persons who foresee larger employer-provided
retirement benefits may be less likely to contribute to a 401(k) plan, or
to an IRA account, or to accumulate other personal financial assets.
Thus we consider whether families with more pension wealth have less
wealth in total personal financial assets.
        There are two circumstances that condition the analysis: first,
the SIPP data do not allow calculation of employer-provided pension
wealth until a person is retired and receiving pension benefits. The
benefit, together with life tables, can be used to determine the present
value of expected future pension benefits—pension wealth. Thus cohort
analysis as presented above is not suitable in this case. Second, both
pension wealth and personal fmancial asset saving will increase with
income, thus without controlling for income persons with greater
personal financial wealth would almost certainly have greater pension
wealth as well. Thus we consider the relationship between personal
financial assets and pension wealth for persons 65 to 69, who have




                                  -24-
retired and for whom we can determine pension wealth.9 And we use
Social Security wealth percentiles to control for lifetime income. The
relationship between Social Security wealth and lifetime income is very
non-linear, with less than proportionate increases in Social Security
wealth as lifetime income increases. But we believe that the percentile
level provides the best available means of grouping people by lifetime
income.
          Using an analysis of variance framework, we estimate the
relationship between pension wealth and three personal financial asset
categories: personal retirement assets, other personal financial assets,
and total personal fmancial assets. The specification is of the form
 A1 = a1 + b1(PensionWealth) + c1(Education) + e,                  (2)


where i indicates the ith Social Security wealth decile and A denote a
personal financial asset category.
          The parameter estimates on pension wealth are reported in
Table 3 for each of the personal asset categories and for each of the
years 1984, 1987, and 1991. The estimates are typically small but
suggest that a dollar more in pension wealth is associated with from 4
cents less to 19 cents more in total personal financial assets in 1991,
although most estimates are not statistically different from zero.
Essentially the same results are obtained if education is excluded from
the specification. And, the same results are obtained if home equity is
added to the specification, to control for other wealth that could in



    9Only persons th reported Social Security benefits are included in the
analysis.

                                     -25-
principle be used to meet financial needs after retirement. Thus we
conclude that there is unlikely to be much if any substitution of
personal financial saving for employer-provided pension entitlement.
        We obtain essentially the same results when equation (1) is
estimated separately for persons with and without a college degree. If
anything, the results are stronger for persons with college degrees.
That is, the estimated coefficients are somewhat larger for the college
educated group. This result is apparently at variance with the recent
results of Bernheim and Scholz [1993], who find no substitution for
persons without a college degree but a positive substitution effect for
persons with a college degree. Their estimates are based on the Survey
of Consumer Finances and pertain to persons who are not yet retired.
They use an indicator variable for pension coverage, whereas we use
pension wealth just after retirement. Their measure of personal assets
includes business equity and property other than primary home,
whereas we include only personal financial assets. Our ANOVA
specification also aims to capture lifetime earnings differences and
allows for complete interaction by Social Security wealth percentile.
        Several other previous studies have considered the impact of
employer-provided pensions on personal saving. The early work of
Cagan [1965] and Katona [1965] found that persons covered by an
employer pension save more in other forms. Cagan attributed this to
a "recognition effect," whereby pension coverage induces awareness of
the need to save for the future. More recently, several studies have
sought to update and add to this line of analysis by relating personal
saving to expected pension wealth, instead of pension coverage. These


                                -26-
studies have focused on older persons who are not yet retired and for
whom the pension-saving tradeoff may be greatest. The results have
been mixed, perhaps because it is difficult to calculate pension wealth
accurately for persons who are not yet retired. Munnell [1976] finds
a substantial offset, as high as 62 cents for each dollar of estimated
pension wealth. Blinder, Gordon, and Wise [1981], Hubbard [1985],
and Avery, Alliehausen, and Gustafson [1986], however, find little or
no evidence of a tradeoff; Diamond and Hausman [1984] find a modest
tradeoff. Thus these findings would suggest that the tradeoff is far
from dollar fOr dollar and the consensus view appears to be little or no
effect.
          Possibly the principle reservation about the previous studies is
the difficulty of constructing an accurate measure of expected pension
wealth for persons prior to receipt of pension benefits.            Such
calculations require assumptions about job mobility, future earnings,
time to retirement, and, most important, pension plan provisions. The
detail necessary to calculate pension wealth is are not reported in any
of the data used by previous investigators, with the exception of the
Survey of Consumer Finances used by Avery, Eli iehausen, and
Gustafson [1986]. Thus we have directed attention to recently retired
persons and have used Social Security wealth percentiles to control for
lifetime income.
IV.       HOUSING EQUITY.
          Rapid increases in housing prices led to large increases in home
equity in many parts of the country over the 1980s. The cohort
data—not indexed—are shown in Figure 8. The substantial cohort


                                   -27-
effect is apparent. Younger cohorts that attained a given age in a later
year typically had accumulated more housing equity. Thus not only did
younger cohorts accumulate more wealth in personal retirement saving
plans, they also accumulated more wealth in the form of housing. For
many, the increase in housing equity was probably an unanticipated
windfall gain. Thus it might be expected that there would be even
more inducement to reduce other personal financial asset saving,
contrary to the findings reported above.
        Notice that the figure shows increasing housing equity for every
cohort through age 76. Cross-section data, however, would show a
misleading decline in housing equity with age. The 1991 cross-section
data, represented by the 1991 values at 52, 58, 64, 70, and 76, show
home equity declining after age 64. Older cohorts have less housing
equity than younger cohorts, but not because they reduce housing
equity as they age.
        We have not attempted in this paper to consider formally the
relationship between personal financial asset saving and housing equity.
Hoynes and McFadden [1993] have recently completed an analysis of
this issue. They find essentially no relationship between increases in
home equity and total personal financial asset saving, based on data
from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID). They are able to
follow the same persons over an extended time period. The SIPP data
follow the same persons for only 30 months and the cohort method we
use in section two does not provide a sufficient number of cohorts to
perform a meaningful comparison of changes in home equity versus
changes in personal financial assets by cohort. Skinner [1991], based


                                 -28-
on a survey of analysis of this issue, also finds little relationship
between housing equity and personal financial assets.
V.     CONCLUSIONS.
       Personal targeted retirement accounts are an increasingly
important form of saving for retirement. By 1989, contributions to
IRA, 401(k), and Keogh accounts exceeded contributions to traditional
employer-provided defmed benefit and defined contribution pension
plans. We have emphasized the effect of this form of saving on the
financial status of recent retirees and on persons approaching
retirement. Based on comparison of younger and older cohorts, we
conclude that, for the most part, the increasing contributions to
personal retirement plans have not displaced other fmancial asset
saving. And thus that the real personal financial assets of younger
cohorts are substantially larger than the assets of their predecessors.
Although any projections must be imprecise, the conservative estimates
that we have made suggest that age 76 families 18 years in the future
will have almost $25,000 more in a personal financial assets than
current 76 year old families—about $67,000 versus $43,000. The
personal financial assets of participating families will be $67,000 higher
at age 76—$93,000 versus $160,000.
        Using Social Security wealth percentiles to control for lifetime
income, we find that thus far there has been little replacement of
employer-provided pension entitlements with personal retirement
saving. Nor do we find any reduction in other personal financial asset
saving with increases in employer-provided pension wealth. Thus we
conclude that, for the most part, personal retirement saving has not


                                  -29-
displaced saving by employers on the part of individuals, nor have
employer pensions displaced other personal financial assets. This
should not be interpreted to mean that employer pensions have no effect
on individual behavior.  It seems apparent that employer pensions
together with Social Security have led to dramatic declines in typical
retirement ages and the labor force participation of older Americans.
Thus even if pensions have not reduced the amount that employees save
in other forms, they surely have reduced the amount that older persons
earn. This issue is discussed in some detail in Lumsdaine and Wise
[1990].
          Because we can find no apparent offset to the increase in
personal retirement saving, we believe that this form of saving will not
only be an increasingly important component of the wealth of the
elderly, but indeed holds the prospect of adding substantially to the
financial status of older Americans. In particular, personal retirement
saving is likely to increase substantially the non-annuitized liquid
financial saving of older families.
          If these trends continue, the baby boom generation will
accumulate substantially larger levels of personal financial assets than
there older counterparts and thus after retirement will have much larger
pools of accessible assets upon which to draw to meet unexpected
contingencies.




                                  -30-
References

Avery, Robert B., Gregory E. Elliehausen, and Thomas A. (Iustafson.
        1986. "Pensions and Social Security in Household Portfolios:
        Evidence from the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances," in F.
        Adams and S. Wachter (eds.), Savings and Capital For,nation.
       Lexington books.
Bemheim, B. Douglas. 1987. "The Economic Effects of Social
       Security." Journal of Public Economics, vol. 33, pp. 273-304.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and John Karl Scholz. 1993. "Private Saving
       and Public Policy." Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 7, pp.
       73-110.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and John B. Shoven. 1988. "Pension Funding
       and Saving," in Z. Bodie, J. Shoven, and D. Wise (eds.),
       Pensions in the U.S. Economy. University of Chicago Press.
Blinder, Alan S., Roger Gordon, and David E. Wise. 1981. An
       Empirical Study of the Effects of Pensions on the Saving and
       Labor Supply Decisions of Older Men. Princeton, NJ:
       Mathtech Inc.
Cagan, Philip. 1965. The Effect of Pension Plans on Aggregate
       Saving: Evidence From a Sample Survey. Occasional Papers
       No. 95. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman.           1984.   "Individual
       Retirement and Savings Behavior," Journal of Public
       Economics, vol. 23, pp. 81-1 14.
Employee Benefit Research Institute.      1986.   "Tax Reform and
       Employee Benefits." Issue Brief No. 59, October.

                               -31-
Feenberg, Daniel, and Jonathan Skinner. 1989. "Sources of IRA
       Saving." Tax Policy and the Economy 3: 25-46.
Feinstein, Jonathan and Daniel McFadden. 1989. "The Dynamics of
       Housing Demand by the Elderly: Wealth, Cash Flow, and
       Demographic Effects," in D. Wise (ed.), The Economics of
       Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gale, William G.. and John Karl Scholz. 1990. "IRAs and Household
       Saving." Mimeo, University of Wisconsin.
Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier.    1993. "Cost of Living
       Increases in Pensions," in Olivia Mitchell (ed.), As the
       Worforce Ages. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.
Hoynes, Hilary and Daniel McFadden.         1993.    "The Impact of
       Demographics on Housing and Non-Housing Wealth in the
       United States," unpublished, September.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. 1985. "Personal Taxation, Pension Wealth, and
       Portfolio Composition," Review of Economics and Statistics,
       vol. 67, no 1, February pp. 53-60.
Joines, Douglas H., and James G. Manegold. 1991. "IRAs and
       Saving: Evidence from a Panel of Taxpayers." University of
       Southern California working paper no. 90-9.
Katona, George. 1965. Private Pensions and Individual Saving.
       University of Michigan Press.
Lumsdaine, Robin L. and David A. Wise. 1990. "Aging and Labor
       Force Participation: A Review of Trends and Explanations."
       NBER Working Paper #3420, August. (Forthcoming in JCER-
       NBER conference volume, University of Chicago Press.)


                               -32-
Munneli, Alicia H.       1976.     "Private Pensions and Saving: New
        Evidence," Journal of PoliticalEcononiy, vol. 84, October, pp.
        1013- 1032.

Phillips, Kristen. 1992. "State and Local Pension Benefits," in John
       A. Turner and Daniel J. Belier (eds.), Trends in Pensions
       1992. Washington D.C.
Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. 1992.
       "401(k) Plans and Tax-Deferred Saving." NBER Working
       Paper No. 4181, October.
 ______________       1993a.   "Do 401(k) Plans Crowd Out Other
       Private Saving?" NBER Working Paper No. 4391, June.
 ______________ 1993b. "The Effects of Special Saving
       Programs on Saving and Wealth," unpublished. September
Schieber, Sylvester and John Shoven. 1993. "The Consequences of
       Population Aging on Private Pension Fund Saving and Asset
       Markets," unpublished, September.
Sheiner, Louise and David N. Weil. 1992. "The Housing Wealth
       of the Aged," NBER Working Paper No. 4115, July.
Skinner, Jonathan. 1991. "Housing and Saving in the United
       States," NBER Working Paper No. 3874, October.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 1986. "Tax-Deferred
       Accounts, Constrained Choice and Estimation of Individual
       Saving." Review of Economic Studies 53: 579-601.
______________        1987.    "IRAs and Saving," in M. Feldstein
       (ed.), The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                  -33-
      ________• 1989. "Aging, Moving, and Housing Wealth,"
       in D. Wise (ed.), The Economics of Aging. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.
      _________ 1990a. "But They Don't Want To Reduce
      Housing Equity", in D. Wise (ed.), Issues in the Economics
      ofAging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      _________• 1990b. "Have IRAs Increased U.S. Saving?:
       Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Surveys."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 105: 661-698.
      ________•      1991. "Aging and the Income Value of

       Housing Wealth." Journal of Public Economics,
       44:371-395.
______________• 1992. "Government Policy and Personal
      Retirement Saving." Tax Policy and the Economy 6:1-41.
Wilson, John F., James L. Freund, Frederick 0. Yohn, and Walter
       Lederer. 1989. "Measuring Household Saving: Recent
       Experience from the Flow-of-Funds Perspective," in R.
       Lipsey and H. Tice (eds.), The Measurement of Saving,
       Investment, and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press.




                               -34-
                                                                          1




  Table 1. Projection Equation Estimated Cohort Effects, by
                 Asset and Contributor Status
              Personal            Total Personal        Other Personal
         Retirement Assets       Financial Assets      Financial Assets
         Coefficient J t-Stat   Coefficient I t-Stat
                                                 Coefficient I t. -Stat
      a. Both Contributors and     Non-Contributors — Means
C42       14076        19.0       16002        8.2      1927       1.0
C44       11085        17.9      12024         7.3       939       0.6
C46        9997        17.3       9568         6.3       -428     -0.3
C48        7821        14.8       6556         4.7     -1264      -0.9
C50        5759        11.9       4132         3.2     -1626      -1.3
C52        3814         8.6       1459         1.2     -2354      -2.1
C54        1944        4.7          452        0.4     -1492      -1.4
C56         363        0.9          734        0.7       370      0.4
C58       -1604        -3.9      -1682        -1.6       -78     -0.1
C60       -3815        -8.7      -5165       -4.5      -1349
C62       -5813      -12.1       -3796       -3.0       2017      1.7
C64       -8130      -15.4       -5234       -3.7       2895      2.2
C66      -10345      -18.0       -8766       -5.8       1578      1.1
C68      -12049      -19.2      -12203       -7.3       -154     -0.1
C70      -13103                 -14081                  -981
                    b. Contributors — Means
C42       30138      16.3     31120     4.4              982      0.1
C44       24305       15.8       25331        4.3       1025      0.1
C46      21990        15.3      20567         3.8      -1423      0.2
C48       17802       13.5       16136        3.2      -1666     -0.3
C50       13235       11.0       11451        2.5      -1784     -0.4
C52        8697        7.9        5686        1.3      -3011     -0.7
C54        4355        4.2        2536        0.6      -1818     -0.5
C56         381        0.4         379        0.1         -2      0.0
C58       -4140       -4.1       -5351       -1.4      -1210     -0.3
C60       -8972       -8.2      -15512       -3.7      -6539     -1.6
C62     -12970       -10.8      -10886       -2.4      2084       0.5
C64     -17496       -13.3      -10101       -2.0      7395       1.5
C66     -21873      -15.3       -11122       -2.0      10751      2.0
C68     -26299      -16.8       -24331       -4.1       1968     0.3
C70     -29153                  -35903                 -6752
  Table 1. Projection Equation Estimated Cohort Effects, by
             Asset and Contributor Status, Cont.
            Personal       Total Personal       Other Personal
Cohort Retirement Assets Financial Assets       Financial Assets
       Coefficient t-Stat Coefficient t-Stat   Coefficient J t. -Stat
                  c. Contributors — Medians
C42      16066      11.8    21522       6.5      -6078         2.3
C44      12793      11.3    19358       7.0      -2771        -1.2
C46      12074      10.3    17811       6.9      -2955        -1.4
C48       9936      10.3    14804       6.2      -2441        -1.3
C50       7383       8.3    11362       5.2      -2005        -1.1
C52        5066     6.2      7053       3.5      -1964        -1.2
C54        3103     4.1      4498       2.4      -1753        -1.2
C56         910      1.2       163      0.0      -1370        -1.0
C58       -1953     -2.6     -3451     -1.9       -374        -0.3
C60       -5556     -6.3    -9896      -5.0      -1806        -1.1
C62       -7414     -8.4   -11095      -5.1         -74       -0.0
C64      -10617    -11.0   -12503      -5.3       3520         1.8
C66      -12448    -11.8   -15700      -6.1       5184         2.5
C68      -14046    -12.2   -20652      -7.3       7186         3.2
C70      -15297            -23274                 7701
     Table 2. Summary of Cohort Effects at Selected Age
               Intervals, Percents and Medians
            Age Interval &            Year Attained Given Age
            Data Reported            1984    I   1987    I   1991
Age 50 to 54
 % With Personal Retirement Saving      36          42          46
 Personal Retirement Assets           5000       10018       15742
 Other Personal Financial Assets      8440        9047        8200
 Total Personal Financial Assets     16054       23004       31549
 % Without Personal Retirement
  Assets                                64          58          54
 Total Personal Financial Assets       500         500         500
Age 55-59
 % With Personal Retirement Saving      43          43          43
 Personal Retirement Assets           5300       10700       15402
 Other Personal Financial Assets     12520       16580       12800
 Total Personal Financial Assets     21200       32000       39400
 % Without Personal Retirement
  Assets                                57          57          57
 Total Personal Financial Assets       600         500         600
Age 60-64
 % With Personal Retirement Saving      38          41          42
 Personal Retirement Assets           6477       12000       22131
 Other Personal Financial Assets     17617       19500       20100
 Total Personal Financial Assets     27101       37300       52498
 % Without Personal Retirement
  Assets                               62          59           58
 Total Personal Financial Assets      1100        600          600
Age 65-69
 % With Personal Retirement Saving      19          27          35
 Personal Retirement Assets           7000       11000       17739
 Other Personal Financial Assets     35500       37540       40000
 Total Personal Financial Assets     44050       53700       74260
 % Without Personal Retirement
  Assets                               81          73           65
 Total Personal Financial Assets     5000        3916         1600
    Table 2. Summary of Cohort Effects at Selected Age
           Intervals, Percents and Medians, Cont.
           Age Interval &            Year Attained Given Age
           Data Reported             1984       I   1987       I   1991

Age 70-74
 % With Personal Retirement Saving          8          15             20
 Personal Retirement Assets           7096           9887          15000
 Other Personal Financial Assets     40800          46000          43850
 Total Personal Financial Assets     62866          58825          78000
 % Without Personal Retirement
  Assets                                92             85             80
 Total Personal Financial Assets      5500           8930          6000

Age 75-79
 % With Personal Retirement Saving       6                 7          11
 Personal Retirement Assets           6000           9450          15000
 Other Personal Financial Assets     36000          60000          61719
 Total Personal Financial Assets     56383          67398          83978
 % Without Personal Retirement
  Assets                                94             93             89
 Total Personal Financial Assets      7800           6000          10741

Age 80+
 % With Personal Retirement Saving          4           4                 5
 Personal Retirement Assets           3730           6000          16018
 Other Personal Financial Assets     45030          35719          56800
 Total Personal Financial Assets     51487          49129          87391
 % Without Personal Retirement
  Assets                                96             96             95
 Total Personal Financial Assets      6000           8000          10000
      Table 3. ANOVA Estimates of the Effect of Employer
       Pension Wealth on Personal Financial Assets, by SS
            Wealth Percentile, and by Asset and Year
 SS Wealth       Personal         Other Personal       Total Personal
 Percentile Retirement Assets    Financial Assets     Financial Assets
                                 1984
 1st          -.021    (.010)     -.006      (.050)   -.027    (.053)
2nd           -.000    (.013)      .052      (.061)     .052   (.065)
3rd           -.005    (.015)      .125      (.073)     .120   (.078)
4th             .008   (.016)     -.003     (.077)     .005    (.082)
5th             .028   (.016)        .230   (.075)     .257    (.079)
6th           -.005    (.011)        .159   (.055)     .153    (.058)
7th           -.008    (.012)        .024   (.059)     .016    (.062)
8th           -.012    (.016)     -.112     (.078)    -.124    (.083)
9th           -.008    (.014)        .126   (.067)     .118    (.071)
10th           .006    (.010)       .045    (.048)     .052    (.051)
                                1987
1st             .013   (.013)       .074    (.053)      .087   (.056)
2nd           -.001    (.015)     -.040     (.060)    -.041    (.064)
3rd           -.011    (.023)       .054    (.090)      .043   (.096)
4th           -.008    (.020)     -.086     (.078)    -.093    (.083)
5th             .000   (.017)       .173    (.068)      .174   (.073)
6th             .020   (.013)       .208    (.053)     .228    (.056)
7th             .002   (.010)       .009    (.041)     .012    (.043)
8th            .020    (.014)       .027    (.057)     .047    (.060)
9th            .005    (.018)    -.278      (.071)    -.274    (.075)
10th          -.032    (.013)      .278     (.052)     .246    (.056)
                                1991
1st            .006    (.020)      .066     (.055)     .072    (.062)
2nd          -.003     (.042)      .003     (.116)     .000    (.131)
3rd           .105     (.039)      .087     (.107)     .192    (.121)
4th           .064     (.030)      .084     (.083)     .147    (.093)
5th          -.016     (.023)    -.023      (.064)    -.039    (.073)
6th          -.029     (.026)      .065     (.07 1)    .036    (.080)
7th          -.007     (.029)    -.007      (.080)    -.013    (.090)
8th           .054     (.028)     .111      (.078)     .165    (.088)
9th           .057     (.026)     .031      (.071)     .088    (.080)
10th         -.027     (.022)     .039      (.061)     .012    (.069)
—
      Appendix Table 1. Components of Asset Categories,
     Proportion of Families Owning, and Mean and Median
                    Levels, Age 65-69, 1991
                                                  Percent
        Asset Category and Component              Owning Mean Median
Personal (Targetted) Retirement Assets             34.5     10992      0
Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs)              30.8      7239      0
401(k) Accounts                                     3.8       617      0
Keogh Plans                                         1.9      1439      0
Life Insurance and annuities                        3.0      1626      0
Other Personal FInancial Assets                    84.8     42018    7428
Saving Accounts & CDs                              72.2     19894    3600
Money Markets Funds, Bonds, &
  Securities                                       13.3      8007       0
 Stocks & Mutual Funds                             21.9     13219       0
 U.S. Savings Bonds                                14.1       548       0
 Non-Interest Bearing Checking Accounts            38.4       351       0
Employer-Provided Pension Assets                   56.2 62305 16017
 Pension                                           34.6 23276     0
 Railroad Retirement                                2.0      3483       0
 Federal                                             5.1     9767       0
 State Government                                    2.6    11550       0
 Local Government                                    2.8     3569       0
                                                     7.1     5251       0
 Military
 Veterans                                            5.2     3891       0
 Other                                               3.0     1517       0
Social Security Assets                              88.0 99682 99167
Home Equity                                         75.3    64955 50000
Equity in Other Property                            81.8    33855    5992
    Net Equity in Other Property                    13.2     7450       0
    Motor Vehicle Equity                            80.6     6902    3950
    Business Equity                                  5.9     7180       0
    Rental Property                                  7.7     7961       0
    Other Properties (vacation, commercial,...)      1.4      369       0
    Money Owed to Family                             2.6      685       0
    Equity in Other Financial Investments            3.5     2258       0
    Money Owed to Family-Business/Property
      Sale                                           2.7      1049      0
                                                                                                      00
           N
                                                                                                 00
           00                                                                                       C
                                                                                                 en (-'I
                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                     en
                                                                                                    en

                                                                                                00             I,)
                                                                                            r.4 en
0                                                                                           en                 N
                                                                                       00
In                                                                                     N    en
                                                                                       en




                                             .
                                                                                  N N
                                                                                  '1 00
                                                                                 V00        C
                                                                                                 I                        .
                      -
                               ..
                                             .
                                             .
                                                                   .
                                                                                 —
                                                                                 NC
                                                                                 00         00
                                                                                            C
                                                                                            I-             •
                                                                                                                          ..



     0
     00

     .—
                               .                                   :



                                                                       a'
                                                                            CSN
                                                                            en•
                                                                            ens
                                                                                  C
                                                                                  en
                                                                                       :
                                                                                       en
                                                                                       —
                                                                                                           •




                                                                       00


     0                                                        C  C
                                                              00 en    N
     0                                                        0\ C
                                                                 N
     L)
                                                       en
                                                       'I-)
                                                              C     a'
                                                       en     00
                                                              0
                                                 en    C               C
          C                                      00
                                                 0\ N                  en
                                                                       C

          00                           en    00
                                                 'e)          0
                                       C
                                       (.4
                                             00               00

                                       00
                                       (.4             C'
                                                       I-
                                en           C'
                                'I.)         en
                                             C
                          en           C'
                          en           en
                                       C


                          .
          4)
                (.1       -'o0o              C                              o0                   00
                                                                                                               N:N N
               Fig I a. Median Assets by Year
                     Families Aged 65 to 69
      350000

      300000 ---------- --.-
                                           __-
200000----- _                                         Other Personal Financial
                                                      LI
                                                      Other Non-Liquid
F50000
a.)                                                   Home Equity
      100000
                                                      Employer Pension
       50000
                                                      Social Security
           0




                Fig I b. Mean Assets by Year
                     Families Aged 65 to 69
      350000

      300000
                                           I.—       LI
                                                     Personal Retirement

,,250000                                             Other Personal Financial
Co
                                L
                                                 N
                                                     LI
                                                     Other Non-Liquid

200000
                                                     [:.
                                                     Home Equity
C 150000
Co
                                                               Pension
100000                                               jpIoyer
                                                     Social Security
       50000

          0
                  1984              1991
                         Year
          Fig Ic. Mean Wealth Increase I 984-91
                      Familles 65-69
      5


      4
aD
0)
0
4-.
>
4-.
Co




      0
           Fig 2. IRA and 401(k) Contributions
      50



      40
(I)
0


C')
 o2O
0
0
      10



       0

                                 Year
                                         Ilillill
                      ILIIIIRA          401(k)I
                 Fig 3a. Retirement Plan Contributions
      140


      120


(I)   100
C
0
w         80
C
U,
          60
Co


a0        40

          20

          0
                                       Year

                 L DB           DC      Keogh    401(k)    IRA




                 Fig 3b. National Flow of Funds Saving
      500



      400
U,
C
0
300
1
U,
Co    200
0
a
      100



          0

                                       Year

      [
               FOF Unadjusted    FOF NIPA Basis — Tot Retire Cont
         Fig 4a. Illustration of Cohort Data
                        Personal Retirement Assets
     16000

     14000

     12000   -_-..-—___i.-_--                          —______                        ——----*.--—-----—--.---

     10000




       C46
             L L_
               I    I          I       I       I           I
             46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76

                   C52         C58 ] C64 • C72 -Y- 84 CS - 91 CS
                                                                    I

                                                                   Age
                                                                             I
                                                                                      [11
                                                                                      I       I       I
                                                                                                              TI
                                                                                                              I   I




             Fig 4b. Illustration of Cohort Data
                   Personal Retirement Assets—Fitted
     16000

     14000               ..
                                                                                  I
                                                                                      _
     12000

     10000                 1
U)


8000
      6000                                             T


      4000                                                                                                I




         0                         I       I       I           I        II       II       I       I       I
              46485052545658606264666870727476
                                                               I




                                                                   Age
                               C46             C52                  C58               C64             C72
         Fig 5a. Personal Retirement Assets
               All Respondents—Five Cohorts—Means
     16000

     14000 -.---..-.-.-.-.--. --   -.---.-.-     -.-   ..-....-.•-.-•-.-


     12000

     10000•
a)




      4000

      2000                         I
                                                                           HHi
                                   iIJt
              46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76
                                           Age

     ____          I_C46EC52c58FiC64mc7oI


             Fig 5b. Other Personal Fin Assets
              All Respondents—Five Cohorts—Means


     50000



a)
     40000


     30000
                                   --___-.-.
              •-..-.————-.---_--._.--_-__                                       .
                                                                           .-.--.--.-.




             JTijIiIi1 .
                               ilTiftiftIll: iIIiii
             46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76
                                         Age

                   Nc46Ec52C58EIc64c7oJ
             Fig 5c. Total Personal Fin Assets
              All Respondents—Five Cohorts—Means
     60000

     50000 -- --------                               _
                   ---------- -.-------__                              —__
                        - ---- -_ _ -_
     40000



F0000




             46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76
                                                   Age
                              C46         C52 C58 C64              C701




                      Fig 5d. Total PFA v PRA
                    All Respondents—Selected Cohorts
     60000                                               f
     50000

     40000         ----.----.-..-----
a)
             —--.—-                               -—.-
30000
     20000                                                     I                -
     10000                                   .               Ii iI_             f
         0   iIH
              52       54
                                         jul.
                                 56'5&.- 6062 64-66 68                     70
                                                                                1!;



                                                  Age
       C52-Tot        C58-Tot           C64-Tot    C52-Ret   C58-Ret   C64-Ret
                 Fig 5e. Personal Financial Assets
                                        Total and Retirement
                              Means—Both Contribuors & NonConthbutors_Indexej
     50000



     40000


     30000
I-
0
     20000


     10000
             y44::
        0
             45666è67o72747                               Age
                                                                        I   I   I   I   I




                 Fig 5f. Personal Financial Assets
                                                     Other
                     Means--Both Contributors & Non-Contributors--Indexed
        50000



        40000                                                                       ___
                     .




                         I


        10000


                          I     I
             0   .
                                            I   ¶.
                                                      I
                                                            I   I
                         42    44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76
                                                                    —




                                                            Age
             Fig 5g. Total Pers Financial Assets
                Means--Both—Actual and Projected
     70000


     60000


     50000

U)



40000



     20000


     10000
                 Fig 6a. Personal Financial Assets
                             Total and Retirement
                        Means— ont ibuors—Indexed
     120000


     100000                                                     /
     80000
0)


60000
                                                                i.iiii
     40000                                                      --
                                                ..--.i--.
     20000


         0    •1   i!i ih i i I'i i!i I',
               42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 i860 6264d668 70 72 74 76
                                         Age
                                                                    iii
              Fig 6b. Personal Financial Assets
                       Means--Contributors--Indexed
      120000


      100000




 600®
       80000

                                                        I__
                                                        I       I




       40000


       20000

                                                                TI"
             0
                 42545586à
                         I      I    I


                                          Age
                                                    I       I       I
                                                62 64 66 68 7b 72 74 76
                                                                        I
               Fig 6c. Personal Financial Assets
                                        Other
                        Means--Non-Contributors--Indexed
          120000


          100000


           80000
     a)



     o00o
           40000




                      1'::
           20000


              0 444 8505
                   42
                            I   I   I   I
                                            .r
                                                       I   i   I    I   I
                                                           64666 70727476
                                                                            I


                                                 Age




              Fig 6d. Total Pers Financial Assets
                    Means--Contributors--Actual and Proj
     180000

     160000

     140000

     120000
a)




     60000

     40000

     20000
               42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56
                 Fig 7a. Personal Financial Assets
                            Total and Retirement
                          Medians-ContjThuors-Jndexj
    70000

    60000

    50000

    40000
0
30000

    20000

    10000

         0
             45664666è7b7277     i   i

                                             Age




                 Fig 7b. Personal Financial Assets
                                     Qther
                       MedIans--Contributors--indexed
        70000


        60000

        50000


    ! 40000
    0


        20000

        10000
                                     ':'i'
             0               I           I
                 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 6 68 70 72 74 76
                                              Age
         Fig 7c. Personal Financial Assets
                                               Other
                        Medians--Non-Contributors--Indexed
     70000

     60000

     50000

     40000
 0
30000

     20000
                                 I                             I


     10000   ——.—————    —.——..——.i———.—.——        ——    ————.—._____
                                                                                    —
                                                                        L—
                                                                        I—i
                                                                            r
         0     II   I       I         II      ¶I    II     — ——
                                                           I
                                                                                I   I

             424446485052545658606264666870727476
                                                         Age




         Fig 7d. Total Pers Financial Assets
              Medians—Contributors--Actual and Proj
110000

100000

90000

80000

70000

60000

50000

40000

30000

20000

 10000
                      Fig 8. Home Equity
                AU   Respondents—Selected Cohorts
    70000

    60000                                C

    50000

    40000
                                --1                 .-.-..-..-

0
30000
    20000

    10000-

       0-
             464850 5254 5658 60 62 64666870 72 7476
                                   Age

                  [C46Ec52c58.c64c72I
