                            NBER WORKING.PAPER SERIES




                          OPEN DOOR POLICY AND CHINA'S
                          RAPID GROWTH: EVIDENCE FROM
                                 CITY-LEVEL DATA




                                       Shang-Jin Wei




                                  Working Paper No, 4602




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      December, 1993

I would like to thank John Page. Takatoshi Ito, Anne Krueger and other participants of the 4th
Annual East Asian Seminar on Economics in San Francisco for helpful comments, Sarah Cook
for constructive comments and proofreading, and Xiongbai Fan for efficient research assistance.
Part of the research was conducted when I was visiting the Research Department of the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco. I gratefully acknowledge the support from the Center for Pacific
Basin Monetary and Economic Studies, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Pacific Basin
Research Center at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government and the William F.
Milton Fund. None of the above named individuals or institutions is responsible for the views
and particularly errors in this paper. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                NBER Working Paper #4602
                                                                          December 1993


                          OPEN DOOR POLICY AND CHINA'S
                          RAPID GROWTH: EVIDENCE FROM
                                 CITY-LEVEL DATA


                                        ABSTRACT

                                                                                           with
      There is clear evidence that during 1980-90 more exports are positively associated
higher growth rates across Chinese cities. In comparison, in the late 1980s, the conthbution to
growth comes mainly from foreign investment The contribution of foreign investment comes
in the form of technological and managerial spillover across firms as opposed to an infusion of
flew capital. Finally, there is nothing magical about the high growth rates of Chinese coastal
areas other than their effective utilization of foreign investment and exports.




Shang-Jin Wei
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
                                       2



               Open Door policy and China's Rapid Growth:
                      Evidence from City-level Data


     China was one of the fastest growing economies in the 19805.

The average annual growth rate of (inflation—adjusted) GD? for
China from 1980—90 was     9.5 per   cent. The corresponding growth rate

for the world as a whole was 3.1 per cent (WDR, 1992, Table 2,

p221). The growth rate for China in 1992 was 12.6 per cent.
     The rapid growth in China is obviously related to its
relentless (but not necessarily consistent) pursuit of economic
reforms, which has unleashed productive                  forces previously

suppressed by rigid central planning. One particularly important
component of the ref on program is China's open door policy.

Indeed,      China has literally been set forth as     a textbook example of

export—led growth2.
     The modest objective of         this   paper is to ascertain answers to
two questions.        First, what is the contribution of exports and

foreign investment to rapid industrial growth in China? Second, is

there       any spillover effect from exports or        foreign investment?

Because the 12—year reform period is relatively short, it is
difficult to do statistical analysis based on the limited number of

 aggregate     observations. One     small innovation of this paper is to


       In a widely used textbook on international
        2                                         economics (Krugman
 and Obstfeld, 1991, p247), the authors     wrote  that the Chinese
                                                a virtualofeconomic
 economic growth in the 1980s "amounted topotential         export—
 miracle—and a classical demonstration of the
 oriented industrialization."
                                 3

employ city—level data3.
     To preview the conclusions of the paper, I have found some
clear evidence that during 1980-90 more exports are positively
associated with higher growth rates across Chinese cities.       In

comparison in the late 1980s, the contribution to growth comes
mainly from foreign investment. Furthermore, the contribution of
foreign investment comes in the- form of technological or managerial

spillover across fins as opposed to an infusion of new capital.
Finally, the superb growth rates of the coastal areas relative to

the national average can be entirely explained by their effective
use of exports and foreign investment.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1,
the process of openning—to—the—outside—world is briefly reviewed.
Section 2 discusses a minimalist conceptual framework that will be

used to assess statistically the contribution of the open door
policy to rapid Chinese growth. In Section 3, the two data sets
are described.    Sections 4 and 5 present and interpret the
statistical results from the two samples. section 6 concludes the

paper.



Section 1: The opening—up of the Chinese economy in the 198 Os
     To assess the contribution of the Chinese open door policy, it




         There are 434 and 74 cities in the two data sets
respectively. After a draft of this paper was completed, I learned
that Wang (1993) was using data on 231 cities, and Wang and Nody
(1993) have used data on seven coastal provinces to assess Chinese
growth.
                                4

is useful to review briefly the path China has taken in this
direction1. In 1978, china was ranked thirty—second in export
volume. In 1989, it became the world's thirteen largest exporter.
Its share of world trade almost doubled during this period.
Between 1978 and 1990, the average annual rate of trade expansion
is above fifteen percent, more than three times higher than that of

total world trade5.
     This change in the degree of outward-orientation is truly
remarkable particularly when one considers China's strong aversion

towards trade and foreign investment before the reform'. China's
trade regime before 1978 was an extreme version of import
substitution.    Many official statements have made this very
explicit. one official in 1955 said that "the purpose            of

importing... is to lay the foundation of China's         industrial

independence, so that in the future China can produce all of the
producer goods it needs and will not have to rely on imports from

the outside."7


       For an excellent discussion of the pre—reform trade system
during 1950-1978 and the evolution of trade reform in the 1980s,
see sung (1991), tardy (1992) and Cheng (1992). The first book has
also expertly delineated the important role of Hong Kong in china's
drive to opening up to the outside world. The following discussion
on the evolution of china's trade regime is mainly based on tardy
 (1992).
      $ Lardy, 1992.
      6 Kamm (1989) has described vividly the eerie feeling of doing
exports and imports business with China in the 1970s. The
discussion on the pre—reform trade regime in this section is based
primarily on Lardy, 1992.
       see Lardy, 1992.
                                 5

     To highlight the nature of the pre-reform trade regime, a few
characteristics are summarized below. (1) The state monopolized

trade through state trade corporations.     No firm or individual
could export or import goods without the intermediation of those

corporations.   (2) There was no close link between the world and
domestic prices of tradable goods.     A state trade corporation
purchased imports at the world price, and sold them domestically at

a price determined by a state plan, which typically did not vary
with world price or domestic demand.      Similarly, a state trade
corporation purchased exportable goods from domestic firms at a
plan—dictated price and sold them at the world market price. (3)

Foreign exchange was tightly controlled by the state. All foreign
exchange resulting from exports was retained by the state. All
imports had to be part of a state plan to be materialized.

     In 1979, china decided to open up to the outside world. Since

then, a few important steps have been taken in this effort. (1) The

government has decentralized decision making regarding exports and

imports to local governments or regional foreign trade
corporations. (2) A series of special economic zones and coastal

open cities are designated for the purpose of stimulating exports
and attracting foreign investment. (3) Administrative restrictions

on exports and imports are replaced by tariffs, quota and
licensing. (4) The control on foreign exchange has been loosened

over the years, particularly for foreign invested/managed firms.
     How open has China become after a decade of reform? An often
used measure of openness is trade (exports plus imports) to GNP
                                 6

ratio.     If one uses market exchange rate to convert China's GNP

into the US dollar, China displays a phenomenal increase in the
trade—CNP ratio from about 9.7% in 1978 to 26.8% in 1989 (Lardy,

1992, p151)
     However, as tardy pointed out, there are two problems with

this ratio.     First, the ratio is not useful for a cross—country
comparison. Smaller countries tend to have higher ratios even if

their government policies are equally favorable (or unfavorable) to

trade'.     Another problem is that using market exchange rate to
convert Chinese GNP nay overstate Chinese openness since it
underestimates China's true GNP.
     Foreign direct investment (FDI) is another manifestation of

the open—door policy.      FDI was virtually non—existent in the
decades preceding 1979. In 1983, the flow of foreign investment
was a mere US$ 1.7 billion. It increased to $ 5.3 billion in 1988,
and to $11.4 billion in 1991. The accumulated FDI from 1979 to
1992 (calculated without depreciation) has reached $34.5 billion9.



         In terms of the source of Ftfl, Hong Kong is by far the
absolute dominant supplier. Between 1984 and 1990, Hong Kong's

share of FM was above 50% for every single year except 1985 when


      To control for the contribution of size or geographic
location determinants to trade volume, one may want to use a
gravity model to establish a norm of trade volume (e.g., Frankel,
1992; Frankel and Wei, 1992). Then, the deviation from the norm
can be used as a more accurate measure of openness.
       almanac of China's Foreign Relations and Trade, 1990; and
People's Daily (Overseas edition) Feb., 1992, and Hay 31, 1993.
                                 7

the share was 48.9%. Of course, of the Hong Kong investment, a
fraction is Taiwanese capital in disguise for political reasons,
and another fraction is mainland Chinese capital in disguise to
take advantage of the preferential treatment of foreign investment

in China. But the bulk of it is genuine Hong Kong capital'°.
     Japan is ranked second in place in tens of its share in total

FDI in China, although it is much less significant than Hong Kong
(Japan's share in 1989 and 1990 was 11 arid 13 percent). the third

in place is the United States which follows Japan closely.

     Foreign investment takes several forms.           Equity joint
ventures, which were an insignificant part of FDI in the early
1980s, accounted for 50% of all F in 1990.         There are also
contractual joint ventures, wholly foreign owned ventures and joint
explorations (mainly in offshore oil explorations) .   Their   shares

in FOX in 1990 were 18%, 18% and 7%, respectively. "Compensation
trade," in which foreign firms provide machines or product designs
to Chinese firms, and obtain part of the output as payment, is also

counted as foreign direct investment in Chinese statistics,
although it is really a kind of barter trade. "Compensation trade"

has become less and less important over time. Its share in FOX has

declined from about 20% in early l98Os to less than 5% in 1990
(Kueh, 1992)

     one serious obstacle for China to attract foreign investment
is its imperfect property and contract laws. The legal enforcement


     10
       See Kueh (1992) who also provided a comprehensive review of
FOl in China and particularly in its coastal areas.
                                    8

is weak in spite of the laws that have been written on paper. So
far, foreign investment has been reasonably robust for two reasons.

First, low factor costs and tax concessions can often ensure high

returns even in a short time.       Second, overseas Chinese can use

their connection and familiarity with "Chinese culture" (whatever

that is) to get things done without the procedural protection of
the laws. The latter is one important reason for why Hong Kong is
so prominent as a source of foreign investment. There is little
doubt that foreign investment from people other than ethnic Chinese

would have been more had there been better and more transparent
legal environment for business, and that improvement in the making
and particularly enforcement of property and contract laws is
important for the continued success of China's open—door policy.

     Foreign investment, like foreign trade, increasingly exposes
Chinese workers and fins to international managerial and
technological standard and knowhow. It increases the efficiency,
not only of those firms that receive foreign investment or are
under foreign management, but also of those domestic firms that

interact with foreign invested/managed firms through various
channels (positive externality), as I will show statistically

later.     It may also promote growth by alleviating shortage of
domestic savings or foreign exchange".




     "
         although   Wei and Fan (1993) fail to find statistical support
for this view using the same 1988-90 city-level data as in this
paper.
                                        9

section 2: A Conceptual Pramework
        In this section, a minimalist model is set up to guide the

subsequent empirical investigation. Let a generic firm j in city
k operate with the following production function

                            =
                                Akjf{Lkj)    i
                                                 AZ
where      denotes its labor input, and A1 is the productivity shift

parameter. f() is a twice differentiable concave function. Capital
stock is left out of the production function because no city—level
data are available.

     Assume that the firm maximizes its profit taking all prices as

given. That is, it maximizes

                            AkJf{Lkj) WtLtj



     In   the equilibrium, the fin's growth is governed by



                            'kj                  Z

    Assume that

                                    =
                                        A,, Ak



where A, and ; are         national and city—level productivity
                                          10

components12. Notice that f or simplicity I have assumed away Iin—

specific productivity shift. This is to focus our attention to
those activities whose benefits spill over to other firms or other
cities. The growth rate of productivity will then be the sum of the

growth rates of the two components.
     Assume further that

                                    £ f(Lkj)   =
                              Zkj




     Then,



                                    Zkj




     Let    g denote any growth rate. The growth rate of city k can be
expressed as a weighted average of the growth rates of all the
fins in the city. That is,

                                          L 5kJ9A + E

                                =              a



where s is firm j's share in city k's output.
      We will focus on a few variables that affect the productivity


      12
           This   specification is similar to Glaeser etc. (1992)
                                      11

increase. Let

                        =
                            f(FDrk,   EXP*, TkO' 14)



where FDIk and EXpk are foreign direct investment in city k and
exports by city k, respectively. Y is the initial size of the
industrial sector in city k.      Finally, 11k    is       the stock of human
capital in city k.
     Assuming a linear version of f(.), we have the following
equation as the basis of our subsequent statistical analyses,

              gk =                                +    a



where e is a city—specific error term. The error term is assumed
to be independent across cities, but can have different variances.
     Having the initial size of an industrial sector, Y, in f(.)
is a crude way to capture the notions of increasing returns to
scale as advanced by Romer (1986), or of learning—by—doing as
emphasized by Young (1991).       The larger the initial scale of
production, the more productive the future production will be.

     FDI is a primary mechanism for the technology to be
transferred from developed countries to developing countries. In
the context of China, it is also a primary mechanism for foreign
management methods and worker discipline to be transferred into the

country.   Exports expose the exporting firms to the rigor of
international competition as well as new techniques in marketing
and processing.
                                12

    EDI can enter the regressions in one of two ways, as a share

of the city's total investment or in absolute scale.   If the role

of FDI is merely as an infusion of capital into a city, or that the
technology it brings with it does not spill over to other firms in
the city, then its contribution to the city's growth will be
proportion to its share in the city's total capital stock. I will
call this as an "intensity effect". On the hand, there may be a

substantial amount of spillover across firms through interactions

of workers or managers between the foreign owned/managed firms and

those that do not receive foreign investment directly. The actual
channels of spillover may include dinner table conversations of
friends or family members who work in different firms.          The

physical presence of foreign firms •in the city facilitates the
transfer. Suppose all domestic firms that do not receive foreign
investment directly always obtain a constant fraction of the
benefits (in terms of extra growth rates) that foreign invested
firms obtain, and suppose further that foreign invested fins
accounted for a small fraction of total output, then, the
contribution of FbI to a city's growth will be proportional to the

total FOl the city receives.     I will refer to this as a "scale

effect". In other words, the presence of a scale effect signals
the existence of positive spillover across firms in the same city.'3

     similarly, exports can also enter regressions in two ways.



     " The pair of terminology, intensity versus scale effects, is
borrowed from Backus, Kehoe and Kehoe (1992), who used it to
 represent an absence or presence of externality in human capital.
                                13

Exporting firms can learn new ideas about marketing, design or
technology from interacting with buyers in the world market,     If

the benefits of learning are confined to those firms who actually
do the exporting, then its contribution will be proportion to the
share of exports in an city's total output. On the hand, the newly
learned ideas are likely to travel to other firms that may not do

any exporting at all.      This transfer of ideas can also be
accomplished through dinner table conversations, or formal business

meeting. Alternatively, non—exporting firms can simply imitate the

management or marketing concept exporting firms have demonstrated.
As far as this spillover is concerned, the benefit of exports to
the city is more closely related to the total exports all the firms

in the city collectively do, than to the share of exports in total
industrial output. That is, one can also use the scale effect to
detect the presence of positve spillover of exports.
     The H variable is to capture the contribution of human capital

to growth, as emphasized by Lucas (1988) and others.         If an
educated person is counted passively as one unit of skilled labor,

then the contribution of skill workers is limited to their share in
total labor force.     But as the theory emphasizes, there are
tremendous positive externalities associated with human capital: I

become more productive if my colleagues are more educated. Under
the hypothesis, more scientists facilitate more and faster cross-
fertilization of ideas.     The contribution of scientists/skill
workers is likely to be greater, the greater is the absolute number
of scientists or skill workers in the city.
                               14

     It is important to point out that an increase in city k's
exports, foreign investment or the other two variables nay improve

the entire nation's productivity (cross—city spillover). But any
such increase will simply be reflected in the intercept of
regressions, because it does not generate cross—city difference in

growth.


section 3: Data Sets



     I employ two city—level data sets in this paper. The first
one has 434 cities for 1988—1990, and the second one 74 cities for

1980—1990. A list of the cities is included in an appendix.
     The first sample has a         reasonably large number of
observations.   Furthermore, many variables of interest, such as
shares of private and foreign firms in total industrial output,
have been systematically collected in this period. On the other
hand, a shortcoming of the data set is its short time period, which

makes it more likely dominated by cyclical factors.    Indeed, the

period is one of the low—growth stages in a generally fast—growing

decade.
     The second sample covers essentially the entire reform period,

which makes it ideal to examine •the contribution of open door
policy to the Chinese growth in a systematic way. The results from
this decade-long sample are less likely to be influenced by
cyclical factors. However, the sample size is considerably smaller

than the first data set. Furthermore, data on many variables of
                                is

interest were not collected in the first half the 1980s. Even for

those variables that were collected in 1980, there is a large
number of missing values for many cities, rendering the effective
sample size much smaller than 74. Overall, one should not rely
exclusively on either sample when drawing general lessons about

Chinese growth.


section 4: Regression Results from 434 cities during 1988 to 1990



Initial industrial size and population growth


     In Table la, the coefficients on the level of 1988 output are

negative although not statistically significant except for one. In
other words, for this two—year sample, there is no evidence that a

larger initial industrial scale of the city helps it to grow
faster.

     The coefficient for the population growth rate is 0.60 and
significant at the five percent level.



Open door o1icv


     Exports and foreign direct investment are used as measures of

the open door policy. The export variable enters the regressions in

two ways: in absolute scale, or as a percentage of total output.
If they are entered separately, both are positive (although only
the scale of exports is statistically significant at the ten
                                 16

percent level). This is a finding often reported in some format in

cross—country studies: openness correlates with high growth4.
Here, a one percent increase in the scale of exports, is associated

with a higher two—year growth rate by 2.5 percentage points.
      If the growth rate of exports is used as an explanatory
variable, its estimated coefficient is 0.046 and significant at the

ten percent level.       Because of the possibility of reverse
causality, I will not read too much into this result.

      We next turn to the effect of foreign direct investment.
Ideally, we would like to use the stock of foreign direct
investment. But the data are not available at the city level, so we

use the flow data'5. Similarly with the export variables, the FM
variable can enter the regression in one of two ways: in absolute

scale (in US dollars), or as a percentage of total fixed capital

investment.
      If the two measures of FDI are entered the regression
separately, only the absolute scale of FM is significant.      A one

percent increase in the size of EDI is associated with 1.3
percentage points higher growth rate for the two—year period. This
 lends some support to the notion of an externality effect of FDI.



  -
      ' See   Edwards (1989) and papers cited therein.
      ' The problem is hopefully not fatal for two reasons. First,
 there is probably a large serial correlation in the spatial patten
 of FDI5. The simple correlation of FDI between 1988 and 1990 is
 0.64. Second, FDI in virtually every city started in early or mid—
 1980s. The annual flow of FDI in earlier years were considerably
 smaller than later years. Judged from national data, the 1988 flow
 of FDI was slightly smaller than the combined FDIs of all previous
 years.
                                17

An extra growth by 1.3 percentage points is not a negligible
number, but neither is it overwhelming for Chinese cities. The
growth rate of FDX over 1988—90, when included as an explanatory
variable, is not significant.
     Table lb examines the effect of including measures of Ff1 and

exports in the same regressions. If the absolute scales-of both
FDI and exports enter the regression, only Ff1 is statistically
significant. If one also adds the growth rates of FDI and exports
to the last regression, both the scale and growth rate of FDI are

statistically significant, but neither measure of exports is.

     To summarize, during 1988—90, foreign investment contributes
more to cross—city differences in industrial output than does the
exports. Furthermore, the scale effect of foreign investment is
significant, and is supportive of the hypothesis of spillover of
technological or managerial knowhow across firms within cities.


Other reform policies



     One often—mentioned aspect of the Chinese reforms is the
vitality of China's non—state sector". Here, we will quantify the

contribution of the non—state sector to overall industrial growth,



     16
       In the Chinese context, non—state sector is not exactly the
sane thing as a private sector. The majority of non—state firms
are what are called collectively owned enterprises.      They are
community based firms, but the relevant local governments often
have powers to appoint or dismiss managers. Among the collectively
owned firms, the township and village enterprises (TVEs) have been
developing particularly fast.
                                 18

and will do so in connection with examining the open door policy.
     The first regression in Table 2 includes as an explanatory
variable the ratio of non—state firms' output to total output.
Here the non—state firms are defined as private firms, township and

village enterprises (TVE5) and foreign—owned or managed firms.
Urban collective firms are excluded because no data are available.

We find this ratio to be positive and significant at the one
percent level. A one percent rise in the output share of the non—

state firms is associated with a 0.19 percent higher growth rate.
     If we decompose the non—state firms into private firms, TVEs

and foreign owned/managed finns, we see an interesting pattern.
Only TVEs and foreign firms have made a positive contribution to
overall city growth. A one percent increase in the output share of

TVEs is associated with 0.22 percent higher growth rate. Cities
with one percent higher share of foreign firms tend to grow 0.55

percent   more rapidly. Since the share of foreign invested/managed
firms in total output circumvent the issue of stockversus flow of

FbI, the relatively high contribution of the foreign firms may be
a better testimony to the contribution of the open door policy to

Chinese growth.
     The share of private individual firms has a negative
coefficient (it is insignificant when it enters the regression
alone). The lack of a positive contribution by private finns is
not intuitive. In search for an explanation, one may note that
private firms in China are typically family—based small business
 (with less than 8 employees) and are newly started during the
                                19

reform years. The regression result may simply reflect a pervasive
underreporting of output by private firms in order to evade taxes.
Indeed, it is possible that cities with better performing TVEs and
foreign firms are financially less necessary to enforce strictly
tax payment by their private firms.
     If one adds the absolute scales of exports and FDI to the
above regression, neither variable is statistically significant.
The lack of significance can be due to a high collinearity between
the EDI and output share of foreign firms.

     A second way to measure the extent of reform in a particular
city is to look at its share of retail sales conducted on the free
market.   Before 1978, almost no retail sales were on the free
market. The share of the free market has increased gradually as
the reform deepens.    The rate of increase is certainly uneven
across the country. This variable can signal initiatives of city
governments in pushing certain reform measures, particularly price

liberalization, holding other things constant, Of course, other
things are not constant. In particular, different cities have
different size of rural areas under their jurisdictions.         For
example, the city government of Shanghai has a jurisdiction of ten
surrounding small counties, while the city governments in Sichuan
control more and larger counties. To the extend that a significant
portion of free market trading is in agricultural goods, the free
market share of total retail sales may not give a precise measure
of reform initiatives related to industrial production. We have to
take this into account in interpreting the regression results.
                                20

     In any case, when the free market share of total retail sales

in 1988 is included in the regression, it actually has a negative
sign (See Table 3). In other words, we cannot find a positive
effect of price liberalization on industrial growth as measured by
the initial share of free market. The growth in the share of free

market, when included as an explanatory variable, is positive and
statistically significant. But the magnitude of the contribution
to the overall city growth is modest: A one percent higher in the
growth of the free market is associated with a 0.09 percent higher

industrial growth.
     A third way to gauge the impact of reform on city growth is to

look for evidence of better growth performance by cities that have
been granted greater authority to conduct localized reform

experiments.
     In August 1980, the Beijing government declared four cities,
Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Shantou, and Xiamen, as Special Economic Zones
(SEZ)". In a SEZ, investment decisions are made largely outside

the State Plan.      special tax concessions and less restrictive
regulations on foreign exchange and land use are adopted in order

to attract foreign investment. For foreign owned/managed firms,
there is a two—year tax holiday, followed by another three—year of
low tax rate (7.5%). After the initial five years, foreign firms
then pay a 15% tax rate. In comparison, outside the SEZs, the tax

rate is 33% for foreign finns and 55% for domestic state—owned


        shekou, the part of Shenzhen close to Hong Kong, was
announced to be an industrial export zone in January 1979.
                                 21

firms. Encouraged by the rapid development in the four SEZs, the
central government further declared in 1983 that the entire island

province of Hainan, close to the size of Taiwan, as a "special area

open to foreign investment" and, in 1988, as the largest special
economic zone.

     In May 1984, the Beijing government announced that fourteen
cities spread along the entire Pacific coast were granted the "Open
Coastal city" status.    The explicit purpose of this is also to
attract foreign capital and technology. In contrast to most of the
SEZs, these cities all have an established industrial base and
well—educated labor force. With the new status, they can offer
essentially all the preferential policies towards foreign
investment as a SEZ except for the income tax rate. Typically,
foreign owned/managed firms need to pay tax at a rate of 24%,
somewhere between the rates in a SEZ and elsewhere in the country.

But the manufacturing firms are taxed at a concessionary 15% rat&'.

     Starting from 1981, the central government (and provincial
governments) have designated 72 cites to be "comprehensive reform
experimenting" cities. Governments of these cities have gained
more authority in managing fins inside the city boundaries, have


     " Started from mid—198os and accelerated from 1988, there have
also been policies to open the entire Pacific Basin, particularly
the Liaoning and Shandong peninsulas, the entire provinces of
Guangdong and Fujian, and parts of Guangxi and Hebei provinces.
Since April 1990, the Pudong New Area of Shanghai, the largest city
in China, has been developed into an "open economic zone" with its
preferential policies even broader in scope than a SEZ. I have not
attempted to formally incorporate these developments in the
statistical work of this paper. For a survey of these development,
see IMF (1993)
                                22

greater access to the revenue originating in them, and can take
over certain firms previously managed directly by the ministries in
Beijing. Notice that the creation of this status largely entails
a bureaucratic decentralization (i.e., a        transfer of some
regulatory authority from the central government to the city
governments), and hence does not automatically imply that more
market oriented reforms will be implemented in these cities.
     To estimate the effects of these localized reform experiments,

I have constructed three dummy variables. They are SEZ for the
special economic zone, COAST for the fourteen "coastal open
cities,' and RFN for the "comprehensive reform experimenting
cities."
     The results with the RFH dummy are in Table 3, and those with

SEZ and COAST in Table 4. The coefficients for the RFN      and SEZ

dummies are not significant. This indicates that at least during

1988—90, there is no systematic difference in           the growth
performance for cities with or without those special status from
the central government. In contrast, the COAST dummy does have a
positive and significant coefficient: a "coastal open city" on
average grows faster than other cities by 9.2 percent over the two

years. However, the dummy is no longer significant once scales of
 FDI and exports, or growth rates of the two are included in the

 same regression. Among the newly added variables, only the scale
 of FDI or its growth rate are significant. This means that the
 entire above—the—non growth rate in the coastal open cities are

 due to their ability to attract foreign investment.
                                 23

      To summarize, cities with a larger share of non—state sector
tend to grow faster. The contribution of the non—state sectors
comes mainly from the TilEs and particularly foreign owned/managed

firms. The coastal open cities do grow faster than the national
average, primarily because of their superb record in attracting
foreign investment.


Human capital



     Recent growth theories have stressed the importance of human

capital on growth (Romer, 1986; and Lucas, 1988). This section
examines the contribution of human capital to Chinese growth, and
whether this addition may change our earlier conclusions.       Our
choice of variable for human capital is largely dictated by data
availability. We measure the stock of human capital by what is
called "scientific and technical personnel" in the Chinese source
both in absolute numbers (to examine the scale effect) and as a

percentage of the non—agricultural population (to examine the
intensity effect).

     It is important to point out that the definition of
"scientific and technical personnel" in the Chinese source is broad
enough to include essentially all skilled workers.    The ratio of
"scientific and technical personnel" to labor force offers a more

direct measure of average skill/education level of the labor force
than primary and secondary school enrollment, since there is a time
lag between school enrollment and entry into labor force. School
                                24

enrollment is often used as a measure of average human capital
level in cross—country studies because the more direct measure is

not availabl&9.
     In the original data source, there is a separate variable,
"mid or higher level scientific and technical personnel", which is

a subset of all "scientific and technical personnel" with advanced
training and sophisticated skills. I have also used this variable

in the regressions and found essentially the sane results.
     The statistical results are in Table 5.        Unfortunately,

neither the scale or intensity measures of human capital         is

statistically significant when included alone in the regression,

and some even have negative coefficient. When the growth of the
number of scientific personnel is included in the regression alone,

it is positive and significant at the ten percent level.      A one

percent increase in the growth rate of scientists is associated
with 0.06 percent increase in the industrial growth rate. However,

when the scales of exports and foreign direct investment are
included in the sane regression, the growth of scientists loses its

statistical significance (at the ten percent level). The scale of

FDI is positive and significant at the ten percent level.
     To summarize, the scale or average level of human capital does

not appear to contribute to the cross-city difference in industrial

growth rates during 1988—90. The contribution of the open door


      19 I thank John Page for pointing out that general
 education/skill level of labor force is probably more important
 than the number of high—level scientists for a country's economic
 development.
                                  25

 policy (in particular, that of the foreign investment) identified
 in earlier subsections is not altered.


Robustness checks



      In this section, I examine the robustness of the statistical
results. To ensure that the earlier results are not driven by a
few outliers, I am prepared to err on the side of taking out too
many observations.

     The mean growth rate for 1988—90 is 0.29. But the variation
among the cities is enormous. Langfang and Ankong were growing at
the rates of 217% and 203%, respectively, while Jingzhou and
Vunchen were growing at —36% and -29%. I will delete all the
observations that are outside a two standard deviation band from
the mean, this criteria deletes eight super—growing cities and six
slowest—growing ones. When all the regressions are redone on this
restricted sample, the earlier results essentially have survived.

In particular, the positive association between FDI and industrial
growth is strengthened, while the weak association between exports
and growth becomes even weaker.

     Because in the main regressions the key regressor (FDI) is in

beginning—of—the—sap value, the problem of simultaneous bias is
probably not serious. Nevertheless, I have also tried to estimate
a system of two simultaneous equations for output growth and FDI,

in which FOl is assumed to be a function of trade/output ratio and

reform dummies. The scale of FDI remains to have a significant and
                                26

positive effect on industrial growth.



Section 5; statistical Results for the 1980—90 Sample


     A few observations are eliminated because data errors are
suspected. The data on Nanchong is omitted because it records an

extremely high export/output ratio (0.58) in 1980. Although the
city is not known for its openness, the recorded ratio was the
highest in the sample.    Furthermore, the ratio is substantially
higher than the second highest (Weihai, 0.23), and is more than
three standard deviations (0.09) away from the mean (0.08)

     The second omitted data is Haikou, because it is the only city

that is reported to have a negative growth rate over 1980-90 in the

absolute scale of exports. In spite of many news stories about how

Haikou has become substantially more open than a decade ago, its
reported total growth rate of exports is —29% over 1980-90.

     Shenzhen is omitted in all regressions because there is no
data on its exports in 1980. It is worth pointing out that Shenzhen

is the fastest growing city in the sample in terms of its
industrial output.   Its ten—year growth rate over 1980-90 is a
phenomenal 545%, twice as high as the second highest growth rate in

the sampl&°, and more than six standard deviations (0.61) above the

mean (155%). As a special economic zone, the city is known to have

been extremely outward—oriented. Had it been included in the


     20
       The second highest growing city in the sample is Guiling,
with the ten year growth rate reaching 267%.
                                 27

sample, it would undoubtedly have reinforced any finding of a
positive contribution of exports or foreign investment to the city

growth.
     We would like to replicate all the key regressions as in the
other sample. Unfortunately, the data on FDI and the ownership
composition of the industrial output are not available for 1980.
The corresponding data for 1990 are used as a substitute. As an
admittedly weak justification for this, we note that those
variables are likely to be serially correlated.         The simple
correlation of the scale of FDI between 1988 and 1990 is 0.64, and

that of the share of FDI in total investment is 0.68.           The

correlations for the output shares of the private fins, TVEs and
foreign invested firms between 1988 and 1990 are 0.74, 0.94 and

0.62 respectively.
     Because of this substitution, one has to interpret the
regression results with caution.      In particular, the use of the

end-of—sample values of these variables tend to underestimate their

contribution to growth (relative to using the beginning—of—sample

values) .   For example, if the foreign firms grow faster than non—
foreign finns, then cities that have a lot of foreign firms also
tend to grow faster. The end—of—sample share of the foreign firms
in total output will be larger than the beginning—of-period share,
even if the number of foreign firms and other things are held
constant. A larger end—of—sample share relative to the beginning-
of—sample share is needed to explain the same growth rate. Hence,
the resulting coefficient estimate will be smaller.
                                28

     On the other hand, with this substitution, the possibility of

reverse causality is also more serious. Imagine that the initial
size of FDI has nothing to do with growth, but new FDIs always go
to cities that grow rapidly.     By the end of the sample, fast-
growing cities may have more FDIs.      Hence, this can produce a
correlation between FDI and growth. For whatever they are worth,
regressions similar to the 1988—90 sample have been run.



Initial size of the industrial sector


     From Table 6, one may notice a somewhat surprising result. The

coefficient on the level of 1980 output is negative and
statistically significant, suggesting a tendency of convergence in
growth rates in chinese cities. A one percent higher in the 1980
output tends to be associated with a reduction in the ten—year

total growth rate by 24 percentage points (or annual growth rate by
2.4 percentage points). Notice that the convergence result would
also have been strengthenedif Shenihen and Haikou were included in

the regression, because they both started with a small industrial

base but enjoyed a phenomenal growth.
     The negative coefficient suggests that the increasing returns

to scale is not operative at the city level in China. This need
not be puzzling if one recognizes that much of the industrial
sector in the pre—ref on China was extremely inefficient, burdened

with obsolete technology, inadequate management and poor worker
discipline. Furthermore, in selecting cities to experiment with
                                 29

reform measures particular in the early 1980s, Chinese government

is often systematically biased against large industrial cities, for

fear of losing control of the state—owned sector. This can lead to
a negative association between the initial size and the subsequent

growth.


Exports and FDI: Scale vs. intensity effects


     The first set of results is in Table Ga. As expected, the
growth rate of the non—agricultural population has a positive
impact on the growth   rates.    The coefficient on the population
growth is about 0.55, which is close to the corresponding estimate

for the 1988—90 sample (0.60).
     The scale of exports in logarithm, when included as an
independent variable, has an estimated coefficient of 0.16, which

is significant at the five percent level. A one percent higher in

the scale of exports of a city is associated with 16 percentage

points higher ten—year growth rate.
     If the ratio of exports to output is included in the
regression, a much larger estimate is obtained.      A one percent

higher in this ratio is associated with 2.17 percent higher growth
rate. If the growth rate of exports over the decade is used as an

independent variable, it is not significant.
     Foreign direct investment again can enter the regressions in
two ways. In terms of the scale effect of foreign investment, the
coefficient is positive and significant at the five percent level.
                                30

A one percent increase in the absolute scale of FIll is associated

with a rise in the ten-year growth rate by 4.8 percentage points.
There is a positive intensity effect as well. A one percent
increase in the FDI to output ratio is associated with a rise in

the city's growth rate by 2.14 percent.
     If we include both the levels of exports and EDT, and the
growth rate of exports in the regression, only the scale of exports
is significant at the five level. Unlike the 1988—90 sample, the
contribution of the exports appears more important than EDT for the

decade. Furthermore, the scale effect of exports suggest that the

contribution of exports is also through some positive spillover.




Contribution of other reforms


     As with the sample over 1988—90, we measure the impact of
reforms in three ways: (1) the role of the non—state sectors, in
particular, TVEs and foreign fins, (2) the ratio of free—market
sales to total retail sales, and (3) dummies indicating enhanced
authority that cities have received from the central government to

experiment with more reforms.
     In Table 7, the estimated coefficient on the non—state sector

is positive and statistically significant: A one percent increase
in the share of the non—state sector in total output is associated

with an increase of 1.3 percent in the ten—year growth rate.
     If we decompose the non—state sector into private individual
                               31

firms, town and village enterprises (TVEs) and foreign invested
firms, we observe a result similar to the other sample: the shares

of DIEs and foreign finns in total output have a positive and
statistically significant impact on the growth rate. A one percent

higher in the share of TVEsis associated with 1.36 percent higher

growth rate.    A one percent higher in the share of -foreign
invested/managed fins is associated with 2.07 percent higher
growth rate. The scale of FOX and the growth rate of exports, when

added to the above regression, are not significant.
     Secondly, the share of free market in the city's total retail

sales is used as a proxy for price liberalization and related
reforms. Because no such data is available for 1920, the 1990 data

is used.    Similarly to the other sample, this ratio is not
significant (and the point estimate is even negative).
     Thirdly, dummies for "coastal open cities," COAST, and for
"comprehensive reform experimenting cities," RFM      are   added as

regressors. The SEZ is not added because there are some missing
values for each of the special economic zones. The COAST dummy is

positive and significant when added alone to the regression. That

is, the fourteen coastal open cities do grow faster than the
national average. However, when the scales of exports and FDI are

added, COAST is no longer significant. At the same time, the scale

of exports is significant. This suggests that, over 1980-90, the
extra growth rate that the coastal cities have enjoyed is largely

due to their above—the—average export performance. [In comparison,

during the last two years of the l9BOs, the extra growth is more
                                32

likely explained by the above-the-average FDI presence in these

cities.)


Human caDital


     As a measure of human capital, the number of broadly defined
"scientific and technical personnel" and the ratio of them to
population are included separately in the regressions21. As- can be

seen from Table 10, neither measure is positive, contrary to what
the human—capital strand of the new growth theory would have
suggested (one of the estimate is even negative and significant)
However, when the growth of the scientific personnel is used as a

regressor, it turns out to be positive and significant. Notice
because there are only seventeen cities that have data on the
number of scientists in 1980, these estimates should be treated
with caution.



conclusion


     Using two city—level data sets, this paper has examined the

contribution of the open door policy to Chinese growth. There is
clear evidence that during 1980—90 more exports are positively
associated with higher industrial growth across the cities.      In




     21 As in the 1988—90 sample, "scientific and technical
personnel" is defined broad enough to encompass essentially all
skilled workers, not just high-level scientists and technicians.
                                33

comparison, in the late 1980s, the cross—city growth difference is
explained by foreign investment rather than by exports.        The

contribution of foreign investment comes in the form            of

technological or managerial spillover across firms as opposed to

infusion of new capital.
     Cities with a larger share of non—state sector grow faster.
The contribution of the non—state sector comes mainly from the

TVEs, and particularly foreign invested/managed firms. The coastal
cities do grow faster than the national average. But the extra
growth comes almost entirely from their ability to attract more

foreign investment.   To the extent that inland areas can also
attract foreign investment and export via coastal cities, they also

benefit from the open door policy.
     Finally, it is important to point out that the contribution of

the open door policy to Chinese growth is likely to be
underestimated.   As noted earlier, much of the benefits of an
export expansion or a foreign investment boom in one city may spill

over to the other cities. The portion of growth that is generated
by the cross—city spillover is reflected only in the intercept of

the kind of regressions reported in the paper.     Even though the

open door policy may substantially raise the overall Chinese
growth, it may not be picked up by the coefficient estimates for
city—level foreign investment or export variables22.


     v One channel through which cross-city spillover takes place
is labor (and manager) movement across cities. This channel is so
far only marginally operative. The inter—city job mobility has
changed from virtually zero in the pre—reform years to a small
                                  34

References



     Backus, David K., Patrick J. Xehoe and Timonthy J. Kehoe,
1992, "In Search of Scale Effects in Trade and Growth." Federal
Research Bank of Minneapolis, Staff Report 152.

     Bardhan, Pranab, 1992, "The Implications of New Growth Theory
for Trade and Development: An-overview."

     Bell, Michael and Simon N'guiamba, 1993, "china's Open
Economic Zones Are Speeding Its Transformation to a Market
Economy," IMF Survey, April 19.

     cheng, Hang—Sheng, 1992, "China's Foreign Trade Reform, 1979-
91," Pacific Basin Working Paper No. P592—01, Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco.

     China State Statistics Bureau, 1989 and 1991, Chinese Urban
Statistics Yearbook.

     China State Statistics Bureau, 1990, The Forty Years of
Chinese Urban Develonnent.

     Davis, Deborah, 1992, "Job Mobility in Post—Mao Cities:
Increases on the Margins," China quarterly, December.

     Edwards, Sebastian, 1989, "Openness, Outward Orientation,


positive number in the 1980s.    The diminished and eventually
abolished use of food coupons in the 1980s has facilitated this
increase in mobility. But the household registration system still
in place, the underdevelopment of housing markets and social safety
net continue to impede labor mobility across cities (Davis, 1992).
     Another channel through which spillover takes place is the
downstream and upstream production linkages for firms located in
different cities.     This channel is likely to be active and
increasingly important, although I only have anecdotal evidence to
support this claim.
                                35

Trade Liberalization, and Economic Performance in Developing
Countries," NBER Working Paper 2908.
     Frankel, Jeffrey, 1992, "Is Japan Creating a Yen Bloc in
Pacific Asia?"
     Frankel, Jeffrey and Shang—Jin Wei, 1992, "Trade Bloc and
Currency Bloc."
     Glaeser, Edward, Hedi Kallal, Jose Scheinkman and Andrei
Shleifer, 1992, "Growth in Cities," Journal of Political Economy,

Vol.100, No.6., p1126—1152.
     Kamm, John, 1989, "Reforming Foreign Trade," in One Step Ahead
in China: Guanctdong Under Reform, by Ezra F. Vogel, Harvard
University Press.
     Krugman, Paul and Maurice Obstfeld, 1991, International
Economics: Theory and Policy. Second Edition, Harper Collins.

     Kueh, Y.Y., 1992, "Foreign Investment and Economic Change in
China," China quarterly, 131:637—690. September.
     tardy, Nicholas, 1992, Foreign Trade and Economic Reform in

china. 1978—1990, Cambridge University Press.
     Lucas, Robert., Jr., 1988, "On the Mechanics of Economic
Development," Journal of Monetary Economics, 22: 3—42, July.
     Quah, Danny and James E. Rauch, 1990, "Openness and the Rate
of Economic Growth," MIT and UCSD.
     Rivera—Batiz and Paul Roner, 1991, "Economic Integration and

Endogenous Growth," quarterly Journal of Economics, CVI, 531—555.

     Romer, Paul, 1986, "Increasing Returns and Long—Run Growth,"
Journal of Political Economy. 94:1002—1037.
                                  36

       Romer, Paul, 1990, "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal
of political Economy. 98:S71—S102.

       Sung, Yun—Wing, 1991, The China-Hong Kong Connection: The Key
to China's Open—Door Policy, Cambridge University Press.
       Vogle, Ezra F., 1989, One Step Ahead in China: Guangdog Under

Reform, Harvard University Press.
       Wang, Tao, 1992, "Market and Reform: The Growth of Chinese
Urban Industries." May.

       Wang, Fang—Yi and Ashoka Mody, 1993, "Industrial Growth in
Coastal China: Economic Ref onus ... and What Else?" Unpublished.

The World Bank. April.

       Wei, Shang—Jin and Xiong Bai Fan, 1993, "Hard Currency versus
Positive Externality: A Statistical X—Ray of Foreign Capital in
China," unpublished. June.
       World Bank, 1992, World Development Report 1992: Development
and the Environment. Oxford University Press.

       Young, Alwyn, 1991, "Learning by doing and the Dynamic Effects
of International Trade," quarterly Journal of Economics, CVI, 369—

405.

       Zhang, Bin, 1993, "Determinants of FDI in China," Unpublished.
University of California, Santa Cruz. May 31.

       Zou, Gang, 1993, "Modelling the Enterprise Behavior under the
Two-Tier Plan/Market System in the PRC," World Bank.
                                           37

Appendix C Definition of variables in the regressions
     All data refer to cities and their surrounding counties in

their jurisdiction.


     I —     gross value of industrial output
     POPNA —          non—agricultural   population
     EXP — purchase for exports in RNB yuan
     FDI —           Foreign direct investment in US dollar
     IV -        total   fixed capital investment by all ownership types
     RYIND —          share of individual/private firms in total industrial
output
     RYTVE — share of township or village owned firms in total

industrial output
     RYFOR —            share of foreign owned/managed finns in total
industrial output
             —       share of private, TVEs and foreign owned/managed finns
in total city industrial output

     RMKT        -    share of free market in total retail sales
     SCNT -           scientific   and technical personnel
     MHSCNT —           middle or higher levels of scientific and technical
personnel
     SEZ — dummy for four special economic zones

     COAST — dummy for fourteen coastal open cities.

     Rfl'I       -    dununy   for 72 "comprehensive reform experimenting
cities".
       Table it: Exports, Poreiqn Investment and Industrial Growth
                                                     (1988—1990)

                    (1)                  (2)               (3)           (4)         (5)    (6)

LYS8                -.0430              -.016             -.01500       -.007       -009     .006
                      .023               .011              .009          .013        .008    .011

GPop                 .598'               .604'             .617'         .271        .618    .274
                    .230                 .231              .258          .201        .233    .203

LExp8B              .0250
                    .015

RExpSO                                   .68500
                                         .422

CExp                                                       .0460
                                                           .027

LFDI88                                                                  .0130
                                                                        .008

RFDIS8                                                                              .289
                                                                                    .192

GFDI88                                                                                      .oosn
                                                                                            .005

lObs               347                  347               342           .142        341     124
SEE                .19                  .19               .19           .13         .18     .13
Adj.R2             .18                  .20               .21           .07         .19     .06


Notes

1) Below coefficient estimates are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

2) '. 0,   #0 denote significance at the 5%. 10% and 15% levels respectively.

3) All regressions bave    an   intercept which is not reported.
        Table ib: Exports, Poreign Investment and Industrial Growth
                                                 (1988—1990)


                   (1)               (2)               (3)


LY8S              -.001             -.003
                   .027              .025

GPop               .271              .262
                   .202              .197

LExpS8            -.006             -.028             -.028'
                   .021              .022              .010

GEip                                 .005              .004
                                     .020              .021


LFDI8S             .014#             .029              .031
                   .008              .007              .008

GFDISS                               .021              .021
                                     .006              .007



#Obs              142               123               123
SEE               .13               .12               .12
Adj.R2            .07               .15               .09


Notes

1) Below coefficient estimates are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

2) ', N and NW denote significance at the 5%, 10% and 15% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
                Table 2: Non—State Sector and Industrial Growth
                                                (1988—1990)

                  (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)         (5)      (6)

LY8S              -.004             .020             -.004             -.008        -.019    -.008
                  .006              .025              .010              .006         .025     .010

OPop              .676              .255              .296              ,676        .223      .248
                  .251              .342              .347              .252        .34.4     347

LEp88                              -.028                                            - .027
                                    .018                                            .018

GExp                                                 -.004                                    .002
                                                      .023                                    .018


LFDIS8                              .010                                            .003
                                    .007                                            .007

GFDIS8                                                .005                                   .005
                                                      .005                                   .005

RYNS88            .194'             .274              .227'
                  .070              .075              .075


RYJND88                                                                -.824'       -.417'   -.426'
                                                                        339         .204     .151

RYTVE88                                                                 .219'       .249'     .171'
                                                                        .080        .070      .066

RYFOR88                                                                 .550*       .731'    .672'
                                                                        .101        .138      .106



#Obs             330                138              120                330          138      120
SEE               .16               .12              .12                .16         .12      .11

Adj.R2            .25               .13              .12                .26         .19      .2!


Notes

1) Below coefficient estimates are hetaroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

2) •, N and NH denote significance at the 5%. 10% and 15% levels respectively.
3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
            Table 3: Reform Experiments and Industrial Growth
                                                 (1988—90)
                  (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)         (5)     (6)

LY88             -.017             -.003              .001            -.017        -.006   .010
                   .011             .029              .028             .014        .027    .025

                  .614              .275              .265             .601        .273     .264
OPop
                  .232              .199              .194             .232        .200     .196

                                   -.005            -.026                          -.007   -.030
LExp88
                                     .022            .024                          .021     .022

GExp                                                  .006
                                                      .021

LF0188                              .014#             .028                         .014#    .029
                                    .007              .008                         .007     .007


RPDI8S                                                                             .289
                                                                                   .192

0FD188                                                .020                                  .021
                                                      .006                                  .006

RMKTB8           -.160#            -.046             -.027
                  .094              .086              .086



RPM                                                                    .005        -.035   -.023
                                                                       .026         .022    .022



#Ohs             346                 142               123              347         142      123
SEE              .19                 .13               .12              .19         .13      .12
Adj.R2           .18                 .06               .14              .17         .07      .15



Notes

1) Below cceflicienc estimates are hetemskedasticiiy-consistent standard errors.

2) , # and IN denote significance at the 5%, 10% and 15% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
                   Table 4: coastal Areas and Industrial Growth
                                                   (1988—90)


                   (I)               (2)               (3)               (4)         (5)    (6)

 LYS8             -.016              .001              .003             -.020#      -.000    .004
                   .011              .026              .025              .012        .027    .025

GPop               .599              .268              .256              .613        .282    .268
                   .233              .202              .197              .229        .194    .190

LExp8S                              -.006             -.022                          .008   -.029
                                     .021              .023                          .021    .021

GExp                                                   .009                                 .004
                                                       .018                                 .019

LFD188                               .012#             .023*                        .013*   .028
                                     .007              .008                         .008    .008

GFDI88                                                 .018                                 .020
                                                       .006                                 .006

SEZ                .044              .028              .088
                   .111              .010             .068


COAST                                                                    .092#      .029    .016
                                                                         .056       .040    .040


RObs               347                142              123               347        142     123
SEE                .19                .13              .12               .19        .12     .12
Adj.R2             .17                .06              .16               .18        .14     .14


Notes

I) Below coefficient estimates are beteroskedasticity-consislent standard errors.
2) ¶ N and NH denote significance at the 5%, 10% and 15% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an intercept which is nol reported.
                   Table 5: Human Capital and Industrial Growth
                                                   (1988—9D)

                   (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

LYBS              -.013             -.016             -.016             -.004
                   .023              .011              .011              .026

GPop               .603              .636              .600              .283
                   .234              .239              .227              .205

LSCNTSS           -.005
                   .021

RSCNT88                             -1.03
                                     .682

GSCNT                                                 .063#             .037
                                                      .035              .047

LExpS8                                                                  -.003
                                                                         .021

LFDI8S                                                                  .014,4'
                                                                        .008


#Obs             346                346               346                 142
SEE              .19                .19               .19                 .13
Adj.R2           .17                .18               .19                 .07


Notes

I) Below coefficient estimates are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

2) ¶ N and IN denote significance at the 5%, 10% and 15% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
                    Table 6a: Exports, Fonign hwcstmcnt and Indisti-isi Grov.lh
                                             (198040)


                  (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)         (5)

LYSO             -.242'            -.076#            -.047            -.147'       -.064#
                  .099              .039              .040             .064         .037

GPop              .549%             .548'             .625             .662'       .703'
                  .297              .271              .402             .329        .332

LExp8S            .155'
                  .070

RExpSO                             2.17!'
                                   1.032

GExp                                                  .128
                                                      .13!

LFDI9O                                                                .048'
                                                                      .022

RFDI9O                                                                             2.143'
                                                                                   .641



MObs               43               43                43                 38        38
SEE               .32              .32               .33                .32        .31
Adj.R2           .17               .17               .12                .20        .23



Notes

1) Below coefficient estimates sit heieroskedasticity-consistenl siandard enors.

2) ', I and MM denote significance at the 5%, 10% and 15% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
                    Table 61,: Exports, Foreign Inv&mad and Industrial Growth
                            •

                                                    (1980-90)


                          (1)               (2)

LYSO                      -.302            -.351
                           .137             .147

OPop                       .5044            .238
                           .305              .336

                                                    -
LExpSO                     .154             .217
                           .102              .105


GExp                                         .187
                                             .117

LFDI9O                     .023              .004
                           .028              .025


#Obs                       38                38
SEE                       .31               .31
Adj.R2                    .23               .25


Notes

1) Below coefficient estimates are hetewskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

2), # and ## denote significance at the 5%, 10% and 15% levels respectively.
3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
                             TaMe 7: Non-state Sector and Indiflial Grov4h
                                                      (l98O9

                   (I)                (2)               (3)               (4)         (5)      (6)

LYSO              -.131'             -.277'            -.128'            -.299'      -.203'    -.339*
                   .031               .124              .033              .138        .053      .120

GPop              -.049              -.073             -.066             -.141       -.310     -.353
                    .226              .202              .244              .228        .250      .237

LExp8O                                .107                                .137                  .114
                                      .081                                .091                  .074

GExp                                                    .027              .077
                                                        .086              .099

LFDI9O                                 (02                               -.004                 -.00!
                                      .021                                .022                  .024

RYNS9O            1.30'              1.04'             1.28               .962'
                  .321               .319              .331               .352

RYIND9O                                                                              -13.35#    1912
                                                                                       7.20     9.18
RYFVE90                                                                               1.36'     1.13'
                                                                                       .292     .272

RYFOR9O                                                                              2.07'     1.49'
                                                                                       .426     .480


#Obs              43                  38                43                38         43        38
SEE               .28                .29               .29               .29         .27       .27
Adj.R2            .36                .36               .34               35          .41       .43



Notes

I) Below coefficient estimaLes   are heteroskedasticicy-consistent standard enors.

2) • and N denote significance at the 5% and 10% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
                          Table 8: Reform Erpeimnsls and Indttsuial Gnnitb
                                                     (1fl90)
                  (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)       (5)      (6)

LY8O              -.071             -.408'            -.490'             -.05!      -.283'   -.330'
                   .048             .125               .135               .038       .130     .139

OPop              .752'             .457               .139               .707!!     .458     .185
                  .341              .2%                .326               .372       .354     .398

LExp8O                              .168#              2M'                           .128     .191!!
                                    .095               .095                          .105     .100

(JEip                                                  .2184'                                 .190
                                                       .123                                   .116

LFDI9O                              .044              .021                          .028     .009
                                    .03!              .028                          .027     .022

ItMKT9O          -.623              -.636            -.445
                  .597              .528              .577

RPM                                                                      -.089      -.079    -.084
                                                                          .117       .160    .151


#Obs              41                36                36                  43         38       38
SEE              .34                .31              .30                  .33       .32      .31
Adj.R2           .10                .27              .30                  .11       .22      .24


Notes

I) Below coefficient estimates are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

2) • antI N denote significance at the 5% and 10% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an mtercept which is not reported.
                              Tabk 9: Coastal Areas and Industrial Grov.Th
                                                     (1980-90)


                            (1)              (2)                 (3)


LY8O                       -.070k           -.3lP
                            .040             .143                .153

                            .641*            .511*                242
GPop
                            .427             .295                .320

                                             .160                .234
LExpBO
                                             .110                .113

                                                                 .195
GExp
                                                                 .121


LFDI9O                                        .026               .010
                                              .028               .023

COAST                       .178*            -.026            -.060
                            .107              .124               .112


#Obs                         43               38                  38
SEE                          .33             .32                 .31
                             .14             .21                 .23
Adjit2

Notc

1) Below coefficient estimates are heteroskedasticity-consLstenL standard errors.

2) •   and N denote significance at the 5% and 10% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
                             Table 10: Human Capital and Industrial Grm'ib
                                                     (I98O9O)


                  (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)         (5)      (6)

LYSO             -.079              -.104             -.115#            -.096        -.1111   -M90
                  .112              .041               .066              .122         .060     .127

GPoi,             l.37l#            .606               .124              .564         .157    .182
                  .812              .676              1.029              .611        1.030    .984

LSCNT8O          -.004
                  .191

RSCNT8O                             -9.45
                                     4.46

GSCNT                                                  .824              .499         .58o     589
                                                       .347              .207         .2.50   .261

LExp8O                                                                  -.023                 -.024
                                                                         .128                  .130

GExp                                                                                  .190    .190
                                                                                      285     .288

LFDI9O                                                                  -.050        -.054    -049
                                                                         .073         .075    .073


#Ot,s              17                15                17                14           14      14
SEE               .43               .38               .38               .38          .38      .41
Adj.R2            J6                .4!               .35               .35          .36      27


Notes

I) Below cc.cfltcienl estimates are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

2) * and N denote significance at the 5% and 10% levels respectively.

3) All regressions have an intercept which is not reported.
