                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          UNCOVERING SOME CAUSAL
                     RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN PRODUCTIViTY
                        GROWTH AND THE STRUCTURE OF
                         ECONOMIC FLUD1JATIONS: A
                             TENTATIVE SURVEY




                                      Philippe Aghion
                                      Gilles Saint-Paul




                                  Working Paper No. 4603




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December, 1993


This paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4603
                                                                              December 1993


                            UNCOVERING SOME CAUSAL
                       RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN PRODUCTIVITY
                            (JROWH AND THE STRUCfURE OF
                              ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS: A
                                  TENTATIVE SURVEY


                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper discusses recent theoretical and empirical work on the interactions between
growth and business cycles. One may distinguish two very different types of approaches to the
problem of the influence of macroeconomic fluctuations on long-run growth. In the first type
of approach, which relies on learning by doing mechanisms or aggregate demand externalities,
productivity growth and direct production activities are complements. An expansion therefore
has a positive long'run effect on total factor productivity, hi the second type of approach,
hereafter labeled "opportunity cost" or "learning-by-doing", productivity growth and production
activities are substitutes. The opportunity cost of some productivity improving activities falls in
a recession, which has a long-run positive impact on output This does not mean, however, that
recessions should on avenge last longer or be more frequent, since the expectation of future
recessions reduces today's incentives for productivity growth. We also briefly discuss some
empirical work which is mildly supportive of the opportunity cost approach, while showing that
it can be reconciled with the observed pro-cyclical behavior of measured total factor productivity.
We also describe some theoretical work on the effects of growth on business cycles.




Philippe Aghion                                                     Gilles Saint-Paul
Nuffield College                                                    ENS
Oxford OX! 1NF                                                      48 Boulevard Jordan
UNITED KINGDOM                                                      Paris 75014
                                                                    FRANCE
1.      Introduction

        Productivity growth. and the business cycle had long been recognized as being closely

interrelated. Yet, for several decades, the two phenomena have been investigated separately

by the economic literature: on the one hand, business cycle theorists would analyse detrended

data and then possibly introduce the trend as exogenous to the cycle; on the other haM,

growth theorists would focus on the existence and stability of a long-run deterministic growth

path.

        However, the emergence in the 1980's of the real business cycle literature,

emphasising productivity shocks as a main driving force behind cyclical fluctuations, called

into question the traditional division of macroeconomic theory between trend and cycles, and

suggested a return to the Schumpeterian view of growth and cycles as a unified phenomenon.

        This paper is an attempt to show why the endogenous growth approach, and

particularly the Schumpeterian models of (vertical) technological change, provides a natural

framework for a better theoretical and empirical understanding of the causal relationships

between trend and fluctuations.

        The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the parallel but separate

evolutions of growth and cycle theories prior to the emergence of the endogenous growth

literature. Section 3 presents a first attempt at generating endogenous productivity growth

in models of business cycles. Section 4 discusses the Schumpeterian idea that recessions may

favour the occurrence of (aggregate) productivity improvements on the basis of recent

theoretical and empirical contributions. Section 5 develops a Schumpeterian model of cyclical

growth that illustrates how the rate of long-run productivity growth depends upon the

structure of the business cycle (that is, upon the magnitude and frequency of economic

fluctuations), both when productivity growth is procyclical as in Section 3 or countercyclical
as argued in Section 4. Finally Section 6 concludes this (very preliminary and incomplete)

survey by mentioning some recent attempts at understanding the reverse causality from

productivity growth to economic fluctuations; one such attempt uses some recent extension

of the neo-Schumpeterian paradigm emphasising the complementarity between fundamental

and secondary innovations and its implication for the existence of Schumpeterian waves.



2.        A Few Historical Benchmarks

          The first consistent model of the trade cycle - the so-called accelerator-multiplier - was

developed as an extension of Keynes' fixed-price paradigm where the disequilibrium between

demand and supply on the goods market was to be resorbed through quantity adjustments,

namely through investments in new capacities. Assuming that current investment is equal to

the difference between the desired level of capital stock next period Kt + , and its current

level 1(1,' and that the desired level Kt.1 is proportional to the expected demand next

period,          one would get: 1       v.Yt+1 - lC     v(Yt+1 - YJ. This would detennine the

supply response of investment to an expected increase in demand, i.e. the so-called

accelerator effect.

          Conversely, a current increase in investment would induce a bigger increase in total
                                                                         '—I
demand 'next period' according to the multiplier effect:                          , where c is the

aggregate propensity to consume.

          Eliminating the k' between these two equations would lead to the well-known second-
order equation describing the oscillator of Samuelson. As Kaldor (1954) already noticed, the

oscillator model had no trend component in it. 'As a pure cyclical model, it had therefore



          Thus, it is implicitly assumed that investment is not instantaneous and requires a one
          period lag to be put in place.

                                                 2
little resemblance to the cyclical fluctuations in the real world, where successive booms

carried production to successively higher levels".

         The absence of growth component in the oscillator model might seem somehow

paradoxical for those who remember that the first balanced growth model by Domar (1945)

had also been formulated in terms of the multiplier/accelerator! The main point there was

to derive a necessary and sufficient condition under which an increase in capacity subject to

the accelerator mechanism would exactly match the increase in demand induced by the

multiplier mechanism.2 However, the existence of a sustainable growth path was left

unexplained. The same criticism also applies to more recent versions of the oscillator model

(Hicks, 1950; Kalecki, 1938 ...) that extended Samuelson's paradigm by superimposing a
linear trend on the original model without altering its basic properties. The trend itself was

left unexplained, but rather introduced from the outside either by assuming a linear

percentage growth in population or by introducing an exogenous source of technical progress.

         Goodwin (1967) is probably the first model of cyclical growth, where the occurrence

of economic fluctuations was modelled as a deterministic consequence of the growth process

and more specifically of the variations in income distribution (between wages and profits) this

process induces over time.3


     2
         At any point in time, the increase in production capacity AQ' and the increase in
         demand aQd must evolve according to:

                (1)    AQ' = '/     (accelerator)

                (2)    AQ4 = AT, (multiplier), where Al denotes the current variation in
                                                                    investment.

         Balanced growth thus requires AQ AC)4, i.e. Ai/ = g       =
         The business cycle results in Goodwin (1967) follows from the following predator-
         prey relationship between unemployment (i.e. wages) and profits: whenthe economy
         is in expansion, growth is high and so is investment, with the effect of decreasing

                                               3
       The pest-Keynesian models mentioned above were all nQfl-market clearing models,

where economic fluctuations resulted, either from capacity adjustments in the goods market

in accelerator-multiplier models, or from employment adjustments in the labour market in the

Goodwin model. More recent growth or business cycle models have gotten rid of non-market

clearing assumptions, yet without solving the difficulty of explaining the growth trend and

its current relationship with the business cycle. This is true of Solow's (1956) seminal

contribution land its various extensions prior to the endogenous growth literature4] where

again no long-run trend would obtain in the absence of population growth or of exogenous

technical progress. This is also true of business cycle models developed in a market clearing

context, either on the basis of unanticipated monetary shocks and informational rigidities (as

in Lucas (1972)), or resulting from strong non-linearities in intertemporal preferences (as in

Benhabib-Day (1983) and Grandmont (1985)), or arising from the combination between

temporary productivity shocks and adjustment lags or inter-sectoral inertia (as in the real

business cycle literature pioneered by Kydland-Prescott (1982) and Long-Plosser (1983):

none of these models were concerned with explaining the existence of a trend in (causal)
relation to the business cycle.

       However, the real business cycle approach came very close to uncovering important

causal relationships between productivity growth and economic fluctuations: being itself




       unemployment. (The labour market does not clear and the real wage is a decreasing
       function of the unemployment rate.) As unemployment decreases, real wage increases
       and the share of profits decreases accordingly. The economy thus enters a recession
       period where the growth in production capacities becomes less than the growth in
       labour supply. Unemployment then starts increasing again, thereby inducing a
       decrease in real wages. This in turn inverts the falling movement in profit share and
       thus anaounces a forthcoming acceleration of growth.

       Notable exceptions being Arrow (1962), Kaldor (1957), Shell (1973).
                                             4
directly inspired by the stochastic growth literature;' emphasising real productivity shocks

as the source of economic fluctuations in order to account for the procydical evolution of

consumption and employment; its         use of the Solow residual in order to measure the

variations in capital or labour utilisation along the business cycle: all this was somehow

predictive of (and was paving the way for) a forthcoming breakthrough. Such a breakthrough

indeed occurred when R. King and S. Rebelo (1986) and G. Stadler (1988) in parallel

generated an endogenous trend in real or monetary business cycles models.



3.     Introducine Endo2enous Technical Chan2e in Business Cycles Modek

       Existing business cycle models based on exogenous productivity or monetary shocks

were unsatisfactory in several respects: first, they could not account for the existence of

stochastic trends6 evidenced in empirical studies by Nelson-Plesser (1982) and Campbell-

Mankiw (1987); second (and relatedly), aggregate demand shocks could have no lasting

consequences on technology and growth; third, money had to remain neutral in the long-run,

with monetary shocks being completely dichotomized in the long run from real technological

shocks.     Endogenising the growth process through the introduction of human capital

investments as in King-Rebelo (1986) or of learning-by-doing as in Stadler (1988, 1990) did

remove the above restrictive or counterfactual features for quite natural reasons which we

shall now briefly review.

          The remaining part of this section summarizes Stadler's contribution, even though the

conclusions relative to the long-run growth effects of real productivity shocks are equally

attributable to King-Rebelo (1986).


          Starting with Brock and Mirman (1972).

          That is, if the fact that aggregate output has a greater-than-unit root.

                                                 S
          The main idea underlying Stadler (1990) can be summarized as follows: a positive

productivity shock [or a positive money supply shock with real temporary effectsl due to

noniinai contractual rigidities a Ia Fischer (1977)-Taylor (1980) or to informational rigidities

a Ia Lucas (1972) should induce a higher level of real economic activity in the short-run.

Then, either because of learning-by-doing a Ia Arrow (1962) or as a result of more intense

R&D investments,7 there wiU be a burst of technological growth. Real income will in

particular end up at a permanently higher level, even after individual expectations have fully

adjusted to the initial monetary shock.

          More formally, the individual output supply by any individual firm i1 at time t is

given by the following Cobb-Douglas technology:


(1)


where 14 is the amount of labour currently employed by firm i, F is a positive productivity

shock with both a temporary and a permanent component in it, and Z is the accumulated

aggregate knowledge in the economy. The evolution of this aggregate knowledge variable

reflects total learning by doing from past aggregate employment, according to the dynamic

equation:


(2)


In words, a greater level of aggregate labour input 11.1 and/or a higher productivity of labour



      '   Implicitly, R&D investments are more profitable during economic expansions and/or
          can then be more easily financed through retained earnings by otherwise cash-
          constrained research firms, as correctly pointed out by Stiglitz (1992).
          The economy comprises a large number of competitive firms all producing the same
          good as output.

                                                6
due to some efficient reorganization of production activities will both increase the rate of

accumulation of knowledge.

         Profit maximization subject to the technological constraint (I) defines a log-linear

labour demand schedule9:


(3)                    = a+b(p-w)+cf,.
This, together with the labour supply schedule, which is also assumed to be log-linear

[17
      = Ø +    Ø2(w1-p)) and depends     on the exoected equilibrium price as of time t,'°

determines the equilibrium employment level 4       = l = /7 and thus the following (log-linear)
aggregate supply function (after substituting for 4 in (1)):


(4)              y7 = a'     +   b'(p,—p,')     C'.q, ÷ d'.J,_1 +

where   i is the log of the accumulated shock to productivity up to time (t-l), and vj is the
log of the real productivity shock at date t.

        The model is then closed by postulating the following aggregate demand schedule,

corresponding to a quantity theory equation with unit velocity:

(5)              1',


where the money supply M1 follows a random walk with positive drift:


(6)              in, = m,1 +      p +

with m = logM and c being a zero-mean constant variance error term. The model is now



        Small letters refer to the logarithms of the corresponding capital letters.         All
        coefficients in the log-linear equations are taken to be positive.

      '° Individuals ignore the true market price p when entering into one-period fixed-
          nominal-wage contracts with firms at the beginning of period t. Thus they supply
         labour on the basis of the expected real wage w1Ip.

                                                7
completely specified: equation (5) implies that the price error (in log terms) is equal to the

unexpected monetary shock m-m = c, minus the unexpected component of aggregate

demand      y-y (which, by market clearing, is also equal to y-y = ?(-p + c'.m").            The

price-error term p,-p7 is then given by:

                                                            I
                                       pt—pt
                                                       l+b''
Overall, the equilibrium aggregate output y1 is simply obtained from equation (4) by

substituting for the price error term p-p:


                            a' +       b'
(7)                    =
                                                 —c'.rl,)   + c'.i, + d'j,1   e'.z.
                                   1   +b ,(e,

        The    sources     of non-stationarity in aggregate output are first the knowledge term ;

(which depends upon past employment levels) and second the accumulated shock to

productivity ?. This model thus immediately delivers a stochastic trend component to
aggregate output.

        A special case of the above model is when unanticipated shocks are purely monetaiy:

then, vj,   = 0 and aggregate output is simply given by:

(8)               y1         a' +                  +
                                       1   +b'
where ; depends upon past values of output and employment levels through the accumulation

of knowledge (or learning by doing) equation (2).

        This implies that an unanticipated increase in money supply today, ç > 0, by

increasing output and employment today, will also increase the level of knowledge
tomorrow. This in turn will induce a further increase in aggregate output and employment




        L and ; are fully expected at the beginning of date t.
                                                        8
tomorrow, thereby increasing ;4.I, and so on. Output will thus grow at an increasin? rate

over time and thus will exhibit greater-than-unit roots in its stochastic evolution.

Furthermore, this model generates a strong non-neutrality result: namely, the real impact on

aggregate output of a temporary monetary shock increases over lime as a result of learning

by doing.

       Another special case is when shocks are purely technological (i.e. c = 0). Again,

as a result of learning-by-doing, a (transitory) productivity shock will have durable (and even

increasing over time) effects on aggregate output.

       Let us conclude this section by mentioning what we believe are limitations of this

otherwise successful attempt at explaining the trend in a business-cycle model. First, the

model as it stands generates explosive        Lrowth'2 and thus does not allow for a



    12 Or explosive downturns if the initial shock on real output is negative! Note that this
       explosive growth result could have been avoided, had the elasticity of current
       knowledge (zJ with respect to past knowledge (zn) been assumed to be less than I.
       To see this, it suffices to consider the following simplified version of Stadler's pure
       monetary model (obtained by setting: y = A, a' = 0, 9 = b'/l+b' and i1 =
         = 9.; in the above equations (2) and (8)):

       (2)'           Z = ,-i + Ay1.1
       (8)'           y1 =

       Combining (2)' and (8)' yields the following reduced form equation:

               (I - (1+A)L)y1 =              (where L.y4 =

       As a solution to this equation when        0 and c = o(r t), aggregate output y,
       follows necessarily an explosive growth path since I + A > 1! Now, let us modify
       equation (2)' by assuming an elasticity of current knowledge w.r.t. past knowledge
       strictly less than 1, equal to 1-5:

        (2)               = (l-5) + Ay11.
        The reduced form equation now becomes:


                                               9
paraxnetrisation of the long-run trend as a function of business cycles chancteristics. Second,

productivity growth is assumed to be procyclical. As we have already discussed above, such

an assumption can be justified as resulting from learning-by-doing or demand spillovers, or

as a consequence of capital market imperfections which constrain R&D investments to
                                                                                         vary
procyclically with current earnings.'3 Furthermore, it is consistent with the observed pro-

cyclical behaviour of the Solow residual. On the other hand, a more recent theoretical and

empirical literature has emphasized several countercyclical factors in the dynamics of

productivity-growth over the business-cycle.       [A pro-cyclical Solow Residual is not
inconsistent with that view either, since the observed procyclicality may be equally due to

supply shocks or mismeasurement, as pointed out by Hall (1990).] This countercyclical

approach is being surveyed in the following section.



4.     On the Virtue of Bad limes

       The Schumpeterian view of business cycles (and particularly recessions) as providing

a cleansing mechanism for reducing (or eliminating) organizational inefficiencies andresource

misallocations, has been recently revived by several authors, including Hall (1991), Gali-

Hammour (1991), Caballeyo-Hammour (1993), Dellas (1993), and Aghion-St. Paul (1991).

       This view was summarized by Schumpeter himself in the following terms'4:




              (I - (l-6+A)L)y1 = (I - (l-6)L)e.
      One can now see that whenever 6 c A, growth remains explosive; for 6 >
                                                                                 A,
      growth tapers off; and for 6 = A, growth becomes asymptotically balanced at a
      positive (endogenous) rate.

      See Stiglitz (1992) for a technical change model with credit-rationing.

      This quote is drawn from Stiglitz (1992).

                                            10
               '[Recessions] are but temporary. They are the meaàs to
               reconstruct each time the economic system on a more efficient
               plan.'

One can indeed think of several reasons why recessions could have positive effects on

productivity: There is first the 'cleaning-up" or 'lame duck' effect emphasized by

Schumpeter and recently formalized by Cabailero-Hammour (1993), whereby less productive

firms are eliminated during recessions and avenge productivity increases accordingly. This

effect, however, may be offset by the fact that the rate of entry of new (efficient) firms is

also lower during recessions, which in turn limits the extent of the phasing out of old

(inefficient) firms. In the limit case where the entry cost is independent of the entry flow,

fluctuations are entirely accommodated through entry and job destruction over time: it does

not react to the business cycle. This is what Caballero-Hammour call the insulation effect.'5

On the other hand, if the entry cost increases with the size of the entry flow, for example due


       More formally, let A(t0) denote the constant flow of output generated by a firm
       created at date to. Let a(t) be the maximum age of firms at date t. Assuming that
       each firm employs only one worker and that labour is the numeraire, the profit flow
       of a firm of age a at date t is given by:
                      r(a,t) = P(t).A(t-a) - I,
       where P(t) is the current price of output.

              Therefore the obsolescence age â(t) is defined by:
       (1)           r(A(t),t) = P(t).A(t—ã(t)) I = 0.
                                                   —


       Now suppose that A(t) = A(0).eTt. The free-entry condition at time t can then be
       expressed as:

                    cQIO,z)) =
                                 f"n(a,t+a)e-th
       (2)

                           frt(I)   f"A(3'-a)r.da,
                                     0

       r being the interest rate and a' being the lifetime of a firm entering at date t. When
       c'(f(O,t)) = 0, i.e. c(f(0,t)) C, equation (2) defines a' as a constant: i.e. the
       obsolescence rate of firms is independent of demand conditions (fluctuations). These
       must thus entirely be absorbed by the entry rate f(O,t), in contrast to the case where
       c'(f(O,t)) >> 0.      0
                                              11
to negative con2estion externalities between the entering firms at a given point in time, the

entry process will tend to be smoothed out over time: namely, firms will avoid entering

during peak demand periods where the entry cost is likely to be higher. The insulation effect

will then be partly neutralised and job destructions (corresponding to the exit of old inefficient

firms) will tend to fluctuate more than job creations by new entering firms, in line with the

empirical evidence provided by Davis-ilaltiwanger (1991).

       A second reason why recessions might have a positive impact on (long-run]

productivity lies in the following 'opportunity cost or intertemporal substitution argument:

Productivity-improving activities such as reorganizations or training often take place at the

expense of directly productive activities (manufacturing). Since the return to the latter is

lower in recessions due to lower demand for the manufactured good, the opportunity cost in

terms of foregone profits of "reorganization' activities will be lower in recessions than in

expansions.

       This idea has first been formalized by Hall (1991) who constructs a model where a

constant labour force is allocated between production and the creation of organizational

capital [in contrast to Real Business Cycles models where the alternative activities are

production and leisure]. As a result of the opportunity cost argument developed above, more

accumulation of 'organizational capital' goes on during recessions: 'Measured outputmay

be low during (recession) periods, but the time spent reorganizing pays off in its contribution

to future productivity'.

       Note that the 'opportunity cost' approach applies primarily to investments which yield

benefits over a long period of time (such as training, reorganization or machine




                                              12
replacemenO6). These are more likely to be countercyclical than say advertising investments

which yield higher profits over a shorter period of time, namely during a current expansion

phase. Cash-intensive investments such as R&D are also more likely to be procyclical (due

to credit-constraints of the kind emphasized by Stiglitz (1992)) than reorganization or training

activities based to a larger extent on a redistribution of existing labour resources.

          The "opportunity cost" approach appears to be supported by recent empirical work,

primarily Bean (1990), Gali-Hammour (1991) and St. Paul (1992). All three find evidence

of a tong-run negative effect of a positive demand shock on productivity,1' thereby
emphasizing reallocation effects as more important than the procydical learning-by-doing (or

demand spillover) effect described in the previous section. Bean (1990) goes on arguing that

the opportunity cost approach can explain the procyclical behaviour of labour productivity:

if firms allocate a larger   share   of their labour force to "reorganization" activities during

recessions, then the actual input to productive activities go down by more than the observed

labour input, hence accounting for the measured decrease in total factor productivity during




     16
          See  Cooper-Haltiwanger (1993), who construct a dynamic model where retooling
          activities involve non-convex costs and therefore tend to be concentrated during
          economic slowdowns or during periods of low productivity. Evidence of such
          "opportunity cost" behaviour is provided by interwar and post-war data on the US
          automobile industry, which show that machine replacements are concentrated during
          the summer months and sometimes extended to the adjacent months if the economy
          goes through a downturn.
          Regressing productivity growth (measured by the Solow residual) on the business
          cycle (measured by the employment rate or the rate of capacity utilization), using US
          data over the sample period 1890-1987, Gali-Hammour (1991) find that a positive
          aggregate demand shock increases employment temporarily (by more than 2%) bnl
          lowers oroductivity Rrowth (by more than 1.4%) in the tong run. Also, Saint-Paul
          (1991) finds a positive cross-country correlation in OECD countries between total
          factor productivity growth and unemployment over the 1974-90 period.

                                                 13
recessions!'8 Further evidence of an opportunity cost effect is provided by St. Paul
                                                                                       (1992)
who shows (using the same variant of Blanchard-Quah's VAR estimation method as (3aJj-

Hammour) that the effect of demand fluctuations on productivity growth is stronger when

demand fluctuations are more tnnsitory.t9

       A third reason for why recessions should have a positive impact on productivity is the

following disciplinary effect: recessions increase the likelihood of bankruptcy for firms that

do not undertake the necessary reorganization investments. Aghion and St. Paul (1991) get

this type of effect in the context of an 'opportunity cost' model of
                                                                         cyclical growth by
introducing fixed costs of production.2° Increases in firms' indebtedness should also

reinforce the disciplinary effect of recessions, as argued in Nickell-Wadhwani-waJl (1992).

       Finally, the following kind of 'externality' effect pointed out by DeIlas(1993) may

also reinforce the countercyclical impact of recessions on avenge productivity:       'If the
difference in expected performance (between good and bad firmsor workers) ... widens more




      This provides one reason why the opportunity cost approach is not inconsistent with
      the observed 'pro-cyclicality' of the Solow residual, the other being that some of the
      productivity-improving activities (like reorganization) may not be measured in the
      national accounts, a point emphasized by Bean (1990). A recent contribution by
      I3urnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1993) analyses labour hoarding along the business
      cycle and concludes that it is a significant source of pro-cyclicality of the Solow
      residual. It is fair to say that when these two sources of pro-cyclicaliçy are removed,
      there is no evidence left of a pro-cyclical Solow residual. Indeed, under the
      identifying assumptions made in Gali-Hammour and Saint-Paul, the evidence points
      to a counter-cyclical residual, in.
      St. Paul (1992) also finds Jjjj evidence of any pro- or counter-cyclical behaviour of
      R&D. The reason might be the cash-intensive nature of R&D which should
                                                                                    partly
      offset the opportunity cost effect. Or it may just be due to the poor quality of
      aggregate R&D data. Finally, the response of productivity growth to demand
      fluctuations explains a non-negligible (10-20%) share of the variance of the Solow
      residual.

   20 The basic
                  framework developed in Aghion-St. Paul (1991) is outlined in the next
      section.

                                            14
than proportionally with the degree of adversity, then adverse conditions can help improve

the selection process by reducing the probability of an occupational mistake."2' A potential

problem with this story is that the reverse effect should also obtain during expansions so that

an increase in the frequency or magnitude of demand fluctuations might have no effect on the

avenge rate of productivity growth. This problem can however be mitigated by assuming

that the difference in relative performance between good and bad workers (or firms) is a flQ&

linear function of the activity level: namely, the relative performance of good workers is

disproportionately high during recessions. This convexity assumption plays a similar role to

Caballero-Hammour's assumption that the unit cost of entry increases during expansion

periods together with the total number of entering firms.

           Our discussion so far has emphasized the (potentially) positive effects of recessions

on the average lyj of productivity.

           The next step is to incorporate these effects into a dynamic framework where th

impact of demand fluctuations on the average rate of oroductivitv rowth could be

systematically analyzed. A first attempt in this direction is presented in the next section.



5.         Modelling the Effects on Productivity Growth of
           the Structure of the Business Cycle

(a)        The basic set-up

           Consider an economy which produces a variety of goods indexed by i, the demand for

good i at time t       (O,) being given by:



      21
           Such improvements in the selection of good firms during recessions are empirically
           supported by Della (1993) on the basis of a study of business closures in the US
           between 1947 and 1983, suggesting that business closures are a convex function of the
           degree of adversity and are therefore countercyelical.

                                                 15
(1)                   = • £!,
                         P1   Pt
where YL is an aggregate demand index,      is the price of good i, and p is an aggregate price

index defined by the usual formula:

                         N,

(2)              p, =
( > 1 and N, denotes the number of varieties produced at time t).

       Each good i is assumed to be supplied by a monopolist whose production (or

employment) capacity is fixed. At any point in time t each firm i is characteriied by a

productivity (or 'technological") parameter;. Its total gross product is thEn equal to e'.
           'ft
Let v = -j denote the speed of productivity improvement: it is assumed to be a choice

variable of firm i, who will constantly trade-off the cost of a higher speed of whno1ogi*

progress (in terms of foregone current profits) against future gains in NPV due to a higher

productivity parameter x in the future. We consider two alternative assumptions regarding

the cost of productivity improving activities:


ASSUMPTION A: In order to grow at rate v1, the firm must sacrifice a fraction k(vh) of

its production. We assume k' = 0, k' > 0, k'(O) = 0.


ASSUMPTION B: In order to grow at rate vk the firm must buy a quantity h(vh) of

aggregate output. We assume h' = 0, h" > 0, h'(O) = 0, h'(+) = +a'.


       Assumption A describes a world (world A) a Ia Hall (1991) where productivity

improvements have disruptive effects on production. This may happen if at the time when

new technologies are implemented, the firm's managers and skilled workers must be trained

in order to learn the new technology, and if at the same time the firm cannot find other


                                             16
workers to perform their current production tasks.

         By contrast, assumption B describes a world a Ia Stiglitz (1992) where productivity

growth can be Thought" on the market (e.g. in the form of R&D services) without interfering

with current production tasks.12

          In both worlds, the j output of firm i is given by:

(3)                    =



where 4, is equal to 1-k(vJ in world A and to I in world B. The market equilibrium
price p which matches the supply of good i defined by (3) with the demand for good i

defined by (I) is then simply given by:


(4)                         yUTI •p 119


          We shall be interested in symmetric equilibria where x1 = ; and v1 = v, for all firms

I c [O,NJ. In such equilibria the equilibrium price p will be the same for all firms and equal

to:



(4)'              p = y,.e"IN,.4,.
The corresponding flows of current profits will then be:

(Sa)                    =
                            PrZi:   =       in world A

                 and

(Sb)                    = PZ - h(v,) =         XL    - h(v,) in world B.




       22 An alternative interpretation of assumptions A and B is in terms of labour adjustment
          costs. In world A, hiring and firing workers is very costly so that it is desirable for
          the firm to stick to its current labour force, be it employed in directly productive or
          in productivity improving activities. In world B, hiring and firing costs are very low
          so that the firm can hire extra workers to perform productivity-improving activities.

                                                '7
          Our description of the basic set-up will now be complete once we can determine the

equilibrium speed of productivity growth v1 and the equilibrium number of varieties N, at any

time t.

          First, the equilibrium number of firms N is determined by entry and exit conditions.

We assume a fixed cost of entry equal to C. Thus, whenever the expected NPV or market

value of an entering firm, V1, is greater than C, the number of firms N1 increases up to the

point where V is exactly equal to C." Concerning exit, we assume that any incumbent
firm that exits the market can recoup a liquidation value equal to OC in symmetric

equilibrium,24 with 0 1. Then, an incipient drop in the market value Vt below OC

triggers exit until V, increases up to the exit value OC.                  If 0 < 1, we have
          =   0 whenever V1 [OC,C].

          Finally, the optimal speed of productivity improvement v1 is determined as follows:

Let V1(x1J denote the market value at time t of firm i where current productivity level is xk.

If r denotes the interest rate at which firms can freely borrow and lend, the market value V,

satisfies the following Bellman equation:


(6)                V,(x) = max         . cit + (1   —r t)E1V,1(x + vth)}
                                I,



where E, denotes the expectation operator as of time t. The firm's optimal policy v1 is then

simply the argmax of the RHS of (6), and it satisfies the first-order condition:



      " Like the profits flows that it capitalizes, the net present value V1 is also decreasing in
         the number of goods N1.


      24 More generally, we assume that the liquidation value is equal to UCet'", where
         $ is chosen in such a way that an increase in productivity x has the same marginal
         impact on the continuation value and in the exit value. Proceeding otherwise
         introduces an exit effect which is analyzed in Aghion-St. Paul (1993).

                                                    18
                     ältk
(7)                             E,.


where            = —pfr.e .k'(v)      in world A,

                =                     in world B.



          The basic set-up is now fully specified; the next step is to introduce demand

fluctuations and then analyze their impact on average productivity growth.


(b)       IntroductinE economic fluctuations

          We formalize economic fluctuations as a two-state stationary Markov process where

aggregate demand y1 is alternatively high equal to y (the subscript E refering to an

 expansions) or low equal to YR (the subscript R refering to a wrecessionu). Transitions from

one state to another follow a Poisson process whereby with flow probability y the economy

drops from E to R and the reverse transition occurs with flow probability c.

        We are looking for a stochastic steady-state where all variables (except x and p) are

constant in each state. Let v, r, V with j c (E,R} be the values taken by v, w1, V1 in state

j. The Bellman equation (6) in such a stochastic steady-state boils down to the following

system:

                    VR(x)
                            = wax       + (lrdt)[VR(x+v&)(1_edr)    +

                    V,jx) = max (ndz      (l—r&)[VE(x+vdz)(l—y&) + V(x+vth)ydr}


The equilibrium speeds of productivity growth yR and VE (respectively in recession and in

expansion) are simply the argmax corresponding to the above two equations, and thus satisfy

both (8) and the first-order condition (7). Letting dt — 0 in (8); then using the first-order
                                                      av      " finally using the fact that:
condition (7) after having substituted for



                   iv     =       —
                                  yl d        inworldA
               and

                          =
                                   -h(v)           d,.-h(v) inworldS,
we obtain the following simple system of equations which fully determine the rate of

productivity growth vj in each state J:

         1)    In world A:


                                                  (r+e)d, +
                                          V
 ft
(n,                                                r(r+€+y)
                              I          (ri-y)dR +edif
                                       - _________
                        A .k(v)/1 k(v)
                                   —          —
                              P     P
                                                   r(r+€4-y)

          d=
where
              Nf        measures individual firms' demand level in state j.

        The LHS of (9a) are the opportunity costs of reallocating workers from directly

productive to productivity improving activities respectively in statesj              E and R. These are

proportional to d, the current state of demand: therefore, the higher current demand, the

larger the foregone profits from shifting labour force into productivity improving activities.

The RI-IS of (9a) are the present discounted values of the gain flows from such reallocation

in states F and R respectively. Because these gains are reaped over the whole future

including both expansion                recession periods, it is not surprising that the RI-iS of (9a)


                                   av
      " The derivation of                itself uses the Bellman equation (6) reexpressed as (8). We

        have, from (6):                              av a                           av         where
                                                           =_L.dt+(1_rcfr)E
               =
                   (1 — l/r)pz, = (1 — l/i)it0 from (3) and (4).
                                                      20
appear as a weighted avenge of dE and     dR.

       Now suppose that individual firms' demand is higher in expansion than in recession:

that is, dE > dft. (This turns out to be the case if 0 C 1.) Then the above system (9a)

implies that productivity 2rOwth is bi2her in recession than in exDansipn. he. V. > v, in

accordance with I-Tall (1991).27 The intuition for this result relies entirely on the

opportunity cost argument developed in the previous section: In world A, the opportunity

cost of productivity improvement is given by the marginal current foregone revenue. It is

therefore higher in expansions than in recessions. On the other hand, the gain from this

action is also higher in expansions than in recessions, but it is spread over the whole future

which includes both expansion and recession phases. The gain is therefore less cyclical than

the cost. As a result the optimal rate of productivity growth v1 is counter-cyclical.

       2)      In world B:




       Assuming that recessions are sharp enough to induce exit, we have: VE = C and V1
       = OC. Substituting for these values in Bellman equations (8) and letting dt — 0, we
       get:
                   = dE = (r + y(l-O))C

        and    lrR = d1 = (it + e(0-lflC.
        So that indeed dE > d1 whenever B C 1.               0
    27 Indeed, (9a) can be rewritten:
                                       (r+e)    +
                                                     ydddR
                 k'(VE)f(1-k(vz)) =
        and                              r(r+e.y)
                                       (r-+y) + SE/dR
                 k'(VR)/(1 —k(vR)) =                             (2)
                                         r(r.e .-y)
        Given that the LHS are identical and increasing in v, and that the R}TS of(1) is larger
        than that of (2), it is clear that yE C v. Q.E.D.
                                                    n4.
                                —I (r+e)dE+yd,
''9b''                                 r(r+e+y)
                   iz'(v)
                       R
                            =   —i   (r÷y)dR÷ed,
                                       r(r+e+y)

One can then show that when the cost function h(v) is sufficiently convex and 8 C 1,

productivity growth is procvclical, i.e. v > v?S The economic intuition here works as

follows: in world B, the marginal cost of productivity-improving activities only depends on

v and is otherwise unaffected by the business-cycle. On the other hand, when evaluating the

present discounted gains from such activities, firms will put more weight on future exDansion

states if currently in expansion than if currently in recession. The result then follows from

the fact that whenever entry costs are not fully recouped upon exit (8 < I) firms' revenues

from a productivity improvement are larger in expansion than in recession.



c)       Effects of economic fluctuations on long-run growth

         It is now very easy to compute the avenge growth rate of the economy. Note that

the economy grows at rate yE in expansions and VR in recessions, and that in stochastic

steady-state, it spends a fraction efy+e of time in expansion and the complementary fraction



     25 Again assuming that recessions are sufficiently sharp to induce exit, so that E = C
         and V = OC, we have in world B:

                   = (r + y(1-8))C + h(vE)

         and d = (rO + c(8-I))C + h(vR).

         Plugging these expressions back into (9b) establishes our claim provided 8 C I and
         the function g defined by:

                g(v) = h'(v) - (n-l)h(v)/(r+e+y)
         is increasing in v. This in turn is automatically true when h(v) is sufficiently
         convex.

                                              22
in recession. Thus the avenge growth i-ate g is simply given by:

                            Y
(10)               8' =
One can now study, in worlds A and B, how the average growth rate g is affected by

variations in the magnitude       dE/dR29   and the frequency (measured by y amdlor c) of

economic fluctuations.

          Here, we shall only briefly deal with the growth effects of variations in the freouency

of fluctuations.3° Three growth effects of a variation in y and/or c can actually be sorted

out:


          (a)    A cQmjiljQfl effect apparent from equation (10): if the frequency of
recessions y increases (or that of expansions c decreases), the economy will spend more time

on average in recession. As a result growth g will tend to increase in world A where VR >

VE, and    to decrease in world B where VE > v,.

          (b)    A return effect, which comes out of equation (9a) or (9b): given that we

typically have dE > 4,       an   increase in the frequency of recessions y tends to lower the

avenge return to productivity-improving activities, thereby decreasing both rates VE and VR.

(Similarly if c decreases.)

          (c)    A cost of canital effect, which comes from the terms (r+y(l-O))C and

(rO+c(O-l))C in the expressions of 4 and dR. An increase in y increases dE and therefore


          I.e. variations in 0 when exit occurs in recession or in YE'YR if no exit occurs in
          recession.

       ° If exit occurs in recessions the amplitude of firm level fluctuations is insulated from
           that of aggregate fluctuations. A change in the amplitude of the business cycle is
           therefore fully met through an equivalent change in NE/Na with all other variables,
           including VE and Va, unaffected. Therefore a change in the amplitude of the cycle as
           no effect on growth. This is why we focus on the frequency effects in the remainder
           of the paper. See Aghion-St. Paul (1993) for a more comprehensive analysis of the
           growth effects of the magnitude and frequency of economic fluctuations.

                                                23
tends to speed up productivity growth in both states, the intuition being as follows: because

entry costs are not fully recouped upon exit, firms make a capital loss whenever the economy

shifts from expansion to recession. Therefore, the higher y, the larger the present discounted

capital loss evaluated by a firm that decides to enter during an expansion phase. The larger

the current profit of such firm dE must then be for entry to take place at all.

       The cost of caoitai effect disappears when S is so small that no exit occurs in

recession. Then, we immediately get that in world B an increase in the frequency of

recessions will have a negative effect on average productivity growth. In world A one can

show that the composition effect dominates when the initial frequency of recessions is low

whereas the return effect dominates when the initial frequency is high: . > I) when to
           d                                                         dy
small and — < 0 when m large. [Converse effects obtain from an increase in the
           dy
frequency of expansions e.J

       In the opposite case where entry costs are nearly recouped upon exit (0 — 1), the

structure of the business cycle (8,€yy) turns out to have no first—order effect on long-run

growth in world A: that is, the above three effects tend to cancel each other out. However,

the same result as above [namely .4t > 0 iff y small] obtains in the range of second-order
                                   thy
effects. In world B, however, one can show that the cost-of-capital effect never outweighs

the composition and return effects, so that c and y always have the following (non-surprising)

                                  4
first-order effects on growth: — t 0 and — dg > 0.
                              dy           de
        Using OECD data for 22 countries between 1950 and 1988, St. Paul (1992) first

confirms the empirical conclusions obtained by Gali-Hammour (1991) that countercyclical

effects of the 'world A' type are likely to prevail. Second, by regressing the avenge growth

rate on indicators of the frequency of fluctuations, St. Paul shows that high frequency

components of fluctuations seem to have a negative effect on long-mn growth, while low


                                             24
frequency components tend to have a positive effect.3'

         These results su000rt the eeneral message that the structure of the business-cvcle.may

affect long-run growth. However, the specific predictions generated above [e.g. concerning

the growth effects of variations in the frequency of recessions and expansions] turned out to

depend on the relative magnitudes of y and e and on the extent to which exits would occur

in recessions. These theoretical predictions are still awaiting the construction of adequate

empirical tests.32



6.       From Growth to Business Cycles: the Schumpetei-ipn Waves ReyLsited

         Our focus so far has been on the growth effects of economic fluctuations. What about

the converse causality from growth to fluctuations and cycles? We do not know of any

empirical work addressing this latter relationship, however the recent neo-Schumpeterian

literature provides some theoretical benchmarks that could serve as a basis for future tests and

analysis.

         A first benchmark is provided by Aghion-Howitt (1992), whose creative destruction

model boils down to a first-difference negative relationship between current and future

research in perfect foresight equilibrium:




     '   See Table 1 in Appendix, where GYD is the rate long-run productivity growth, T(O,9)
         is an index of the transitory nature of demand shocks, SP4 (resp. SPI) is the
         proportion of the variance of demand shocks explained by frequency components
         whose period is between 2 and 4 years (respectively more than 16 years). The SF4
         coefficients are negative whereas the SF1 coefficients are positive.

     32 Hamilton (1989) has estimated a two-state Markov process for the American business
         cycle (see also Acemoglu and Scott (1992)). A promising direction for friture
         research would be to estimate such processes for a cross-section of countries and
         correlate their parameters with long-run productivity growth. This would allow for
         more direct tests of the above analytical results.

                                              25
(1)                   =   t(,,1), ii'<O
where n, is the amount of labour devoted to R&D after the t innovation has occurred. In

words, the more research is expected to occur following the next innovation the shorter the

likely duration of the monopoly power to be enjoyed by the next innovator and hence the

smaller the payoff to current research." This difference equation can be shown in many

cases to have periodic solutions of order two in addition to the steady-state (or "balanced

growth') solution A =     *()- In these periodic solutions, the amount of labour devoted to
research oscillates regularly between a high arid a low level, thereby generating a cyclical

rowth pattern.

          Secondly, whether in steady-state or on a cyclical path, the endogenous growth

process remains stochastic, reflecting the uncertainty of the innovation process?' In steady-

state the log of output can be shown to follow a random walk with drift, in accordance with

recent empirical studies emphasizing the random nature of the economic trend (e.g.

Campbell-Mankiw (1989)).

          A third, more recent, line of research has been to explore the existence of
heterogeneities in the innovation process and in particular the dichotomy between fundamental

innovations (or "breakthroughs') and secondary innovations (or 'improvements"). By
focusing on this dichotomy between breakthroughs and increments, Jovanovic and Rob (1990)

in a partial equilibrium context and more recently Cheng and Dinopoulos (1992) in a general


      "   An additional reason for the negative dependency of current research it, upon future
          research n.1 is the fact that higher demand for future research labour will push future
          wages w,1 up, thereby decreasing the flow of profits to be appropriated by the next
          innovator.
      "   This uncertainty however disappears at the aggregate level if the economy consists of
          a continuum of independent sectors pursuing L1S! innovation processes. (See
          Grossman-Helpman (1991) and Aghion-Howitt (1992).)
                                                26
equilibrium framework, have been able to generate the so-called Schumpeterian waves where

each fundamental innovation is followed by a sequence of more and more incftmen

adaptations.

       Of particular interest as a macroeconomic model is the Cheng-Dinopoulos (1992)

paper where Schumpeterian waves obtain as a unique        steady-state] equilibrium solution,

along which the current flow of monopoly profits follows a cyclical evolution. "Because the

economy's wealth is equal to the discounted present value of aggregate monopoly profits,

fluctuations in profits generate procyclical fluctuations in wealth, the interest factor,

consumption, (...) and aggregate R&D investments." (Cheng-Dinopoulos.)

       The basic set-up can be summarized as follows: the economy comprises n industries,

each of them allowing for a countably infinite set of successive [product] Eenenticms. A

generation is a sequence of quality improvements of decreasing size & > â ... > &(, and

it is brought about by a "breakthrough"

       As in previous quality ladders models, all goods in a given industry are perfect

substitutes once we adjust for quality, and the profit flow of the leading monopoly finn is

increasing in the size of the quality improvement this firm introduces. Therefore, the lower

the ranking    of a   quality improvement (i.e. the higher   j   E {O,... ,K)), the lower the

corresponding discounted monopoly profits.

       The key assumption of the paper concerns the comparative costs of the two kinds of

innovative activities (fundamental and secondaries).

       Cheng and Dinopoulos suppose that all secondary innovations involve the same cost

h(R) expressed as the duration of the R&D race required to discover (or implement) the

innovation, R being the aggregate R&D investment in the race. Since the discounted

monopoly profits generated by successive secondary innovations decreases with their ranking


                                             27
j c {O,... ,K}, it becomes less and less profitable to devote R&D resources to secondary
improvements j     as   j increases.   Then, if h0(R) denote the cost, again in terms of the duration

of the corresponding patent race, of generating a fundamental breakthrough, the basic

assumption of the paper is simply that:


(2)                h0Q > h(R).

Thus,      in turn, may suffice to generate Schumpeterian waves: immediately following a
fundamental breakthrough that has already brought about a quality improvement of size &,

if & is sufficiently close to & then it is more profitable to invest R&D resources in the
 J=1       secondary improvement than in a new fundamental breakthrough because of (2) above.

However, forj sufficiently large (and hence â sufficiently close to 1), it becomes profitable

to race for a new fundamental breakthrough?5 This cyclical pattern of innovations in turn

generates deterministic fluctuations in real output around its growth trend?'

           Other research lines also deserve to be investigated: One line, suggested by Cooper-

Haltiwanger (1993), would be to investigate whether business cycles can result from the

existence of strategic complementarities or (demand) spillovers between multiple producers,

each of them following an 5* policy in the adoption of new equipments. (Such lumpy

adoption process in turn would follow from non-convexities in the retooling technology.)




           This is particularly true if the cost of implementing a new breakthrough decreases with
           the length of time, r, since the last breakthrough: hM = hC(R,r), with h,, < 0.
           See Cheng-Dinopoulos (1992).
      36
           An interesting outcome of this multi-industry model concerns the different patterns
           that can be followed by the cyclical wave; either jnjmindustiy where the fundamental-
           secondary sequence takes place within a single industry before being reproduced
           elsewhere; or jjjindusfry where breakthroughs diffuse across industries before the
           first improvements appear.
                                                    28
                                         References



Aghion,    P. and P. Howitt,       'A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction',
         Econornetrica, 60 (1992): 323-5 1.

Aghion, P. and 0. St. Paul, 'On the Virtue of Bad Times', unpublished, DELTA, Paris
         (1991).

Arrow,    K., 'The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing", Review of Economic
         Studies, 29 (1962): 155-73.

Bean,   C., Endogenous Growth and the Procyclical Behaviour of Productivity', Euroucan
        Economic Review, 34 (1990): 355-63.

Brock, W. and L. Mirman, 'Optimal Economic Growth and Uncertainty: The Discounted
      Case, Journal of Economic Theory, 4 (1972): 479-513.

Caballero, R. and M. Harnmour, The Cleansing Effect of Recessions', NEER Working
         Paper (1991), forthcoming in the American Economic Review.

Campbell, J. and 0. Mankiw, 'Are Output Fluctuations Transitory?', Ouarterly Journal of
     Economics (1927): 257-880.

Cheng,    L. and E. Dinopoulos, "A Schumpeterian Model of Economic Growth and
         Fluctuations', Mimeo (1992), University of Florida.

Cooper, R. and J. 1-laltiwanger, "The Aggregate Implications of Machine Replacement:
     Theory and Evidence', American Economic Review, No.3, 83 (1993): 360-380.

Dellas, H.,        'Recessions and Ability Discrimination", Mimeo (1993), University of
         Maryland.

Domar, E., "Expansion and Employment', American Economic Review, 37 (1947).

Fischer, S., 'Long-term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the Optimal Money Supply
       Rule', Journal of Political Economy, 85 (1977): 191-205.
Gali, J. and M. Hamrnour, "Long-mn Effects of Business Cycles", Mimeo (1991),
       University of Columbia, New York.

Goodwin, R-M., "A Growth Cycle", in Feinstein (eds.), CaDitalism and Economic Growth,
     Cambridge, (1967): 54-58.

Grandmont, J.M., "On Endogenous Competitive Business Cycles', Econometrica, 53-5
     (1985): 995-1045.



                                              29
Grossman, 0. and E. Helpman, "Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth", Review of
     Economic Studies, 58 (1991): 43-61.

Hall, R., "Recessions as Reorganizations", (1991), NBER Macro Annual.

Hicks, J. (1950)


Jovanovic, B. and R. Rob, "Long Waves and Short Waves: Growth through Intensive and
      Extensive Search", Econometrica, 58 (1990): 1391-1409.

Kaldor, N., "A Model of Economic Growth", Economic Journal, 67 (1957).

Kalecki

King, R. and S. Rebelo, "Business Cycles with Endogenous Growth", (1986), Mimeo.

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate fluctuations", Econometrica,
      50 (1982): 1345-1370.

Long, I. and C. Plosser, "Real Business Cycles", Journal of Political Economy, 91(1983):
       1345- 1370.

Lucas, R., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money", Journal of Economic Theory, 4
      (1972): 103-124.

Muet, P.A., "Croissance et Cycles", Economica (1993).

Nelson, C. and C. Plosser, "Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic Times Series:
      Some Evidence and Implications", Journal of MonetarY Economics, 100982): 139-
          162.

Nickel!, S., Wadhwani, S. and M. Wall, "Productivity Growth in U.K. Companies, 1975-
       1986", European Economic Review, 36 (1992): 1055-1085.

Saint-Paul, 0., "Productivity Growth and the Structure of the Business Cycle", fijjj
       Economic Review, (1993).

Shell, K., "Inventive Activity, Industrial Organization, and Economic Activity", in Models
       of Economic Growth, ed. by 1. Mirrlees and N. Stern (1973), London McMillan.

Solow, R., "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth", Ouarterlv Journal of
     Economics, 70 (1956): 65-94.

Stadler, 0., "Business Cycle Models with Endogenous Technology", American Economic
       Review, 80 (1990): 763-778.


                                           30
Stiglitz, J., "Endogenous Growth and Cycles, NBER Working Paper No.4286 (1993).

Taylor, J., "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts', Journat of Political Economy,
       88 (1980): 1-23.




                                          31
                            Apyendix



                            Tablet Growth Regression.            (1tJ (;)2.))
                 Dependent     variable:    GYD




Independent       I))               (2)           (3)      (4)        Is)         (6)
Vir lab les:

C                3.69               2.44          3.19     2.48      2.47       2.91
                (5. 06)            (3.56)     (5.00)      (3.35)    (5.07)     (4.   87)

YD6S            -0.05              -0.086     -0.05       -0.40     -0.49       -0.43
               (—0.   95)      (—1.71)       (—1.01)     (—6.32)   (—10.5)     —13.8)


SE               0.01              —0.00          0.00     0.05      0.05       0.05
                (0.88)         (-0.27)        (0.27)      (5.83)    (4.78)      16.03)


1(0.9)          -2.42                                     -0. 65

               (-2. 65)                                  (—0.52)


SPI                            .    1.95                             1.59
                                   (2.68)                           (1.71)


SF4                                           —4. 17                           -3.94
                                             (—3.09)                           (—1.85)




                 0.43               0.44          0.49     0.98      0.98       0.98
Weight           None               None          None     FOP       POP        POP




Notes:  20 observations   (Iceland and      Luxembourg excluded):
SE—Secondary Enrollment; Y065—Real 1965     income, 1987 DolLars;
C—Constant; GYD— Real GDp per capita growth. annual. 1965—87; POP
populatIon, 1987; 1(0.9), SF4, SRI. delined in text. t-statlstics
    In parentheses. Data (or SE.             POP. GYD    and Y065 fro. World
Oeveiopaenc     Report, 1989
