NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AUCTIONS VS. NEGOTIATIONS

Jeremy Bulow
Paul Kiemperer

Working Paper No. 4608

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January, 1994

Thanks to Margaret Meyer, John Roberts, and Lawrence Summers, as well as other colleagues
at Stanford Business School and Oxford University for valuable comments. This paper of part
of NBER's research pmgram in Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #4608
January 1994

AUCTIONS VS. NEGOTIATIONS

ABSTRACT

Which is the more profitable way to sell a company; a public auction or an optimally

structured negotiation with a smaller number of bidders? We show that under standard
assumptions the public auction is always preferable, even if it forfeits all the seller's negotiating
power, including the ability to withdraw the object from sale, provided that it attracts at least one
extra bidder. An immediate public auction also dominates negotiating while maintaining the right

to hold an auction subsequently with morn bidders. The results hold for both the standard
independent private values model and a common values model. They suggest that the value of
negotiating skill is small relative to the value of additional competition.

Jeremy Bulow
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER

Paul Kiemperer
St. Catherine's College
Oxford
UNITED KINGDOM

Auctions vs. Negotiations
1.. Introduction
Consider a board of directors attempting to do its fiduciary duty of maximizing

shareholder wealth. In incumbent management's hands the company is worth its
current, publicly observed, stock price. A raider, or several raiders, privately approach the board, offering to buy the company at a premium to the current price.
The raiders are willing to negotiate on price.
The board considers several options. The first option is to negotiate with the
raiders for the best possible price. The second option is to publicly announce that
the company is for sale, and hold an open auction among the raiders and any other

bidders who may then emerge. A third option is to negotiate with the raiders,
maintaining the right to hold an auction subsequently if the negotiations do not
lead to a sale.

Which option is best? The advantage of negotiating is that the seller may
be able to bargain the raiders into agreeing to pay a higher price by, for example,
credibly threatening not to sell if the buyers' offers are too low, making an offer to
one buyer that depends on information learned from other buyers, and maintaining
the prerogative of discriminating among buyers' bids. We assume that the directors
are extremely skilled at negotiations; in fact, we assume that they can use whatever
sales mechanism will maximize expected profit from a given set of bidders.

The advantage of proceeding directly to an auction is that this is probably the

strategy that will ensure maximum participation in the bidding.' The problem is
that publicizing a sale to increase the number of bidders may make it harder to
1

A public auction not only attracts extra bidders through the extra publicity,

but also attracts extra bidders if bidding is costly, because for any given number of bidders the expected surplus per bidder is higher in an auction than if the
seller negotiates optimally. (For analysis of optimal seller strategies with costly bidder participation, see Engelbrecht-Wiggans (1993), McAfee and McMillan (1987a),
McAfee and Vincent (1991), and Shleifer and Vishny (1986).)

I

negotiate effectively. In fact we will assume that putting the company "in play" by

making it public knowledge that it is for sale makes it impossible for the company
to be taken off the market, and forfeits all the seller's negotiating power, forcing the

seller to simply accept the highest bid, provided it exceeds the current stock price.2

Finally, negotiating while maintaining the right to hold an auction if negotiations do not produce a sale reduces the cost of a failed negotiation, but makes
negotiation less effective — buyers know that if none of them accedes to the seller's

demands then they will have another chance to purchase the company.

The point of our paper is that the choice between these options is clear: Provided only that the auction will attract at least one extra bidder it yields the highest
expected revenue, under standard assumptions. A direct auction with N+ I bidders

beats an optimal negotiation with N bidden, and is also superior to negotiating
with N bidders and then holding an auction with those N bidders plus an additional
bidder if negotiations fail.

We can prove these results even though we assume that a negotiator can use

the techniques of mechanism design to precominit to any sales mechanism that
maximizes the expected revenue from N bidders, an assumption which undoubtedly overstates the bargaining ability of any real life negotiator. Rirthermore, our

assumption that an auctioneer must accept the highest offer among N + 1 bidders,
no matter how low, probably understates the power of a seller who holds an auction.

Therefore, our result that an auction with N + I bidders is better in expectation
than any negotiation with N bidders is conservative in some important respects.
2 One

reason why a company might be forced to take the top bid once it announces an auction is that U.S. takeover law has the concept of a "moment of
inevitability" at which a sale is thought to become inevitable, and "At this point,

the duty of the board is said to change and become in effect that of a fair auctioneer
who must seek the highest bid and may not consider long-run value maximization..."
(Choper el. aL(1989), p.l152). A second reason is that the business of a company
whose future ownership is thought to be uncertain may be damaged until the question of ownership is resolved and it may be hard to credibly withdraw the company
from the market. See, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny (1988).
2

In short, sellers, whether they are boards of directors of publicly held cornpanies, or governments privatizing public sector companies, should focus on ma.xirniz-

ing the number of potential bidders for their assets and should generally refuse to
bargain with bidders who wish to pre-empt the auction process.3
Section 2 presents our model, which encompasses both private values andcom-

mon values. Section 3 shows how to compute the expected revenue from any arbi-

trary sales mechanism that a seller might choose.

In section 4 we describe the optimal negotiating strategy. In general, it is to
hold an English auction among the N buyers until the top bidder is revealed. At
this point, the seller should make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the last remaining
buyer, with the exact amount of the offer determined by the information that the
seller learns through the auction bidding. (Often the take-it-or-leave-it offer will

simply be the price at which the next-to-last bidder exits the auction.) We then
compare the expected revenue from negotiating to that from a simple auction.
Section 5 gives some examples of our results.

In section 6 we show that moving directly to an auction is preferable to negoti-

ating with the existing bidders before moving to an auction. Thus the seller should

never accept any "lock-up" agreement that a buyer is willing to offer in return for
not holding an auction with more buyers.

Section 7 extends our results to multiple unit auctions, and demonstrates an
analogous result about the value of attracting new customers relative to the value
of being able to charge a monopoly price.
The remaining sections show the effects of relaxing the assumptions in our basic

model, and condude.

By assuming a single seller, interested only in expected revenue we are abstracting from issues such as shareholders' individual incentives to sell (see, e.g.,
Grossman and Hart (1980), Hirshleifer and Titman (1990), and Holmstron and
Nalebuff (1992)), or management's interest in retaining control (see e.g. Hams and
Raviv (1988)).
3

2. The Model
A seller has been approached by N 1 potential buyers. If she chooses to
negotiate with them, she may impose any mechanism she wishes including, for
example, discriminating between buyers, enforcing no-resale provisions, andcredibly

committing to consider only offers above some minimum amount. Alternatively she

may choose to hold an auction. The auction will attract an additional N + 1-st
bidder, but once the auction is announced, the seller is then restricted to running a
conventional ascending bid auction and to selling the object to the last remaining

bidder at the price at which the next to last bidder drops out.
We normalize the seller's value of the object to zero. Each bidder i observes

a private signal i. We write T for the vector (i1,. , tp,÷i). Conditional on the
signals of all the potential buyers i = l,...,N + I, the asset would be worth vj(T)
to bidder i. We assume that v1(T) is differentiable everywhere, and 8t(fl > 0 and
0 Vi,j.
Without loss of generality we can normalize so that all the t1 are uniformly
distributed on 10, 1). That is, a signal of t = .23 is more optimistic than 23 percent

of the signals bidder I might receive and less optimistic than 77 percent. In the
special case of private values v(T) is a function only of t1, and in the special case
of pure common values v1(T) = v1(T).

We write T' for (t1, . . . iv). Contingent on the first N signals we let the
expected value of the asset to bidder i be v((T")

E,,, {v(T)). (More generally,

we write E1 {f(z, y)J for the expectation of f(x, y) contingent on y and with respect

to x.)
Let p1(T) be the probability that buyer i will receive the object (in equilibrium),

contingent on the vector of signals T, and let pr(TN) be the probability that i will
receive the object (in equilibrium), contingent on TN. Let 51(t1) equal the expected

surplus to buyer I. We let dT! adtj,...,dt_1,dt1+1, .. .,dipj, and let IN and
represent N and N + I integrals from 0 to 1, respectively.
4

We also make the following assumptions:

A.1 All bidders are risk neutral.
A.2 While t1 is private information to bidder i, the value functions v(.) are common
knowledge.

A.3 v(1,1,1,...1) =iY< oc.
A.4 v(O,. . .0) 0. Every bidder is a "serious bidder" willing to make an opening
offer of zero, the seller's value, in an open English auction.

A.5 The variables i1,t2 . . .ijq4. are independent.

A.6 Symmetry: Bidders' value functions are symmetric so v1(t1, ...,

..., t1, ...)

=

v1(tj,. . . ,i1,. . . , ti,.. .), and bidden choose symmetric strategies in a conventional ascending bid auction.4

A.7 t1 > t, * v1(T)> v3(T). (The bidders with the highest signals have the
highest values.)
A.8 We define MRj(T)

j[(i—t1)v1(T)) = vj(T)_(i_ij)OT), and analogously
MRr(TN) vf(TN)_(1 _t1)avçr") = E1÷,{MRj(T)}. We assume that

t > * MR1(T) > MR1(T).
Assumption A.8 is a standard regularity condition in auction theory. Note
that (1 — 11)v€(T) is the expected revenue the seller would receive from i, if all the

signals except i1 were publicly known and the seller offered i a take-it-or-leave-it
price of v1(T). (This price would be accepted with probability (1 — t1).) Thus MR1

is the marginal revenue from i, that is the increase in this expected revenue if the
asking price were reduced, per extra unit sold, and our assumption corresponds to
the standard assumption that marginal revenue is downward sloping.
We relax A.5 through A.8 in sections 8, 9, and 10.

Thus the bidder with the highest signal always wins such an auction. With
pure common values (but not, it is believed, for any other cases of our model — see
Bikhchandani and Riley (1993)), it is possible to construct asymmetric equilibna
in which the bidder with the highest signal does not always win such an auction.
5

3. Profitability of Alternative Sales Procedures
We begin by calculating the profitability of any arbitrary sales mechanism to

Nbidders,i=1,••.N.
Begin by noting that in any sales procedure, the 1th bidder, with signal t1
cannot, if he is behaving optimally, gain by deviating to the strategy he would use
if he had signal 2/, so

S(t) S(t')
—

vr(ti,. ,t_1, t/, .., LN)Jpr (21, ...,

t/, ..., iN) dTE

V

So S(i) has derivative

A.
Ni'rN
VU1 I.L
) N,'rpN .rrN

20.! •\
P
______ —
— I/
25

As
(hi

JN—i

c1

and therefore

S(x) = S1(O) + J

J

Ovf4t(TN)

tj=O N—i

pr(r)dTN.

Therefore the expected surplus of the N bidden equals

+

tLO [s(o) Jt L_,

N(TN)

pr(r) aIM] dx

equals (integrating by parts)

f (s1o +

—

t) 8v((T") pr(TM) rN)

Now expected seller profits can be written as the expected value of the good

to the winning bidder, EifN V!T(TN)PtJ(TN)dTN, less the expected surplus of
the N bidden. It follows that
Lemma 0: The expected profits from a sales procedure involving N bidders

equal > (fNMRTP1r

CTM —

6

S(O)).

This interpretation of the seller's profits in terms of the marginal revenues of
the bidders weighted by their probabilities of receiving the object follows Bulow
and Roberts (1989) but extends their private-values model to the general commonvalues case. The result is also a straightforward extension of Myerson's (1981) model

which is restricted to a specific form of common values in which players' values are

additive functions of signals.

4. Auctions vs. Negotiations
Optimal Negotiations
Lemma 0 implies that no sales procedure can earn greater profits than a pro-

cedure in which S(O) = 0 Vi (obviously no sales procedure can give any type of
bidder a negative expected surplus), the good is always given to the bidder i for
whom MRr(TN) is largest if that value is greater than zero (that is, ptt(TN) =I

for this bidder and pf(T") = 0 for all other bidders, j

1), and the good is not

sold if the largest MR((TN) is negative (that is, pj(T') = 0 Vi in this case).5
But all this can be achieved under our assumptions by using the following
modification of a standard open English auction. Let the price rise continuously

and, at the point at which the next to last bidder drops out, offer the last bidder
a take-it-or-leave-it price equal to the maximum of the current price and the price

this bidder, i, would just be willing to pay if his MR.?(TN) were zero (given the

information that can now be inferred about other bidders' signals). To see this
yields the desired outcome, observe that if the seller uses this procedure each bidder

will drop out of the bidding at the price he would just be willing to pay if all the
remaining active bidders had signals equal to his own,6 so (i) a bidder of the lowest

$ tinder our assumptions, the probability of two bidders having identical MRs is
zero, and any allocation suffices in this case.
6 To see this, note that, given all other bidders follow this rule (and infernng the
signals of bidders who have dropped out using this assumption), a bidder is happy
(unhappy) to find himself the winner at any price below (above) this stopping pnce.
Strictly, bidders with very low signals are indifferent about participating since they
know that they would never meet the seller's take-it-or-leave-it price. However, the
7

possible type, t = 0, wins with probability zero, so S(0) = 0, (ii) the bidder, i, who
has the highest signal L, will be the final bidder, so the winner (if any) will also be

the bidder with the highest MRr(T"), and (iii) the signal tj of every bidder j who
drops out can be inferred by the price at which that bidder leaves the auction, so the
final take-it-or-leave-it price can be set using precise information about all the other.

bidders' signals to ensure that the high bidder i wins if and only if MRI?'(TN)
It follows therefore that

0.

Lemma 1: The expected profits from an optimal negotiation with N bidders
equal ETN {max{MRr(T'), MR.'I(TN),. . . , MR(T), 01).
We note that unless bidder valuations are "private," so that v(.) depends only

on t1, information about other valuations is useful in setting the final take-it-orleave-it price, so that alternative mechanisms which do not reveal the signals of the
losing bidders will not in general be revenue equivalent to the mechanism described.

Auctions
Following the derivation of Lemma 0, the expected profits from a sales proce-

dure to N + 1 bidders are

E (j MR,(T)p1(T)dT_ S(0)).
N+1

But in any standard auction with symmetric
bidders,7 the bidder with the

highest actual signal wins the auction, so p1(T) = 1 if t is the highest actual
signal and p(T) = 0 otherwise, and a bidder of the lowest possible type wins with
probability zero, so S(O) = 0. Therefore
seller can induce all bidders to participate at an arbitrarily snail cost in expected
revenue by committing to foregoing the take-it-or-leave-it offer with a probability
approaching zero and to always accepting the highest bid in this event.
Including, for example, a Dutch auction, or a first-price sealed bid or a secondpnce sealed bid auction, as well as the open ascending (English) auction on which
we are focusing.
8

Lemma 2: The expected profits from an auction with N + 1 bidders equal

Er{max{MR1(T),MR2(T),.
Lemmas I and 2 allow us to prove our main theorem:

Theorem: The expected profits from an auction with N + 1 bidders exceed the
expected profits from a negotiation with N bidden.

Proof: For each realization of TN,
either, for some

max{MRf'(T11"),. .MR(T'),0} = MRtJ(TN) =
or

max{MRr(T"),. . . MR(T"),0} =
—

<VN+l(T , 0)—

=

J

N

((1— tN+1)vN+1(T , tf.J4.)Jdi.f1

MR;::(T)dtN+l = E+,{MRN+l(T)}.

So, in either case, for all T",

max{MRr(T"),

01 max{Eg4, {MR1(T)},

{MRN+l(T)} }

Et,{max{MRi(T),. ..MRN+I(T))},
and since the inequalities are strict for a set of T" that occur with positive probability, we have

ETN {max{MRr(T'),.. . MR5(T"5, 0}) <ET{max{MRI(T),. MRv+i(T) }.
Q.E.D.

I

The argument of the proof is straightforward: The expected marginal revenue

of a bidder computed over all his possible values equals his lowest possible value
(just as the average marginal revenue of any demand curve computed up to some

quantity equals the average revenue, that is, the price, at that quantity), and the
9

lowest possible value of any serious bidder exceeds zero by assumption. Thus in

expectation the MR of the (N + l)st bidder is at least as good as the zero that
negotiation provides. But the added variance of the MR of the (N + 1)st bidder is
also helpful, given that the option of choosing one of the Ma, of the first N bidden

is available. So the auction is clearly better.

Note, however, that there is no simple dominance relationship between an
auction with N + 1 bidders and a negotiation with N bidders. For example, an
auction with two bidders with private values drawn uniformly from [0,11 performs
worse than a negotiation with 1 bidder, averaged across states in which the first

bidder's value actually exceeds f (that is, MR exceeds 0), but performs better than
the negotiation averaged across the remaining states. Thus it is only by expressing

expected profits in the forms given in Lemmas 1 and 2 that our result becomes
apparent.
5. Examples

If the seller negotiates with one bidder, with a value drawn from a uniform

distribution on [0, 1), then it is easy to check her optimal strategy is to offer a
take-it-or-leave-it price of . The seller's expected profit is . Alternatively, an
auction with two bidders, each with private valuations drawn independently from
this distribution would yield expected profit equal to the expected second highest
valuation, or

More generally, the expected profit from an open auction with N + 1 >

1

bidders whose values are drawn independently from a uniform distribution on [0, IJ

is y%i. Since v6 = tai, MR1 =

u(2i1 — 1),

so MR1 = 0 at t1 = 1/2. Therefore,
the optimal negotiation strategy is to run an auction with a minimum price of .
Thus, the expected profit from negotiating with N bidden will be N_)4f" v, less

than the profit from the absolute auction with N + I bidden.
As a second example, consider a common value auction in which the true value

of an item is the same to each bidder, namely the product of i1, t2, and
10

where

all the signals are drawn independently from a uniform distribution on (0,1]. Each

potential bidder observes one of the signals. Then a seller negotiating with two
bidders would optimally begin with a continuous English auction. Each bidder, will

compute his strategy by averaging over all the possible values of the third signal,
which in this case is equivalent to assuming that this signal tikes on its expected

value of .

So each

bidder i would drop out in equilibrium at a price of 4(t1)2
which would be his value if his competitor also observed the
same signal. After one

bidder has dropped out, the remaining bidder j has a value uniformly distributed
between D and 4(t1). This implies that v5 =
f(t1)(t1) and MR1 = (t1)(2t1 — 1),
so MR1 = 0 = = 4
vj
/DTh. So the seller should set a take-it-orleave-it price of
if this exceeds D, that is, if D c 1/8, but if D > then
the seller should simply agree to sell to j at the dropout price D. The addition of

t

==

the take-it-or-leave-it price adds 6.25 percent to the revenue expected when there
are two bidders but no take-it-or-leave-it offer. But having a third bidder and no
ability to make a take-it-or-leave-it offer would add 20 percent.8

6. Negotiations followed by an Auction
The seller cannot benefit by first negotiating with N bidders while reserving the

right to hold an auction among all N + 1 bidders if the negotiations fail—this can
do no better than proceeding directly to an auction. (That is, it would be optimal
to set a take-it-or-leave-it price in the negotiation phase that is so high that it is
never accepted.)

The reason is that if the seller has the option of resorting to the auction, it
will be obvious to all that if negotiations fail, there will be an auction. Viewing
the two-stage process as a whole, then, the seller is constrained to choosing among
mechanisms that always lead to a sale. But clearly any optimal mechanism that

= m for two bidders and no final take-it-or-leave-it offer;
The values are:
for two bidders and a final take-it-or-leave-it offer, and for three bidders and
no final take-it-or-leave-it offer.

j

11

always sells must always sell to the buyer with the highest signal. Therefore, it will

not be optimal to sell in the negotiation stage unless it is certain that the buyer's

signal is greater than or equal to the signal of the N + 1st bidder. Therefore the
seller should insist on a price in the negotiation phase that will only be accepted
when a buyer gets a signal of 1, which occurs with probability zero.
Therefore, under our assumptions, the seller should not accept any high "lock-

up" bid that a buyer may be willing to offer in return for not holding an auction
with an additional buyer.9

7. Multiple Units
If a seller is offering X identical goods for sale, then negotiating optimally with
N bidders each interested in buying one unit will yield lower expected revenue than

holding an auction that awards units to the top X among N + X bidders.
It is easy to generalize our analysis to show that the expected profits from the
auction equals the expected sum of the X highest values among MR1 (T), MR2(T),...,

MRN+X(T), while expected profits from the negotiation are the expected sum of the

X highest values among MR(T),Mftt(T1),. . . ,MR(T') and X zeros!° It
follows as before that the auction yields greater expected profits.

This result would be unaffected by other bidders having costs of entering the
auction. (But the presence of such costs can explain why bidders may jump bid
to deter competitors from entering; see Fishman (1988) and Png (1985). See also
Avery (1993), Daniel and Hirshleifer (1993), and von der Fehr (1993) for related
discussion.)
10 For this section only, we define T (ii,.. . , tjq.f,y) and we define MRflTN)
iy..,x {MFt(T)}.
I See our forthcoming paper, Bulow and IClemperer (1994), for a further analysis

of multiple unit auctions. Optimal negotiation is in general more complex than in
the single unit case since determining any bidder's MR requires knowing all other
bidders' signals. One way to achieve optimal negotiation is (i) ask each bidder i
to independently report his signal t (in equilibrium all reports will be honest),

and let t be the (X + 1)st highest signal reported; (ii) for each i who reports a
signal in the top X signals, compute i s.t. MRflL1, . ..t_1, ii, t1..',. . . ipi) = 0 and
sell to this bidder if t I, at the maximum of v(t1,. ..t1_1,1,t1+1,.. .tN) and
•ti—1, 1, t1..1,

.

. trq).
12

An interesting application of this result is to a competitive industry with con-

stant marginal costs c up to a fixed capacity X, and demand N at a price of c.
Provided the (industry) marginal revenue curve is downward sloping, the industry
would earn more revenue from a marketing program that multiplied demand hori-

zontally by the factor (N + X)/N, than it would earn from perfect collusion at the
monopoly price.

8. Non-independent Signals

Negotiating with One vs. Auctioning with Two
Affiliated signals reinforce our conclusion that an auction with two bidders is

more profitable than negotiating with a single bidder: Let G(xj, x2) be the prob-

ability that i1 x and t2 x2. Then, with affiliated signals, the probability
that 12

x, conditional on Ii

probability, 1 — x, that 12

x, is greater than or equal to the unconditional

x, so we have

C(x,x) (1 — x)2.
in a standard ascending auction the expected revenue is just the minimum of
vi(ii,ti) and v2(12122). (Since bidder i would be pleased to win at any lower price

than ve(i,i) but would not wish to find himself the winner at any higher price.)
Therefore, the probability that the seller will earn at least vi(x, x) dollars is G(x, x),

and expected revenue can be written as
—
vi(O,O)+ .11 dv1(xz)G(X x)dx vi(O,O) + j' dvl(xx)(1 x)2 dx.

The right hand side of the above is the expected revenue when there is the
same unconditional distribution but independent draws. Therefore, since two independent bidders yield more revenue than optimally negotiating with one bidder,

two affiliated bidders in an auction must yield more revenue than one bidder in a
13

negotiation.12

Negotiating With Multiple Bidden
When more than one bidder is available for a negotiation, and their signals are

not independent, a shrewd negotiator may be able to do better than an English
auction with continuously rising prices and a final take-it-or-leave-it offer.

As an example, consider a seller negotiating with two buyers. Each bidder
knows his own value precisely, v1 = A + B and v2 = C + B, where A, B, and C are

all distributed independently and uniformly on [0,1], but bidders do not know the
values of A, B, or C individually, so the observed variables v1 and v2 are affiliated.'3

Now consider the all-pay mechanism where each bidder submits a non-refundable

non-negative bid for the object, with the object going to the highest bidder. (That
is, if you bid 40 cents, then your payment is 40 cents, regardless of whether you win

the object or not.)
It is easy to show that the symmetric equilibrium bids are b(v1) =

Re-

markably, each bidder's expected surplus is zero regardiless of his value, so the
expected revenue to the seller is the expected value of the higher of the two bidders,

which is 7/6. By comparison, adding a third symmetric bidder (with valuation
B + D with D also independently and uniformly distributed on [0,1)) would make
expected revenue equal to the expected second highest value of the three bidders,

that is, I, in an auction.
More generally, if a negotiator has the power to design mechanisms that extract

12 Affiliation implies correlation, but not vice-versa. With negative correlation
between the bidders' signals, negotiating with one may be more profitable than
auctioning with two. An example has 2, +t2 = 1 and any v1(T) satisfying vi(T) <2,
if 0<11 < 1/2; vj(T) > 1/2 if t1 >1/2.
13 In terms oft1 and 2, this example translates to:
v1(T) =

(2t)'2

0 i 1/2
1/2 i I

v1(T) = 2— (2(1 —

14

i = 1,2
i = 1,2

all surplus, as in, for example, Cremer & McLean (1985), then an extra bidder can
never make up for the loss of this power.14 However, in an example such as the one

above, a seller will do better with N +1 bidden in an auction than with N bidden
in an auction followed by an optimal negotiation with (that is, a take-it-or-leave-it
offer to) the last of the N bidden.

In particular, assume that each bidder i's signal derives from an independent
component x transformed by some common random function g(.), so each bidder
observes g(z€) and has value vi(g(xl),. .. ,g(XN÷i)) Vi, such that it remains true
that the highest value bidder has the highest MR. (In our example above, 9(11) =
z + B, in which 11 = A and x2 = C.) Then if the seller had perfect information

about g(•), her problem of setting the optimal reservation price at the end of the
game with N bidders would be just the same as in the independent signals case.
However, we know that even with an optimal take-it-or-leave-it offer contingent on
knowing g(.), the seller does worse in expectation than with the N + 1 bidden in

an auction. (Bidders are unaffected by whether or not they know g(.), with or
without a final take-it-or-leave-it offer, since their optimal strategies depend only
on the actual signals, which are inferred exactly as when they are independent.) It
14 For any given TN, relabel the first N bidden so that ii

this T" an open auction with (N + 1) bidders yields

... ti. Then for

{vi(ij ,2,..•, tpi,ij) ItN+i tl}Prob(tN+I i')
+ EIN+1 {vN+1QN+l, t2,. . tjq, tN+l)fri > ij'J t2} ProbQi >
+ E1,., {v2(t2, t2,. . . LN,tN+I)It! > tpj.f} Prob(i2 >

itj.)

N+1

which is less than the value of extracting all the surplus from the highest of the

N bidders which is

Efl+,vIQ1,i2,...tN,tN÷l)
=
{vi (ii, t2. . . tji, tN+1 )IiM+i i1} Prob(tpq1 ii)
+
{vi(ti, 2,• . Lp,r, tN+1)li1 > i+ t2 Prob(ti > tpq.
+
{vi(ti,t2,.. . tN,tN+I)1i2 > i,q÷i) Prob(t2 > iN4j).

15

t2)

follows that, absent information about g('), the seller prefers auctioning with N + 1

to negotiating with N.

9. Asymmetric Bidders
With asymmetric bidders, the optimal negotiation would always entail sale to

the bidder with the highest positive MR., which may be different from the person
with the highest value. That is, the seller will choose a mechanism that discriminates

among buyers in the same way that a monopolist will price discriminate across

markets, equating MR rather than price. In this case, optimal negotiation may
succeed in achieving a higher expected MR and, therefore, a higher expected revenue

than an auction with an extra bidder.
For example, assume in a private values setting that v1(T) = lOOt1 and v2(T) =
50. Then, with either v3(T) = lOOt3 or

vs(T) =

50, an auction with all three bidders

will yield expected revenue of 50,15 Now consider an optimal negotiation with
bidden 1 and 2. The seller would give 1 a take-it-or-leave-it price of 75, promising
to sell to 2 for 50 if 1 turns her down. Expected revenue becomes .25(75) + .75(50) =
56.25.

10. "Irregular" Distributions
Our assumption of symmetric bidders, (A.6), does not by itself guarantee that

If v3(T) = 50, then the value of the second highest bidder will always be 50,
and that will be the revenue from an auction, If v3(T) = lOOt3, one time in four
both vj(T) and v3(T) will be less than 50, and expected revenue will be the higher
of their two values, on average 33!, Similarly, once in four times both vi(T) and
vs(T) will exceed 50, and expected revenue will be the lower of the two values, on
average 66. Finally, fifty percent of the time v2(T) will be the second highest value,
and revenue will be 50. So total expected revenue is .(33k) + (66k) + (50) = 50.
H The
superior revenue would generally hold even if resale were permitted. The
seller could immediately get a take-it-or-leave-it price from buyer 2 of 56.25, and

leave it to 2 to offer I a take-it-or-leave-it price of 75, for example. (75 is the
optimal take-it-or-leave-it price for buyer 2 to demand from buyer 1 since buyer l's
MR is just equal to 50, buyer 2's value, if buyer l's value is 75.)
16

the bidder with the highest signal will have the highest MR.'7 If assumption (A.$)
fails, then the bidder with the highest signal may not have the highest MR., and an

optimal negotiation might be preferable to an auction with an extra bidder.
For example, consider the following case:
3(1—li)
—

•f 1

—k

MR4(T):_k

3> •> lt,( )_—

90—li)3
I

1tj MR1(T)=1

Optimal negotiation with N bidders with signals drawn independently from
this distribution involves setting a take-it-or-leave-it price of 1 (and any arbitrary
allocation among bidden willing to pay this price when there is more than one such
bidder18). Expected revenue is 1—
would yield only 1—

—

A simple auction with N + 1 > 1 bidders
—

(l)N)19

11. Conclusions
When a company is approached by a potential buyer or buyers, its options may

be either to negotiate or to put the company up for auction. Our analysis implies
that if the board expects at least one extra serious bidder to appear in an auction,
then it should generally not negotiate and should directly begin an auction.
Of course, institutional considerations may make any given situation more com-

plex. For example, if allowing many bidders access to confidential financial infor-

The analog for monopoly is that, even though demand curves must be downward sloping, MR curves may not be.
' Note that the distribution of values for a bidder is continuous in this example.
Strictly, we violate (A.7) for t1 2/3, but by making v1(T) = I + e(t — ) for

i > 2/3, small, we would have an example that satisfied all assumptions except
(A.8).

' With probability 1— (a)N+1 the winning bidder has a signal exceeding and
a MR of 1; with probability (k)N+l, no bidder's signal exceeds , so the winner's
MR is — 1 with the remaining probability, (1)"' — (l)N+1 the winner's MR must
therefore equal —. So the expected MR of the winning bidder is (i — (1)"') +

1iN+I1
—U)
(i\N+I\(2
U)
C3)\+(2N+i
I\3/
p3
17

mation would cause the company's value to be diminished to the eventual buyer,
then one might wish to restrict bidding.
But remember that our analysis assumed that a seller could negotiate optimally,

making credible commitments of the sort that might not be possible in real life,
and we also assumed that bidders had no bargaining power in a negotiation. We
therefore believe that our basic result does not overstate the efficacy of auctions
relative to negotiations. Certainly a firm that refused to negotiate with a potential
buyer, and instead put itself up for auction, should be presumed to have exercised
reasonable business judgment.

18

References
Avery, Christopher. "Strategic Jump Bidding and English Auctions." Discussion
paper. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University (1993).

Bikhchandani, Sushil, and Riley, John C. "Equilibria in Open Auctions." Unpublished manuscript, University of California, Los Angeles (September 1993).

Bulow, Jeremy I. and Kiemperer, Paul D. "Auctions vs. Negotiations." Stanford
Business School Working Paper (1993).

Bulow, Jeremy I. and Klemperer, Paul D. "Rational Frenzies and Crashes." J. PoL
Econ. 102 (February 1994):forthcoming.

Bulow, Jeremy I., and Roberts, D. John. "The Simple Economics of Optimal Auctions." .1. Pol. Econ. 97 (October 1989): 1060—90.

Choper, Jesse H., Coffee, John C. Jr., and Morris, C. Robert Jr. Cases and Materials on Corporations. Third Edition. Boston: Little, Brown (1989).

Cremer, Jacques, and McLean, Richard. "Optimal Selling Strategies under Uncertainty for a Discriminatory Monopolist when Demands Are Interdependent."
Econometrics 53 (March 1985): 345—361.

Daniel, Kent and Hirshleifer, David. "A Theory of Costly Sequential Bidding."
Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, manuscript (1993).

Englebrecht-Wiggans, Richard. "Optimal Auctions Revisited." Games and Economic Behavior 5 (1993): 227—39.

von der Fehr, Nils Henrik. "Predatory Bidding in Sequential Auctions." Discussion
paper. Department of Economics, University of Oslo (1993).
Fishman, Michael J. "A Theory of Pre-emptive Takeover Bidding." Rand .1. Econ.
19 (Spring 1988): 88—101.
19

Grossman, Sanford J. and Hart, Oliver D. "Takeover Bids, the Free-Rider problem,

and the Theory of the Corporation." Bell Journal of Economics 11 (1980): 42-64.

Harris, Milton, and Raviv, Artur. "Corporate Control Contests and Capital Struc-

ture." Journal of Financial Economics 20(1/2) (1988): 55-86.

Hirshleifer, David and Titman, Sheridan. "Share Tendering Strategies and the
Success of Hostile Takeover Bids." Journal of Political Economy 98(2) (1990): 295324.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Naiebuff, Barry. "To the Raider Goes the Surplus? A
Reexamination of the Ftee-Rider Problem." Journal of Economics and Management
Strategy 1(1) (November 1992).

McAfee, It Preston, and McMillan, John. "Auctions with Entry." Economics Letters 23 (198Th): 343—347.

McAfee, R. Preston, and McMillan, John. "Auctions and Bidding." Journal of
Economic Literature 25 (June 198Th): 699—738.

McAfee, R. Preston and Vincent, Daniel. "Updating the Reserve Price in Common
Value Auctions." Unpublished manuscript, University of Texas, Austin (December
1991).

Myerson, Roger B. "Optimal Auction Design." Math. Operation-s Res. 6 (February
1981): 58—73.

Png, Ivan P.L. "The Information Conveyed by a Takeover Bid." UCLA Anderson
Graduate School of Management Working Paper No. 3-85, (February 1985).

Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W. "Greenmail, White Knights, and Shareholders' Interest." Rand. J. Econ. 17 (Autumn 1986): 293—309.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W. "Value Maximization and the Acquisition

Process." J. Econ. Perspectives 2 (Winter 1988): 7-20.
20

