NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS IN
MODELS OF GROWTH

Robert J. Barro
Xavier Sala-i-Martin

Working Paper No. 4610

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC.RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January, 1994

This research has been supported by grants from the National Science Foundation. This paper
is part of NBER's research programs in Growth and Productivity. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4610
January 1994
QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS IN
MODELS OF GROWTH

ABSTRACT

Technological progress takes the form of improvements in quality of an array of
intermediate inputs to production. In an equilibrium that is standard in the literature, all research

is carried out by outsiders, and success means that the outsider replaces the incumbent as the
industry leader. The equilibrium research intensity involves three considerations: leading-edge
goods are priced above the competitive level, innovators value the extraction of monopoly rents
from predecessors, and innovators regard their successes as temporary. We show that, if industry

leaders have lower costs of research, then the leaders will do all the research in equilibrium.

However, if the cost advantage is not too large, then the equilibrium research intensity and
growth rate depend on the existence of the competitive fringe and take on the same values as in

the standard solution. We discuss the departures from Pareto opdmality and analyze the
detennination of the economy's rate of return and growth rate.

Robert J. Barro
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 120
Harvard University
Cambridge. MA 02138
and NBER

Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics
Yale University
28 Hillhouse
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER

Some recent contributions to the endogenous-growth literature model technological
progress as either an increase in the number of types of products (Romer [1990],
Grossman and Helpman [1991, Ch. 3]) or an improvement in the quality of products

(Aghion and Howitt [1992], Grossman and Helpman [1991, Ch. 4fl. We can think of

increases in the number of types, N, as basic innovations that amount to dramatically
new kinds of goods or methods of production. In contrast, increases in the quality or
productivity of the existing goods involve a continuing series of improvements and
refinements of products and techniques.

Figure 1 shows the basic setup. We consider intermediate inputs, as in Ethier
(1982) and Romer (1990), and assume that these come in N varieties, arrayed along the

horizontal axis. In models of expanding variety, N can increase over time, but we treat
N as fixed in the present analysis. The leading-edge quality of each type of intermediate

good is currently at the level shown on the vertical axis. We specify later the precise
meaning of the ladder numbers indicated on this axis. Since the process of quality

improvement turns out to occur at different rates (and in a random manner), the figure
shows that the levels currently attained vary in an irregular way across the sectors.
For analyses of basic innovation, a common assumption is that the new types of

intermediate inputs do not interact directly with the old ones. In particular, Romer
(1990) uses the Spence (1976)/Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) functional form in which inputs enter

into the production function in an additively separable manner. This specification turns
out to imply that the introduction of a new kind of good does not tend to make any old
goods obsolete. (Young [1993] takes a different approach, in which the newly discovered

goods are complements of some existing goods and substitutes for others.)

In contrast, when a product or technique is improved, the new good or method

tends to displace the old one. That is, it is natural to model different quality grades for
a good of a given type as close substitutes. We follow Aghion and Howitt (1992) and

2

Grossman and Helpman (1991, Cli. 4) and make the extreme assumption that the

different qualities of a particular type of intermediate input are perfect substitutes;
hence, the discovery of a higher grade turns out to drive out completely the lower

grades. For this reason, successful researchers along the quality dimension tend to
eliminate the monopoly rentals of their predecessors, the process of "creative

destruction" described by Schumpeter (1942) and Aghion and Howitt (1992). This
feature of the quality-improvement model is the key distinction from the models of
expanding variety, as formulated by Romer (1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1991,
Ch. 3).

A. Sketch of the Mode!
Before we get into the technical details, we provide a sketch of the structure of the
model that we shall develop to analyze improvements in quality. Producers of final

product use N varieties of intermediate inputs, but N is constant. Each type of
intermediate good has a quality ladder along which improvements can occur.
Improvements build on the currently best technology and derive from efforts by
researchers. A successful researcher retains exclusive rights over the use of his or her
improved intermediate good.

At each point in time, the knowledge exists to produce an array of qualities of each
type of intermediate good. In the equilibrium, however, oxily the leading-edge quality is
actually produced in each sector and used by final-goods producers to generate output.
The researcher who has a monopoly over the use of the latest technology receives a

flow of profit We begin with a standard model in which the latest innovator is a
different person from the previous innovator, so that a research success terminates the
predecessor's flow of profit. Therefore, in considering how much resources to devote to

research, entrepreneurs consider the size of the profit flow and its likely duration. This

3

duration is random, becauseit depends on the uncertain outcomes from the research
efforts by competitors.

The temporary nature of an inventor's monopoly position brings in two important

considerations: first, the shorter the expected duration of the monopoly the smaller the
anticipated payoff from R&D, a distortion because the advances are permanent from a
social perspective, and, second, part of the reward from successful research is the
creative-destruction effect that involves the transfer of monopoly rentals from the

incumbent innovator to the newcomer. Since this transfer has no social value, this
second force constitutes an excessive incentive for R&D. We show that the second

element is larger than the first, because the two terms are basically the same, except
that the second element comes earlier in time. Hence, the net effect is an increase in the
private return from research relative to the social return.
In a later section, we assume that the industry leader has a cost advantage in
research. If the cost advantage is large enough, then the leader carries out all the
research; in particular, the leader regards innovations as permanent and does not give
any credit for the expropriation of his or her own monopoly rentals. If the leader's cost
advantage in research is smaller, then the leader still carries out all the research in

equilibrium, but the intensity of this research is the amount required to deter entry by

outsiders. The rate of return and growth rate then turn out to coincide with the values
that prevail when research is done by outsiders. We comment at the end about
implications for policy.

B. Behavior of Firms
1. LeveLs of Quality in the Production Technology

4

The production function for firm i is

(1)

where Ocacl,

=

L is labor input, and

is the quality-adjusted amount employed of the

jth type of intermediate good. The potential grades of each intermediate good are

arrayed along a quality ladder with rungs spaced proportionately at interval q>1.' We
normalize so that each good begins—when first invented—at quality 1. The
subsequent rungs are at the levels q, q2, and so on. Thus, if

improvements in quality

have occurred in sector j, then the available grades in the sector are 1, q,

...,

(q)k

Increases in the quality of goods available in a sector—that is, rises in c—resu1t from
the successful application of research effort, to be described later. These improvements

must occur sequentially, one rung at a time.
Let Xjjk be the quantity used by the ith firm of the jth type of intermediate good
of quality rung k. The rung k corresponds to quality qk, so that k=O refers to quality 1,

k=1 to quality q, and so on. Thus, if

is the highest quality level available in sector j,

then the quality-adjusted input from this sector is given by

'ci

(2)

X1 =

(qk.X..)

1This setup follows the models of Aghion and I-fowitt (1992) and Grossman and Helpman
(1991, Ch. 4), except that we follow Romer (1990) in modeling the goods as intermediate

inputs to production, rather than final products.

5

The assumption in equation (2) is that the quality grades within a sector are perfect

substitutes as inputs to production. The overall input from a sector, X, is therefore the
quality-weighted sum of the amounts used of each grade,
In models of expanding variety, such as Romer (1990), Ic=O applies in each sector,

and technological advances arise in equation (1) from increases in N. Since N is fixed

here, we are assuming implicitly that all of the edsting types of intermediate goods were

discovered sometime in the (distant) past. But we allow

to evolve over time in each

sector in response to the R&D effort aimed at quality improvement in that sector.
Figure 2 shows a possible path for the evolution of the leading-edge quality in

sector j. The best quality available equals 1 at time t0, rises to q (rung 1) at time t1, to

q2 (rung 2) at time t2, to qk (rung k) at time tk, and soon. Thus, tk+l_tk is the
interval over which the best quality is q1' for k =

The figure shows intervals

of differing length for each value of k; these lengths are random in the model developed
below.

The researcher responsible for each quality improvement in sector j retains the

monopoly right to produce the jth intermediate good at that quality level. In particular,

if te quality rungs k =

have been reached, then the kth innovator is the sole

source of intermediate goods with the quality level qk.2 (The results would be the same
if the innovator instead licensed production to competitive producers of goods.)

The intermediate good is nondurable and entails a unit marginal .cost of production

(in terms of output, Y). That is, the cost of production is the same for au qualities
where k = 0,... ,tc. Thus, the latest innovator has an efficiency advantage over the prior

2Since this model does not consider the initial discovery of a type of product, we have to
assume that goods of quality 1 (rung 0) can be produced by anyone. The treatment of
these lowest quality goods will not be an issue if substantial quality improvements have
already occurred in each sector.

6

innovators in the sector, but will eventually be at a disadvantage relative to future
innovators.
Suppose for the moment that only the best existing quality of intermediate good

j—with quality level (q)3—is available currently for production. (The other grades
will turn out not to be used in equilibrium.) The marginal product of this good can be
computed from equations (1) and (2) as

= An•

(3)

Lc. (q)J. (X,)'•

If units of the leading-edge good are priced at P and if no other quality grades of good
j are available, then the implied demand function (from the aggregate of profitmaximizing final-goods producers) can be written as

(4)

=

The leading-edge producer acts as a monopolist in this environment, and profit

maximization leads to the markup formula,

(5)

=

monopoly pricing

P

= i/a.

J

Hence, the monopoly price is constant over time and across sectors.

The aggregate quantity produced of the jLh intermediate good—all of leading-edge

quality—can be determined from equation (4) as

7

(6)

J

The evolution of

ll

= LA ''-

monopoly pricing ___.

'

I(J.
I\

' •(q)

.J

over time in each sector and the divergences of the

across the

sectors will lead to variations in X over time and across sectors.
Suppose now that goods from quality rungs below

are also available for

production in sector j. We assume in this section that the a'cth innovator, who has the
rights to produce the best known quality, was not also the (ec—1)th innovator, who can

produce the next best quality. If the leading-edge producer charges the monopoly price
shown in equation (5) and if this price is high enough, then the producer of the next
lowest grade will be able to make positive profits by producing.

Recall from equation (2) that the different quality grades are perfect substitutes,
but are weighted by their respective grades. Thus, each unit of the leading-edge good is

equivalent to q>1 units of the next best good. It follows that if the highest grade is

priced at P, then a good of the next lowest grade could be sold at most at the price

(1/q).Pj,ç, the one below that at the price (1/2)-P and so on. If (1/q)Pj,ç is less
then the unit marginal cost of production, then the next best grade (and, moreover, all
of the lower quality grades) cannot survive.
Equation (5) shows that the leading-edge producer's monopoly price is 1/a, a price

that would allow the next best producer to price at most at l/(aq), the one below that

at 1/(aq2), and so on, If 1/(aq) is less than one, then the next best producer (and all
lower quality producers) cannot compete against the leader's monopoly price.

Therefore, the condition aq>1 implies that monopoly pricing will prevail. This
inequality will hold if q, the spacing between quality improvements, is large enough; the
lower grades are then immediately driven out of the market even though the leading

good is priced at the monopoly level. In this case, only the best available quality,

of

8

each type of intermediate good is produced and used as an input by final-goods

producers. The price and quantity of type j are then given by equations (5) and (6).
If aq<1, then we can follow Grossman and llelpman (1991, Ch. 4) by assuming

that the providers of intermediate goods of a given type engage in Bertrand price

competition. In this case, the quality leader employs a limit-pricing strategy, that is,
the leader sets a price that is sufficiently below the monopoly price so as to make it just
barely unprofitable for the next best quality to be produced.3 This limit price is given
by

limit pricing =

(7)

= q.

If the leader prices at q—c, where eis an arbitrarily small positive amount, then the
producer of the next best quality can charge at most 1 — /q, a price that results in

negative profit, The lower quality goods are therefore again driven out of the market.
A comparison of equations (7) and (5) shows that, if aq<1—the condition for limit
pricing to prevail—then the limit price is no larger than the monopoly price.
The total quantity produced (of the highest quality) when limit pricing applies is
given by

(8)

limit pricing

= LAh1_k).(a/q)h/().(q)

3Grossman and 1'lelpmari (1991, Ch. 4) effectively assume a=O, so that the magnitude of the
elasticity of demand is 1, and the monopoly price shown in equation (5) is infinite. Since
the inequality aql must hold in this situation monopoly pricing cannot apply in their
model.

9

A comparison of equations (8) and (6) shows that, if aqcl, then the quantity produced

under limit pricing is larger than the amount that would have been produced under
monopoly.

The monopoly formulas in equations (5) and (6) apply if aql, and the limitpricing formulas in equations (7) and (8) hold if oq1. Either way, price is a fixed

markup on the marginal cost of production) and only the best available quality of each
type of intermediate good is actually produced in each sector and used by final-goods

producers. We assume in the main discussion that aq1, so that the monopoly formulas
in equations (5) and (6) apply. The main results are similar, however, if &q<1, so that

limit pricing prevails.

We can use the results to rewrite the production function from equation (1) as

= AL—.

(9)

@)J.(X..)&,
J

j=1
where

is the ith firm's input of the jth intermediate from the highest available

quality rung, lc. We can, in other words, ignore any goods of less than leading-edge
quality.

If we substitute the quantity X from equation (6) (with L1 appearing instead of
L) and aggregate over the firms i, then we get an expression for aggregate output:

(10)

Y=

10

Since L and N are constants, the key to growth of Y in this model is expansions of the
quality-ladder positions

in the various sectors.

We can define an aggregate quality index,

N

(11)

j =1
so that

(12)

Y=

The index Q is a combination of the various ,c's, and increases in the ic-'s affect

aggregate output to the extent that they raise Q.
We also note from aggregation of equation (6) across the sectors that total

spending on intermediates, denoted by X, is proportional to Q:

(13)

x = A1/(1_a).C2/(1_).LQ.

We now consider the determinants of changes in the

a'c's.

2. The Incentive to Innovate
a. The Flow of Monopoly Profit

Innovation in a sector takes the form of an improvement in quality by the multiple
ic—i

q. The ,c.th innovator in sector j raises the quality from q

tc.

to q .

This innovator

will be able to price in accordance with equation (5) and sell the quantity of
intermediate goods given by equation (6). The Qow of profit associated with quality

11

fling lc equals (P_1)XjK and is therefore given by

=

(14)

The profit shown in equation (14) applies when a sector's highest quality rung is

ic.. Thus, this profit accrues from the time of the ,c.th quality improvement, tpç until
3

3

J

the time of the next improvement by a competitor, t,c+l• The interval over which the
,cth innovation is in the forefront is therefore

=

t1ç.f

t/ç•

If the interest rate is the constant r—as will be true in equilibrium—then the
present value (evaluated at time t,) of the profit from the ,c.th innovation in sector j is
3

j

given by

V. =

(15)

[1—exP(.—rT,)]/r.

This present value, which represents the prize for the tcth innovation, depends
we now have to determine the

and TjK: Since we know

positively on
.1

.3

3

duration, TjK.
3

b. The Duration of Monopoly Profit
Dehote by

the flow of resources (in units of Y) expended by the aggregate of

12

potential innovators in sector j when the highest quality-ladder number reached in that

sector is 'ci. The higher

the larger the probability, p, per unit of time of a

successful innovation, that is, an increase in the ladder number from

to ic+l.

Specifically, we assume

(16)

pj= ZJK.ø(c)

so that, for given

the probability

of success is proportional to the overall

research

We assume also that the probability of success declines for given effort

effort,
3

with the complexity of the project, represented by the ladder number, 'ci, that is,

The randomness of R&D success implies that progress will occur unevenly in a

single sector; usually nothing happens, but on rare occasions the productivity jumps by

a discrete amount. We assume, however, that individual sectors are small and that the
probabilities of research success across sectors are independent. The Law of Large

Numbers then implies that the jumpiness in microeconomic outcomes is not transmitted
to the macroeconomic variables: the adding up across a large number of independent

sectors N leads to a smooth path for the aggregate quality index Q, shown in equation
(11), and therefore for aggregate economic growth. (This result would be exact if we

4The linearity in Z. means that the marginal contribution of R&D effort to the probability
of success, Op/OZ. ,equals the average contribution, p/Z. That is, the research process

is not being modeled as a congestible resource, like a fishing pond, in which an individual's
expected return declines with the aggregate level of investment. For this reason, a
researcher is indifferent to entry by additional researchers or to changes in the effort levef
by his or her competitors. The model therefore does not have the property of some patentrace formulations in which—for congestion reasons—the overall level of research tends to
be too high from a social perspective (see Reinganum [1989] for asurvey of these models).

13

treated N as continuous, that is, if sectors were of infinitesimal size.) Thus, the analysis
abstracts from the aggregate fluctuations that are the focus of real business-cycle
models.6

Define G(r) to be the cumulative probability density function for Tj,ç The
derivative of G(r) is

dG/dr =

(17)

where we

assume that p is constant over the interval, (t,ct,c+j) In other words, the

research effort, Z, and, hence, the probability of success, p, do not vary over time
between innovations in a sector. (These conditions hold in equilibrium.) Since P/c is

ii

constant over time, we can readily solve the differential equation (17). If we use the
boundary condition, G(O)=O, then the result is

G(r) = 1 —

exp(—P/cr).

The probability density function can then be found from differentiation of the
cumulative density:

(18)

g(r) = G'(r) =

p

.exp(—p. r).

5We could get similar results for aggregate growth if we assumed that innovation occurred
deterrninistically in a single sector, that is, the application of a given level of R&D effort
generated a quality improvement after a known interval of time. The aggregation would
then depend, however, on how the R&D effort and, hence, the innovations were
synchronized across the sectors. The framework with a Poisson success probability in each
sector is much more manageable.

14

We can use equations (15) and (18) to compute the expected present value of

profit, evaluated at time tK:

E(V,) = (
If we substitute for

/r).p .f_e_1T).exp(_p,j). dr =
from equation (14), then we get

2/(1a),

(19) E(V) = cAl/U_a).
c. Determination of R&D Effort

We now consider how the prize for successful research, E(VjK) determines the

quantity of R&D effort, Z, and thereby the probability of success, jK• We assume
J

a

that potential innovators care only about the expected value shown in equation (19) and

not about the randomness of the return. This assumption can be satisfactory even if
individuals are risk averse because each R&D project is sinai] and has purely
idiosyncratic uncertainty.6

The cost of research per unit of time is Z. , and this effort results in the
J,cj

probability p per unit of time of success, where Pj)ç. =

økc)

from equation (16).

The expected reward per unit of time for pursuing the (ic+1)th innovation is

p..E(v. , Ø, Hence, the expected flow of net profit,

ii

JJj

that is currently at quality rung

is
J

K+1 —
E(V'3

Jj

,from research in a sector

Z, which equals
J

6We have to assume that research projects are carried out by syndicates that are large
enough to diversify the risk. The syndicates cannot be so large, however, that they would
Internalize the distortions that are present in the model.

15

ll = Z.
• LA1. (!).

(20)

q(t1)• ']/(r+p.1) _i].

We assume free entry into the research business. Hence, if Z>0 then fl=O
must hold. The term

then cancels out in equation (20), and the free-entry

condition with positive R&D can be written as

(21)

r+PJK+1 = LA1I(1_a). (ks). 2/(I-&)

q('5+1)

Note that the right-hand side depends on c, but does not differ otherwise across sectors.
Equation (21) implies that the probability of innovation would generally vary with
(tc.+1). a/U—a)
because of two offsetting effects. The term q
appears because the
expected reward from an innovation is increasing in

(see equation [19]). This effect

arises because the quantity of intermediates sold (equation [6]) increases with quality

and, hence, with

The second effect reflects the assumption that innovations in a

sector are increasingly difficult, that is,

If the first effect dominates, then the rate of return to R&D is higher the more
advanced a sector. The more advanced sectors will then tend to grow faster than less
advanced sectors, and the growth rate of the overall economy will rise over time as the
average value of

increases. In other words, R&D features a form of increasing

returns, and this property creates a pattern of divergence for growth rates.
In contrast, if the second effect dominates, then more advanced sectors will tend to
grow relatively slowly, and the growth rate of the overall economy will fall over time.

In this case, R&D exhibits a form of decreasing returns, and this relation generates the

16

kind of convergence behavior that appears in the neoclassical growth model (see Barro
and SaIa4-Martin [1992]).

Finally, if the two forces exactly offset, then all sectors will tend to grow at the

same rate, and the growth rate of the overall economy will be constant over time. In
this case, R&D exhibits constant returns. This case therefore features endogenous,

steady-state growth of the sort that arises in models with constant returns to a broad
concept of capital (Rebelo [19911). We focus the subsequent discussion on this case, that

is, we deal with the situation in which rates of return to R&D are constant.
Equation (21) shows that the balance between the two forces depends on the form

of Ø(tc). A specification that makes the two effects exactly offset is

(22)

where

—(,c.+1).
a/(1—a)
.'

Ø(i9=(1/.q

the parameter (>0 represents the cost of research. A higher (lowers the

probability of success for given values of

and in equation (16).

The term on the far right-hand side of equation (22), q

,indicates

the negative effect of a project's complexity (represented by ic+l) on the probability of

success. This particular form cancels out the term on the far right-hand side of equation

(21). For that reason,

is invariant with

ic.

If we substitute from equation (22) into equation (21), then the free-entry
condition becomes

(23)

r+p = (L/C.Ah/(1).(1).a2/(1_&),

17

where we substituted

p=p,1 because the probability is constant7 (across sectors and

over time in a given sector)) The right-hand side of equation (23) represents the rate
of return from research (the expected flow of profit per unit of research effort). The key,
however, is that a successful

researcher

maintains this return only until the time of the

next innovation. The rate of return must therefore cover the ordinary rate of return, r,
plus the premium for the probability, p, per unit of time that a competitor will succeed
and thereby drive the incumbent out of business.
Equation (23) implies that the probability of an innovation per unit of time is

p=

(24)

If r is constant over time, then p is also constant (as well as the same for all sectors).
= pf(i'c.). If we use
The amount of resources devoted to R&D in sector j is
equations

(22) and

(25)

7Equation (21)
sector,

(24) to substitute for Øk) and p, then we get

=

4+I

—

[LA1/U ).(1c2). a2/(l_a) rc].

determines the probabilities that correspond to the next quality rung in each
In the equilibrium, the current relative spending on R&D across sectors

can differ ibm the amount that corresponds to the constant p (equation [24] below) by a
random term.
8For the case of limit pricing (equations [7] and [8]), the result in equation (23) is modified

to

r+p =

(L/()

.

A'1'.

(q-1) .

(/q)1/(1&)

This result applies if aq<l and reduces to equation (23) if aq=1.

18

Hence, more advanced sectors—with higher tc—have a larger quantity of research

devoted to them. The probability of success is, however, independent of

because

equation (22) implies that correspondingly more effort is required in a more advanced

sector to generate the same probability.
The aggregate of R&D spending, denoted by Z, is

(26)

= q.q/(1a).

Z
j=1

where

[LAhI(1.(i2.a2/(1)_rc],

Q is the aggregate quality index, as shown in equation (11). Hence, Z is

proportional to Q for a given value of r.

3. The Behavior of the Aggregate Quality Index
The level of aggregate output, Y in equation (12), the aggregate resources
expended on intermediates, X in equation (13), and the total expenditure on R&D, Z in

equation (26), are all constant multiples of the aggregate quality index, Q. (We assume

here that r is constant, a condition that will hold in equilibrium.) Hence, the growth
rates of these quantities are all equal to the growth rate of Q:

= 7x =

7z

=

where the symbol denotes the growth rate of the variable

designated by the subscript.

To understand growth in this model, we have to explain the changes over time in Q.

19

Recall the definition of Q from equation (11):

ic.a/(1—a)
(11)

3='
In sector j, the term q '.

(tc.+l)- a/(l—a)

q

does

not change if no innovation occurs, but rises to

in the case of a research success. The proportionate change in this

term due to a success is qaI(1 — 1, and the probability per unit of time of a success
is the value p shown in equation (24). Since p is the same for all sectors, the expected
proportionate change in Q per unit of time is given by

E(Q/Q) = p.(qa/(1) -1).

(27)

Tithe number of sectors, N, is large, then the Law of Large Numbers implies that
the average growth rate of Q measured over any finite interval of time will he close to

the expression shown on the right-hand side of equation (27). We assume, in particular,

that N is large enough to treat Q as differentiable, with Q/Q non-stochastic and equal
to the right-hand side of equation (27). (This result holds exactly if N approaches
infinity, and the size of each sector tends to zero.) If we substitute for p from equation
(24), then we get the growth rate of Q:

(28)

•YQ =

[(Lb.

Ah/(a) . (!L). a2i't1_ —

r]

.

[qtY/(1—a)

—

1].

Equation (28) shows that, to determine the growth rate of Q—and, hence, the

growth rates of Y, X, and Z—we have to pin down the rate of return, r. To determine

20

r, we have to bring in the behavior of households as consumers. We first analyze the
market value of firms, then consider the choices of households (who own the firms), and

finally deal with the equilibrium conditions that allow us to determine r and

4. The Market Value of Firms
Since goods below leading-edge quality are not produced, the only firm with

market value in each sector is the one that possesses the rights over the latest (cth)

innovation. The market value of this innovation, E(V3,), is given by equation (19). If
we substitute for r+p from equation (23), then the formula becomes

(29)

E(Vj,ç) =

(q

i'c.a/(l—a)

The expression on the right-hand side represents the (expected) cost of generating the

ecth innovation (taking account of equation [22)). Note that the more advanced a
sector—the higher K—the greater is the market value of the leading-edge firm.
The aggregate market value of firms, denoted by V, is the sum of equation (29)
over the N sectors:

(30)

,c.a/(1—a)

V=(.qJ

=(Q.

j =1

The total market value of firms is therefore a constant multiple of Q.

C. Households and Market Equilibrium

We assume that each household maximizes a familiar expression for utility over an

21

infinite horizon:

1—0

(31)

U=

J(c 1).e_Ptdt,

where c is consumption per person, the rate of population growth is zero, 0>0 is the

constant elasticity of maiginal utility with respect to c, and p>0 is the rate of time
preference. Households earn the rate of return r on assets and receive the wage rate w

(equal to the marginal product of labor) on the fixed aggregate quantity L of labor. In a
dosed economy, the total of households' assets equals the market value of firms, (Q,

as

shown in equation (30).9 The key condition that we need from household optimization

is the standard one for the growth rate of consumption:

(32)

= (1/O).(r—p),

where C is aggregate consumption.

To apply the result in equation (32), we have to use our previous analysis to derive
an expression for C, the level of consumption. The economy's overall resource

constraint is

C = Y —X —
9The wage rate equals the marginal product of labor, which can be computed from
equation (1). We can use this condition to show that the households' aggregate income,
wL+rCQ, equals a concept of net product that takes account of capital losses, Y—X—p(Q,
where X is aggregate spending on intermediates (equation [131) and p(Q is the capital loss

from destruction of the market value of superseded innovations. Household saving, (Q,
equals income less consumption, Y—X—p(Q—C. The economy's resource constraint is
Y=C+X+Z, where Z is aggregate spending on R&D. Household saving therefore equals
Z—p(Q, that is, net investment equals R&D spending less the capital loss due to
destruction of existing market value.

22

where Y is. given in equation (12); X is given in equation (13); and Z is given in equation

(26). Since Y, X, and Z are all constant multiples of Q, C is also a constant multiple of

Q. In paiticular, if we make the substitutions for Y, X, and Z, then we get'°

(33)

C=

[Ah/1_aL(1_a2).a24(1_r).L _p(.qO/(1_O)]

.Q

Since the expression in brackets is constant (if p is constant), C grows at the same rate

asQ
The variables

.

Y, X, Z, C, and

Q all grow at the same rate, which we can denote by

Equation (28), which derived from the behavior of firms as producers, gives one

expression for ' as a function of r. Equation (32), which came from the behavior of
households as consumers, provides another expression for 7 as a function of r. In a
market equilibrium, the value of r is such as to equate the two expressions for the

growth rate. The resulting values of r and 7 axe constants and therefore constitute the
steady-state values. The solutions are

(34)

(35) 7=

p + 9.[qal'(1a)_].

a

1 + 0.
[q&/(1—a) —

11. [(LI (• A1 (1—a) (J_2). cr2/U_a)
1 + . [qa/(l-a)_1]

—

We assume that the parameters are such that is positive (so that the free-entry
condition in equation 121] actually holds with equality), and r> applies (to satisfy the

LOThe transversality condition, r> 7 in the following, ensures that the expression for C in
equation (33) is positive.

23

transversality condition)." Equation (27) implies that the equilibrium value of p is the

expression for 7 in equation (35) divided by the term

—

(36)

[l+O.(qüI()_l)]

This model exhibits no transitional dynamics.'2 The single state variable is the

aggregate quality index, Q. Given an initial value, Q(O), the variables Q, Y, X, Z, and

C all grow at the constant rate 7 shown in equation (35). The interest rate, r, is the
constant value shown in equation (34).

Although the mean growth rate of output in each sector jis also y, the realized
growth depends on the random outcomes of research efforts. In particular, the relative
quality positions of the sectors and, hence, the relative amounts spent on intermediate
goods and R&D evolve in a random-walk like fashion. At a point in time) the realized
quality positions across the sectors will therefore exhibit an irregular pattern, as
suggested by Figure 1.

The solution in equation (35) implies that the economy's growth rate is higher if
people are more willing to save (lower p and 0), if the technology for producing goods is

better (higher A), if the cost of doing research is lower (lower O and if q, the step size
between innovations, is larger. The model also contains a scale effect: a larger labor

iLEquations (34) and (35) imply that the condition for r>'y is

p > (1_9).[1—aI(1—a)]. [(L/o.Al/(1_a).cL).a2/u_)J. The condition for 7>0 in
equation (35) isp <
'2We have shown here only that an equilibrium exists with no transitional dynamics. W&
can show that any other proposed solution violates a condition of optimality (either the
transversality condition does not hold or consumption hits zero in finite time). The proof
is the same as the one provided in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1994, Ch. 4).

24

endowment, L, raises the growth rate.13 The model has this property because a quality

improvement can be used in a nonrival manner across the entire economy. The larger
the economy—represented by 11—the lower the cost of an invention per unit of L (or

Y). For that reason, an increase in L has the same effect on 7 in equation (34) as an
equiproportionate decrease in the R&D cost parameter, (.
Scale

effects are not supported empirically if we identify scale with the size of a

country's population or economic activity. Countries may, however, not be the proper

unit for measuring scale in the present context. The scale that matters in the model has
two aspects: first, it involves the total of production over which an improved input can
be used in a nonrival manner, and, second, it measures the scope of the inventor's

property rights. If ideas flow readily across borders, then countries do not define the

proper units in the first context. Countries may also be inappropriate in the second
context if patent protection applies internationally or if a monopoly position can be
sustained worldwide by secrecy.

If the world operated as a single unit with respect to the flow of ideas and the
maintenance of property rights, then L would be identified with world population or an
aggregate of world economic activity. The model would then predict a positive relation
between world per-capita growth and the levels of world population or the aggregate of

world output. Kremer (1993) argues that this hypothesis may be correct.

D. Innovation by the Leader
The results predict a continual leapfrogging in leadership positions in an industry.
Since the incumbent does no research, he or she is replaced on top at the time of the

'3Because of this effect, the economy does not tend toward a steady state with constant percapita growth if we allow for growth in population L, at a positive rate.

25

next quality improvement by an outside competitor, who is subsequently replaced by

another outsider, and soon.
In the real world, most improvements in the quality of existing products seem to
be made by industry leaders. This outcome likely arises because the leaders typically

have the best information about the current technology and other advantages that
effectively reduce their research costs.H We therefore want to investigate whether a
change in specification about research costs will improve the model's predictions about
research by insiders.

We begin with a setting in which outsiders are precluded from research; hence, the
industry leader acts as a monopolist with respect to the choice of research intensity.

Next we allow for research by outsiders, but at a cost that exceeds that for insiders. We
show that the monopoly research outcome applies if the leader's cost advantage in R&D
is sufficiently great. Otherwise, the probability of research success coincides with the
value from our previous analysis. However, we now predict—in contrast with

Grossman and Helpman (1991, Ch. 4)—that the research will be carried out by the
(low-cost) insider, rather than the (high-cost) outsiders.

1. The Leader as a Monopoly Researcher
Suppose that the incumbent's research technology also takes the form of equations
(16) and (22):

(37)

PJ(Z/Q).q

I

l4Current technological leaders—.companies or countries—are less likely to have a cost
advantage for the discovery of entirely new products. See Brezis, Krugman, and Tsiddon
(1993) for this argument.

26

where

is the cost parameter for the industry leader. We assume that the leader's cost

may be smaller than that for competitors, Q(.
Suppose,

for the moment, that the leader is the only source of research in a sector,

that is, outsiders are prohibited from conducting research. This setup differs from the
previous one in two respects: the leader regards all quality improvements as permanent
and does not value the transfer of monopoly rentals from his or her predecessor (that is,
from himself or herself). We therefore have to compute the present value of the leader's
net receipts in this new environment.

Let Z. be the level of research effort, p the resulting probability of success per
unit of time, and

the flow of monopoly profit, which is still given by
J

(14)

Let

=

LA"' (14). a2/U_&)

taI(14

.

be the present value of the leader's net receipts. The expectation, E(Vj,ç) can

be broken into two parts. The first part is the present value of the net earnings,
up to the time of the next quality improvement. These earnings accrue, as
J

J

before, over an interval of random length Tj,ç• The present value of this flow has the
same form as equation (15):

—Z.).[i —exp(—rT.)].

(lr

J

3

Since the probability density for

.1

is still given by equation (18), the expected
3

present value of the first part of E(V) is

27

• f(1—) exp(—p. r). dr = (wj—Z.)/(r+p.)
The second part of E(Vj,ç) covers the period after the time of the next quality

ii

improvement, T.,. The expected present value starting from that date is E(V.
but we have to discount this term by the factor

j+1

),

exP(__rTJK). Therefore, if we again use

the probability density for Tj,ç from equation (18), then we can evaluate this second

part as

E(VjK) PJ ferT.exp(_pr) dr = P•
If we combine the two parts, then we get

E(V) = (r+Hkj,c —

(38)

+

We can use equation (37) to substitute out for

E(V.) =

1

(r+pY [

— (1q

in equation (38). The result is

•

+

Thus, E(V.) depends on p., and some other terms, including E(V.,

Jj

ii

Jj+1

), that are

independent of p. The monopolist would choose p (by selecting the R&D effort,

Zj,ç) to maximize E(V). If we set the derivative of E(V) with respect to
zero to get the first-order condition, then the result can be written as

p to

28

(39)

E(V,1) — E(Vj,ç) = (1•q

(ic-i-i)
-

cr/(1—cr)

=

where the last equality uses equation (37).

The result in equation (39) differs from the free-entry condition in the previous
in equation [20]) in two respects. First, the term Z/p is now

setup

equated to the increment in present value, E(V ic+i —

j

E(V) rather than to the full
3

present value, E(Vj,c.+i)i because the leader does not value the expropriation of his or
her own monopoly profit. Second, the term E(Vj,ç) is calculated differently from before,

because it considers that the leadership position is permanent, rather than temporary.
To see this last property, substitute the result for E(V•,ç ) from equation (39)
j+1
into equation (38) and also substitute for
from equation (37) to get

(40)

EN.) = r/r.

The term on the right-hand side is the present value yielded by a permanent stream of

profit of size lrj,ç. (Since the stream is permanent, the discount rate is r, rather than

r+p..)
If we substitute from equation (40) into equation (39) and use equation (14) to

substitute out for r, then we get a condition for r. The resulting value, denoted r1, is
the equilibrium rate of return for an environment in which the research in all sectors is

carried out by the industry leader:'5

15ff rcrt where r1 is given in equation (41), then the derivative of E(V) with respect to

29

(41)

r = (LI Q

Al/U_a)

(1). a21U_. [1_c-_a/U—a)].

The corresponding growth rate (of Q and the other quantities) is given, as usual, by

7,= (1/O).(rj—p).
The rate of return in the previous model satisfies the condition (from equation
[23]),

(42)

1= (L/g.A1/U_a).(i?).a2/(1_a)

This expression includes p on the right-hand side, although we could also substitute the
equilibrium value for p from equation (36). The result for r1 in equation (41) differs

from the solution for r in equation (42) in three ways. First) Q( tends to make rfr.
Second, r falls with p in equation (42) because the private return to an innovation is

temporary. This force tends to make rtr. Finally, equation (41) includes the term
[l_c_a/(1_a)I<l, because the leader weighs only the increment in present value from a
research success. This term tends to make r1cr.
If we use equation (36) to substitute out lot p in equation (42), then we get the
equilibrium value for r, as expressed in equation (34).

Q=( so that the leader has no

cost advantage in research, then we can use equatiâns (41) and (34) to show r1Cr.16 The
difference between the rates of return involves two offsetting forces: r1<r because no

weight is given to the expropriaticn of the existing monopoly rentals, but r1>r because

p

is positive, so that the leader would like to carry out an infinite amount of research. If

J

r>rt then the derivative is negative, so that no research is carried out, and the economy —
does not grow. An equilibrium with positive growth therefore requires
r=rt
'6The proof requires the transversality condition, r>, given in n. 12.

30

innovations are viewed as permanent. The net effect is unambiguous because the two
forces are essentially the same, except that they differ in sign and one comes earlier than

the other. The extraction of the monopoly rent is the amount taken from one's
predecessor. The treatment of an innovation as temporary is equivalent to ignoring the
rents that will be taken by one's followers. The terms are the same in magnitude,
except for two considerations: the later term is higher because of growth of the economy

at the rate 7, but is smaller in present value because of discounting at the rate r. The

relation r>—the transversality condition—implies that the first term dominates, so
that r1'zr must hold.

2. Research by Outsiders
Suppose now that we allow outside competitors, as well as the leader, to carry out

research. If C=Q, then equations (41) and (34) imply r1cr, that is, outsiders view
research more favorably than the leader. The probability of success, p, and the expected
growth rate of quality in each sector are therefore higher than the values that would be
determined by a leader who had exclusive rights to do research.

These results do not mean that all research will be conducted by outsiders. Given
the competitors' willingness to carry out enough research to generate a probability of
success p, the •leader would have to accept this probability of an innovation as a

constraint given by the existence of the outside competition. (The constraint is effective
here because leaders would otherwise determine a lower probability.) For a given
success probability—and, hence, a given expected duration of the currently leading

technology—the rate of return from research for the leader is exactly the same as that

for outsiders (when (=Q). Although the leader does not consider the extraction of the
existing monopoly rentals as part of the return from successful research, he or she does

count as a return the prevention of the loss of these rentals to an outsider. Thus, when

31

(=Q

the solutions that we obtained before are valid—for r in equation (34), i in

equation (35), and p in equation (36)—but it is a matter of indifference whether the
research is done by leaders or outsiders.'7

Now we make the more realistic assumption Qc(, that is, incumbents have a cost
advantage in improving and refining the existing types of products. We noted before

that r1cr applies when

but equation (41) shows that a reduction in Q raises

There exists a critical value (such that (c( implies r1>r. If the leader's cost
advantage in research in each sector is large enough so that (g<(, then the existence of
the outside competition does not constrain the incumbent's choice of research intensity.

Hence, Qc( implies that the equilibrium rate of return equals the valuer1 shown in
equation (41), and the growth rate is given correspondingly by -y(1/O).(r1_p).Is Note
that the computations that underlie these solutions for r1 and

treat innovations as

permanent and do not attach any value to the taking of the existing monopoly rentals.

Consider now the range (cQc(. In this case, the cost advantage for leaders is not
sufficient to ignore the outside competition. The equilibrium is then an analog to limit
pricing—research intensities and the corresponding probability of success are just

sufficient to deter outsiders from entering the research business. In particular, the limit
success probability is the value p shown in equation (36). In this equilibrium, the

industry leaders conduct all the research, but the solutions for r and y are the same as
those that arise when outsiders do all the research (equations [34] and [35], respectively).19
l?This statement is correct if monopoly pricing prevails in either case.
LSThis equilibrium determines the aggregate spending on R&D and the economy's overall
growth rate. The allocation of R&D across the sectors is indeterminate however, because
all rates of return to research by leaders equal r1 and are independent of the amount
invested. See n. 7 for an analogous indeterminacy in the model in which outsiders carry
out all of the research.
tOThe only difference from before is that the amount spent on research, Z, is smaller because
it depends on the research cost for leaders,
Q, rather than that for outsiders, (. The level
of consumption, C, in equation (33) is correspondingly higher.

32

Thus, on the one hand, we no longer predict the pattern of leapfrogging in which
every innovation goes along with the replacement of the industry leader by an outsider.

But, on the other hand, the values of r and #y are the same as those predicted by the
leapfrogging model. The results are as if researchers were seeking the incumbent's

rentals and anticipating that their successes would only be temporary.
is that the existence of the competitive

Another result in the range where

fringe for research is important for the equilibrium. Research intensity and the
economy's growth rate are higher than they would be if this fringe did not exist (because
-

r1cr applies in this range).

K

Pareto Optimality
We can assess the Pareto optimality of the decentralized equilibria by comparing

them with the solution to the social-planner's problem. The social planner seeks to
maximize the expression for utility in equation (31), subject to the economy's resource

constraint,

(43) Y =

AL•

=

C

+ E(XjN+Zj) = C + X + Z.
j=1

j=1

The first part of the equation says that total output depends on the quality levels, qJ,
and the quantities employed, X.K, of the leading-edge intermediates in each sector.

ii

(We have already used the result here that the optimizing social planner would not
produce and use any intermediate goods of less than leading-edge quality.) The next

33

part of the equation indicates that output can be used for consumption, C;
intermediates, X; and R&D effort, Z.

The planner's problem is also constrained by the R&D technology. We assume
that the probability of a research success in sector j, which has attained the quality rung
is again given from equation (37) by

(37)

Pj/ç=(1/Q).ZjJ
J

J

We enter the leader's research cost, Q, which we assume is no larger than the cost for
outsiders, because the social planner would assign the research activity to the low-cost
researcher.

It is convenient first to work out the planner's choice of X.,—which is a static

JJ

problem—and then use the result to write out a simplified Harniltonian expression. We
can show that the first-order condition for maximizing U with respect to the choice of

X implies

(44) X (social planner) = LAh/_4.ah/(1_Q).qJ/().
Recall that the choice in a decentralized economy is

(6)

X- = LAh1(14.a21(1_a).q3).

Hence, because of monopoly pricing of the intermediate inputs, the privately chosen

quantity is smaller than the socially chosen amount (by the multiple

34

Substitution for

from equation (44) into equation (43) gives an expression for

aggregate output:

Y (social planner) =

(45)
N

where Q =

is the same aggregate quality index that we considered for

j=1
the decentralized economy in equation (11). The level of output for a decentralized
economy is

(12)

Y=

A11_.a2'(1_(.LQ.

Therefore, for given Q, the social-planner's level of output exceeds the decentralized

value. This result reflects the decentralized economy's failure to achieve static efficiency

by choosing a high enough quantity of intermediate goods, X, in each sector.
Equation (45) also implies that the social plainer's growth rate of Y equals the growth
rate of Q.

lithe social planner applies the research effort Z.Nto sector j, then the expected

ii

change in Q per unit of time is given by

E(Q) = p•.[qkJ+1)

a/(

a) _qja/(la)j,

j=1

Substitution for p from equation (37) simplifies the expressioa to

35

E(AQ) =

(46)

Thus, the expected change in Q—and, hence, in Y—depends only on the aggregate of

R&D spending, Z,

and

not on the manner in which this spending is spread across the

sectors. We again assume that the number of sectors is large enough so that we can
treat

Q

as

differentiable;, hence, we use equation (46) to represent the actual change, Q.

We can use the results to write the social-planner's Uamiltonian expression as

(47)

J = (c _i)e_Pt + ii.

[LAh/(1_a).(i2).ah/ULQ —Z-cL]

+
The Lagrange multiplier u applies to the resource constraint.
from

This constraint comes

equation (43) after substitution for Y from equation (45). The shadow-price p

attaches to the expression for 9 from equation (46).
Note that the Hamiltonian in equation (47) depends on the aggregate outlay for
R&D, Z,

but

not on the distribution of this spending across the sectors. This property

means that the relative allotments of R&D across the sectors are indeterminate.20
We now use familiar methods to derive the dynamic-optimization conditions for

the choices of c and Z in equation (47). The first-order conditions and the transition

equation for 9 lead to the social-planner's growth rate:

(48) ' (social planner) = (1/0)20This indeterminacy

{(—)

- Ah/U_). (2C)-

[i_q_üI(1_4} —

reflects the lack of diminishing returns to research in each sector. This
kind of indeterminacy also applied in the decentralized frameworks; see n. 7 and n. is.

36

The implicit social rate of return1 which corresponds to the expression in the large
brackets that precedes the term —p, is therefore

(49)

r (social planner) =

A11 (J.). a1
(!).
-

l—a)

The planner's rate of return can be readily compared with the return r1 (from
equation [411) that applies when industry leaders have a monopoly in research. The rate
because of the effect
r1is lower than the social rate of return by the multiple

from the monopoly pricing of the intermediate goods. (Recall that the decentralized

quantity of intermediates, Xjm in equation [6) falls short of the social-planner's
quantity in equation [44] by the factor

The gap in rates of return

corresponds to an excess of the planner's growth rate over the decentralized growth rate.
An appropriate subsidy on the purchases of intermediate goods would, if financed by a

lump-sum tax, eliminate the discrepancy in rates of return and growth rates. This
subsidy also removes the static inefficiency that results from the economy's failure to
employ a sufficient quantity of intermediate goods.

The rate of return r1 prevails in the decentralized economy if leaders have a
sufficient cost advantage in research (Q<C in the previous discussion). Otherwise, the

rate of return is the value r shown in equation (34). The spread between the social rate

of return and r adds rrr to the gap between the social rate and r, a gap that we have
already discussed.

Recall that r1cr because of two offsetting effects: the rate r is higher because it
counts the expropriation of the predecessor's monopoly profit, but is lower because it
views the benefits from an innovation as temporary. We discussed before why the first

effect was larger, so that r1cr on net. This result implies that the difference between

37

the social rate of return and r is smaller than the difference between the social rate and

rt Hence, the gap between the planner's and decentralized growth rates is also not as
large as before. It is even possible that the privately determined rate of return and
growth rate would exceed the planner's values. This result applies if the effect from the
monopoly pricing of the intermediates is less important than the gap between r and r1

(which reflects the net effect from the seeking of monopoly profit).
We already mentioned that the appropriate subsidy to the purchase of

intermediates would remove the distortions from monopoly pricing. The additional
distortions that arise when the private rate of return is r (given in equation [34]) can be

eliminated if a scheme is implemented—in the spirit of Coase (1.960)—that effectively

endows industry leaders with property rights over their monopoly profits. This scheme
would require innovators to compensate their immediate predecessor for the loss of

rental income. An innovator in sector j then raises the cost of innovation to include the
required compensation to the current leader, but also raises the prospective reward to

include the anticipated compensation from the next innovator. The first part of the
scheme causes the innovator to count only the net change in the flow ofmonopoly

rentals as a contribution; that is, the incentive to seek the existing rents is eliminated.
The second part motivates the innovator to view his or her contribution as lasting
forever, rather than just until the next innovation. As usual, however, the successful
implementation of this kind of policy becomes problematic in a richer model; for

example, in contexts where quality improvements are hard for a policymaker to

evaluate.
The internalization just described occurs automatically in the model if the leaders

have a monopoly position in research so that the private rate of return is the value

rt

Thus, one way to reach the first best in this framework is to preclude research by

outsiders! This provision reduces the incentive to innovate, but only to the appropriate

38

extent. This method works, however, only if the effects of monopoly pricing have

already been neutralized through the appropriate tax.subsidy policy. If these taxsubsidy policies are infeasible, then the prevention of research by followers is likely to
worsen the outcomes in this model.
We can summarize the model's conclusions about welfare as follows:
1.

The decentralized rate of return and growth rate coincide with the socialplanner's choices if the effects of monopoly pricing are eliminated (for

example, by implementing the appropriate subsidy to the purchase of
intermediates) and if innovators are forced to compensate their immediate
predecessor for the loss of monopoly rentals. This compensation scheme

effectively institutes the claim on these monopoly rentals as a formal

property right.
2.

If the effects of monopoly pricingare eliminated, bat no compensation is

awarded to predecessors, then the decentralized values for the rate of return
and the growth rate exceed the social-planner's values. The failure to
compensate one's predecessor makes the private rewards to innovation too
high, whereas the failure to receive compensation later goes the other way.
The net effect from this tent seeking is unambiguous, however, because the

distortions are essentially the same, except that the second one occurs later.
3.

If there are no interventions—so that the effects of monopoly pricing are
not eliminated and no compensation is paid to one's predecessor—then the

decentralized values for the rate of return and the growth rate may be
higher or lower than the social-planner's values. Monopoly pricing causes

the decentralized rate of return and growth rate to fall short of the socially
optimal values, but this effect is offset by the net effect from rent seeking,, a

force that makes the private rate of return too high.

39

F. Summary Observations about Growth
The quality improvements studied in this paper represent ongoing refinements of
products and techniques, whereas the expansions of variety considered in other models

describe basic innovations. From a modeling standpoint, one distinction between the
two kinds of technological progress is that goods of higher quality are close substitutes

for those of lesser quality, so that quality enhancements tend to make the old goods
obsolete. In contrast, discoveries of new kinds of products may not, on average, be

direct substitutes or complements for the existing types. Therefore, basic innovations

may not drive out the old varieties. One consequence of this distinction is that, in a
decentralized economy, the R&D effort aimed at quality improvements may be too high
(because of the incentive to seek the monopoly rents of incumbents), whereas the effort

aimed at basic innovations tends to be too low.
Another difference from the varieties models is that the costs of quality
improvements for insiders tend to be smaller than those for outsiders. Hence, we argued

that the insiders would tend, in equilibrium, to carry out the research that underlies the
regular process of product refinement. In contrast, insiders are unlikely to have a cost
advantage in breakthrough research; basically because there are no insiders for this

activity. Therefore, dramatically new innovations are unlikely to come from existing
industry leaders.
Thetwo types of technological progress have similar predictions about the
determination of growth rates. In both cases, growth is higher if the willingness to save
is greater, the level of technology is higher, and the cost of R&D is lower. Both
formulations also predict scale effects, represented in the models by the quantity of a
fixed factor like raw labor or human capital.

40

References

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt, "A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,"
Econoinetrica, 60, March 1992, 323—351.

Barro, R.J. and X. Sala4-Martin, "Convergence," Journal of Political Economy, 100,
April 1992, 223—251.
Barro, R.J. and X. Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, unpublished manuscript, Harvard
University, 1994.

Brezis, E., P. Krugman, and D. Tsiddon, "Leapfrogging: a Theory of Cycles in National
Technological Leadership," National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper
no. 3886, October 1991.

Coase, R.fl., "The Problem of Social Cost," Journal of Law & Economics, 3, October
1960, 1—44.

Dixit, A.K. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity," American Economic Review, 67, June 1977, 297—308.

Ether, W., "National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of
International Trade," American Economic Review, 72, June 1982, 389-405.
Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman, Innovation an4 Growth in the Global Economy,
Cambridge MA, M.I.T. Press, 1991.

Kremer, M., "Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to
1990," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, August 1993, 681—716.

Rebelo, S., "Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth," Journal of Political
Economy, 99, June 1991, 500—521.

Reinganum, J.F., "The Timing of Innovation: Research, Development, and Diffusion,"
in R. Schmaiensee and R.D. Willig, eds., Handbook of Indu3trial Organization,
v. 1, New York, Elsevier Science Publishers, 1989.

41

Romer, P.M., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 98,
October 1990, part 2, S71—S102.

Schumpeter, J.A., Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, New York, Harper and
Brothers, 1942.

Spence, M., "Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition," Review of
Economic Studies, 43, June 1976, 217—235.

Young, A., "Substitution and Complementarity in Endogenous Innovation," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108, August 1993, 775—807.

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Number, K

Ladder

Quality

1

(1

Figure

2

1:

3

[}

4

5

[1

N-i

[1

N

[1
product number

Quality Ladders and Discoveries of New Products

4-'

1

+

0
0
C)

4-a

4-a

C/)
C)

0)
Cl)
Co

C
C)
4-.

C)

D
D
Cu

-J
Cu

(\J

C

4-.

+3-

c\J

C)
U-

0

+
L..
I—

0

1)

0

4-.

