                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      INTERNATIONAL EQUITY TRANSACTIONS
                           AND U.S. PORTFOLIO CHOICE




                                      Linda L. Tesar
                                     Ingrid M. Werner




                                  Working Paper No. 4611




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  January. 1994

The authors thank Bernard Dumas. Geert Bekaert, Jeff Frankel. Danny Quah, Peter Reiss, Doug
Staigerwald, and our discussants Philippe Jorion and Richard Levich for invaluable comments
and suggestions. We also thank Tiff Macklem of the Bank of Canada and Hartmut Draeger of
the Deutsche Bundesbank for their assistance. Richard Crabb and Jon Riddle both provided
excellent research assistance. Any remaining errors are our own responsibility. This paper is
part of NBER's research programs in Asset Pricing, International Finance and Macroeconomics.
and International Trade and Investment Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                      NBER Working Paper #4611
                                                                                  January 1994


                        INTERNATIONAL EQUITY TRANSACTIONS
                             AND U.S. PORTFOLIO CHOICE


                                           ABSTRACT

        This paper studies the cross-border transactions in equity by investors in Canada,
Germany, Japan. the U.K and the U.S. We find that investors from different countries make
very different decisions about the allocation of their portfolio across markets. in contradiction
to the notion that high variable transactions costs hinder international diversification, we find that
the volume of gross equity flows vastly exceeds net equity flows and the turnover rate on foreign
equity investments by some investors even exceeds domestic turnover rates. We also reject the
hypothesis that U.S. investors follow the standard CAPM in allocating their global equity
portfolio.




Linda 14. Tesar                                               Ingrid M. Werner
Economics Department                                          Graduate School of Business
University of California at Santa Barbara                     Stanford University
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                                       Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER                                                      and NBER
                                                                                                 1



I. Introduction
   The gain from diversification of investment portfolios across national markets is by now a
weli-eitablished fact. Studies published in the late 1960s and early 1970s demonstrated that
investors would be rewarded for holding a global set of assets rather than skewing their port-
folios toward domestic investments (see Grubel (1968), Levy and Sarnat (1970), and Solnik
(1974)). Since that time, fixed barriers to international investment - such as government con-
trols on cross-border capital flows, difficulties in obtaining information about foreign markets
and differences in financial institutions - have gradually declined. ilowever, as of 1991, the share
of portfolio investment allocated to foreign assets by the United States and Canada remained
at less than five percent of their total portfolios (Tesar and Werner (1993a)). Somewhat sur-
prisingly, the turnover rate on the component of portfolios allocated to international equities
is substantially larger than the turnover rate on national equity markets. This suggests that
variable transactions costs are unlikely to be the main cause for home bias in portfolioalloca-
tions. Therefore models of international portfolio choice must provide explanations for both the
heterogeneity in national portfolios, in particular the bias towards domestic securities, and the
high volume of transactions in international securities markets.
    To gain further insight into the behavior of international investors, we examine the time
series patterns of bilateral equity flows between five large OECD countries; Canada, Germany,
Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Our study uses quarterly data drawn from
Statistics Canada and the U.S. Department of the Treasury. This reasearch makes anumber
of contributions to the existing literature on international portfolio investment,. First, our data
allow us to identify the nationality of the investors involved in cross-border transactions. Thus,
we are able to study potential differences in investment behavior across investors from different
countries. Second, having data on bilateral securities transactions (rather than aggregate port-
folio inflows and outflows) allows us to examine how each investor allocates these funds across
markets. Finally, our study examines the actual portfolio choice of U.S. investors. Thus we
can test models of portfolio choice directly using both the information about asset allocations
and returns. Our results suggest that existing models of international portfolio choice are not
supported by the data. It is our hope that these findings will help guide the development of
 new models of portfolio choice that are more consistent with the observed behavior of investors
 in international equity markets.
     We summarize the rules governing U.S. reporting of international securitiestransactions in
                                                                                                2


Section 2. In Section 3, we examine net equity flows reported by Canadian and U.S. reporting
agencies. We find that net equity flows to and from the United Kingdom account for the
majority of flows across U.S. borders, while flows to and from the United States account for
most of net equity flows across Canadian borders. In a simple frictionless world, net equity
flows result from changes in investors' perceptions about expected returns to, and the risk of,
individual markets. If investors across countries shared the same views, one would expect net
acquisitions of equity to be synchronized across investors and over markets. We find very little
evidence for such a consensus among investors in the data. Perhaps even more puzzling is that
net purchases are strongly positively autocorrelated suggesting that portfolios adjust sluggishly
over time. This could be explained by very slow moving state variables driving the perceived
investment opportunity set, or by frictions that prevent a rapid adjustment of portfolios in
response to altered expectations.
   In Section 4, we construct estimates of U.S. investment positions in foreign equities and
foreign investment positions in U.S. equities. U.S. holdings of foreign equity have increased at
a modest pace during the sample. Foreign holdings of U.S. equity exhibit a more rapid increase
and reached a level of roughly 10 percent of U.S. market capitalization by the end of the sample.
In section 5, we combine these estimates of investment positions with gross transactions volumes
to create a measure of turnover in foreign equity. Two basic conclusions emerge. First, gross
trading volume in foreign equity is substantially larger than the corresponding net acquisitions
of equity. Second, we find that the rate at which foreign investors turn over their U.S. equity
portfolios is roughly at par with the average turnover rate in U.S. markets. In contrast, U.S.
investors appear to be trading more frequently on their portfolio of foreign equities, particularly
Japanese and British equities, than the average transactions rate on U.S. stock exchanges. U.S.
turnover rates in foreign equity also tend to exceed the average turnover rates in the markets
where transactions take place.
   In Sections 6 and 7, we combine our data on net purchases with excess returns to test some
simple models of portfolio choice. We find that U.S. net purchases show very little significant
comovement with equity returns, interest rates, dividend yields, exchange rates and measures
of investor wealth. We then use our estimates of international investment positions to test
whether 13.5. investors allocate portfolios according to the capital asset pricing model [CAPMI.
Our data strongly reject this hypothesis.
                                                                                                3


2. Reporting of International Securities Transactions
    Our data on equity flows are collected from Statistics Canada and the U.S. Department of
the Treasury.1 Foreign direct investment activity is excluded from this data. Statistics Canada
reports quarterly net transactions in foreign and domestic bondsand equities between Canadian
residents and residents of the U.S., the U.K., Japan, and the EC excluding the U.K. The U.S.
Treasury Bulletin reports quarterly data on purchases and sales of equities and bonds between
U.S. residents and foreign residents from Canada, Germany, Japan, the U.K., and from a large
number of other countries. The sample period is 1978.1.1991.3.2 Data from the U.S. Treasury
appears to be the most comprehensive of the data-sets (see Tesar and Werner 1992)). Appendix
A briefly summarizes the reporting requirements specified by the U.S. government.3 Reports are
filed monthly with the Treasury department covering transactions with foreigners in long.term
marketable securities. A foreigner is any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
other organization located outside the United States.4
    Before going on to the analysis, we should mention some of the shortcomings of the data.
First, there is no explicit penalty for failing to report securities transactions to the regulatory
agendes. However, the securities brokers we have spoken with indicate that they are unlikely
to "overlook" reporting requirements as they Wish to stay on friendly terms with reporting
agencies. In fact, they are more likely to bend over backwards to remain in compliance. Second,
the rapid expansion of markets and the development of new types of financial instruments
make it difficult for the reporting agencies to keep pace with the volume of flows.5 Third, the
data may not reflect the transactions of foreign-based firms which are transacting on behalf of
domestic residents. An important example are U.S. mutual funds domiciled off-shore.6 Finally,
the initial deposit of ADRS and GOBS on domestic markets is reflected in the data; however,
the subsequent re-issue and ultimate trading of these essentially foreign securities by domestic
residents is not picked up by our data sources.
    Despite these problems, the data provide a wealth of information about international port-
folio investment. It is unlikely that the data reflect all cross-border securities transactions.
However, as long as there is no systematic bias between the reporting of purchases and sales,
and there is little reason to suspect such bias dnring the time period we study, our data can be
interpreted as reflecting the investment choices of those investors who report theirtransactions
to official agencies. As will be seen below, to the extent that gross cross-border transactions
are underreported, some of the evidence on the magnitude of transactionsin foreign equity and
                                                                                               4


turnover becomes even more puzzling.
    We will apply two basic concepts to the data on equity transactions. The first, net equity
flows, is the change in a country's net holdings of foreing equity. We define U.S. residents'
net purchases of Canadian securities as gross purchases of foreign securities from Canadian
residents minus gross sales of foreign securities to Canadian residents. Similarly, Canadian
residents' net purchases of U.S. securities are defined as the gross sales of domestic (U.S.)
securities by Canadians minus the gross purchases by U.S. resident of domestic (U.S.) securities
from Canadians. The second concept, gross equity flows or transactions, is the volume of cross-
border equity trading. We define transactions in foreign equity by U.S. residents to be the sum
of U.S. residents' purchases of foreign equity from and U.S. residents' sales of foreign equity to
foreign residents. Transactions in U.S. equity by foreign residents are similarly defined.
    We did some basic cross checking of the correspondence between comparable series reported
by Statistics Canada and the U.S. Treasury. The reported net equity flows are significantly
positively correlated.7 It does, however, appear that the average quarterly net purchases of U.S.
shares reported by Statistics Canada is less than half of those reported by the U.S. Treasury.
No discrepancy of similar magnitude is present for the reported U.S. net purchases of Canadian
equity.8 This may reflect a tendency for Canadian investors to mis-report their purchases of
U.S. equity. One might suspect that the reason is to avoid taxation or circumvent quantitative
capital controls. It is of course also possible that the reporting requirements differ in the two
countries. The asymmetric evidence of under-reporting however, is difficult to reconcile with
such an explantion.
   To facilitate comparisons between equity flows reported by the two official sources, we report
afl flows in millions of U.S. dollars. The Canadian data are translated into U.S. dollars using
the average quarterly exchange rate drawn from the International Financial Statistics [IFS]
data base. We produce descriptive statistics for real flows expressed in December 1977 prices.
These are computed by deflating nominal flows using the average monthly seasonally adjusted
consumer price index for each quarter from Citibase.


3. Net Equity Flows
Net Equity Flows Crossing the U.S. Border
  Figures la and lb show net equity flows crossing U.S. borders. These flows have become
more volatile after the mid 1980s, primarily due to fluctuations in U.S. purchases of Japanese
                                                                                               5


and British equity. Figure lb shows that the same two countries also exhibit the most volatile
net purchases of U.S. equity. Note the large sale of U.S. equity by British residents during the
fourth quarter of 1987 - the quarter including the stock market crash. It is interesting that
investors from the other countries did not simultaneously dump U.S. stocks. We will document
that such heterogeneity in investor responses across countries appears to be a characteristic of
international investment behavior.
    Table la shows that the United Kingdom is the most important counterpart in cross-border
equity transactions with the United States. U.S. investors bought on average 169 million con-
stant dollars worth of equity from the U.K. per quarter during the 1978.1-91.3 period. Quarterly
net purchases from Canada were less than half that at $74 million, and U.S. investors bought
$27 million of equity per quarter from Germany. While average quarterly net flows from the
United States to Japan have been modest at $49 million their volatility has been exceptionally
high. The table also reports statistics on net purchases of U.S. equity by Canadian, German,
Japanese, and British investors. British and Japanese investors have been the dominant foreign
investors in U.S. equity, acquiring on average $235 million (41 percent of total inflow) and $200
million (34 percent of total inflow) respectively per quarter. Canadian investors bought on av-
erage $120 million constant U.S. dollars of equity per quarter while German investors spent $25
million per quarter. Note that the combined average quarterly net investment in U.S. equity by
foreign investors of $580 million is almost twice as large as the combined average net investment
in foreign equity by U.S. investors of $319 million. Thus, net purchases of U.S. equity by foreign
residents contributed to financing the U-S. current account deficits of the 1980s and early 1990s.

Net Equity Flows Crossing the Canadian Border
   Net equity flows crossing the Canadian border are illustrated in Figures ic and ld. Related
descriptive statistics are presented in Table lb. Ftom Canada's perspective, the United States
is its largest trading partner in terms of equity transactions. Canadian average net purchases of
U.S. equity of $55 million is more than twice as large as net purchases of British equity at $21
million. U.S. investors provide 85 percent of the average equity flows to Canada. Net purchases
by EC residents account for roughly 20 percent of U.S. net purchases. Note that bilateral equity
flows between the United States and Canada are not only the largest in magnitude (relative to
the other countries) but also exhibit the most volatility. Japanese net equity investment was
modest while British investors on average withdrew funds from the Canadian equity market.
Net average quarterly equity flows crossing the Canadian border were virtually balanced during
this period.
                                                                                                6


Autocorrelation of Net Equity Flows
   The data on U.S. and Canadian net purchases exhibit substantial positive autocorrelation.
In only one case, Canadian net purchases of EC equity, do we observe a significantly negative
autocorrelation coefficient. This persistence in net purchases may be evidence that investors
adjust their portfolios gradually over time. If this is indeed the case, such dynamic adjustments
should be incorporated into the development and testing of models of portfolio choice.
   The serial correlation of net acquisitions of equity also affects our inference based on simple
correlations of net equity flows across markets. We report correlation coefficients since they have
the advantage of being unit-free. However, the calculation of appropriate standard errors of
the estimated correlation coefficients between time series with serial correlation is not straight-
forward. Instead we base our inference on the covariance between the time series and correct
the corresponding standard errors for autocorrelation using a method proposed by Newey and
West (1987). The method is outlined in Appendix B. Our null hypothesis is that the estimated
covariances are zero, or that net equity flows are uncorrelated.
Correlations of Net Equity Flows Across Markets
    In Tables 2a and 2b, we report the correlations among real net equity flows to investigate
the extent to which net acquisitions of equity are synchronized across investors from different
countries. Suppose that investors follow a simple mean-variance model for asset allocation,
and that they for exogenous reasons start with a portfolio of primarily domestic securities. In
such a world, the decision to invest in foreign equity can be prompted by an expectation that
the return to foreign equity will exceed the return on domestic equity or that the inclusion of
foreign equity in the portfolio will reduce risk.
    To the extent that cross-border investment is driven solely by differences in expected re-
turns, we expect to see a negative contemporaneous correlation between domestic investors' net
purchases of foreign equity and foreign investors' net purchases of domestic equity. Moreover,
investors would channel funds into the same "foreign" market simultaneously. If, on the other
hand, cross.border investment is driven primarily by the desire to diversify across markets, the
correlation between net equity purchases crossing a border from different directions might very
well be positive. The diversification motive might, alternatively, make different investors target
different foreign markets for their investment, which means that the cross-sectional correlations
could be positive or negative.
   Of course, portfolio flows between countries are part of the larger picture of trade and
financial linkages that connect open economies. If equity flows are in some sense the "residual"
                                                                                                 7


component of the capital account, net equity flows may be determined by factors quite separate
from the simple mean-variance tradeoffs discussed above.
   The first panel of Thble 2a shows the correlation between quarterly net purchases of foreign
equity by U.S. residents. The marginal significance levels give the probability that the estimated
covariance is zero. U.S. net purchases of equity from Canadian and Japanese residents are
negatively correlated, while the rest of the pair-wise correlations of net purchases are positive.
In no case are the cováriances significantly different from zero. Correlation of foreign investors'
net purchases of U.S. equity, reported in the second panel of the table, have mixed signs but
again none of the covariances are significant. Thus, there appears to be little synchronization
in foreign investment in U.S. equity. The bottom panel reports the correlations between U.S.
net acquisitions of foreign equity and foreign acquisitions of U.S. equity. if U.S. and Canadian
investors concur, for example, that it is appropriate to reallocate the portfolio between U.S.
and Canadian equity, we anticipate that the correlations will be negative. While the majority
of correlations are in fact negative, none of the covariances are significantly different from zero.
    A somewhat different picture emerges from the correlation between cross-border flows for
Canada in Table 2b. The correlation between Canadian net purchases of foreign equity in the
first panel are of mixed signs, suggesting more of a reallocation across markets rather than
a general increase in Canadian holdings of all foreign equity. None of the covariances are,
however, significantly different from zero. The consistently positive correlations in the second
panel indicate that there appears to be a consensus among British, EC, and U.S. investors
about the approporate timing of investment in Canadian equities. However, the mixed signs
and the high marginal significance levels in the bottom panel suggest that Canadian investors
do not agree with the investors in the other countries.
   The overwhelming impression from Tables 2a and 2b is the lack of significant correlation
among net equity flows.9 Given the general nature of the alternative hypothesis and that the
sample is rather limited, we do not expect to have much power against the null. The absence
of comovement in net equity flows may indicate that the decisions about international portfolio
choice are guided primarily by the diversification motive. This conclusion is somewhat contra-
dicted by the high volume of cross-border investment between countries whose stock markets
are highly positively correlated, i.e. Canada and the United States. Another potentialexpla-
nation is that investors' strategies for portfolio allocation differ substantially across countries.
Alternatively, net equity purchases may be mainly affected by more general macroeconomic
conditions such as business cycle fluctuations, the differential between output growth at home
                                                                                              8


and   abroad, or fiscal policies.


4. Cumulated Foreign Investment Positions

      In the remainder of this paper we   concentrate on equity flows to and from the United
States as reported by the U.S. Treasury. Using our bilateral data on net purchases of equity,
we construct a quarterly time series of U.S. foreign investment positions. Such data are not
available from published sources.10 The time series are interesting for two purposes. First,
they provide information about the allocation of the U.S. investment portfolio across global
markets. Second, the investment positions are the relevant base for thinking about turnover
rates on foreign equity investments.
    To create an investment position series from U.S. net purchases of equity, we cumulate
net purchases starting from an initial investment position, which we take as the investment
position at the end of 1977 as estimated by the Department of Commerce. At the end of 1977,
the reported U.S. investment position was $4,971 million in Canada, $350 million in Japan, and
$4,485 million in Western Europe. We allocate the Western Europe position over Germany and
the U.K. according to their relative market sizes at the end of 1977.11 The resulting position
is $1,794 million in Germany and $2,691 million in the United Kingdom. Starting from these
intitial values, denoted X, the quarterly investment position is created using the following
algorithm:

(1)                             X1 =Xf(1-FR÷1)+NP1,
where  .K1' is the U.S. investment position in market i at t, R÷1 is the gross return (including
dividends) on equity in market i over the quarter, and Nfl1+1 represents quarterly net pur-
chases of U.S. investors from market     Using the data on net foreign purchases of U.S. equity,
the same algorithm can be used to generate the investment position of foreign investors in the
U.S.'3
    The resulting series for U.S. investment positions across foreign markets as a fraction of
the U.S. market capitalization are plotted in Figure 2a.14 According to our estimates, the
U.S. international investment position has increased from 1.3 percent of U.S. equity market
capitalization in the first quarter of 1978 to 3.9 percent by the third quarter of 1991. This
increase can largely be accounted for by the growing U.S. investment position in the United
Kingdom, which went from 0.3 percent in 1978.1 to 1.7 percent at the end of the sample. U.S.
holdings of Canadian equity increased sharply from 0.7 in 1978.1 to 1.6 percent in the first
                                                                                                .9


quarter of 1980, but have since fallen to a level of 1.2 percent. The U.S. investment positions
in Germany and Japan have remained stable and low at around 0.5 percent throughout the
sample-period.
   The investment positions of foreign investors in the United States as fractions of U.S. market
capitalization are reported in Figure 2b." Total foreign holdings of U.S. equity have increased
steadily over the sample from a level of 4.3 percent at the outset to a level of 1.5 percent by the
end of the sample. All countries have increases their investment positions in the United States,
but the most dominant contributors to U.S. risk-captial were British investors whose equity
holdings went from 2.1 to 5.6 percent of U.S. market capitalization over the 1978.91 period.
The Japanese investment position began to rise in the mid 1980s and reached a level of 1.1
percent of U.S. market caitalization by the third quarter of 1991. This late start can in part be
explained by the relaxation of capital controls which took place in Japan in the mid 1980s.16
Canadians and Germans held 2.1 and 2.7 percent respectively of the U.S. equity market by the
end of the sample.
   Although the data display a steadily increasing level of investment in foreign equity markets
by U.S. investors, the fraction of U.S. wealth allocated to foreign markets by U.S. investors is
still very limited. According to our estimates, over 96 percent of U.S. wealth was invested in
U.S. equity in 1991. Home bias is still very much a feature of international equity markets.


5. Gross Equity Flows and Turnover

    Table 3 provides descriptive statstics on gross cross-border equity trading. We report the
real value of transactions by U.S. residents in Canadian, German, Japanese, and British equity
as well as the value of transactions in U.S. equity by residents from Canada, Germany, Japan,
and the U.K. As a benchmark, we also report the combined quarterly real trading volume in
the U.S. defined as the trading volume on the American Stock Exchange, NASDAQ and the
New York Stock Exchange. The first three columns report the means, standard deviations,
and the coefficients of variation respectively for the entire period, 1978.1 - 1991.3. Results for
subsamples are reported in columns four through nine.
    The numbers in the first column indicate that the largest average volume of transactions is
between U.S. and British citizens. The second largest volume is transactions between U.S. and
Japanese citizens, followed by U.S. transactions in equity with Canadians and Germans. This
ranking holds regardless of whether transactions involve U.S. or foreign equity. By comparing
                                                                                                10


the results in Table 3 with our figures on net equity flows in Table la, it is clear that the
gross transactions volume vastly exceeds the corresponding net transactions volume. Gross
quarterly transactions range from 18 (U.S. transactions with German citizens) to 67 (U.S.
transactions with Japanese citizens) times the average quarterly net bilateral equity flows.
Comparing the two sub-periods, we also find a large increase in average quarterly transactions
over time. Looking across U.S. residents' transactions in foreign equity, the increase is 1105
percent in British equity, 919 percent in German, 631 percent in Japanese and 85 percent in
Canadian equity. Correspondingly, the quarterly level of transactions in U.S. equity went up
by 2253 percent for Japanese residents, 284 percent for British, 162 percent for Canadian, and
86 percent for German residents.
    The volume of gross cross-border equity trading displays considerable variation over time.
In terms of volatility relative to the mean, U.S. residents' transactions in foreign equity from
Germany, Japan, and the United Kingdom are each about twice as high as the volatility (com-
pared to the mean) of their transactions in Canadian equity. An even higher volatility compared
to the mean is evident in Japanese transactions in U.S. equity. Although the volatility of trans-
actions has gone up dramatically from the earlier to the later part of the sample, the coefficients
of variation for the two subsamples it have fallen in all cases except Japanese transactions in
U.S. equity where the volatility almost doubled. Interestingly, the same pattern of declithng co-
efficients of variation appears in U.S. transactions in emerging stock markets (Tesar and Werner
(1993b)). The data seem to indicate that as U.S. investors increase their investment position
in a particular market, their transactions volume (relative to the mean level of transactions)
declines.
    By cumulating the (nominal) quarterly gross cross.border transactions over each year and
dividing by the estimated dollar investment position we obtain the turnover rates for cross-
border equity trading. Table 4 reports the annual turnover rates (in percent) for each year
from 1982 to 1990. The first striking observation is that turnover rates for foreign investments
are higher than the turnover rate in the investor's home market and the turnover rate in the
market where trading takes place. Interestingly, the most extreme cases are Japanese investors'
turnover rates in the U.S. equity market with an average of 334 percent and U.S. investors'
turnover in Japanese equities of 377 percent. One possible explanation for these extraordinarily
high numbers is that the base, or the investment position, is underestimated. However, one
would have to increase the estimated positions of U.S. investors in Japan and Japanese investors
in the United States six-fold to get turnover rates which are at par with the benchmarks. Also
                                                                                               11


U.S. investors trading in British equity and Canadian investors trading in U.S. equity turn over
their positions at a substantially higher rate than they do in their home markets. These turnover
rates are also higher than the average turnover rates in the U.K. and the U.S. respectively. The
only exception is German investors, who transact at a very modest average rate of 21 percent
in the United States. Based on the last column, which gives the mean turnover rate over the
entire period, it appears that U.S. investors have a larger tendency to "churn" their portfolios
of foreign securities than foreign investors trading in ILS. equity.'7
    Another message from the table is that turnover rates vary, both across different markets
and across time. For instance, the average turnover for Germany at 97 percent is substantially
higher than that of the other countries. The Canadian market is at the other extreme with
an average turnover rate of 20 percent. Turnover also varies over time for most markets. All
markets experienced a temporary increase in turnover after the stock market crash in 1987.
  The heterogeneity in turnover rates for foreign investments is most easily seen in Figures
3a and 3b which illustrate U.S. investors' turnover rates in foreign equity and foreign investors'
turnover rates in U.S. equity in the 1982.1.1991.3 period. Turning first to Figure 3a, we see that
the U.S. investors' turnover rate on the Japanese market is substantially larger than in other
markets, and that there is a large increase in the turnover rate in the 1987.90 period, followed
by a sudden drop in the second quarter of 1991. The time variation in turnover rates is even
more dramatic in Figure 3b. The turnover rate on U.S. equity holdings by Japanese investors
increased roughly 800 percent between 1984 and 1987, falling of suddenly in the fourth quarter
of 1988.
   Several things should be kept in mind in comparing turnover rates across markets and
over time. First, the numbers used in creating our measures of turnover rates may contain
substantial measurement errors. Second, differences in regulations across industries and changes
in regulations over time may affect where an investor chooses to conduct his or her financial
transactions. This in turn may affect whether the transaction is considered a transaction with a
domestic resident (in which case it will not be reported) or with a foreign resident. Finally, the
transactions data include derivative securities. In periods of volatile returns in equity markets,
investors may hedge their portfolios, effectively transacting several times on the same underlying
investment position.
    Whatever the source of the variation in turnover rates, the high volume of transactions and
the high turnover rates in cross-border equity trading makes it difficult to ascribe the home bias
puzzle to high variable transactions costs. The high turnover rates also give some indication
                                                                                                12


that foreign equity investment may be dominated by institutional investors who face lower
transactions costs than the average investor.


6. What Drives U.S. Net Equity Flows?
    Even though we have seen no strong patterns of coniovement between net equity flows, it is
stilt possible that international equity purchases are sensitive to variables such as returns and
risk. Table 5 reports the correlations of U.S. net purchases of equity from Canada, Germany,
Japan, and the United Kingdom with four sets of financial variables.'8 The marginal significance
levels refer to the probability that the estimated covariances are zero.
    The first set of variables are contemporaneous changes (in absolute terms) in the market
capitalization of the United States and each of the foreign markets. Changes in U.S. market
capitalization proxies for changes in the wealth of U.S. investors. If U.S. investors follow a
strategy of holding a constant fraction of their wealth in foreign equity, an increase in wealth
would be associated with increased purchases of foreign equity. Judging from the consistently
 positive correlations in the first row of the table, this hypothesis has some support in the data.
 For U.S. investment in the United Kingdom, the covariance is significantly different from zero
at the ten percent level. Media tend to follow high growth markets, and to the extent that
U.S. investors follow the advice of investing in such markets they would increase their equity
purchases as foreign market capitalization increases. The correlation coefficients in the second
row of the table are all positive, but the association is not significant.
    The second set of variables is related to the returns on equity in the respective markets.
Models of portfolio allocation relate investment decisions to expected returns and risk. In
this simple illustration, we view the average realized monthly excess return over the quarter
as a rough proxy for expected future returns, if the decision to invest in equity hinges on
the investor's expectation of returns, one would expect that increases in U.S. returns should
tend to decrease foreign equity purchases while increases in foreign returns should increase net
equity purchases from abroad. The results show that net equjty flows generally are positively
correlated with both U.S. and foreign returns. U.S. purchases of equity from Japan and the
United Kingdom covary positively with the return on the U.S. market. Part of the explanation
for the positive correlation might be that U.S. equity returns are highly correlated with changes
in U.S. wealth. Although U.S. net equity purchases are consistently positively correlated with
the return on foreign markets, none of the marginal significance levels are lower than ten percent.
                                                                                              13


    To capture the impact of risk on foreign investment, we measure the correlation between
net purchases and the beta of the foreign market. Beta is measured as the covariance between
excess returns on the foreign market and the U.S. market divided by the variance of excess
return in the U.S. market based on 60-month (5 year) rolling samples. One would expect that
U.S. investors would decrease their purchases of equity from a market when that market covaries
more strongly with the U.S. market. There is no evidence for such a pattern in the data.
    It is often suggested by policy makers and the financial press that recent increases in cap
ital outflows from the United States can be explained by historically low domestic interest
rates. To check whether this is borne out by the data, we correlate net purchases with U.S.
and foreign dividend yields and U.S. interest rates. A majority of the estimated correlations
are negative, as predicted, but only in the case of U.S. investment in the United Kingdom
does the marginal significance level imply that we reject the null hypothesis of no association.
The correlations between U.S. net purchases and foreign yields have mixed signs. For U.S.
acquisitions of Canadian equity, the association is significantly negative. We finally investigate
the correlation between returns to and levels of trade.weighted and bilateral exchange rates
and net equity flows. Bilateral exchange rates seem generally to be of limited importance for
cross.border investment decisions. The level of the trade-weighted U.S. dollar is significantly
positively related to U.S. net purchases of Canadia equity, but the value of the dollar has no
significant impact on purchases of equity from other countries.'9
    Of the financial variables we examine, very few are significantly associated with acquisitions
of foreign equity by U.S. investors. Granted, our measures of expected returns and risk are crude
and might not adequately capture the importance of such variables in general for international
portfolio transactions. In addition, simple correlations do not capture the investor's problem
of trading off risk and return across financial assets. It is still puzzling that the data display
so little systematic comovement between equity flows and simple measures of return and risk.
We turn to a more explicit test of portfolio allocation in the next section.


7. Do U.S. Investors Allocate their Portfolios According to the CAPM?
   Recent tests of international asset pricing models yield mixed results about the extent of
global market integration and the validity of the CAPM in an international context (Frankel
(1982), Wheatley (1988), Engel and Rodrigues (1989, 1992), Korajzyk and Viaiiet (1989),
Harvey (1991), Cooper and Kapla.nis (1991), Ferson and Harvey (1991), Dumas and Solnik
                                                                                                 14


(1992), Heston, Rouwenhorst, and Wessels (1992), Harvey (1993)). We combine our estimates
of the actual international investment positions of U.S. investors in foreign equities with data
on equity returns to test whether the observed U.S. portfolio allocation satisfies the first-order
conditions of maximization in a simple CAPM world. This amounts to testing whether the
portfolio chosen by U.S. investors is mean-variance efficient.
      Consider the set of first order conditions dictating the demand for risky assets in a standard
capital asset pricing model from Merton (1973):

(2)                                             =

where  r is a vector of portfolio allocations chosen by the investor at t, is the risk aversion of
the investor, 0 is the covariance matrix of excess returns, and v1.41 is a vector of expected excess
returns between t and t + 1. When preferences are isoelastic, 7 is the coefficient of relative risk
aversion and Ig corresponds to shares of wealth.
    The traditional way of implementing empirical tests of the CAPM involves aggregating
similar conditions across all investors, exploiting the fact that the market portfolio equals the
market-capitalization weighted average of returns to individual equity markets. We will instead
exploit our information on portfolio allocation to directly test the implications of the model on
the first-order condition for maximization of one group of investors, namely U.S. residents. If
the model accurately describes investment behavior, the first order conditions in equation (2)
should be satisfied for each investor in international equity markets.
    Our empirical implementation follows Engel and Itodrigues (1992). We assume that U.S.
investors have access to a constant riskfree rate, r. Let R1+i — r denote the realized excess
return on equity. If expectations are rational, it follows that

(3)                                       —   r = v1.4.1 +
where    cg is a white noise error term. The first-order conditions can then be re-stated as

(4)

The corresponding unrestricted model is

(5)

where I) is a matrix of regression coefficients of the same dimension as the covariance matrix.
                                                                                                  15


   Under the null, the covariance matrix of the residuals, cc', is equal to the covariance matrix
of excess returns, Il. Thus, the restrictions we test are that the regression coefficients in
the matrix B are proportional to the covariance matrix of the residuals. The unidentified
constant of proportionality is equal to the coefficient of risk aversion of U.S. investors. Under the
assumption that the covariance matrix is constant over time, the test involves first estimating
the unrestricted systen in equation (5) using full information maximum likelihood [FIML].
The system of equations is then re-estimated, imposing the constraints implied by the model.
We use a likelihood ratio test to see whether the data reject the null hypothesis that the
constraints implied by the model hold. The likelihood-ratio (LR) statistic has an asymptotic
X2(q) distribution, where q is the number of restrictions imposed.
    The results from FIML estimation of the system of five equations of excess returns on
U.S; portfolio shares are given in Table 6. The model assumes that investors have preferences
with constant relative risk aversion, and that z corresponds to shares of wealth invested in
Canada, Germany, Japan, the U.K., and the U.S. respectively. As a proxy for U.S. wealth, we
use the U.S. market capitalization plus the total foreign investment posititonof U.S. investors
minus the total investment position by foreign investors in the U.S. The top panel of the
table reports the estimated regression coefficients and the corresponding standard erros. Few
of them are significantly different from zero, which is to be expected given the well known
difficulty of explaining the ex post variation in excess equity returns. The covariance matrixof
the residuals is given in the lower panel in Table 6. Covariances are multiplied by 100. Note
that there is considerable variation in the ratios of estimated coefficients, bjj, and the elements
of the covariance matrix, s. Under the null-hypothesis that the model is correct, all those
ratios should be equal
    It is possible to design the set of constraints of the model in several ways. In principle, the
best way to test the model would be to let the constraints be bj, = ysjj. Since we do not know
the coefficient of risk aversion, this constraint cannot be tested without assigning an ad hoq
value for y. Alternatively, the constraint can be expressed as b1/s1 equal for all i,j. Engel
and Rodrigues (1992) argue, based on results in Gregory and Veall (1985), that tests based on
products rather than tests based on quotients result in more power. We follow their suggestion
and specify the constraints to be of the form bjk( = 6k1ij, for all i,j. This leaves us with the
problem of choosing the benchmark, k, 1. We use b50,3 and 8japjtp since both these estimated
coefficients are significantly different from zero.
    The log-likelihood value for the unrestricted system is 307.67. When the twenty-four con-
                                                                                                16


straints implied by the model are imposed, the resulting value of the log-likelihood is 284.18.
Our results give a value of the LIt-statistic of 46.99 which for a X2(24) has p-value of 0.003.
The data thus strongly reject the null hypothesis that U.S. investors follow the CAPM in their
portfolio allocation. Another way of interpreting the result is that the U.S. equity investment
portfolio is not mean-variance efficient.
   To check the robustness of our result, we grouped countries into regions. First, we aggre-
gated Germany and the U.K. into "Europe." This should reduce the problem of erroneously
classifying trading in German securities which takes place in London as transactions in U.K.
shares. Combining our new European aggregate with Canada, Japan and the U.S. implies a
four-by-four system. Market capitalization-weighted return series were generated for Europe,
and the U.S. investment position in Germany was added to the fraction of wealth allocated to
the U.K. market. To conserve space, we do not report the estimated coefficients. The only
significant parameters are in the equation for excess returns on the Japanese market; the coef-
Ilcient on the Europe-weight is significantly negative, and the coefficient on the Japan-weight is
significantly positive at five percent. The resulting LR.statistic was 33.43 which for a X2(15)
has a p-value of 0.004. Finally, we also considered North America (Canada and the U.S.) as one
region. If Canadian residents are in fact conducting many of their transactions in New York, it
may be that little information is lost in the aggregation. Again, the estimated coefficients of the
resulting three-by-three system are not reported to conserve space. All three coefficients in the
equation for excess returns in Japan are significant but none of the other estimated parameters
are significant. The LIt-statistic was in this case 26.52 which for a X2(8) has a p-value of 0.001.
    The null hypothesis that U.S. investors follow the simple CAPM in allocating their in-
vestment portfolio is thus strongly rejected by the data. Even if we try to reduce potential
reporting problems by aggregating markets into regions, we still strongly reject. Engel and
Rodrigues (1992) were not able to reject that the market-capitalization-weighted portfolio was
mean-variance-efficient using monthly data on market capitalizations and excess returns from
ten countries. Beyond the differences in data frequency and sample countries, a possible expla-
nation for our stronger result is that we study the investment behavior of one particular group
of investors whereas Engel and Itodrigues capture the behavior of the marginal investor in each
market, wherever that investor may reside.
                                                                                                17



8. Conclusion
   In this paper we examine cross-border equity flows in Canada, Germany, Japan, the U.K.
and the U.S. To our knowledge, this is among the first studies to combine information about the
return to equity investment with the actual portfolio allocations of international investors. In
many respect, our results are negative. Observed adjustments in international portfolios are not
consistent with the first-order conditions of the CAPM. Neither do investors across countries
seem to behave in unison; country- and investor-specific factors seem to play an important role
in portfolio allocations. Net equity flows to and from the U.K. account for the majority of all
flows across U.S. borders. Flows to and from the U.K. account for most of the flows across
Canadian borders. Finally, U.S. residents appear to churn their holdings of foreign assets,
while the turnover rate on foreign holdings of U.S. equities is more closely in line with the
average turnover rate on the U.S. market. We conclude that there is a considerable amount of
heterogeneity in international investment behavior.
   The data strongly rejects that U.S. investors' portfolios are mean-variance efficient. Previous
studies have had only limited success in rejecting the CAPM on international data. This
highlights the difference between the norm in the finance literature which involves basing tests
solely on relationships among rates of return as opposed to testing the actual portfolio allocation
strategies of invstors. When trying to understand international portfolio choice, research should
focus on combining the price data with the actual portfolio investment made by international
investors. To facilitate this task, it is imperative that researchers obtain more detailed data on
international securities transactions.
    One possible explanation for our failure to confirm even the most basic predictions of simple
models of portfolio choice is that cross-border equity flows are underreported to official agencies,
and therefore our data are not representative of investor behavior. This may indeed be the
case; however, equity investment by the countries included in our sample now account for over
10 percent of all transactions on U.S. stock exchanges. If these data are to be considered
suspect, one has to question the validity of any analysis using balance of payments data. It is
possible that reporting problems make it difficult to find linkages between returns and portfolio
allocations. Given that the results are robust to aggregating across regions, which should reduce
such problems, the evidence seems more convindng.
    Another possibility is that existing models of portfolio allocation can be thought of as
descriptions of "mature" investors making marginal changes in an already well-diversified port-
folio. As of the 1990s, national portfolios remained strongly biased toward domestic securities.
                                                                                             18


The problem facing investors is how to move their existing holding of equity toward a bet-
ter diversified portfolio, while still remaining sensitive to high frequency changes in returns.
Thus, our research points to the need for new models of portfolio choice which can explain the
dynamics of portfolio adjustment.
Tesar and Werner: Endnote.s                                                                 19


                                           Endnotes

  1. Data on corporate and government bonds are available from the same source.

  2. The Deutsche Bundesbank reports quarterly purchases and sales of equities and bonds
     between German residents and residents of Canada, Japan, the U.K., the U.S., and a
     broad set of other countries. We excluded the German data from our analysis to conserve
     spate. We have not been able to find similar bilateral data on international portfolio
     transactions for the United Kingdom and Japan.

  3. This is extracted from the Instructions for Preparation of Monthly Form 5, Interna-
     tional Capital Form 5, Department of the 2}easury, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
     Economic Policy, 0MB No. 1505-0001. We do not have access to the corresponding doc-
     umentation for Canada. Discussions with representatives from the Bank of Canada lead
     us to believe that the reporting requirements in Canada are similar.

  4. Note that the data reflect the residency of the party involved in the transaction and not
     the country of origin of the security itself.

  5. See Stekler and Truman (1992) for a complete description of the problems involved in
     collecting data on portfolio flows.

  6. It is our understanding that in 1992, the U.S. began collecting data on off-shore U.S.
    brokerages.

  7. The correlation between U.S. net purchases of Canadian equity reported by the two data
     sources is 0.853. The correlation between reports of Canadian net purchases of U.S. equity
     is somewhat smaller at 0.518.

 8. Tesar and Werner (1992) show that the Canadian equity-investment position in the U.S.
    reported by Statistics Canada is considerably smaller than the Canadian investment po-
    sition reported by the U.S. Treasury.

 9. In examining the correlations between U-S. net purchases of equity from nineteen coun-
    tries, including 15 emerging stock markets, Tesar and Werner (1993b) also find little or
    no correlation between net purchases from different markets.
Tesar and Werner: Endnotes                                                                   20


 10. The Department of Commerce only reports the investment position on an annual basis for
     a limited number of countries. Their series is constructed in a way similar to the method
     we propose below.

 ii; According to Morgan Stanley Capital International the market capitalization of Germany
      was $65.1 billion, and of the United Kingdom was $96.4 billion in the fourth quarter of
      1977. We apply the weights of 40 percent and 60 percent to German and the United
     Kingdom respectively for the intitial values of our Western Europe aggregate.

 12. Gross returns are calculated using stock market indices from Morgan Stanley Capital
     International.

 13. As initial values, we use the reported foreign investment positions (assuming a 60-40 split
     between the U.K. and Germany); Canada $5,671 million, Japan $594 miliion, Germany
     $17,083, and the U.K. $11,389.

 14. Our estimates of the U.S. investment position are slightly lower than those reported by
     the Department of Commerce. At the end of 1990, they estimate the foreign investment
     position in Canada and Western Europe combined to be $86,510 million. Our estimate
     is $85,907 million. The Department of Commerce stopped reporting the U.S. investment
     position in Japan in 1987 since they perceived the position to be grossly underestimated.

 15. Our estimated investment positions of foreign investors in the United States are larger
     than those reported by the Department of Commerce. They estimate the total foreign
     investment position by these countries at the end of 1990 to be $188,967 million. Our
     estimate is substantially larger at $256,004 million. This is a bit surprising since our
     algorithm tends to bias the estimated position downwards by not crediting capital gains
     to equity acquired during the quarter of purchase. On the other hand, we assume that all
     dividends from foreign equity investment are reinvested, which may make the investment
     position too large.

16. See Riddle (1992) for a discussion of capital controls in the five countries in our sample.

17. Tesar and Werner (1993a) discusses the high turnover rate on foreign equity holdings in
    more detail.

18. We use the following data sources. Data on market capitalization, equity returns, and
    dividend yields are calculated from the stock market indices published by Morgan Stanley
Tesar and Werner: Endnotes                                                                   21


     Capital International. Treasury Bill returns are from CRSP and exchange rates from
     Citibase.

 19. Froot and Stein (1991) find no significant relationship between the value of the dollar and
     aggregate portfolio inflows.
Tesar and Werner: References                                                              22


                                        References

 Adler, M., and B. Dumas, 1983, International Portfolio Choice and Corporation Finance: A
     Synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925-984.

 Cooper, l.A., and E. Kaplanis, 1991, What Explains The Home Bias in Portfolio Investment?,
     (London Business School).

 Dumas, B., and B. Solnik, 1992, The World Price of Exchange Rate Risk, Working Paper
    (WE.C. School of Management).

 Dumas, B., 1993, Partial Equilibrium cs. General-Equilibrium Models of International Capital
    Market Equilibrium, Wharton School Working Paper No. 93-1.

 Engel, C.M. and A.P. Rodrigues, 1989, Tests of International CAPM with Time- Varying
     Covariances, Journal of Applied Econometrics 4, 119-138.

 Engel, C.M. and A.P. Rodrigues, 1992, Tests of Mean-Variance Efficiency of International
     Equity Markets, Working Paper (University of Washington).

Ferson, WE, and C.R. Harvey, 1991, The Risk and Predictability of International Equity
     Returns, Working Paper (University of Chicago).

French, IC., and J. Poterba, 1991, Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets,
    The American Economic Review, 222-226.

Frankel, J., 1982, In Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A Six-Currency Test Assuming
    Mean-Variance Optimization, Journal of international Money and Finance 1, 255-74.

Froot, K.A, and J.C. Stein, 1991, Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment: An Irnper-
    fect Capital Markets Approach, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 1191-
     1217.

Cergory, A., and M. VeaJI, 1985, Formulating Wald Tests of Nonlinear Restrictions, Econo-
    metrica 6, 1465-1468.

Grubel, H.G., 1968, Internationally Diversified Portfolios, The American Economic Review
    58, 1299-1314.

harvey, Cl., 1991, The World Price of Covariance Risk, The Journal of Finance4l, 111-157.
Tesar and Werner: References                                                               23

 Harvey, C.R., 1993, Predictable Risk and Returns in Emerging Markets, Working Paper (Duke
     University).

 Heston, S.L., K.G. Rouwenhorst, and R.E. Wessels, 1992, The Structure of International Stock
     Returns, Working Paper (Yale University).

 Korajczyk, and Viallet, 1989, An Empirical Investigation of International Asset Pricing, The
     Review of Financial Studies 2, 553-585.

 Levy, H., and M. Sarnat, 1970, International Diversification of Investment Portfolios, The
     American Economic Review 50, 668-675.

 Merton, R.E., 1973, An Interteinporal Capital Asset Pricing Model, &onomelrica 41, 867-887.

 Newey, W. and K. West, 1987, A Simple Pcitive Semi-Definite Heteroscedasticity and Auto-
    correlation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.

Riddle, J., 1992, Controls on International Securities Transactions, Working Paper (University
    of California, Santa Barbara).

Solnik, BiT., 1974, why Not Diversify Internationally Rather than Domestically?, Financial
    Analysts Journal 30, 91-135.

Stekier, L. and E.M. Truman, 1992, The Adequacy of the Data on U5. International Financial
    Transactions: A Federal Reserve Perspective, International Finance Discussion Papers,
     Board of Governors No. 430.

Tesar, L.L., and LM. Werner, 1992, Home Bias and the Globalization of Securities Markets,
     NBER working Paper No. 4218.

Tesar, L.L., and I.M. Werner, 1993; Home Bias and High Turnover, Working Paper, (Stanford
    Business School).

Tesar, L.L., and LM. Werner, 1993b, U.S. Equity Investment in Emerging Stock Markets, to
    appear in Portfolio Investment in Developing Countries, the World Bank.

Wheatley, S., 1988, Some Tests of International Equity Integration, The Journal of Financial
     Economics 21, 177-212.
Tesar and Werner: Appendix A                                                                   24


                                     Appendix A:
                U.S. Reporting of International Securities Transactions
   Each month, all transactions between U.S. and foreign residents in long-term marketable
securities must be recorded on a form ("International Capital Form 5") which is then filed with
the Treasury department. Reporting is required by law for "all banks, other depositary insti-
tutions ..., International Banking Facilities (IBFs), bank holding companies, brokers, dealers,
nonbanking enterprises or other persons in the United States ..., who on their own behalf, or on
behalf of customers, engage in transaction in long-term securiteis DIRECTLYwith foreigners.."
(Instructions, p. 1). Reports are also required by brokers and institutions who intermediate
transactions between a domestic client (private investors or another broker or dealer) and a
foreigner. A foreigner is any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other organi-
zation located outside the United States. Under these guidelines, branches of American brokers
and dealers located in foreign countries are considered foreigners. Exemption from reporting
is granted when the grand total of purchases or sales of all long-term securities fall below $2
million during the reporting month.
    The definition of long-term marketable securities include public and private issues of debt
and equity with maturity of more than one year from date of issue. It includes "common and
preferred stocks or investment company shares, rights, scrip, bonds, debentures, Floating Rate
Notes (FRNs), Continually-Offered Medium Term Notes, Collateralized Mortgage Obligations
(CMOs), zero-coupon bonds and notes, equipment trust certificates and similar long.term mar-
ketable corporate debt instruments issued by entitites located in the United States or in a
foreing country; marketable long-term debt obligations of the U.S. Treasury, Federal Financing
Bank, United States Government-owned corporations, and Federally-sponsored agencies; and
marketable long-term obligations of state and local government or of governments of foreign
countries, including any agencies, corporations financial institutions, or other instrumentalities
thereot" It also includes " American Depository Receipts (ADRs), when issued by, or sur-
rendered to, Depositories of ADRs; options and warrants to purchase and/or sell long-term
securities and certificates or receipts representing an interest in particular coupon of principal
payments of marketable U.S. Treasury securities" (Instructions, p. 4). Reports cover new se-
curity issues, direct placements, and securities issued under Shelf Registration provisions. The
rule is that the geographic location of the issuing entity determines the classification of a secu-
rity as domestic or foreign. Thus, equity issued by a U.S. subsidiary (branch or agency) of a
foreign-based firm is considered domestic equity.
Tesar and Werner: Appendix A                                                                   25


    Transactions with foreigners in options and warrants should be reported regardless of the
maturity of the option and warrant (Instructions, p. 4). When options and warrants are issued
by an entity other than the issuer of the underlying security, the option and warrant is classified
according to the location of its own issuer. Form S gives the following exampe: "a dealer located
in New York writes put/call warrants on a British stock, e.g. British Telecom, and sells the
warrants to foreigners. The sale of the warrants should be reported as purchases by foreigners
of a domestic corporate bond. At the time the warrants are exercised, the transactions would
be recorded as a purchase/sale, as appropriate, of foreign stock to which the warrants applied"
(Instructions, p. 5). Options and wanants are bundled with the underlying class of securities,
i.e. corporate equity, corporate bonds, marketable Treasury & Federal Financing Bank bonds
& notes, and Bonds of U.S. Government corporations and federally sponsored agencies in the
aggregated data.
Tent and Werner: Appendix B                                                                  26


                                      Appendix B:
                    Calculating Robust Standard Errors of Conriances


    Although our sample is rather short, we rely on asymptotic theory to derive the formula for
robust standard errors of covariances. if r and y denote the de-meaned time series, and we
define Zt to be the product of these series, z1y, then


(6)                             V'? [tztJ —'

where V      = limr,, Var(* sT=1 zt)- We estimate V as

                         i 1'              k(l)
(7)                  =    E ((z -      + 2EWr(1)(zt - Ir)(zg.., -

where   2'     + s?1 z, k(I) is of order T11, and Wr(l) =   [1
                                                                 —     Our time series have 55
observations, and we use 6 lags in estimating V (2• (55)1/4). Under the null that the series are
uncorrelated, T 0. We thus set this to zero in the formula for calculating V. The random
variable         has a standard normal distribution, N(O, 1), under the null hypothesis. The
reported marginal significant levels refer to this distribution.
Tesar and Werner: List of Tables                                                      27

                                      List of Tables

Table la Net Equity Flows Crossing the U.S. Border 1978.1.1991.3

Table lb Net Equity Flows Crossing the Canadian Border 1978.1-1991.3

Table Za Correlations: Net Equity Flows Crossing the U.S. Border 1978d-1991.3

Table 2b Correlations: Net Equity Flows Crossing the Canadian Border 1978.1-1991.3

Table 3 Gross Cross-Border Equity Trading 1978.1-1991.3

Table 4 Turnover in Cross-Border Equity Trading (percent)

Table 5 Correlations of net U.S. Equity Flows and Financial Variables 1978.1-1991.3

Table 6 Regressions of Excess Returns on U.S. Portfolio Shares
Table is       Net Equity Flows Crossing the U.S. Border 1978.1 -1991 .3

   Variable       Mean      Standard     Max         Mm       AA(1)   AR(2)    AR(3)    AA(4)   UunQ-8ox(4)
                            DeviatIon                          (a)      (a)      (a)     (a)      p-value


U.S. purchases of foreign equity

CANADA              74.0       163.8     503.3      -254.4    0.54      020     -0.06   -0.15        0.000
GERMANY             26.8       113.0     439.2      -311.4    Q39*    -0.04     -0.05    0.14        0.038
JAPAN               48.6       592.3    2415.3     -1486.9    0.32*   0.32       0.25    0.04        0.004
U.K.               169.4       370.8     1678.6     -461.3     0.27   -0.09     -0.00    0.13        0.238


Foreign purchases of U.S. equity

CANADA             120.3       161.9      553.1     -364.1    0.4     0.28*    .0.05    -0.29        0.000
GERMANY             25.0       131.9     450.4      -208.7    0.45     0.10    -0.12    -0.13        0.007
JAPAN              200.1       540.5    fl56,0      -796.5    0.54    0.28*    0,28      0.20        0.000
U.K.               234.8       585.4     1347.3    -2692.1     0.25    0.10     -0.21    0.17        0.072



Source: U.S. Treasury Oulletin
Units: Million U.S. dollar (1977=100)
(a) An asterisk indicates sIgnificance at the five percent level.
(b) Nominal purchases are deflated using the average quarterly Consumer Price Index from Citibase (1977=100).
Table lb         Net Equity Flows Crossing the Canadian Border 1978.1-1 991 .3

   Variable         Mean       Standard       Max                                              A(4)
                                                                     AR(l)
                                                                                        )
                                                                                       ARfl)
                                                           FAin               AFI(2)                   L)ung4o4s)
       (a)                     Deviation                               (b)     (b)              (b)      p-value


Canadian purcases of foreign equity

EC ex. U.K.             3.5        10.3         46.6        -30.0    .0.30e    0.16    -0.02    0.13       0.098
JAPAN                   0.9        23.2        105.1        -43.5     0.14     0.26     0.02   .0.18       0.128
U.K.                   21.3        36.2        127.3         -40.3   0.49     o.sr      0.32   0.38e       0.004
U.S.                   54.5       160.9        726.7       -307.7    -0.14    -0.02    -0.03   -0.09       0.238

Foreign purchases of Canadian equity

EC ox. U.K.            12.3        45.3        240.8        -58.1    0.56      0.23     0.09   -0.02       0.789
JAPAN                   1.6        16.5         74.9        -52.8    0.3Cc     0.10     0.02    0.05       0.190
U.K.                   -2.1        51.0        169.7       -100.0    0.39      006     -022    -0.15       0.010
U.s.                  67.6        257.2        752.8       -394.5    0.48e     0.22    -0.15   -0.24       0.000



Source: Stndstics Canada
Units: Million US. dollars (1917=100)
(a) Nominal purchases are translated into US. dollars using the average quarterly exchange rate from Citibase.
 Dollar purchases are deflated using the average quarterly Consumer Price Index from Citibase (1977=100).
(b) An asterisk indicates significance at the five percent level.
Table 2a Correlations: Net Equity Flows Crossing the U.S. Border 1978.1-1991.3


                                     con.      MSL (a)         corr.     MSL (a)         con-.     MSL (a)



U.S. purchases of equity from:
                                     GERMANY                   JAPAN                     U.K.


CANADA                               0.00       1.00           -0.19     0.16            0.19      0.16
GERMANY                                                        0.35      0.15            0.04      0.29
JAPAN                                                                                    0.23      0.49



Purchases of U.S. equity by:
                                     GERMANY                   JAPAN                     U.K.


CANADA                               0.02      0.87            -0.05     0.64            -0.18     0.15
GERMANY                                                        -0.14     0.20            0.20      0.27
JAPAN                                                                                    0.20      0.15


Investor agreement between the U.& and:

CANADA                               GERMANY                   JAPAN                     U.K.
con.          MSL (a)                con.  MSL (a)             con.      MSL (a)         con.       MSL (a)

-0.315        0.188                  -0.13     0.23            -0.37     0.25            0.15       0.23



Source: U.S. Treasuty Bulletin
Units: Million U.S. dollars (1977=100)
(a) The Marginal Significance Level gives the probability under the null that the covariance is zero.
Table 2b Correlations: Net EquIty Flows CrossIng the Canadian Border 1976.1-1991.3


                                     corn      MSL (a)        con.      MSL (a)         cart.       MSL (a)


                                                                                                .
Canadian purchases of equity From:
                                 JAPAN                         U.K.                     U.S.


EC ex. U.K.                          -0.26     0.46            0.16     0.44            -0.02       0.93
JAPAN                                                          .0.41     0.14           -0.06       0.27
U.K.                                                                                    0.04        0.48


Purchases of Canadian equity by:
                                     JAPAN                     U.K.                     U.S.

EC ox. U.K.                          0,11      0.40            0.59      0.24           0.44        0.16
JAPAN                                                          0.09      0.57           0.12        0.51
U.K.                                                                                    0.44        0.35



Investor aggrement betwen Canada and:

EC ex. U.K.                          JAPAN                     U.K.                     U.S.
con.          MSL (a)                con.      MSL (a)         con.      MSL (a)        con.        MSL (a)

0.062         0.542                  -0.06     0.67            0M9       0.67           -0.24       0.23




Source: Statistics Canada
Units: Million U.S. dollars (1977=100)
(a) The Marginal Significance Level gives the probability under the null that the covariance is zero.
Tabi. 3                   Gron Crosa-Bord.r Equity Trading 1978.1-1991.3

                           1918.1-1991.3 (55 cbs.)               1978.1-1984.4   (28 oS)                 1985.1-1991.2 (27 cbs.)
Variable                         Mean     Standesd   Sid. 0.t)     Mean          Srd&d       Std. 0.vj      Mean      Standard     Std. Osi.!
                                          Dfltcn       Mean                      Deviation     Mean                   De1atlon       Mean


Reel lreneacUoflS by U.S.
Reeldenta In Equity fror'. (a)


CANADA                             1097       528        3.48          114            314        0.40          1422        495          0.35
GERMANY                             495       538        1.08             90           58        0.65          916         463          0.53
JAPAN                              3239      3009        0.93          790            421        0.53         5775        2338          0.40
U.K.                               4067      4251        1.05          633            335        0.53         7628        3398          0.45


Real Treneaclloin w, U.S.
Equity by Reald ants from (a)


CANADA                             3399      1810        0.53         1696            651        0.34         4960        1183          0.24
GERMANY                            1187       529        0.45          834            300        0.36          1553        463          0.30
JAPAN                              3915      5227        1.33          325            152        0.47         7645        5328          0.70
U.K                                8555      4457        0.68         2740           1257        0.45        10512        2771          0.26

Total Real Trarnacllons
S.U.S.equfty(e)                  170311     85071        0.50        98480         37123         0.38       244801      47757           0.20



Source: U.S. Treasury Bull.Iln
Units: Million U.S. dollar (1917—100)
(a) Nominal groat flows are deflated using th. average quarterly Consumer Price Index From Citbase.
Table 4       Turnover in Cross-Border Equity Trading (percent)


Turnover                      1982      1983      1984     *985      1966     1967      1988     1989      1990       mean


U.S. mwket (a)                   44       48        48       55        65       03        56        53       49             57

Candians In U.S (b)              88       98        89       89       103      122        85        68       69          92
Gern,ansinU.S(b)                 17       28        22        17       21       29        20       23        17          21
Japan... ntiS. Q)               181      229       151      348       502      658       513      228       198         334
Brltsh in U.S. (b)               49       54        49       53        86       67        65       67        50          61
Foreigner. in U.S. Q)            49       57        51       55        73      117        98        75       65             71


C.nSiannwket(a)                  14       17        IS       20        Ii       35        24        25       23             20
Americans In Canada (b)          29       33        29       38        47       80        33        29       26             36

i3erman market (a)               24       44        42       54        72      270       75*       100       97             97
American. In Gennany ,)          27       51        33       47        74      *05        69        72      105             65


Japanese market (a)              35      *27        35       36        20       75        60       63        40          50
Americans In Japan (b)          298      272       257      244       254      405       450      556       654         377

Ut market (a)                    31       38        37       38        57      *07        06       44        42             51
Americans In U.K. (b)            72       96        97      109       152      235       174      209       193         152

Amsrlcans abroad (b)             61       75        76       87       129      181       150       170      165         122



(a) From Anatomy otWorid Marksls. 1991. Goldman Sach. invennent Research. Table 1.16. p.17.
(b) Authors estImate, based on gross fransactons as reported by the U.S. Treasury and authors own eslimates of investnenl
position. based on cumulated n.t purchases ol euqity. We lake the annual averages ol our estimated investment position.
as the base and the annual transactions volume to be the quarterly transaclions cumulated over the year.
Table S                 Correlations of Net U.S. Equity Flows and FinancIal Variables
                         1918.1-1 991 .3


                        Net U.S. purchases of equIty from:
Financial Variable
                          CANADA                  GERMANY                      JAPAN                        U.K.
                        cor,. (b)    1.151. (a)   con. (b)     MSL (a)      con. (b)    1.431. (a)   corr. (b)     MSL (a)



Changes In market capitalization:

U.S.A.                      0.30         21           0.21         0.16        0.46         0.11         0.23         0.10
Foreign                     0.32         0.17         0.45         0.15       0.216         0.30         0.17         0.15

Average equity returns and betas with U.S. market:

U.S. return                 0.30         0.19         0.14         0.17        0.33         0.08         0.17         0.08
Foreign return              0.26         0.15         0.37         0.11        0.20         0.16         0.09         0.24
Foreign beta Cc)            .0.12        0.17         0.29         0.23        0.12         0.41         0.04         0.89

Average dividend yields and interest rates:

U.S. yield                  -0.27        0.13        -0.20         0.41        -0.06        0.83        -0.45         0.03
Foreign yield               -0.40        0.09        .0.08         0.33        0.01         0.97         0.10         0.51
30-day U.S. T-hlll          -0.27        0.25        0.10          0.63        -0.04        0.88        -0.26         0.15
90-day U.S. 1-bill          -0.31        0.20        -0.11         0.49        -0.04        0.85        -0.24         0.19

Average exchange rate: (d)

(I) Returns
Trade-weIghted             -0.35         0.12         0.09        0.47         0.15         0.28         0.14         0.42
Bilateral                  -0.07         0.42         0.06        0,62         0.01         0.87        -0.15         0.41


(ii) Levels
Trade-weighted             007           0.01        -0.06        0.71         '0.11        0.52        -0.04         0.69
Bilateral                   0.31         0.23        -0.11        0.61         -0.07        0.79        -0.22         0.17



Sources: Net purchases of equity come from the U.S. Treasury Bulletin. Stock market returns, dividend yields.
and market capitalizations corne from Morgan Stanely Capital international. T-blli returns are from CRSP
and exchange rates from Citibase
(a) Th. Marginal Significance Level gives the probability under the null that the covarlance is zero.
(b) An asterisk (underlined coefficient) Indicates that the oovarlance Is significantly different from zero at tlt'e (ten) percent.
(c) Authors' estimates of beta defined as the covaiiance of the return on the foreign market with the U.S. market,
divided by the variance of the return to the U.S. market. Estimates are made on rolling 60-month samples of excess returns
using data from Morgan Stanley Capital International and CRSP.
(d) Note Thai the U.K. exchange rate is expressed as U.S. dollars per Pound.
Table 6               Regressions of Excess Returns on U.S. Portfolio Shares.

In vestment
           position       CANADA             GERMANY             JAPAN               U.K.               U.S.
Equation               (standard error)   (standard error)   (standard error)   (standard error)   (standard error)

Estimated coefficients: (a)

CANADA                     10.053             15.200              4.343             4184               -0.065
                          (27.479)           (62.609)           (27.563)           (20.403)            (0.318)

GERMANY                    -0.986             56.412             21.987            -16.519             -0.051
                          (53.261)           (87.497)           (27.972)           (28.770)            (0.507)

JAPAN                      -2.947             35.781            59.I97             -27.294              0.035
                          (25.5)             (34.962)           (24.152)           (15.009)            (0.248)

U.K.                          1.462           20.405              6.471             -5.787             -0.025
                          (18.945)           (70.488)           (36.440)           (26.984)            (0.249)

U.S.                       -2.204             -5.556             10.472             -0.955             0.039
                          (32.646)           (63.131)           (27.948)           (28.127)            (0.337)



Covariance matrix of residuals (xlOO)

CANADA                     1.039               0.198             0.323              0.590              0.604

GERMANY                                        1.104             0.245              0.408              0.306

JAPAN                                                            0.815              0.423              0.295

U.K.                                                                                0.893              0.426

U.S.                                                                                                   0.692

Log-likelihood:            307.67



Specification: R(t+1) - r = Bx(t) + e(t+1)
Sources: The intitial investment position was taken from the Department of Commerce Survey of Current Business.
We used net equity flows reported in the U.S.\ Treasury Bulletin to oreate the quarterly investment
positions of U.S. investors. The U.S. market capitalization as well as returns on equity indices
came from Morgan Stanely Capital International. T-biII returns are from CRSP.
(a) An asterisk (underlined coefficient) indicates significance at the five (ten) percent level.
Tesar and 14'erner: Figure Legends                                                          28


                                      Figure Legends

Figure la Net U.S. Purchases of Foreign Equity
     Source: U.S. Treasury Bulletin (1977=100).

Figure lb Net Foreign Purchases of U.S. Equity
     Source: U.S. Treasury Bulletin (1977=100).

Figure Ic Net Canadian Purchases of Foreign Equity
     Source: Statistics Canada (1977=100).

Figure Id Net Foreign Purchases of Canadian Equity
     Source: Statistics Canada (1977=100).

Figure Za U.S. Equity Investment Position in Foreign Equity
     Note: U.S. equity investment position as a fraction of U.S. market capitalization.

Figure 2b Foreign Equity Investment Position in U.S. Equity
    Note: Foreign equity investment position as a fraction of U.S. market capitalization.

Figure 3a U.S. Investors' Turnover Rates in Foreign Equity
    Note: Transactions divided by the investment position.

Figure 3b Foreign Investors' Turnover Rates in U.S. Equity
    Note: Transactions divided by the investment position.
                          Figure la
             Net U.S. Purchases of Foreign Equity
                 Source: U.S. 'l'rcasury BulleLiti (1977=100).

      3000


      2000


0     1000


U)       0



     —1000



     —2000


                                                   CANADA        JAPAN
                                                   GERMANY       U.K.
                                                  -l
                                                  C)

                                                  0
                                                  C)

                                                  C)




    0•
   •
   —'
   —— 0
       F-
      F-                                          Co
                                                        00
                                                  It,
   U) -;-
— Q)
w
14 t                                              0
                                                  C')
                                                  C

                                                  0
                                                  -1
                                                  0
                                                  0
                                                  0
                                                  a,
                                                  N


            C
            C     0
                  o    0
                       o    C    0
                                 o    0
                                      o     0
                                            0
            C
            Cr,
                  o
                  CQ
                       o
                       —4
                                 o
                                 —4
                                      o
                                      C'J
                                            0
                                            C')
                                       I     I




                        UO!IIIN f1
                                          Figure ic
                           Net Canadian Purchases of Foreign Equity
                                          Sotirce: Statistics Can;ula (1977=109).

      750
                                                                                                                 I

                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                 'I
                                                                                                                 'I
      500
                                                                                                                II
                                                                                                                II
                                                                                                                'S
                                                                                                                II
.2    250              I
                                                                                                   A
—
—                                                              I
                                                      Al                                p1         is
                   I
                                                           I
                                               1.'/   '                        .
0)                         ¼
                                                                   I'I,   s/
                                                                                         1
                                /--I!yc-
                                     II                            I,
                                     I!
                                                                                                  i it,
                                     II
     —250-                           V                                                                  II
                                      I

                                                                                                        I




      500
             78   79           80   81.     82        83           84     85       88   87   88   89    90       91
                                                                                    ___ EEC                  U.K.!
                                                                                         JAPAN               IJ.S.J
                                 Figure     id
             Net Foreign Purchases of Canadian Equity
                    Source:   Statistics Canada (1977=100),
      1000


       750


       500
C
C
—
       250
CI)
         0


      —250


      —500


                                                              EEC
                                                          -JAPAN
                                     Figure 2a
                  U.S. Equity Investment Position in Foreign Equity
                Note: U.S. equity investment position as a fraction of U.S. market capitalization.
0.05-




                       /        \—_\                  Canada                                    -
0.01•
                                                                     -
                                                                           Japan
,_ .- ,-                     —   —ttc—--c                   —
                                                                                 Germany


                                       I
                                           IIIhlP11i1l                           •' I' I'
           78     79       80    81.       82   83    84
                                                           I 85II 86IllIllIllili
                                                                        87 88 89 90 91
                                  Figure 2b
              Foreign Equity Investment Position in U.S. Equity
          Note: Foreign equity investment position as a fraction of U.S. market
                                                                                capitalization.
0.125


0.100-                                                              Total foreign



0.075


Q.050
                                                                            Germ any          .,'
                                                                    /N_a._           .—-——-"       ,_,
                                                       .r-——        ,t'__.' \'_.——     U.K.
                                       —
0025-
                                                                Canada                    -- --
                                                                  -

                                                   Japan            ,—
                                                        I   I   I    I
         78   79     80     81    82     83      84    85           86     87   88   89       90     91
                                        TOTAL                            GERMANY     —--—U.K.
                                        CANADA          __ JAPAN
                                              Figure 3a
                          U.S. Investors' Turnover Rates in Foreign Equity
                                           Note: Transactions divided by the investment position.
       8-

       7.
                                                                                                                  I'4
                                                                                                                  1
       6-                                                                                                     I"
                                                                                                        i\    /
.4-J                                                                                      £                                  t
cc     5.                                                               Japan/\
                                                                             SI                     A"
5—.
di                                                                                            ¼.!
                                                                                                    //
       4.                                                                                      -
C                         N                                                          —
                      I                                                          /
       3•,/t         ,                     I'                                I
                               \
                                           /"                                                 U.K.
             ,\I\ /                I''—'
                 V                            N ,l     \/—_                          /
       1-
                          --        ———
                                                                                                              /Canada
                                             —--—.-- - - -              -,                    --
       0_I    IllIllIllullIll                                  I

              82               83             84        85         86                87            88    89             90       91
                                                          TOTAL                               GERMANY                        U.K.'
                                                          CANADA                 —-—--JAPAN
                                            Figure 3b
                        Foreign Investors' Turnover Rates in U.S. Equity
                                 Note: 'rransactions divided by the investment position.

       8•
                                                                                                  $
                                                                                                  I'
                                                                                                      3'
       7                                                                                      /
                                                                                              I
                                                                                  I
                                                                                   '
                                                                                      3   1
       6-                                                                     I
                                                                                '
                                                                              I"\I                         It
C)                                                     Japanese,I
.4—,
 c'    5.                                                                 I
                                                                                                            I

 w     4.                                             I'
                                                      1.            S

 o                                                 I'3,I
                                                                /                                               I
                                                  1
       3.                                                   $
                                                  I
 ,                      I
                            I                              'I                                                   I
                    /
                    $                         I
                                              'I                                                                I
                                                                                                                    I
                /                             I
       2-                                                                                                           /        —._   \
            /                             /
                                                                         dians


       0-       I       I   I    I   I    IIIIIIIIIIII IulIllIlIll III                                I

            82              83           84                85             86              87               88           89     90      91

                                              I___ TOTAL                                  ____GERMANY                        __tJ.K.
                                                                        CANDA                         -- JAPAN
