                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CITIES AND GROWFH: THEORY AND
                        EVIDENCE FROM FRANCE AND JAPAN




                                       Jonathan Eaton
                                        Zvi Eckstein




                                  Working Paper No. 4612




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January, 1994

We thank Paul Beaudry, David Canning, Sam Kortum, Ed Prescott, Victor Rios-Rull, and
participants at presentations at Universitat Pompeu Fabra and Harvard Universityfor constructive
comments, M. Minni of INSEE for his helpfulness in providing data on French aggloneratioiiS
and Aditya Bhattacharjea, Yuval Nachtom, and Akiko Tamura for their
                                                                             excellent research
assistance. Akiko Tamura constructed population data for Japanese urban agglomerations from
census figures on the population of Japanese cities. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4612
                                                                               January 1994


                          CITIES AND GROWI'H: THEORY AND
                         EVIDENCE FROM FRANCE AND JAPAN


                                          ABSTRACT

       The relative distribution of the populations of the top 40 urban areas of France and Japan
remained very constant during these countries' periods of industrialization and urbanization.
Moreover, projection of their future distributions based on past growth indicates that their size-
distributions in steady state will not differ essentially from what they have been historically.
Urbanization consequently appears to have taken the form of the parallel growth of cities, rather
than of convergence to an optimal city size or of the divergent growth of the largest cities. We
develop a model of urbanization and growth based on the accumulation of human capital
consistent with these observations. Our model predicts that larger Cities will have higher levels
of human capital, higher rents, and higher wages per worker, even though workers are
homogeneous and free to migrate between cities. Cities grow at a common growth rate, with
relative city size depending upon the environment that they provide for learning.



Jonathan Eaton                                              Zvi Eckstein
Department of Economics                                     Tel-Aviv University
Boston University                                           Ramat Aviv
270 Bay State Road                                          Tel Aviv 69978
Boston, MA 02215                                            ISRAEL
and NBER
            CITIES AND GROWTH:   THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROl FRANCE AND JAPAN




                           Jonathan Eaton and   Zvi   Eckstein
                                    December 1993



I. INTRODUCTION



       A basic aspect of economic development is the movement of population from

the countryside to cities.1 In this paper we consider the particular cases of

France between 1876 and 1990 and Japan between 1925 and 1985, both of which

experienced substantially increased urbanization during these periods of

industrialization. 2

       We   consider the further issue of whether urbanization took the form of:

(1) an increase in the population of larger cities relative to other cities

("divergent growth"), (2) the growth of smaller cities relative to larger

cities ("convergent growth"), or (3) similar growth rates across cities of

different sizes ("parallel growth"). We find that the evidence rejects the

first hypotheses: Urbanization took the form of similar growth rates across

cities of different sizes (with only slightly faster growth of large cities in


tKuznets' (1966) historical data document the increased share of population
living in urban areas during the economic development of a number of rich
nations. Chenery and Syrquin's (1980)-cross—sectional evidence shows that the
share of a nation's population that lives in cities rises with its per capita
GNP.
2Between 1876 and 1990 the population of France grew from 36.9 million to 55.8
million, while the agglomeration of Paris grew from 2.6 million to 9.3
million. Between 1925 and 1985 Japan grew from 59.7 to 122.6 million people,
while metropolitan Tokyo grew from 6.5 million to 26.5 million. Hence we are
considering each country for a period in which the total population roughly
doubled, while the population of the largest urban areas (as well as the other
urban areas in our sample) approximately quadrupled.
                                       —2—



Japan).

     We   then develop a model of growth and urbanization consistent with this

finding. We adopt a model of urban development in which urban growth is

driven by the acquisition of human capital.3 We choose this approach because

of the emphasis that a number of observers of urban development have placed on

the role of human capital in the functioning of cities.4 Lucas (1988), in

particular, specifically relates what his model identifies as the driving

process of economic growth, the acquisition of knowledge and the externalities

associated with it, to the forces that lead to the development of cities:




        It seems to me that the 'force' we need to postulate to account
     for the central role of cities in economic life is of exactly the
     sane character as the 'external human capital' I have postulated
     as a force to account for certain features of aggregate development.
     (1988, pp. 38—39)



Nevertheless, this literature has so far not provided any formal link between

the processes of economic growth and of urbanization.

     Going back at least to Adam Smith, analysts have thought about economic

growth in terms of nations. This focus may partly reflect the availability of

data at that level. But nation states typically correspond to single legal

jurisdictions and, as posited by Ricardo, may best correspond to the domain of



3Work on the determinants of economic growth has attempted to explain the
secular growth of per capita GNP in terms of (i) physical capital investment
(Solow, 1956, Romer, 1986), (ii) the accumulation of human capital (Uzawa,
1965, Lucas, 1988), (iii) product and process innovation (Inada, 1969,
Grossman and Helpman, 1991), and (iv) learning by doing (Arrow, 1962, Young,
1991).
4See, for example, the discussions in Jacobs (1969, 1984), Henderson (1988),
Rauch (1991), and Glaiser, et al. (1992). Much of the urban literature has
focused on the development of cities that specialize in the production of
particular commodities (as in Henderson, 1988). Our approach, in contrast,
focuses on cities that need not be specialized, whose productivity derives
from the interaction of individuals with complementary forms of knowledge.
                                        —3—


factor markets. For these reasons this choice of unit may be totally

reasonable. Nevertheless, it remains an open question whether the driving

forces of economic growth are primarily national in character, with the growth

of cities following as a derivative, or whether the process of economic

development can better be understood by focusing on some smaller unit, such as

the city. The model we develop in this paper allows us to distinguish between

local and national sources of growth.

     Our purpose here is to review some issues raised by the role of

urbanization in economic growth, to examine some evidence, and to provide a

simple analytic framework to relate the process of urbanization to economic

growth. We do so by integrating two branches of literature, that on the

endogenous determinants of economic growth, in particular the Lucas (1988)

model of human capital accumulation, and that on circular cities, developed by

Hills (1967), Arnott (1979), Helpman and      Pines   (1980), and Henderson (1987,

1988), among others.

     In Section II which follows we consider the basic empirical question of

the extent to which the process of urbanization associated with development is

primarily extensive, taking the form of the creation of new cities, or

intensive, involving the growth of existing cities. Existing work on

urbanization and growth (e.g., Niyao, 1987, Henderson, 1987), predicts that

urbanization takes the form of the creation of new cities, whose size

converges to an optimum city size.5 Hére we develop an alternative approach

in which urbanization involves the parallel expansion of a given number of

cities.




5Henderson's (1987) analysis relates new cities to new industries. The
steady—state implication is that "the economy grows by churning out new cities
at the rate of population growth." (p. 950). Glaiser et al. (1992), on the
other hand, find that diversified cities tend to grow faster.
                                      -4-



     The question is analogous to the issue of "convergence" in economic

growth. The hypothesis that urbanization is primarily extensive implies that

city sizes should "converge," i.e., initially smaller cities should grow

faster than larger cities. Our alternative model implies "parallel growth,"

that is, population growth rates that are independent of initial size, with

growth raie3 converging to a common value.

     We examine this issue with data from 39 French urban areas

(agglomerations) from 1876 to 1990 and for 40 Japanese urban areas for the

period 1925 to 1985. The French data provide striking evidence in favor of

parallel growth: The size distribution of cities remains virtually unchanged

throughout the period. Moreover, we find little evidence either of "new" or

of "dying" cities. Results for Japan also suggest evidence of parallel growth

with some slight, statistically insignificant, additional concentration in

large cities. In neither country do we find any support for the convergence

or divergence hypothesis.

     We then develop, in Sections III, IV and V, a model of urbanization and

growth consistent with the parallel steady—state growth of cities, but with

possibly different short—term growth rates and changes in the ranking of

individual cities.

     Section III presents a static model of a city. Land is a factor of

production, and total productivity within a city declines with the distance of




6The notion that relative city size does not change even as urban populations
grow relative to the population as a whole has an old tradition in the
regional science literature. In particular, the "rank—order rule" asserts
that the product of a city's population and its rank in population is constant
across cities and time. Beckmann (1958), Rodwin (1970), and Henderson (1988)
discuss the rule and its history. With the exception of the analysis in
Henderson (1988), which concerns the growth of specialized cities, the rule
does not appear to have played a role in current theories of urban growth.
The rule does not appear to be mentioned, for example, in the Iandbook of
legionat and Urban Economics (1987).
                                        —5—



production from the city center. This last assumption is meant to capture in

a simple way the contribution of urban agglomeration and   proximity   to

productivity.

     In Section IV we make the model dynamic. We relate total factor

productivity in a city to its average level of human capital, as in Lucas

(1988). A basic characteristic of a city is the environment that it provides

for acquiring human capital (which can either be city—specific or general in

terms of its applicability). Cities are linked together in terms of how their

human capital stocks contribute to learning, much as the human capital stocks

of different countries jointly contribute to national pools of knowledge in

Lucas (1993). The interaction of the human capital stocks of different cities

implies that, in the long run, city populations will grow at common rates.

     Migration provides the link between the growth and distribution of human

capital among cities and their relative populations. In Section V we analyze

migration between cities of different relative levels of human capital. The

model implies that cities where time spent acquiring human capital is more

productive will have larger populations, higher wages, higher land rents, arid

higher levels of human capital per worker, correlations consistent with the

data.7 In Section VI we provide some concluding remarks.



II. EVIDENCE ON DE1ELOP1ENT AND TILE   SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF CITIES



     We have already mentioned that economic growth and urbanization are very

parallel processes. We now consider the question of how cities of different



TVe find a correlation between city population and wages and population and
price level in our French data. Rauch (1991) finds a significant positive
correlation between levels of human capital and city size in U.S. cities.
Henderson (1988) discusses other evidence on the correlation of education
levels and city size.
                                        -6-



sizes grow during the process of development. One possibility is that

urbanization occurs as new cities develop, and as smaller cities catch up with

larger ones, in which case the size distribution of cities would become more

even over time. At the other extreme, urbanization could take the form of the

expansion of the largest cities, so that the size distribution would become

more unequal.

       To examine this issue we look at historical data on urban agglomerations

from France and Japan. Ve choose France for several reasons. First, since it

is a high—income country we can observe the evolution of its urban structure

during the process of industrialization. Second, it has constituted an intact

nation—state more or less within its current borders throughout the industrial

revolution. Third, its total land area was settled at the origin of the

industrial revolution. Fourth, it is geographically large enough to contain a

number of distinct, large metropolitan areas.8 Japan shares the first three

characteristics but not the fourth. However, we have constructed data on

agglomerations for Japan that seem to be consistent for the period under

consideration.

       We have collected data on the population of 39 urban agglomerations in

France for the years 1876, 1911, 1936, 1954, 1962, 1982 and 1990 (see Table

A1).9 Our criterion for selection is a 1911 population of at least 50,000

inhabitants. Only two agglomerations (Grasse—Cannes—Antibes and Bethune) nt

in our sample rank among the top 35 ciUes in 1990 (rank 17 and 19) in 1990.

The smallest agglomeration in our sample (Hagondage) ranks 50 in 1990. Hence,


8Vhile Great Britain shares the first three characteristics, because of its
much greater population density, metropolitan areas tended to blend into each
other during the process of urbanization. We could not find historical data
based on definitions of urban areas that remained consistent during the period
of interest.

9The   data are from INSEE, Annuaire StaU3tique de La France, various issues.
                                        —7—



there are almost no new urban agglomerations since 1911 and no urban

agglomeration has fallen drastically in its relative size, i.e., no city that

was big (relatively) in 1911 has "died."°

     For Japan we have organized data for the largest 40 agglomerations from

1925 to 1985 for every 5 years (see Table A2). The definition of each

agglomeration is not trivial. An appendix explains how agglomerations were

defined and how the data were constructed.11 We included all agglomerations

that had a population of at least 250 thousands in 1965. As in France, only a

few (3) agglomerations not in the sample became marginally larger than those

in the sample by the end of the period. But there is no "new" city in that

every city in the top 30 cities in Japan in 1990 was in our sample.

Similarly, none of the cities in the sample "died" in that none of the cities

in the sample ranks below 50 in 1985.

     As we discussed in the introduction, the urban economics literature

addresses the issue of new cities and the optimal size of a city (e.g.,

Henderson, 1988), both in static and dynamic contexts. The evidence from

France and Japan is that there are      new cities. Even the tourist cities in

France, which may be viewed as new, existed and had a moderate size by the

beginning of the 19th century.


'°Moreover, the two towns that did grow substantially faster than the other
cities and became agglomerations that rank among the top 20 in France are
tourist centers with a significant loc3tional advantage. If the demand for
leisure and tourism is highly income elastic then the substantial increase of
French income per capita over the last 130 years can easily explain the high
growth of these two cities. Since our focus is on aggrepte growth and the
size distribution of cities that produce a common good, it seems reasonable to
ignore those cities whose location led to higher growth due to a higher income
elasticity of demand for their specialized product.
l1The data are based on historical city population census data provided in
rankeisu Showa-kokusei-Soran, vol. 1, in turn based on data from the
Statistics Bureau of the Management and Coordination Agency of the Japanese
Government. Akiko Tamura aggregated the city population data into data for
urban agglomerations. An appendix discusses agglomeration definitions and
aggregation procedures.
                                      -8-


Lorenz Curve3



     Using our French and Japanese samples of agglomerations we computed the

Lorenz curves for population for each year in our sample for France and every

second year for Japan. These are displayed in Figures 1 and 2 and in Tables

A3 and A4. The French data demonstrate starkly how the size distribution of

cities has not changed noticeably during the most spectacular period of growth

of population, movement of population from rural to urban areas, and growth of

income per capita. While the population of Paris nearly quadrupled during

this period (while that of France as a whole did not quite double) its share

of the total population of our sample of cities remained stable at 40—43

percent from 1876 to 1990. The change of ranking among the cities (up and

down within the sample) is more frequent for small cities. That is, the

relative size of a city in the sample is more stable among the largest cities.

     The Japanese Lorenz curves show a slight movement towards less equal

distribution of size. The share of the larger cities went up and, in

particular, Tokyo's share increases for the whole population as well as among

the top cities. It is interesting to note that the Lorenz curve for France is

the same as the Japanese Lorenz curves for the early years. ilence, the two

countries, which are significantly different in their geographical structure,

have a very similar size distribution of cities.L2

     The stability of the Lorenz curve could be the consequence of any number

of dynamic processes driving the population growth of individual cities. The

most obvious possibility is that all cities on average grow at the same rate

starting at different levels ("parallel growth"). Two possibilities are ruled



'2The "rank—order rule" also implies stable Lorenz curves. However, this rule
makes the largest city to be about 207. of the sample of 40 cities, while the
largest city is in fact much bigger (30 7. for Japan and 40 Z for France).
                                     —9—


out, however. If there were an upper bound on city size that was attained by

any city in our sample then we would expect the initial level of population of

the city to be negatively correlated with average growth rate ("convergence of

size distribution"). The size distribution of cities would then be getting

more equal over time. On the other band, if the growth rate of a city is

positively correlated with its initial size ("divergence of size

distribution") then we would expect the Lorenz curves to exhibit increased

inequality over time.

     Figure 3 displays the French average annual growth rates of the cities

from 1876 to 1990 and the initial level of each city in 1876. The regression

line implies that there is no correlation between the initial size of the

agglomeration and the growth rate during that period. (The slope coefficient

is —1x10 with a S.E. of 1.56x1O.) Figure 4 presents the equivalent

picture for the Japanese cities. Here, as well, there is no obvious

correlation between the initial level of population and its subsequent growth.

The slope is positive but not significant(1.3x109 with a S.E.of .8x109).

This result is consistent with stability of the Lorenz curves as well as with

parallel growth. 13



Size and oiher Features



     For France we also have data on the average salary per full—time employee

in each agglomeration in 1982 and 1989 (Table A5). A regression of wage

income on population of the agglomeration yields a positive and significant

coefficient for each year separately (see Table la). Furthermore, the



l3The results in Figures 2 and 3 are similar to Barro's (1991) on the
relationship between per—capita income growth and the initial level of income
per capita in the Summers and ileston (1991) country data.
                                         —10—


coefficients of the two years estimated separately turned out to be close.

Hence, wages are higher in larger cities following a stable relationship.

Table lb reports the regression of the price of housing on city size, which

indicates that larger cities have a higher cost of housing.'4



Evolving Size Distri but ion.




       Quah (1993) provides a statistical method to make further observations on

the cross—section dynamics of relative levels and growth rates of income per

capita in ternis of evolving distributions. Following Quah's procedure, we

group the two samples of cities into 6 cells defined according to a division

of population sizes relative to the average population for the respective

period. To examine the sensitivity of the results to the particular cell

division, we use different assignments, but we report only one division which

is   the same for both France and   Japan and is reported as the row headings in

Tables 2 and 3. (Alternative cell divisions provided very similar results.)

       Our division classifies cities according to whether their population fell

in the range: (1) less than .30 of the mean, (2) between .30 and .50 of the

mean, (3) between .50 and .75 of the mean, etc. These tables show the

frequency distribution and numbers corresponding to each cell. The stability

of these distributions across time and the similarity between France and Japan

is   of course another manifestation of the observations we made about the
Lorenz   curves that we described above.

       Ve define Ft as a 6x1—vector indicating the frequency of cities in each

cell at time t. Ve assume that F evolves according to:




'4The data for this regression are from 1982, and are available for only 20
agglomerations.
                                             —11—




                                       Ft+i
                                              =   I   Ft
                                                                                     (1)




where I is a 6x6 matrix mapping the assignment from period t into an

assignment the subsequent period. An element of this matrix denotes the

probability with which a city initially in the cell corresponding to that

column transits into the cell corresponding to that row. The s—period—ahead

predictor for the distribution is thus:



                                      F
                                       t+s
                                                  1SFt


Taking   s   to     we can characterize the long run       (ergodic)   distribution of Ft,

defined as F (if it exists and is unique).

     Defining K i+1 as the actual transition matrix from period i to period

i+l, we have estimated the matrix I by computing the average I i+1 for all

the periods in the sample. The estimated I matrices for France and Japan are

given in Tables 4 and 5, respectively. The large values of the diagonal terms

and the many low values and zeros of the off—diagonal terms of both matrices

indicate high persistence. For France, diagonal terms tend to increase with

relative size, indicating more persistence for larger cities. For Japan, the

diagonal terms are higher for small and large cities than for medium—sized

cities. Overall, the values on the diagonal are higher for Japan than for

France    and     there are no off—diagonal trms for the highest cell in the

Japanese matrix. These results suggest that there is more persistence in the

Japanese data, no movement in and out of the cell containing the largest 3

cities, and less movement among the smaller cities than is the case for

France.

     The ergodic probability distribution is estimated by taking the average
                                        —12—


of the implied ergodic distribution from each date in the sample using the

estimated average period—to—period transition matrix. That is, using the

estimated M we calculated F by first calculating, for each year in the data:



                                        =
                                    1          1




and then estimated F as the simple average of F. These values are reported

in Tables 6 and 7 for France and Japan, respectively. Concentration of the

frequencies around one would imply convergence to the mean. The results show

no such convergence for either country. For France, about 907. of the cities

will be below the average. Only few cities will be above the average size.

About 597. of the cities will be less than one half of the average size. The

results for Japan are similar: 887. of the cities are below average and 757,

are below one half of the average. Hence, the dispersion of population in

Japan is expected to be less equal than that for France (as was also suggested

by the movement of the Lorenz curves).

     The predicted relative size of Paris will be smaller and there will be

fewer cities that are large. That is, compared with the historic relative

frequency for France, the ergodic frequency has more weight on the smaller

cells. In 1990 the larger than average cities in France are about 157. of the

total and their share will drop to about 107.. For Japan, as we explained

above, there is almost no change at th top but a small increase in the share

of the smaller cities relative to 1985 distribution.

     Hence, the evidence rejects a divergence hypothesis and is consistent

with parallel growth with a somewhat less disperse distribution for France.

In particular, Paris and the other larger cities would be somewhat closer to

the average size. Similarly Japan displays no evidence of convergence. In
                                     —13—



summary, the data support the view that a wide range of city sizes will

persist.



III. A IODEL OF A CITY



     We now develop a model of a system of cities with features that reflect

our empirical findings on the size distribution of French and Japanese cities,

and correlations between city size and other city characteristics. Our theory

has the implication that cities' populations converge to a common growth rate,

with different relative populations. A city's relative size depends upon its

productivity as a place to acquire human capital. In steady state, wages per

worker are higher in larger cities because the level of human capital per

worker is higher. City populations adjust to remove any incentive to migrate.

     We describe each of K individual cities in terms of a representative

resident who lives, works, and learns in that city. We pursue our analysis in

three steps. Step 1, presented below, describes the preferences and the

static production technology for a typical city. Here we characterize the

equilibrium relationships between wage, population, and city area implied by

the maximization problem of the representative resident.'5 Step 2, undertaken

is Section IV, considers human capital accumulation and growth in a typical

city, again in terms of the maximization problem of the representative

resident of that city, ignoring the possibility of migration. Here we provide

conditions for steady—state growth in the system of cities. Step 3, discussed

in Section V, treats the incentive for a representative resident to migrate,

and its consequences for relative city size.



'5Our static model of production takes much from the literature on circular
cities. See, for example, lills (1967), Helpman and Pines (1980), and
Henderson (1987).
                                       —14—



Endowrneni3 and Tasles




     The representative resident of each city supplies a unit of labor each

period regardless of the wage. Residents are infinitely—lived (or behave

dynastically), and maximizes an objective function:




                         V0 J e_Ptln(ct)dt        ,   p   0,



where c is period t consumption. Residents do not worry about the amenities

that different cities offer except as they affect income.



Techno logy




     To focus on the issues at hand, we assume that labor and land are the

only factors of production.'6 These factors produce a single kind of output,

which has a price one each period. Production is Cobb—Douglas in labor and

land, with land having a share fi.   Total   factor productivity in each city i is

affected by a city—specific multiplicative factor A1. At this point in the

analysis, this term could reflect the level of technology used in the city,

the average level of human capital of its work force, or city infrastructure,

among other things. We pursue the second of these possible interpretations,

allowing total factor productivity to evolve over time, in Section IV below.

     Ve introduce the notion of urban land scarcity in a very simple way.

Total factor productivity diminishes with distance from the city center.

Specifically, output a distance d from the center, d' is:



t6As long as capital is perfectly mobile across cities, its incorporation into
the analysis is straightforward and inconsequential.
                                          —15—



                                                           fi,   C E (0,1)      (2)




where Ld is the labor input a distance d from the center of the city and, of

course, 21d is the land input. (Since our focus here is on a single city, we

omit the city—subscript i.) Total factor productivity a distance d from the

city center is Ad', where parameter          is the elasticity of total factor

productivity with respect to distance from the city center. We restrict the

land share fi   to   exceed E/2.   Otherwise one city would absorb the entire

population, as indicated by equation (6) below.

      Factors earn their (private) marginal products, so that payments to land

and labor exhaust output. Worker mobility within the city establishes a

common city wage V. For the private marginal product of labor to be equal

across the city the amount of labor working a distance d from the center must

be:




                             Ld 2T{Ad[(1—fi)/W]}.                               (3)




The corresponding land rent is:




                              Rd =   ${Ad[(1_fi)/V]1}1,

which falls as distance from the center increases.

      Land has an alternative nonurban use that yields Ra The distance from

the center at which Rd has fallen to Ra establishes the city limits D. This

condition relates the radius of the city D to the wage V and to the average

level of productivity A. Solving for V:
                                        —16—



                           V =   (1fl)[AD(fl/R)fJh/().                    (4)




Hence a city's wage increases with its total factor productivity A, but falls

with its area D (or equivalently, as we show next, with its labor force L).

     Substituting (4) into (3) and integrating across all urban locations from

the city center to the city limits gives an expression for the urban labor

force L in terms of city radius D and total factor productivity A:



                            L                                             (5)
                                  .[RDf/(sA)]l/(l_fi)


where I'   2(1—5)÷. This expression implies that greater total factor

productivity reduces the labor force, given city area. The reason is that a

smaller labor input is needed to offset the effect of greater total factor

productivity on rent.

     Finally, (4) and (5) together provide an expression for the wage in terms

of productivity and the effective labor force, with the area determined

endogenously:



                  W =
                        (1_fl){[2Tfl/(2fl_E)](fi/Ra)2flA2L}1/'•           (6)




As one would expect, given its labor force, the wage in a city is higher the

higher total factor productivity and, iven total factor productivity, the

smaller the labor force.

     Expression (6) relates the wage per unit of effective labor in a city to

the city's effective labor force and its total factor productivity. To

construct the equilibrium configuration of cities we need a theory of

intercity migration. Simply postulating that labor is perfectly mobile across
                                          —17—



cities, and that workers seek out the highest wage, would imply that cities

with higher total factor productivity will have larger effective labor forces.

In the next section we develop a theory of total factor productivity growth

based on the accumulation of human capital. The level of total factor

productivity is consequently endogenous. The implications for migration and

city size are not as straightforward. Nevertheless, the association between

higher total factor productivity and greater population remains. We defer the

determination of relative city size and migration to Section V.



IV.    A DYNAJIC MODEL OF LEARNING AND URBAN GROWTh



       We now develop a theory of total factor productivity growth generated by
investment in human capital. The accumulation of human capital in        each   city
derives from the dynamic optimization problem facing the representative
resident of that city. We characterize the solution to that problem and
provide conditions under which the decisions of the representative       residents

of    different cities lead to steady—state growth in a system of K cities
interconnected by    knowledge   flows.
        To simplify things we assume that the nonurban   rent   is   common to all
cities    and remains constant over time. Denoting the physical labor force in

city i as N, the average level of human capital in that city as Ii, and the

average time worked per worker as e1, the effective labor supply in city i is

L1 =             We follow Lucas (1988) in assuming that the average level of

human capital in the community influences total factor productivity there,

although we treat the community as the city rather than the country.'7 Hence



'7Again, allowing productivity to depend on the national average level of human
capital as well as on the average city level would not affect our basic
results. What is key is that the city average matter.
                                        —18—


   =       where y is a parameter relating city i's average level of human

capital to its total factor productivity.



luman Capiial Accumulation and Growth



       Incorporating the expression for effective labor into expressions (5) and

(6),   and differentiating with respect to time gives an expression (with e held

constant) for the growth in the wage per unit of effective labor:


                                                —
                                  —   (27—e)g       cg


so that growth in the wage per physical worker, which in steady state is the

growth rate in per capita output and consumption, is:



                                         2(1—fi+7)g11 —
                                                          cg
                                                                          (8)




       While more rapid accumulation of human capital can lover growth in the

wage per unit of effective labor, it always means higher consumption growth.

Whether per capita consumption grows or falls over time depends upon whether

the effect of human capital accumulation overcomes the congestion effects of

population growth.

       We now consider what determines the rate of human capital accumulation.



Learning



       As in Lucas (1988), workers must take time off from work to acquire human
                                          —19—


capital. Workers have a time endowment of 1 out of which to choose time at

work e. The rest of the time they learn.

     Also    as in Lucas, productivity of time spent learning increases with what

has been learned already, but Lucas assumes that the individual's own level of

human   capital   is what matters. Instead, we posit that learning productivity

depends upon a linear combination of the average levels of human capital in

each city.18 Moreover, we assume that cities differ intrinsically in the

environment that they provide for acquiring human capital. Our specific

assumption is that the increase in a worker k's level of human capital hkjt in

city i is:




                                 hkit =   Hl(l_-ek)                        (9)


where    11it is the knowledge base that an individual in city i draws upon in

acquiring human capital. Here ek1 is worker k's own time spent working (so

that l—ek is worker k's time learning).

        We make the specific assumption that:



                                   111t =




where        reflects the contribution oLcity j's average level of human capital

to learning in city i.      If city i has larger values of     than some other

city then it is a more productive place to learn, while if city j     has larger

values of         than some other city then its human capital contributes more to

learning. To the extent that the matrix of 6's is heavily diagonal dominant



'8Allowing productivity of learning time to depend on the worker's own level of
human capital as well would not materially affect our analysis.
                                                       —20—



then growth is largely generated by factors specific to the city in question.

Less diagonal dominance implies more pooling of knowledge across cities.




Single—City Dynamics



        We assume that cities are connected by a common capital market, so that

individuals in any city can borrow and lend at a given interest rate r, which

we treat as constant. Since we ignore leisure and risk, optimal learning

decisions maximize the discounted present value of wage income. Hence we need

only concern ourselves with workers' decisions about allocating time between

learning and working, which are independent of their decisions about consuning

and saving.

        At each period t, then, individual k in city i with human capital hkjt

chooses ekl to maximize:



                                        a,
                                    I            —rT
                                    t        e     w.h.e.dr
                                                    ir kir kir



subject to the equation of motion (9).

        Solving the problem for individual k in city i implies that, at an

interior solution (in which an individual both learns and works):



                              r +                 — g     =
                                        gj                    Hjt/hkit.       (10)




where         is the growth of the wage in city i, and gj is the growth rate of
          i                                                               i
city i's knowledge base.

     Condition (10) is independent of ek itself. The reason is that the
                                         —21—



returns to working and learning are each linear in time spent in that

activity. Hence, at an interior solution, an individual is indifferent

between the two undertakings. If the individual is both learning and working,

then the two activities must yield that person the same marginal, and hence

average, return.

     oreover, if the right—hand side of expression (10) exceeds the left then

the (average and marginal) returns to learning exceed the returns to working

so that the individual only learns, while if the left—hand side exceeds the

right the individual only works.



As3imilat ion




     For the representative resident of a city (for whom hkjt    H1t) to be

willing both to work and to learn, then, requires that:



                            r +          —      = H/H                    (10')
                                   gj1




     A particular implication of expressions (10) and (10'), which is

important to the migration decision that we analyze below and in the appendix,

is that an immigrant arriving in a city in which the representative resident

is both working and learning will eventually become assimilated. An immigrant

arriving with a level of human capital below the city average will find the

reward to learning strictly greater than the reward to working, so will only

learn. The immigrant's human capital will consequently grow faster than the

city average until it catches up. Conversely, an immigrant arriving with a

level of human capital above the city average will find the reward to working

strictly greater than the reward to learning, so will only work. Since the
                                         —22—



immigrant's human capital level stops growing, the city average will

eventually catch up with that of the immigrant. Either way, the immigrant

eventually becomes just like the representative resident of the city of

destination.




Steady-St ate growth



     In    steady state: (i) each city's average level of human capital and

population (and hence, by equations (4) and (5), each city's area and wage)

grow at the same rate; (ii) each individual's human capital corresponds to

the city—wide average; (iii) individuals have no reason to migrate between

cities. Criteria (i) and (ii) determine the steady—state growth rate of human

capital, while criteria (iii) establishes relative steady—state populations.

We first establish conditions under which a unique steady—state growth rate

exists, and then turn to the determination of relative city size in Section V.

     We have already noted that, within a city, the average level of human

capital will move toward the average for that city. Criterion (i) implies

that expression (10') hold for each city, with the same left—hand side

applying to each city. Hence the right—hand side must be equal across cities

as well.

     Individuals' savings and consumption decisions determine the nationwide

interest rate r. With Bernoulli preferences the steady—state interest rate

equals the pure rate of time preference plus the growth in per capita

consumption,         equal to the growth in human capital plus the growth in the

wage per unit   of   effective labor. Hence:




                               r=P+g=p+g11+g                               (11)
                                               —23—



      Substituting (11) into (10') implies that, in steady state, for each city

1:




                                    p    +           =                                  (12)
                                             2g11




      Since the left—hand side of expression (12) is independent of i, we can

write    (12) for all cities i =   1,...K      in matrix form as:



                                             All =       All                            (13)




where A = p +
              2g11,
                    H is the vector of city—level human               capital   {Hl,...,HK}',
and



                                        11 12                  1K
                               A= 2122                         52K,

                                        5K1                    6KK



the matrix of city interaction effects.

        Steady—state growth requires that this system have an eigenvalue that

exceeds p whose corresponding eigenvector is nonnegative. Since A is

nonnegative, Frobenius' theorem ensures that if A is also indecomposable then

it has a real eigenvalue A1 (the Frobenius root) where:

        (i)     is real and   strictly   positive;

        (ii) associated with A'    is   an eigenvector HF > 0 which is unique up to a

scalar multiple;

        (iii) A' is the only eigenvalue of A that has an associated eigenvector

that is nonnegative;
                                          —24—



     (iv) ' is      the largest eigenvalue in absolute value;

     (v) F is increasing in each element of A.19



     These properties ensure that if A is indecomposable and its elements are

sufficiently large then there exists a unique steady state growth rate of

human capital g11     (' — p)/2.     The corresponding eigenvector      gives the

relative steady—state levels of human capital. lore knowledge spillovers

imply higher growth. If, however, the elements of 5 are so small that               <


then no learning or growth occurs in steady state.

     The matrix A is indecomposable if there is no ordering of its elements

that allows it to be partitioned as:




                                      =   A11 A12
                                          o
                                              A22




     If A is decomposable then the cities corresponding to the elements of

A22, what we call the isolated set of cities, do not receive spillovers from

any city corresponding to the elements of A. Even if A is decomposable,

however, it still has a Frobenius root           if A12 has at least one strictly

positive element (so that the set of cities corresponding to the elements of

A11 are nonisolated) and Au and A22 have Frobenius roots 4 and 4 such that

                            =
4   4. In this case             4:   The levels of human capital in the entire set

of cities grow at the same rate as in the isolated set of cities left on their

own. In this particular case the isolated cities are "leaders" in that these

cities drive the growth of the others. If, however, 4 < 4 and 4 > p then

the isolated cities eventually grow more slowly than the nonisolated set, and


'9See McKenzie (1960, Lemma 1) or Takayama (1974, Theorem 4.8.1).
                                              —25—



get left behind.

    Note    that    and F depend on only the parameters of the knowledge
spillover   matrix. An implication is that the relative levels of human capital

depend   on only these parameters as well, and that the growth rate of human

capital depends on only these parameters and the discount factor p.

     In the special case of two cities (K2) we get that:



                                        +
                          =   oll+522        [(o11—622)2+4512ö21J1/2




                     H        1122 +        [(511_522)244512621]hhhl2

                      2                           21



Other things equal, the city in which the contribution of existing knowledge

to learning is greater has a relatively higher level of human capital.



     So far we have established conditions for the parallel growth of human

capital across cities. Ye do not, however, have observations on the human

capital levels of the cities but on their populations. Our theory implies

that if the population of each city is also growing at a common rate, then so

are wages and consumption, with parameters of technology linking the growth of

human capital and population, on one hand, to the growth of wages and

consumption, on the other.

     Individual migration decisions link the distribution and growth of human

capital to the size distribution of cities. Ye now turn to the migration

decision of the representative resident of each city, and consider conditions

under which the parallel growth of human capital levels across cities implies
                                          —26—




parallel     growth of populations.



V.   IIGLLTION AND CITY SIZE



       We now turn to the third criterion for a steady state, that the

representative resident of each city have no incentive to migrate elsewhere.

This criterion determines relative city populations in steady state.



       The cit'-specificiiy of human capita1



       An issue is the degree to which the human capital acquired by someone in

one city contributes to that individual's productivity elsewhere. At one

extreme, human capital might be perfectly general, and augment labor

productivity by the same amount anywhere. At the other extreme, human capital

might be totally city—specific, not enhancing         productivity        anywhere except

where it was acquired.

      We introduce the parameter      to deflate human capital acquired elsewhere

than in the city where it is used. A migrant from city i to j with an amount

of human capital h acquired in the city of origin will arrive in city j with

an amount of human capital h. Hence a value of               =   1   implies that human

capital is fully general, while       = 0 implies that it is completely

city—specific.



      In analyzing a decision to migrate we need to distinguish between a move

to a city where the migrant's human capital, upon arrival, will be lower than

the average of the city of destination and a move to a city where the migrant

will find his own level of human capital above average. We undertake this
                                         —2 7—




analysis for an individual contemplating a move in an economy that is in

steady state.



       loving up



       Consider first an individual's decision about whether or not to migrate

from city i—i to city i, where Hi > H_1. The immigrant would arrive in city

i with a lover level of human     capital   than the destination average. We showed

in part IV that, upon arrival, the immigrant would devote all available time

to learning until becoming assimilated with the representative resident in the

destination city. Wage income during this training period would be zero, but

once    it was over the immigrant would resume working the steady—state amount.
       We denote the steady—state present income of an individual    with human
capital h remaining thereafter in a city with an average level of human

capital H as V(h,H). We derive this function for the cases h=H, h<H, and h>H

in the appendix.

        Hence the value to the potential migrant of remaining at hone is given by

                   as given in equation (Al) in the appendix, while the value of

moving to city i and remaining there is V(Hi,H1), with V taking the form

given in expression (A2).

        Hence there is an incentive to migrate from city i—i to city i if

V(Hi,H) > V(H11,H_1).             For the wage differential to remove this

incentive, the radius of city i must exceed that of i—i by at least the ratio:




                                                                             (14)




where       =           is the ratio of human capital city at rank i to that of
                HIH11
                                        —28—



city at rank i—i, and g11 =    ()Y—p)/2, the   steady—state growth rate of human

capital.

        The city with the higher steady—state level of human capital must have a

larger area in order to deter migration from the lower human capital city. It

must also have more effective labor, and a larger population, as can be seen

by combining this expression with (5), to obtain:




                           =                                                 (15)




and, since L1 H1N, where N1 is the physical population of city i:



                       =
                                                                             (16)




        These expressions are lower bounds on how much the size of a city with

higher human capital must exceed that of a city with lower human capital to

remove migration incentives. If this bound is violated, workers in the lower

human capital city have an incentive to migrate to the higher human capital

city.

        Note that this lower bound on the relative population of city i to that

of city i—i depends on all the parameters of the model, which we assume are

the same for all cities, and on the ratio of human capital of the two cities.



        loving Down



        Eliminating the corresponding incentive to move from a high to a low

human capital city places an upper bound on how much the size of the high
                                               —29—



human capital city can exceed that of the low human                    capital   city. To

establish these bounds consider now an individual in city i contemplating a

move to city i—i, where          >
                                     H11.
     Since the immigrant arrives with a level of human capital that exceeds

the average in the destination city, the immigrant's incentive is to work full

time, not learning at all, until the human capital level in the city has

caught up to the immigrant's level. The potential migrant now compares the

value of staying home, V(111,H) as given by (Al), with that moving to city

i—i. The value of making this move permanently is V(H,E_1), where the

relevant expression for V is given by (A3).

     To remove the incentive to migrate from city i to city i—i, the maximum

amount by which city i's radius can exceed that of city i—i is:



                D1           (1—fi÷7)/                —p/g11                  ($—1)/e
                     =
                                         [(l—°)()              +
                                                                       Ooi]                 (14')




where:



                                         0=-
                                               (p+g11)e*



and e = (F+P)/2AFis the steady—state work effort.

     If city i—i were any smaller relative to city i, it would attract

immigration from the larger city. The maximum difference in human capital is:




                         =     (f27)/([(10)(,Pig11                 +
                                                                       0]V(                 (15')


while the maximum population difference is:
                                       —30—



                                                    +
                                                        o-R.              (16')




     A steady state requires that the lower bound not exceed the upper bound.

The interval of permissible city sizes falls as     rises. In our simulations

the interval became negative with strictly positive discounting (p>O) and

values of   very close to one. The implication is that, with discounting, a

steady—state outcome with multiple cities requires some element of city

specificity of human capital (Or some other form of moving cost).20 With

discounting but no impediment to migration, residents have an incentive to

switch cities occasionally, moving to lower human capital cities when their

human capital is high and working there full time, but later moving to higher

human capital city to replenish their human capital.

     The rest of our discussion here posits that values of ' and p guarantee a

steady state with no equilibrium migration. We discuss two particular cases

in which a steady state is guaranteed:




     fully city—3pecific human capital



     Say that   =   0, so that knowledge acquired in one city has no value
elsewhere. In this case there is no possibility of "moving down," since one

arrives anywhere new with no human capital that is appropriate for the city of

destination. Moreover, there is no reason to migrate temporarily to a high

human capital city for the purpose of learning since any   knowledge acquired


200ur calculations compare the value of staying in the city of origin with that
of a permanent move to another city. Hence the bounds that we derive are
necessary but not sufficient for a steady state: A steady state could be
upset by the temptation to undertake even a temporary move to another city. A
  sufficiently close to zero (or some other sufficiently high transport cost)
can render even temporary moves unattractive, however, as we discuss below.
                                                 —31—



there would be useless anywhere else. Expressions (14), (15), and (16),

evaluated at =O, thus provide lower bounds on the extent to which the area,

effective labor force, and population of city i can exceed those of city i—i.

The upper bounds are given by the condition that V(O,1111) < V(H1,H), i.e.,

that it is not worthwhile moving to the lower human capital city to start over

there. This upper bound necessarily exceeds the lower bound established by

the condition that V(H11,H11) > V(O,H1).



       zero discointing



       In the special case in which there is no pure time discounting (p=O) only

steady state human capital levels matter in determining comparisons across

cities. The lower and upper bounds on city radius, effective labor, and

population differences converge to:



                                 1       —        (1—fl+)/     '14"




                                 L.
                                     1       —     (['+27)/f   '15"




and:




                                         —        2(1—fl+7)/   '16"
                                1—i



respectively.

       In this special case, then, relative steady state city size leaves the

residents of each city indifferent between staying put or moving to any other,
                                      —32—



larger or smaller, city. The city—specificity of human capital makes no

difference since the destination city's level of human capital is always

acquired in finite time. The larger size (or, equivalently, higher land

rents) of cities where learning is more productive make them equally

attractive as cities where learning is less productive.

     Equation (16") thus provides a simple relation between average levels of

human capital and the relative population of the cities. This relationship

depends on all the parameters of the model (which we treat as common to all

cities) and relative total factor productivities (which in our analysis are

determined by relative average levels of human capital) among cities. More

generally, with potential migration, relative population levels provide a

fairly tight, but possibly not exact, measure of the relative levels of total

factor productivity in different locations.

     The model thus provides an explanation for the observed stability of the

relative populations of cities. The spillover of knowledge between and within

cities determines the common rate of growth of total factor productivity of

all cities, and their ranking. The migration decision then implies a

restriction on the distribution of population among cities. Without

discounting, the relative human capital level of a city uniquely determines

its relative size. With discounting the growth rate of human capital, which

is equal across cities, has an effect on the bounds of the city size as well.

Simulation results indicate that, with plausible parameter values, very small

differences in steady—state human capital levels (around 5   per cent) can imply

large differences in city populations and areas.

     Higher costs of congestion are captured by higher values of .     Raising
does not change the distribution of human capital (agglomeration)   among
cities, but from (16") we can see that the distribution of city sizes become
                                     —33—



flatter, so that the ratio          is smaller. Hence the shape of the Lorenz

curves is affected by both the process of human capital accumulation and the

parameters of the production function and preferences. However, if these

parameters are stable, the dynamic structure of human capital accumulation

alone can explain the stability of the Lorenz curve, and our observation that

there are no "new" cities and that no City "dies."



VI. CONCLUSION



     The French and Japanese experiences provide striking evidence that, while

the process of development is associated with a significant increase in urban

population, it has had little effect on the distribution of population among

different urban areas. This finding suggests that the forces driving the

process of industrialization are present in individual cities in proportion to

their initial populations.

     In economies with labor mobility, per capita output or wages are a poor

indicator of total factor productivity across regions.2' We have developed an

equilibrium model in which relative populations reflect total factor

productivity differentials across cities. Hence, the observed parallel growth

of urban populations in France and in Japan can be interpreted as evidence for

parallel growth in total factor productivity across cities. The model also

suggests how cities can serve as a fundamental force in the process of

industrialization.

     The structural link between the dynamic process of human capital growth



21Land rents would provide a much better measure. Unfortunately data on land
rents are rarely available comprehensively. An exception is Japanese data on
land values by prefecture. Dekie and Eaton (1993) explore their implications
for measuring agglomeration effects in manufacturing and in financial
services.
                                     —34--




and the growth and distribution of population among cities is the central

aspect of the theory. This link implies that we can use the data on the

populations of cities to measure the pattern of growth of total factor

productivity. In this paper we use this implication to interpret the

stability of the Lorenz curves.

     Our theory, taken literally, would also imply that the matrix describing

the transition of cities across relative sizes (I, in equation (1)) is

diagonal. we found in section II, however, that the matrix M includes off

diagonal terms. We interpret these off diagonal terms using a stochastic

version of the model in a sequel to this paper.

     Our theory is compatible with many possible relationships among cities in

a growing country. One possibility is that the matrix & of knowledge

spillovers is nearly diagonal, which would suggest that cities are largely

"self relia.nt" in terms of their growth. In this case the process of economic

development is best thought of in terms of the city. Another possibility is

that off—diagonal elements are large, in which case the growth of individual

cities is highly interconnected. In this case the nation or some broader unit

might provide the more appropriate unit of analysis. In our sequel paper we

use the stochastic formulation of our analysis to estimate knowledge

spillovers themselves.

     Our analysis also has implications for the relationship between migration

and development. It suggests, for example, how changes in the way knowledge

flows across locations, as well as changes in land shares and urban

transportation technology and infrastructure, would affect migration patterns

and relative city size. Extensions of the analysis could also have

implications for the relationship between migration and human capital

accumulation. The analysis above suggests that migrants moving toward more
                                     —35—



populated cities would tend to be less educated than average upon arrival, but

would acquire hunian capital more quickly once they arrive. Migrants to less

populated regions would have the opposite characteristics.
                                       —36—




                                   REFERENCES



Arnott, R. (1979), "Optimum City Size in a Spatial Economy," Journal of Urban
Economics, 6: 65—89.

Barro, R.J. (1991), "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106: 407—444.

Barro, R.J. and X. Sala—I---Martin (1992), "Convergence," Journal of Foliical
Economy, 100: 223—251.

Beckmann, M.J. (1958), "City Hierarchies and Distribution of City Size,"
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 6: 243—248.

Chenery, H.B. and I. Syrquin (1975), Patterns of Development: 1950-1970
(London: Oxford University Press).

Dekie, R. and J. Eaton (1993), "Ag1omeration and the Price of Land: Theory
and Evidence from the Prefectures.' manuscript, Boston University.

Glaiser, E.L., H.D. Kallal, J.A. Scheinkman, and A. Shleifer (1992), Growth in
Cities," Journal of Political Economy, 100: 1126—1152.

Grossman G.M. and E. Helpman (1991 ,   Innovation and Crowth in the Fond
Economy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press

Henderson, J.V. (1987), "General Equilibrium Modeling of Systems of Cities,"
Handbook of legional and Urban Economics, Volume II, Edited by E.S. Mills
(Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers).

Henderson, J.V. (1988), Urban Development: Theory, Fact, and Illusion (New
York: Oxford University Press).

Helpnian, E. and D. Pines (1980), OPtimal Public Investment and Dispersion
Policy in a System of Open Cities," American Economic leview, 70: 507—514.

Inada, K. (1969), "Endogenous Technical Progress and Steady—State Growth,
leview of Economic Studies, 36: 99—108.

INSEE, Annuaire Statistique, various issues.

Jacobs, J. (1969), The Economy of Citie3 (New York: Vintage Books).

Jacobs, J. (1984), Cities and the h'ealth of Nations (New York: Vintage
Books).

fanketsu Showa-koku.sei Soran.

Kuznets, S. (1966), lodern Economic Crowih (New Haven: Yale University
Press).
                                     —37--



Lucas, R.E. (1988), "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of
Nonetary Economics, 22: 3—42.

Lucas, R.E. (1993), "Making a Miracle," Econometrica, 61.

Mills E.S. (1967), "An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a
Metropolitan Area," American Economic leview, 57: 197—210.

McKenzie, L. (1960), "Matrices with Dominant Diagonals and Economic Theory,"
laiheniatical leihods in the Social Sciences, 1959, edited by K.J. Arrow, S.
Karlin, and P. Suppes (Stanford University Press).

Miyao, T. (1987), "Dynamic Urban Models." ffandbook of legional and Urban
Economics, Volume II, edited by E.S. Mills (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
Publishers).

Quah, D. (1993), "Empirical Cross—Section Dynamics in Economic Growth,"
European Economic teview, 37: 426—434.

Rauch, J. (1991), "Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of human
Capital: Evidence from the Cities," manuscript, University of California, San
Diego.

Rodwin, L. (1970), Nations and Cities (Boston: Houghton—Mifflin).

Romer, P. (1986), "Increasing Returns and Long—Run Growth," Journal of
Political Economy, 94: 1002—1037.

Solow, R.M. (1956), "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70: 65—94.

Summers, R. and A. Heston (1991), "The Penn world Table (Mark V): An Expanded
Set of International Comparisons," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106:
327—368.

Takayama, A. (1974), lathematical Economics (Hinsdale, IL: Dryden).

Uzawa, H. (1965), "Optimum Technical Change in an Aggregative Model of
Economic Growth," International Economic leview, 6: 18—31.

Young, A. (1991), "Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International
Trade," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106: 369—406.
                                          —38--




                           APPENDIX A: Migration and City Size



     Here we derive the total discounted wage income, at some time 0, of an

individual with human capital h0 remaining thereafter in city i. City i has

an average level of human capital 11i0' which we assume is growing at the

steady—state rate g11. We denote the discounted wage earnings of this

individual as V(ho,Ho). In deriving this amount we need to distinguish

three cases:



1. The representative resident:



     The discounted present wage income of the representative resident, for

whom h0 =           is simply:
             H10,


                        V(HO,HIO) =                 =
                                                        e*''°                    (Al)




where e* =    (,F+p)/2A,    the steady—state amount of time spent working.



2. The below—average resident:



     Consider now a resident whose human capital is initially below the city

average, so that h0 < 11i0• Expression (10) implies that this resident will

choose e =   0 as long as ht < H1t.

     How long does it take to acquire the city's average level of human

capital? Define the ratio of the city—average level of human capital to that

of the below—average resident at time t as x =                    Since h/ht =
                                                        H,t/ht.
                                                   —39---




                                      X                   —    F
                                                              , xt,

a differential equation in x solved by:



                                                              g11t
                                               xoexp
                                =
                                                                           AFX
                                    "x0
                                    —exp           g11t
                                                               +1—-——
                                                                            g11




At T, x       =   1, so that:
         Tu




                                                    = AF'_g11/x0
                                          g11T1'
                                    exp                  F
                                                          A —
                                                                     g11




Hence, for h0       H10:




         V(h0,H10) = e*exp_PTU
                                     w1,0H0               =                                w0H0      (A2)
                                                              e*[A F          Ixo]_P/U



3.   The above—average resident



     Finally, expression (10) implies that a resident with human capital

initially above the city average (for whom h0 >                                     will spend no tine
                                                                           11i,O)
learning as long as ht remains above HtO. Hence this individual's human

capital does not grow at all while the city average grows at rate                                   until

the city average catches up.

     Let Td denote how long it will take the average level of human capital in
                                                 —40—



the city to reach that of the initially above—average resident. To calculate

Td, denote the ratio of the resident's human capital level to the city—average


as    =
           h/Hit.       As long as      >   1'    ht
                                                          0 while H_1/H1_1 = g11, so that, in


                                                                              t                             d
this range — = —g11.       Hence, while y÷ >           1, y =           yexpH     .   Since y , = 1,    T
                                                                                             T
                                                                d
                                                        —g11T
is determined by the condition that y0exp                           =   1, or that:



                                            g11Td
                                        exp            =y0.


     Hence, for h0 2 H10:



             V(h0,H10) =                                  +
                               Jdwi,thOexp_rtdt                     lTd wi,tHj,te_rtdt
                    =
                        (l0_r/H) ?0 +                   e*y0
                                                                        g11                      (A3)




where r'     p +    =r     —         The first term is discounted wage income during

the period when the resident's human capital exceeds the city average, when no

effort is devoted to human capital formation. The second term reflects

earnings once the city's average human capital level meets that of the

above—average individual's, at which point the individual reduces his work

effort to e*.
                      Figure 1
          Lorenz Curves for French Cities
  1



                                            —
                                            1876
0.8                                         -.-
                                            1911
                                            -t-
0.6                                         1936

                                            1954
0.4
                                            -.-
                                            1962

                                            1982
0.2

                                            1990

 0
      0      10        20        30
                       Figure 2
          Lorenz Curves for Japanese Cities


                                                   1925
0.8
                                                   1935

0.6                                                1947

                                                   1955
0.4
                                                   1965

                                                   1975
0.2
                                                   1985

  0
      0       10        20        30          40
                     Figure 3 : French Cities
                 Growth Rates and 1876 Cities Size
   0.02
                   .
  0.0 18
                   —
                                    a
  0.016
                 U.    —
  0.0 14
           •1•
0 0.012 I
           1-    —.
           I-
                                                                         a
   0.01
           T
           t       U   U                                      U
  0.008            U"—                       U
                               U
                                                                                           U
  0.006
                                             U
  0.004                    I                              I                    I

           0           100                       200              300                400
                               Population in 1876 (in Thousands)



       R-Squared                   0.024 7         Coefficient               -1 .28E-06

      No. of Observations               39         Std. Error of Coef.       1.317E-06
                  Figure 4 : Japanese Cities
               Growth rates and 1925 cities size
  0.04

 0.035

  0.03

 0.025




I::
                                               I                I
                  I



         0      1000       2000    3000      4000       5000        6000       7000

                         Population in 1925 (in Thousands)




 R-Squared             0.0708             Coefficient               I .3E-09

 No. of Observations      40              Std. Error of Coef.        8E-I0
Table 1: Cross-Section Regressions for French Data



a. Ln(Wage) on Ln(City's Population)

   Year      1982                        Year      1990                     I
Constant                     1.8644   Constant                     1.7787
Std Err of Y Est             0.0219   Std Err of Y Est             0.0362
R Squared                    0.3997   R Squared                    0.3789
No. of Observations              39   No. of Observations              39
Degrees of Freedom               37   Degrees of Freedom               37

(Coefficient(s)    0.0508             'K Coefficient(s)   0.0794
Std Err of Coef.   0.0102             Std Err of Coef.    0.0167
  T stat           4. 9638               T stat           4.7506




b. Ln(Price) on Ln(City's Population)


         Constant                       81.185
         Std Err of Y Est               7.3627
         R Squared                      0.5867
         No. of Observations                20
         Degrees of Freedom                 18

         X Coefficient(s)    0.0044
         Std Err of Coef.    0.0009
             stat            5.0551
Table 2: Frequency & Relative Frequency for French Data

                               Cells Upper Endoint

                         0.3       0.5    0.751       1      2      20

   1876 Frequency         7         18       5        2      4        3
        Probability   0.179      0.462   0.128    0.051   0.103   0.077

   1911 Frequency        11         12       7        4      1        4
        Probability   0.282      0.308   0.179    0.103   0.026   0.103

   1936 Frequency        11         13       6        4      1        4
        Probability   0.282      0.333   0.154    0.103   0.026   0.103

   1954 Frequency         9         15       6        4       2       3
        Probability   0.231      0.385   0.154    0.103   0.051   0.077

   1962 Frequency         8         15       6        5      2        3
        Probability   0.205      0.385 0.154 0.128 0.051          0.077

   1982 Frequency          5        18       8        2       3       3
        Probability   0.128      0.462   0.205    0.051   0.077   0.077

   1990 Frequency         6         17       8        2       3       3
        Probability   0.154      0.436   0.205    0.051   0.077   0.077
Table 3: Frequency & Relative Frequency for Japanese Data

                                Cells Upper Endpoint

                         0.31       0.51   0.751          1      2      20

1925 Frequency             2         23        8          2       2       3
     Prob.              0.05      0.575      0.2       0.05    0.05   0.075

1930 Frequency             3        24         6          1       3       3
     Prob.             0.075        0.6     0.15   0.025      0.075   0.075

1935 Frequency             6         23       4           2      2        3
     Prob.              0.15      0.575      0.1       0.05    0.05   0.075

1940 Frequency             9         21        4          I       2       3
     Prob.             0.225      0.525      0.1   0.025       0.05   0.075

1947 Frequency             2        20       10        3          2      3
     Prob.              0.05        0.5     0.25   0.075       0.05   0.075

1950 Frequency             3         21        8       3          2       3
     Prob.             0.075      0.525      0.2   0.075       0.05   0.075

1955 Frequency             6         21        6          2       2       3
     Prob.              0.15      0.525     0.15       0.05    0.05   0.075

1960 Frequency            11         17        6          1       2       3
     Prob.             0.275      0.425     0.15   0.025       0.05   0.075

1965 Frequency            15         13        6          1       2       3
     Prob.             0.375      0.325     0.15   0.025       0.05   0.075

1970 Frequency            17         11        5          2       2       3
     Prob.             0.425      0.275    0.125       0.05    0.05   0.075

1975 Frequency             16        12        4          4       1       3
     Prob.                0.4       0.3      0.1        0.1   0.025   0.075

1980 Frequency            15         13        4          4       1       3
     Prob.             0.375      0.325      0.1        0.1   0.025   0.075

1985 Frequency            17         12        3          3       2       3
     Prob.             0.425        0.3    0.075 0.075         0.05   0.075
Table 4: Average Transition Matrix for French Cities, 1876 - 1990

                       Cells Upper Endpoint

                 0.3       0.5    0.75         1       2        20

    0.3        0.723     0.154       0         0       0         0

    0.5        0.254     0.796   0.118         0       0         0

   0.75        0.024      0.05   0.741    0.275        0         0

     1             0         0    0.14    0.692     0.083        0

     2             0         0       0 0.033        0.792     0.097

    20             0         0       0         0 0.125        0.903




Table 6: Average of Ergodic Probabilities for French Cities

                       Cell's Upper Endpoint

                 0.3       0.5     0.75        1[       2       20

Frequency      8.229    14.898   7.956    4.095     1.677     2.145

Probability    0.211     0.382   0.204    0.105     0.043     0.055
Table 5: Average Transition Matrix for Japanese Cities, 1925 - 1985

                       Cells Upper Endpoint

                 0.3       0.5     0.75        1       2       20

       0.3     0.888     0.114        0        0       0        0

       0.5     0.112     0.855    0.152        0       0        0

       0.75        0 0.032        0.776    0.111       0        0

        1          0         0 0.072       0.826   0.069        0

        2          0         0        0 0.063      0.931        0

       20          0         0        0        0       0        1




Table 7: Average of the Ergodic Probabilities for Japanese Cities

                       Cells Up?er Endpoint

   .             0.3       0.51    0.751       1       2       20

Frequency      15.08     14.88     3.12     2.04    1.84        3

Probability   0.377      0.372    0.078    0.051   0.046   0.075
TABLE A 1: FRANCE AGGLOMERATIONS
         SIZE IN THOUSANDS AND ANNUAL GROWTH RATE

                            YEAR          1876           1911        1936            1954
CITIES                             I._________

MIENS                                 68 0.96%      95 0.17%      99 0.00%      99 2.00%
NGERS                                 68 0.93%      94 0.25% 100 0,88%         117 2.08%
BESANCON                              56 0.15%      59 0.45%      66 0.64%      74 3.96%
BORDEAUX                             256 0.88% 348 0.63% 407 0.40% 437 0.70%
BREST                                 87 1.06%      126 -0.23%    119 -0.39%   111    2.85%
BRUAYENARTOIS(BETHUNE)                19 3.19%      57 2.27% 100 0.58%         111 -0.46%
AEN                                   46 0.35%      52 1.58%       77 0.74%     88 3.84%
LERMONT-FERRAND                       49 1.22%      75 1.83%      118 0.87%    138 2.18%
DIJON                                 52 1.27%      81    1.04%   105 0.97%    125 2.81%
DOUAI                                 53 1.32%       84 1.01%     108 0.54%    119 1.50%
DUNKERQUE                             48 1.68%       86 0.52%      98 -0.11%    96 2.83%
3RENOBLE                              61 1.27%       95 1.32%     132 1.21%    164 4.65%
HAGONDAGE-BRIEY                       13 4.71%       65 0.88%      81 0.71%     92 3.05%
LE HAVRE                             106 1.24%      163 1.00% 209 -0.44%       193 1.65%
LEMANS                                53 0.88%       72 0.81%   88 1.60%       117 2.54%
LENS                                  42 3.84%      157 0.95% 199 1.05% 240 0.76%
LILLE-ROUBAIX-TOURCOING              416 1.29%      651 0.22% 688 0.17% 709 1.00%
LIMOGES                               60 1.26%      93 0.13%      96 0.66%     108 1.43%
LYON                                 416 1.01%      591 0.65% 695 0.35% 740 2.23%
AARSEILLE                            327 1.54%      559 0.72% 668 0.17% 689 1.92%
1ETZ                                  61 1.75%      112 0.21% 118 0.45% 128 2.34%
AONTPELLIER                           56 1.06%      81 0.55%      93 0.40%     100 2.93%
1ULHOUSE                              83 1.44% 137 0.17% 143 0.08% 145 1.55%
NANCY                                 83 1.76% 153 0.52% 174 0.37% 186 1.71%
NANTES                               151 0.86% 204 0.65% 240 1.00% 287 1.68%
NICE                                  58 2.83% 154 2.05% 256 0.04% 258 2.24%
NIMES                                 63 0.68% 80 0.65%    94 -0.30%  89 1.84%
)RLEANS                               63 0.89% 86 0.36%    94 0.56% 104 2.63%
PARIS                              2563 1.59% 4446 0.88% 5539 0.30% 5842 1.25%
REIMS                                85 0.99% 120 0.10% 123 0.22% 128 1.66%
RENNES                               58 0.89%  79 0.99% 101 1.32% 128 2.75%
ROUEN                               170 0.88% 231 0.49% 261 0.37% 279 1.89%
STETIENNE                            171 0.63% 213 0.80% 260 0.00% 260 1.24%
STRASBOURG                           117 1.87% 224 0.49% 253 0.24% 264 1.65%
HIONVILLE                             20 3.38%       64 0.79%     78 1.33%      99 2.96%
OULON                                 90 1.21%      137 1.32%     190 -0.03%   189 2.54%
OULOUSE                              134 0.36%      152 1.42% 216 1.29% 272 2.45%
rouRs                                 62 1.13%      92 0.97%      117 0.50%    128 2.26%
IALENCIENNES                          77 1.08%      112 0.75% 135 0.62%        151    1.57%


Source: INSEE, Annuarie statistic, Various issues
TABLE A 1(Cont.): FRANCE AGGLOMERATIONS
                SIZE IN THOUSANDS AND ANNUAL GROWTH RATE

                            YEAR            1962           1982     1990
CITIES
                                                                    —
MIENS                                 116 1.46%      155 0.08%      156
 NGERS                                138 1.82%      198 0.62%      208
BESANCON                              101 0.91%      121    0.21%   123
BORDEAUX                              462 1.71% 648 0.95%           699
BREST                                 139 1.86%      201    0.00%   201
BRUAY EN ARTOIS (BETHUNE)             107 4.50% 258 -0.15%          255
AEN                                   119 2.26%      186 0.40%      192
LERMONT-FERRAND                       164 225% 256 -0.10%           254
DIJON                                 156 1.71% 219 0.61%           230
DOUAI                                 134 2.10% 203 -0.19%          200
DUNKERQUE                             120 2.43%      194 -0.19%     191
 3RENOBLE                             236 2.62% 396 0.28%           405
HAGONDAGE-BRIEY                       117 0.13%      120 -0.86%     112
LE HAVRE                              220 0.74% 255 -0.05%          254
LEMANS                                143 1.46%      191 -0.13%     189
LENS                                  255 1.27%      328 -0.19%     323
LILLE-ROUBAIX-TOURCOING               768 1.04%      944 0.20%      959
LIMOGES                               121    1.77%   172 -0.07%     171
LYON                                  883 1.63% 1220 0.42% 1262
MARSEILLE                             802 2.23% 1246 -0.15% 1231
METZ                                  154 0.95% 186 0.46% 193
MONTPELLIER                           126 2.99% 227 1.11% 248
MULHOUSE                              164 1.48% 220 0.23% 224
NANCY                                 213 2.15% 326 0.11% 329
NANTES                                328 1.79% 468 0.70% 495
NICE                                  308 2.28% 483 0.85% 517
NIMES                                 103 1.25% 132 0.65% 139
 )RLEANS                              128 2.77% 221 1.19% 243
PARIS                                6454 1.64% 8927 0.54% 9319
REIMS                                 146 1.59% 200 0.37% 206
RENNES                                159 1.95% 234 0.58% 245
ROUEN                                 324 0.80%      380 O.00%      380
ST ETIENNE                            287 0.51%      318 -0.20%     313
TRASBOURG                             301 1.08%      373 0.49%      388
rHIONVILLE                            125 0.46%      137 -0.46%     132
 OULON                                231 2.92% 411 0.80%           438
TOULOUSE                              330 2.74% 567 1.72%           650
rOURS                                 153 2.90% 271 0.50%           282
/ALENCIENNES                          171 3.68% 352 -0.47%          339



Source: INSEE, Annuarie statistic, Various issues
Table A2: Japanese Cities - Population in Thousands and Annual Growth Rate

                    Year        1925            1930                 1935              1940
Cityname

rokyo(84)                      6,539   3.45%   7,746     3.24%     9.085     2.78% 10,422     -290%
Osaka(37)                      4,055   2.92%   4,683     3.94%     5,680     2.45%    6.410   -5.07%
Nagoya(19)                     1,404   2.67%   1,602     4.27%     1,975     1.55%    2.132   .2.15%
Kyoto(7)                       1,049   2.73%   1,200     2.44%     1.354     0.22%    1.369   -0.40%
Kitakyushu(5)                    740   2.59%    8.40     2.95%       972     3.55%    1,158   -2.65%
Hiroshima(3)                     561   3.13%    655      2.57%       743     1.42%      797   -3.24%
Okayamalkurashiki(2)             496   0.73%    515      1.91%       566     0.06%     568     2.13%
Fukuoka(3)                       302   2.99%    350      2.86%       403     1.37%     432     0.97%
Maebashi/Takasaki(4)             431   1.90%    473      1.53%       510     0.44%     522     2.24%
Shizuoka(3)                      371   1.94%    408      1.85%       447     1.20%     475    1.29%
Sapporo(2)                       220   3.08%    256      2.86%       294     1.10%     311    3.06%
Sendai(5)                        272   2.69%    311      2.14%       345     0.75%     358    2.46%
Hamamatsu(4)                     314   2.01%    347      2.18%       387     0.81%     403    0.57%
Nagasaki(2)                      318   1.19%    337      0.61%       348     1.47%     374    0.08%
Gitu(3)                         301    1.39%    322      1.45%       346     0.76%     360    1.22%
Hemeji(2)                       290    1.03%    306      1.22%       325     1.99%     359    1.95%
Toyama(3)                       313    1.15%    331      0,72%       3.43    1.45%     369    1.56%
Niigata(3)                      258    1.71%    281      1.11%       297     1.62%     321    2.55%
Kumamoto(2)                     264    1.65%    287      1.17%       304     -0.41%    298     2.84%
NumazulFuji(3)                  213    1.90%    234      2.23%       261      1.49%    281     3.28%
Mito/Hitachi(3)                 219    2.02%    242      1.92%       267      2.98%    309     1.05%
Nagano(3)                       268    1.11%    283      0.27%       287      0.02%    287     3.35%
 rokushima(3)                   277    0.90%    290      0.83%       302     -0.33%    297     1.52%
Takamatsu(2)                    254    1.27%    271      0,86%       283     -0.60%    274     2.17%
Wakayama(2)                     274    1.73%    298      1.60%       323     .0.21%    319    -0.47%
Iwaki                           208    0.86%    217      1.61%       235      2.12%    261     2.69%
Toyohashi(2)                    211    2.17%    235      0.55%       241      0,66%    249     2.00%
Kanazawa(1)                     241    0.67%    249      0.50%       255     -0.04%    255     2.12%
Kagoshima                       203    1.42%    217      1.41%       233      0.59%    240     0.08%
Fukuyama(i)                     231    0.70%    239      0.61%       246     -0.29%    243     2.52%
Nagaoka(3)                      227    1.02%    239      0.88%       250      0.92%    262     1.23%
Matsuyama(2)                    205    1.07%    216     -0.06%       215     -0.12%    214     2.81%
Korlyama                        185    1.99%    204      1.04%       215      0.65%    222     3.10%
Fukui(2)                        220    1.12%    233      1.93%       256      0.09%    257     0.27%
Nara(3)                         197    0.53%    203      1.77%       221     -0.46%    216    3.67%
Yokkaichi(1)                    177    1.03%    187      1.02%       196      1.30%    210    2.37%
Hakodate                        183    3.67%    219      1.42%       236     -0.98%    224    0.95%
Sasebo                          161    3.00%     187     4.63%       234     1.82%     256    -3.07%
Kochi(2)                        187    1.65%    203      0.20%       205     -0.01%    205    1.69%
sahikawa(1)                     150    2.06%    166      0.71%       172     -0.43%    169    2.74%


Source:    Population Census
Table A2(Continue): Japanese Cities - Population in Thousands and Annual Growth Rate

                  Year       1947               1950                 1955               •1960
Cityname

 rokyo(84)                  8484     5.90% 10365        4.24%     12,756    3.23%      14,956    368%
Osaka(37)                   4,455    5.18%     5,180    3.76%      8,231    3.51%       7,403    3.74%
Nagoya(19)                  1,832    3.97%     2,059    3.04%      2,391     3.09%      2,783    3.05%
Kyoto(7)                    1,330    2.41%     1,429    1.49%      1,539     1.12%      1,627    1.73%
Kitakyushu(5)                 959    4.78%     1,103    2.91%      1,273     2.01%      1,407    0.73%
Hiroshtma(3)                  633    3.97%      712     2.19%        793     1.76%       866     2.52%
Okayamalkurashiki(2)          858    1.64%      691     1.24%        735     0.86%       767     1.33%
Fukuoka(3)                    462    5.33%      5.40    3.90%        654     2.82%       751     2.72%
Maebashi/Takasaki(4)         610     1.08%      630     0.43%        643     0.06%       645     1.18%
Shszuoka(3)                  519     2.90%      566     2.05%        626     1.76%       683     1,86%
Sapporo(2)                   384     4.63%      440     4.42%        546     4.48%       680     5,68%
Sertdai(5)                   425     4.02%      478     1.74%        521     1.97%       575     2.39%
Hamamatsu(4)                 419     2.56%      452     2.00%        499     1.35%       534     1.45%
Nagasaki(2)                  376     3.93%      422     2.43%        476     1.47%       512     0.76%
Gifu(3)                      392     2.16%      417     2.14%        464     1.98%       512     2.37%
Himeji(2)                    410     1.83%      433     1.22%        460     1.25%       490     2.30%
Toyama(3)                    411     1.98%      436     0.83%        454     0.77%       472     0.68%
Niigata(3)                   383     1.92%      406     1.04%        427     1.01%       450     1.25%
b<umamoto(2)                 362     2.07%      385     2.09%        427     1.07%       450     1.25%
NumazwFuji(3)                353     1.46%      368     1.61%        399     1.86%       437     2.16%
MitolHitachi(3)              332     1.62%      349     1.57%        377     2.05%       417     1.89%
Nagano(3)                    362     0.48%      367     0.06%        368     0.14%       371     0.65%
Tokushima(3)                 330     1.87%      349     0.76%        362     0.21%       366     0.41%
Takamatsu(2)                 319     2.51%      3.44    0.96%        360     0.37%       367     0.58%
Wakayama(2)                  309     2.13%      329     1.48%        354     1.03%       373     2.16%
Iwaki                        314     2.74%      340     0.65%        351    -0.33%       346    -0.69%
Toyohashi(2)                 287     2.55%      309     1.75%        337     1.13%       357     2.07%
Kanazawa(1)                  295     1.98%      313     1.01%        329     0.79%       342     1.34%
Kagoshima                    242     3.72%      270     3.10%        314     1.28%       335     2.09%
Fukuyama(1)                  289     0.83%      296     0.62%        306     0.85%       319     1.19°k
Nagaoka(3)                   285     1.44%      298     0.48%        305     0.32%       310     0.48%
Matsuyama(2)                 260     2.25%      278     1.66%       302      1.26%       321     1.55%
Koriyama                     274     1.36%      286     0.77%       297      0.39%       302     0.55%
Fukui(2)                     262     2.86%      285     0.52%       293      0.86%       306     0.82%
Nara(3)                      278    -1.32%      267     0.75%       277      0.38%       283    263%
Yokkaichi(1)                 247    1.68%       260     1.00%       273      1.42%       293     2.14%
Hakodate                     240    1.80%       253     1.17%       268      0.24%       271     0.72%
Sasebo                       206    3.39%       228     2.99%       264 -0.11%           262    -1.20%
Kochi(2)                     231    2.10%       246     1.34%       263     0.88%        274     1.44%
¼sahikawa(1)                 204    3.37%       225     2.69%       257     1.82%        281     2.08%


Source: Population Census
Table A2(Continue): Japanese Cities - Population in Thousands and Annual Growth Rate

                 Year       1965               1970                 1975                 1980             T85
ityn a me

rokyo(84)               17,915      3.09% 20858         1.72% 22,710        0.87% 23,718        2.26% 26,517
)saka(37)                8.893      2.57% 10,098        1.51% 10,883        0.3.6%     11,079   0.41%    11,307
Nagoya(19)               3.234      2.12%     3,593     1.62%     3,894      0.78%     4,049    0.60%     4,171
yoto(7)                  1,773      1.88%     1,947     1.73%     2,121      1.02%     2,231    0.66%    2,305
Kitakyushu(5)            1,459      0.12%     1.467     0.78%     1,525      0.50%     1,564    0.04%     1,567
Hiroshima(3)                981     1.96%     1,081     2.08%     1,197      0.65%      1249    2.22%     1,394
)kayamaiKurashiki(2)        819     2.60%       932     2.06%     1,032      0.85%      1,076   0.69%     1,114
:ukuoka(3)                  860     2.78%       986     3.25%     1,157      1.98%      1,277   8.71%     1,938
AaebashiiTakasaki(4)        684     1.45%       736     1.30%       784      0.95%       822    0.77%       854
Shizuoka(3)                 749     1.64%       813     1.47%       874      0.74%       908    0.51%      931
Sapporo(2)                  896     4.34%     1.108     4.15%     1,358      2.43%      1,531   1.89%     1,682
Sendai(5)                   647     2.85%       744     3.14%       869     2.00%        959    1.40%     1028
Kamamatsu(4)                574     1.73%       625     1.71%       680     1.23%        723    1.08%      763
4aasaki(2)                  532     0.63%       549     1.26%       584     0.40%        596    0.36%      607
 ifu(3)                     575     1.43%       618     1.19%       656     0.43%        670    0.35%      682
Himeji(2)                   549     2.39%       618     2.43%       696     1.33%        744    0.73%      772
 oyama(3)                   488     0.67%       505     1.17%       535     0.70%        554    0.31%      562
Niiata(3)                   478     1.12%       506     1.76%       552     1.52%        595    0.76%      618
Kumamoto(2)                 479     1.26%       510     1.44%       548     1.39%        587    1.03%      618
4umazuJFui(3)               487     1.75%       531     1.69%       577     0.62%        595    0.79%      619
AitoMitachi(3)              458     1.86%       502     1.79%       549     1.18%        582    0.86%      607
agano(3)                    383     0.95%       401     1.31%       428      1.08%       452    0.70%      468
 okushima(3)                374     0.49%       383     1.06%       40.4     0.67%       418    0.44%      427
'akamatsu(2)                378     1.03%       398     1.68%       432      0.98%       454    0.59%      467
akayama(2)                  415     1.78%       453     1.08%       478      0.46%       489    -0.06%     488
waki                        334    -0.41%       327     0.19%       330      0.71%       342     0.49%     351
'oyohashi(2)                395     1.59%       427     1.84%       468      1.03%       493     0.90%     515
Kanazawa(1)                 365     1.44%       392     1.91%       431      1.35%       461     0.92%     483
Ka9oshima                   371     1.68%       403     2.52%       457      2.04%       505     0.98%     531
Fukuyama(1)                 338     2.85%       389     2.14%       433      0.70%       448     0.57%     461
NaQaoka(3)                  317     0.53%       326     0.80%       339      0.78%       352     0.25%     357
Aatsuyama(2)                347     1.78%       379     2.30%       425      1.70%       482     1.07%     487
(oriyama                    311     1.11%       329     1.45%       353      1.33%       377     0.92%     395
Fukui(2)                    318     0.71%       330     1.41%       354      0.78%       368     0.71%     381
Nara(3)                     322     4.08%       393     3.67%       470      2.28%       527     1.55%     569
(okkaichi(1)                326     1.48%       350     2.10%       389      1.15%       412     0.78%     428
Hakodate                    281     0.79%       292     1.02%       307      0.81%       320    -0.06%     319
Sasebo                      247     0.07%       248     0.23%       251      0.04%       251    -0.04%     251
Kochi(2)                    295     1.60%       319     2.12%       354      1.26%       377    0.76%      392
sahkawa(1)                  312     1.48%       336     1.22%       357      1.71%       388    0.48%      397


Source: Population Census
Table A3: Lorenz Curves for French Data

    1876     1911      1936       1954      1962     1982     1990

  0.0020   0.0050    0.0052     0.0054    0.0065   0.0055   0.0049
  0.0050   0.0104    0.0112     0.0119    0.0132   0.0110   0.0104
  0.0080   0.0160 0.0174        0.0185    0.0201   0.0170   0.0162
  0.01 46 0.0221     0.0237  0.0252 0.0275         0.0232   0.0223
  0.0217   0.0283    0.0306 0.0323 0.0351          0.0303   0.0292
  0.0291   0.0352    0.0379 0.0395 0.0428          0.0381   0.0367
  0.0367   0.0424    0.0453 0.0468 0.0505 0.0466            0.0450
  0.0447   0.0499    0.0527 0.0542 0.0583 0.0551            0.0535
  0.0529   0.0575    0.0602 0.0618 0.0664 0.0638            0.0619
  0.0611   0.0653    0.0679  0.0698  0.0745 0.0726          0.0704
 0.0698    0.0730    0.0757 0.0779 0.0837 0.0817            0.0792
 0.0785    0.0810    0.0835 0.0861   0.0914 0.0908          0.0881
 0.0875    0.0892    0.0914 0.0947 0.1003 0.0999            0.0972
 0.0964    0.0974    0.0993     0.1033    0.1092   0.1092   0.1063
 0.1057    0.1062    0.1076     0.1120    0.1185   0.1192   0.1162
 0.1152    0.1151    0.1160    0.1212     0.1279   0.1292   0.1263
 0.1246    0.1240    0.1252    0.1306     0.1378   0.1393   0.1370
 0.1342    0.1331    0.1354    0.1400     0.1477   0.1496   0.1478
 0.1439    0.1422    0.1437    0.1494     0.1577   0.1603   0.1588
 0.1537    0.1529    0.1531    0.1589     0.1680   0.1719   0.1699
 0.1642    0.1635    0.1627    0.1690     0.1786   0.1836   0.1811
 0.1747    0.1750    0.1731    0.1797 0.1892       0.1953   0.1924
 0.1867    0.1870    0.1837    0.1908     0.2002   0.2077   0.2048
 0.1995    0.2001    0.1949    0.2028 0.2139       0.2222   0.2186
 0.2124    0.2132    0.2086    0.2165 0.2281       0.2370   0.2328
 0.2255    0.2277    0.2235    0.2304     0.2430   0.2520   0.2473
 0.2390    0.2423    0.2391    0.2446     0.2582   0.2680   0.2623
 0.2529    0.2570    0.2555    0.2622     0.2747   0.2850   0.2790
 0.2693    0.2719    0.2725    0.2812     0.2932   0.3023   0.2961
 0.2874    0.2875    0.2913    0.3003 0.3026       0.3204   0.3139
 0.3082    0.3070    0.3112    0.3197 0.3325       0.3391   0.3332
 0.3315    0.3273 0.3313       0.3397 0.3533       0.3604   0.3551
 0.3578    0.3487    0.3517    0.3602 0.3745       0.3824   0.3778
 0.3843    0.3707    0.3722    0.3813 0.3958       0.4083   0.4065
 0.4239    0.4039 0.4041       0.4134  0.4256      0.4378   0.4373
 0.4745    0.4573    0.4566    0.4641     0.4751   0.4808   0.4795
 0.5389    0.5136    0.5106    0.5162     0.5268   0.5364   0.5338
 0.6033    0.5758    0.5652    0.5706     0.5838 0.5932     0.5894
       1         1        1   ______           1       1         1
Table A4: Lorenz Curves for Japanese Data

 1925 I 1930    1935
                   (  1940 [ 1947   1950    1955
 0.0065 0.0064 0.0056 0.0052 0.0069 0.0066 0.0061
 0.0135 0.0135 0.0123 0.0114 0.0139 0.0132 0.0135
 0.0213 0.0207 0.0192 0.0179 0.0218 0.0204 0.0203
 0.0292 0.0285 0.0264 0.0244 0.0299 0.0278 0.0273
 0.0373 0.0363 0.0336 0.0310 0.0381 0.0354 0.0343
 0.0454 0.0441 0.0410 0.0378 0.0465 0.0432 0.0415
 0.0540 0.0524 0.0488 0.0446 0.0554 0.0511 0.0491
 0.0628 0.0607 0.0567 0.0520 0.0643 0.0592 0.0568
 0.0717 0,0690 0.0645 0.0594 0.0736 0.0676 0.0646
 0.0808 0.0774 0.0724 0.0671 0.0830 0.0759 0.0725
 0.0899 0.0863 0.0805 0.0749 0.0927 0.0846 0.0805
 0.0992 0.0953 0.0888 0.0827 0.1025 0.0933 0.0886
 0.1087 0.1043 0.0971 0.0906 0.1123 0.1023 0.0971
 0.1183 0.1135         0.1057   0.0985   0.1223 0.1115 0.1059
 0.1279 0.1227         0.1143   0.1065   0.1328 0.1211 0.1150
 0.1378 0.1319         0.1230   0.1149   0.1435   0.1310   0.1242
 0.1478 0.1415         0.1319   0.1236   0.1543   0.1411   0.1335
 0.1583 0.1513         0.1414   0.1323   0.1655   0.1513   0.1429
 0.1693 0.1617         0.1510   0.1414   0.1768   0.1615   0.1524
 0.1805   0.1724 0.1609 0.1505 0.1888 0.1722 0.1622
 0.1920 0.1833 0.1708 0.1600 0.2011 0.1830 0.1725
 0.2037 0.1943 0.1809 0.1695 0.2134 0.1942 0.1836
 0.2155 0.2054 0.1911 0.1793             0.2262 0.2061 0.1947
 0.2274 0.2168 0.2019 0.1891             0.2392   0.2183 0.2065
 0.2395 0.2285 0.2128 0.2001             0.2523   0.2306 0.2184
 0.2521 0.2404 0.2243 0.2110             0.2656   0.2433 0.2304
 0.2652 0.2528 0.2358 0.2220        0.2560 0.2428
                                         0.2795
 0.2783 0.2655 0.2474 0.2333             0.2935
                                    0.2689 0.2557
 0.2919 0.2784 0.2591 0.2448             0.3078
                                    0.2821 0.2692
 0.3056 0.2918 0.2721 0.2571        0.2961 0.2834
                                         0.3222
 0.3195 0.3052 0.2856 0.2703             0.3379
                                    0.3119 0.2996
 0.3356 0.3208 0.3005 0.2848 0.3556 0.3284 0.3163
 0.3543 0.3390 0.3176 0.3008 0.3763 0.3486 0.3333
 0.3759 0.3587 0.3366 0.3181 0.3978 0.3695 0.3523
 0.4003 0.3838 0.3615 0.3425 0.4202 0.4017 0.3729
 0.4325 0.4160 0.3940 0.3780 0.4528 0.4435 0.4059
 0.4781   0.4620 0.4394 0.4198 0.4980 0.4853 0.4458
 0.5392 0.5235 0.5055 0.4851 0.5602 0.5455 0.5078
 0.7156 0.7030 0.6958 0.6812 0.7116 0.6969 0.6693
      1        1           1        1        1         1        1
Table A4(Continue): Data for Japanese City's Lorentz Curves

 1960       1965 1 1970        1975   1980          1985
 0.0060     0.0048     0.0042 0.0041 0.0039
 0.0123     0.01 03    0.0092 0.0091 0.0089         0.0083
 0.0186     0.0160     0.0148 0.0145 0.0143         0.0134
 0.0250     0.0221     0.0204 0.0200 0.01 98        0.0186
 0.0315     0. 028 1   0.0260 0.0258 0.0255         0.0241
 0.0383     0.0343     0.0317 0.0316 0.0314         0.0298
 0.0452     0.0406     0.0374 0.0374 0.0373         0.0355
 0.0523     0.0469     0.0434 0.0432 0.0434         0.0413
 0.0594 0.0534         0.0499 0.0495 0.0498         0.0475
0.0667 0. 0600 0.0565 0.0561              0.0563    0.0537
0.0741 0.0668 0.0631 0.0631               0.0633    0.0604
0.0818 0.0739 0.0698 0.0701               0,0704    0.0672
0.0896 0.0811 0.0766 0.0771               0.0775    0.0740
0.0976 0.0884 0. 0834 0.0842              0. 0847   0.0810
0.1058 0.0958 0.0902 0.0912               0.0919    0.0881
0. 1142 0.1032 0.0971 0.0987              0.0995    0.0952
0.1227 0.1109 0.1045 0.1063               0.1072    0.1027
0.1312 0.1190 0.1122 0. 1140              0.1151 0.1104
0.1397 0.1279 0. 1208 0.1218              0.1234 0.1186
0. 1493 0.1372 0.1294 0.1305              0.1320 0.1268
0.1594 0.1465 0.1381 0.1395               0.1411 0.1356
0.1697 0.1560 0.1468 0.1485               0.1503 0. 1445
0.1801 0.1655 0.1559 0.1575               0.1596 0.1534
0. 1909 0.1759 0.1653 0. 1669             0. 1689 0. 1624
0.2022 0.1866 0.1759 0.1764               0.1782 0.1714
0.2140 0.1977 0.1864 0. 1871              0. 18870.1813
0.2257 0.2090 0. 1971 0.1982              0.2000 0.1924
0.2380 0.2215 0.2097 0.2096               0.2116 0.2036
0.2512 0.2349 0.2225 0.2224               0.2244 0.2160
0.2661 0.2495 0.2364 0.2366               0.2386 0.2296
0.2817 0.2654 0.2523 0.2509               0.2536 0. 2445
0.2974 0.2821 0.2692 0.2677               0.2704 0.2607
0.31 47 0.2996 0.2877 0.2866              0.2899 0.2810
0.3323 0.31 87 0.3067 0.3062              0.3099 0.3037
0.3522 0. 3471 0.3318 0.3284              0.3338 0.3282
0.3845 0.3805 0.3651 0.3533               0.3582 0.3563
0.4220 0.4150 0.4088 0.3879               0.3931 0.3898
0.4859 0.4780 0.4703 0.4515               0.4563 0.4504
0.6562 0.6512 0.6431 0.6292               0.6294 0.6147
        1          1       I          1        I           I
Table A5: French Wage Index

                     Year     1982    1990
City
PARIS                         124.2   121.3
MARSEILLE                     103.1   105.7
LYON                          105.2   100.1
LILLE-ROUBAIX-TOURCOING        98.1    96.0
BORDEAUX                      100.9   99.5
TOULOUSE                      100.3   101.2
NICE                           96.4   97.9
NANTES                        100.7   102.4
OULON                          90.5   88.8
GRENOBLE                      104.7   108.9
ROUEN                         100.1   100.9
STRASBOURG                     99.4    95.3
VALENCIENNES                   89.9    84.7
LENS                           97.1    97.6
NANCY                         100.5    86.8
ST ETIENNE                     95.3    95.6
flOURS                         93.9    92.3
BRUAY EN ARTOIS (BETHUNE)      85.7    82.1
CLERMONT-FERRAND               97.6    96.7
LEHAVRE                       104.9    97.7
RENNES                         99.2   101.3
MONTPELLIER                   103.3    96.2
ORLEANS                       100.8   100.8
MULHOUSE                       99.6    93.9
DIJON                          95.2    95.9
DOUAI                          99.7    97.8
BREST                          94.3    92.0
REIMS                          94.3    95.6
NGERS                          92.8    95.6
DUNKERQUE                     108.4    92.6
LE MANS                        95.9    91.5
METZ                           93.4    99.4
CAEN                           94.6    92.6
LIMOGES                        95.1    91.9
MIENS                          91.8    89.7
HIONVILLE                     100.1    87.3
NIMES                          89.4    94.3
BESANCON                       90.5    60.6
HAGONDAGE-BRIEY                99.0    91.2
                           Data Appendix
                      Japanese Agglomerations
                          Akiko Tamura

     The data are based on the population census taken every 5
years from 1925 to 1985 (except 1947 instead of 1945), calculated
by the city's legal border in 1980, by the Statistics Bureau of
the Management and Coordination Agency. In 1980 there were 650
cities in Japan.

     We created about 60 agglomerations according to the
following procedures:
     First, we took the largest 100 cities in 1955, and then
aggregated the surrounding small cities' populations with that of
each large city. The basic criteria for selection are
1) Tokyo --- within a radius of 45 kilometers from Shinjuku.
Tokyo includes 84 cities other than 23 special districts. Most
of the cities in Kanagawa, Chiba, and Saitama prefectures are
included in Tokyo.

2) Osaka, Nagoya ---   within   a radius of 30 kilometers.

3) The 6 "Designated Cities": Sapporo, Sendai, Kyoto, Hiroshima,
Kitakyushu, Fukuoka --- within a radius of 25 kilometers.
(In 1993, 12 cities were "Designated Cities." These cities are
given 17 categories of administrative responsibilities otherwise
assigned to the prefectural government, such as welfare, health,
and city planning. Of these 12 we separate Osaka and Nagoya
because of their size. We have assigned Yokohama, Kawasaki, and
Chiba to the Tokyo agglomeration and Kobe to Osaka.
4) Other cities —--   within   a radius of 20 kilometers

     The number in the parenthesis following the city name shows
how many small cities are included in its metropolitan area other
than the city itself. In some cases, two similarly—sized cities
are within 40Km circle. We then call the agglomeration by the
name of both cities, for example, Maebashi/Takasaki, Numazu/Fuji,
and Okayama/Kurashiki

     Some exceptions occur where indicated by geographical and
traffic conditions. For example, for Tokyo(with a 90Km
diameter), we exclude Kisarazu since it is separated from Tokyo
by Tokyo Bay, but we include Yokosuka, which is 47 Km from
Shinjuku but connected by a fast express line to Tokyo.
     If circles overlap, then the small cities in the overlapping
area are aggregated with the nearer city unless: i) the sizes of
two central cites' are significantly different, in which case the
city is aggregated with the larger of the two central cities (For
example, in the case of Osaka and Kyoto, the small cities in the
overlapping area are in Osaka; ii) the prefectural border
crosses the overlapping area, in which case the small cities are
aggregated with the central city in same prefecture.
