NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL MARKET IMPERFECTIONS
AND COUNThRCYCLICAL MARKUPS:
ThEORY AND EVIDENCE

Judith A. Chevalier
David S. Scharfstein

Working Paper No. 4614

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
January, 1994
We owe a special thanks to Julio Rotemberg and Jeremy Stein for many veiy helpful discussions.
We also thank Paul Klemperer and seminar participants at Berkeley, Columbia, Northwestern,

and Stanford for helpful comments. Jodi Fingerman helped collect data and Sabrina Bemold
provided exceptional research assistance. We are grateful to John Little for helping us gain
access to the data described in Section 7 of the paper. We thank Information Resources, Inc. for
providing these data. Scharfstein received research support from the National Science
Foundation, the IFSRC at MIT, and a Sloan Foundation Research Fellowship. This paper is part
of NEER's research program in Industrial Organization. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #4614
January 1994

CAPITAL MARKET IMPERFECtiONS
AND COUNTERCYCLICAL MARKUPS:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE
ABSTRACT
During recessions, output prices tend to rise relative to wages and raw-materials prices.

One explanation of this fact is that imperfectly competitive firms compete less aggressively
during recessions - that is, markups of price over marginal cost are countercyclical. We present

a model in which markups are countercyclical because of capital-market imperfections. During
recessions, liquidity-constrained firms try to boost short-run profits by raising prices to cut their

investments in market share. We provide evidence from the supermarket industry in support of
this theory. We show that during regional and macroeconomic recessions, the most financially
constrained supermarket chains tend to raise their prices relative to less fmancially constrained
chains.

Judith A. Chevalier
Department of Economics
Liuauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge. MA 02138
and NBER

David S. Scharfstein
E52-433, Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER

1. Introduction
Simple models of business cycles based on aggregate demand shocks imply that during

booms, factor prices should fall relative to output prices. This follows from the standard
assumption that, at high output levels, marginal products are low. However, this implication

is difficult to square with the facts. During booms, wages and raw-materials prices tend to
rise relative to output prices — that is, real factor prices are procyclical.'
A number of papers have argued that imperfect competition can reconcile procyclical
real factor prices with aggregate-demand-driven business cycles. These papers build on the

old idea in Pigou [1927] and Keynes [1939] that increases in aggregate demand may have

little effect on prices — and thus large effects on output — because firms behave more
competitively during booms. As a result, output prices fall relative to marginal cost (i.e.,
markups fall) and real factor prices rise.

There are at least three distinct reasons why markups may be countercyclical. First,
demand may become less elastic during recessions, allowing imperfectly competitive firms
to increase markups.2 Second, as argued by Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) and Rotemberg
and Woodford (1991, 1992), markups may be countercyclical because firms are less able to

collude during booms. When demand is high, firms have greater incentives to cut prices
because the short-run profits from stealing market share are high relative to the long-run
profits from collusion. Finally, Greenwald, Stiglitz and Weiss (1984), Cottfries (1991), and

Klemperer (1992) have suggested that markups may be countercyclical because of capital-

market imperfections. During a recession — when firms have low cash flow and greater
difficulty raising external funds — they will try to boost current profits to meet their liabilities

and finance investment. They may do so by increasing prices and foregoing attempts to build

market share.
'See, for example, Barsky and Solon (1989) and Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989).
2See, for example, Bits (1989), Klemperer (1993), Okun (1981), and Stiglitz (1984) for
reasons why elasticities of demand may be procyclical.
1

Our goal is to analyze the link between capital-market imperfections and countercycli-

cal markups and to test its empirical relevance. The starting point for our work is the large
theoretical and empirical literature suggesting that information and incentive problems in the
capital market can limit the ability of cash-constrained firms to make valuable investments.3
We build on this literature by focusing on how liquidity constraints affect pricing behavior.4

Just as capital market imperfections can prevent firms from choosing investment projects
that maximize the discounted value of profits, they can also prevent firms from choosing
prices that maximize the discounted value of profits.
In Section 2, we formalize the idea that liquidity constraints can affect pricing behavior.

We start with a simple model of competition based on Klemperer's (1987a,b) model of
markets with consumer "switching costs."5 In this class of models, firms try to build market
share by keeping prices down in the short run. Market share has value in this model because
consumers find it costly to switch firms, and this gives firms market power over their repeat
customers. This model by itself can predict procyclical or countercyclical markups depending

on the nature of the demand shocks and the parameters of the model.
However, if firms are liquidity constrained and capital markets are imperfect, markups

tend to be more countercyclical. We make this point by examining a model in which firms

need to raise external funds to finance their operations. We model a particular type of
incentive problem in which debt emerges as the optimal financial contract along the lines of

Hart and Moore (1989) and Bolton and Scharfstein (1993). Since firms may default, they
3See, for example, Myers and Majluf (1984) Bernanke and Certler (1989) for theoretical
models along these lines and Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) and Hoshi, Kashyap and
Scharfstein (1991) for empirical evidence.
4Fudenberg and Tirole (1986) and Bolton and Scharfstein (1990) have also recognized
that liquidity constraints can have product.market effects. Their point is that if firms invest
less when they have less cash flow, rivals have an incentive to ensure that cash flows are low.
At the extreme, cash constrained firms may completely disinvest (i.e. exit the market), so
that this theory can help to explain predatory practices.
5See, also Farrell and Shapiro (1987) and Klemperer (1993) for a review of this approach.
9

have less incentive to build market share because they may not reap the benefits of the
investment. During a recession, this effect is particularly strong because the probability of
default is high. Thus, the model illustrates that capital market imperfections combined with
a market-share model of product-market competition can explain countercyclical markups.

We then empirically analyze the effects of capital market imperfections on product-

market competition in the supermarket industry. We study a single industry to avoid the
problems associated with cross-industry comparisons of competition6, a feature of existing
studies of cyclical variation in markups. These difficulties also raise problems for the existing

empirical studies of the movement of markups over the business cycle.7 We study the super-

market industry in particular because firms compete in many local markets. This allows us
to use price data for a cross-section and time-series while still examining a single industry.8

We present three pieces of evidence that suggest the importance of capital market
imperfections in generating countercyclical markups. The first is from examining local price

changes following the severe recession that occurred in the oil producing states as a result
of the halving of oil prices in 1986. In some cities, national supermarket chains have large
market shares, while in others, local and regional chains have a larger presence. We would

expect the liquidity of the local and regional chains to be more adversely affected by the
downturn since the national chains have operations in non-oil states that were experiencing

high economic growth during this period. Thus, if there are capital market imperfections
6See Bresnahan (1989) for a discussion of the limitations of such studies.
'See, for example, Rotemberg and Saloner (1986), Rotemberg and Woodford (1991,1992)
and Domowitz, Hubbard, and Petersen (1986).
8We are aware of one other study which estimates changes in markups in a single industry
in local markets. Using the seasonal pattern of gasoline demand, Borenstein and Shephard

(1993) find that markups in retail gasoLine markets are higher when demand in the near
future is expected to be high. They interpret these results as consistent with models of tacit
collusion such as Rotemberg and Saloner (1986). Since we would not expect liquidity to vary
over the predictable seasonal demand cycle, this evidence does not bear on the question of
how liquidity affects markups.
3

and firms price for market share, we would expect prices to fall by less (or rise more) in cities

where local and regional chains have a large presence. Indeed, they do.

The second piece of evidence comes from examining the local price responses to the
most recent macroeconomic recession of 1990-91. During the latter half of the 1980s many
supermarket chains undertook leveraged buyouts (LBOs), thereby increasing their debt ratios

dramatically. We would expect these firms to be more liquidity constrained in response to
an adverse shock and to cut prices less (or raise them more) in a downturn. This also seems

to be the case, particularly in cities that did very poorly in the recession.
The third piece of evidence is from an examination of firm.level pricing in the period
following the macroeconomic recession of 1990-1991. We would expect that LBO firms would

cut prices less than their less leveraged rivals in cities which continue to perform poorly
following the recession. We would also expect firms to cut prices less in poorly-performing
cities if their rivals are highly leveraged. 'We find evidence for both of these effects.

The empirical results are consistent with our model of product-market competition in
which firms price for market share and in which liquidity constraints affect pricing behav-

ior. The results are inconsistent with the Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) and Rotemberg
and Woodford (1991, 1992) tacit-collusion models of countercyclical markups. As discussed

above, these models predict that in booms there is a greater temptation to deviate, from
the collusive outcome by cutting prices and thereby increasing short-run profits. However,

adding liquidity constraints to their model tends to reverse the prediction of countercycli-

cal markups. If firms are more liquidity constrained in recessions, then they will be more
tempted to cheat on the collusive arrangement because they need to increase short-run prof-

its. Thus, their model predicts that prices should fall more in busts in markets where firms
are most cash constrained. By contrast, we find that prices fall less.

Although our principal focus is on countercyclical markups, the paper adds support
to recent work on the link between capital markets and product markets. Chevalier (1993)

4

also looks at the effects of liquidity on supermarket pricing. The paper shows that following

an LBO — an event which reduces corporate liquidity— local supermarket prices tend to

rise if there are already many other LBO firms in the market. We are taking the same basic
approach, only studying different events that reduce liquidity.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we outline a simple model which shows

how capita! market imperfections can generate countercyclical markups. In Section 3 we
begin discussion of our empirical approach. Section 4 presents the results from the oil shock
and Section 5 analyzes the effect of leverage on pricing in the most recent recession. Section

6 concludes the paper with a discussion of the results and related research.

2. The Model
In this section we present a simple model that illustrates how capital market imperfections can generate countercyclical markups. As a benchmark case, we first analyze a model
in which financing issues are not important. The basic point of this model is very similar to
Bus (1089) and Stigiitz (1984). We then introduce capital market imperfections and compare

the equilibria.
The basic model of product-market competition follows Klemperer (1993), a simplified

version of his earlier models of markets with switching costs. Two firms, A and B compete
for two periods, i- = 1,2. Their marginal cost of production is constant and equal to c7 in

period r. Consumers have a reservation value of R for each unit they purchase.

There are two types of consumers. The first are "old-timers," who purchased from
firm A or firm B in the past. These consumers incur a switching cost, s, if they buy from
the other firm in period 1. Thus, for an old-timer of firm A to buy from firm B, B's price
would have to be at least s less than A's. This means that old-timers have relatively inelastic

demand so that each firm has some monopoly power over its old-timers. Each firm has a
old-timers and they consume only in the first period.
The second type of consumer is a "newcomer." Newcomers consume in both periods.
5

They are distributed with uniform density on the line segment, [0,1), with firm A located at 0

and firm B located at 1. In the first period, they bear a "transportation cost" oft per unit of
distance travelled along the line to the firm of their choice. One can take this transportation

cost at face value as might be reasonable in retail markets (such as supermarkets). Thus,
a consumer located at y E [0,11 would incur a cost of ty to buy from A and t(1 — y) to

buy from B. Alternatively, one can view this cost as stemming from non-spatial product
differentiation: it measures how far each firm's product is from a consumer's ideal set of
product characteristics. In this interpretation, a consumer located at y derives utility R — ty
from product A and 1?— (1 — t)y from product B.

For simplicity, we assume that transportation costs for newcomers are zero in the
second period. However, in the second period, newcomers (like old-timers in the first period)

incur a switching cost, s, to buy from a different firm.

In a more general model, one might assume that there are overlapping generations of

consumers, each of whom consumes over two periods. In any period, r = 1,2,3,..., there
are old-timers who have switching costs and newcomers who must decide which firm to buy

from (taking into account that in the following period they will become old-timers with
switching costs). Firms face a tradeoff between attracting newcomers through a low price

versus taking advantage of old-timers through a high price. We will see that this basic
tradeoff emerges in our model as wetl, though the analysis is simpler than in the full-scale
overlapping generations model.

Because we are ultimately interested in how changes in demand affect equilibrium
prices, we allow demand to vary across the two periods. The expected demand of newcomers
in the first period is U and their expected demand in the second period is normalized to one.

The demand of old-timers is fixed.
For each firm, the first-period demand of newcomers can be high (Og) with probability

p or low (9k) with probability 1 — p. We interpret a high value of p as a boom and a low

6

value of p as a bust. While, the value of p is the same for both firms, the actual realization
of demand, Oy or Or,, is firm-specific. We think of this firm-specific demand realization as
stemming from some unmodelled aspect of a firm's product that affects the relative demand
of newcomers.9 Firms choose prices before they know this demand realization.
This assumption impLies that during booms the demand of newcomers rises relative to
the demand of old-timers. This is a reasonable assumption if we think of a boom as increasing

the number of consumers in the market. If, however, a boom increases the demand of all
consumers, then the relative demands of newcomers and old-timers should remain fixed.

Bils (1989) presents indirect evidence that during booms newcomers are relatively more
important. Advertising expenditures — arguably directed at attracting new customers —
are highly procyclical. He also finds that in some durable-goods industries, during booms
demand is more likely to come from first-lime buyers than from buyers who are replacing

their existing durablesY
Finally, in order to compete in this market, firms must invest an amount I at date 0,

the beginning of the first period. One can think of this as an initial investment or as the
investment needed to continue existing operations. There are two types of firms: those that

have enough cash to finance investment out of their own pockets; and those that need to
raise I from outside investors. The former case is the standard one analyzed in the literature
so we will start by analyzing such a model as a benchmark. We will then examine the effect

of external financing and capital-market imperfections on product-market equilibria.
9The assumption that demands 6,, and Oj. are firm-specific will later eliminate any need
to consider financial contracts which are dependent on the other firm's actions.
'°This interpretation is not exactly correct if c 1. In this case, there are an additional
I—
consumers who enter the market in the second period. These consumers cannot have
switching costs. However, in a more general model, second-period demand could depend
on first-period demand and provided it is always less than first-period demand, there is no
problem with this interpretation.

A. Equilibrium without External Financing
To solve for the equilibrium in this two-period model, we need to first solve for the

equilibrium in the second period. As noted above, after purchasing from a firm in the
first period, the consumer incurs a switching cost, s, to buy from the other firm, but no
transportation cost to buy from either firm. If this switching cost is high enough, each firm

can charge the consumer's reservation price, R, without fear of being undercut by its rival.

While in the standard Bertrand pricing model a firm would only have to cut the price an
infinitesimal amount below H to R — c to steal away its rival's customers, in this model the

firm would have to cut the price a discrete amount to H — s — c. Thus, while the firm may
sell more units at this lower price, it earns considerably less on its first-period customers —
these

customers would have bought from the firm in the second period even at the higher

price of H. Indeed, if switching costs are so high that the firm would lose money on these
new customers (H — $ <c2), then it would never pay to charge R — a and the second-period

equilibrium price would be the monopoly price, H. Also, ifs is large enough, it would never

pay for a firm to cut its first-period price to attract old-timers from the other firm-" To
keep the model simple we maintain this assumption.
It follows that the second period profits for each firm, Jr = A,B, depend on their first

period markets shares, o. In particular, we can write firm k's second-period profits as:

= (R—c2)c,

()

In the first period, firms take into account the fact that their second-period profits are

higher if they capture more of the market in the first period. If firm A charges pj4 and firm

B charges p in the first period, a newcomer located at point y will buy from A rather than

"The condition for this is_more complicated. However, it suffices to assume that a >
(H — c,)/2 -4- (H — c2)/(4c + 9).

S

B provided

p+yp?+t(1—y)

(2)

or
(3)

Newcomers will buy from B if the inequality is reversed.
Note that inequality (3) is only valid if prices plus transportation costs are less than the

consumer's reservation value, P. We assume that the parameters are such that this condition

is met. Also note that the consumer's choice of whether to buy from A or B depends only
on the first period price; in the first period the consumer does not care who he will end up
buying from in the second period since t = 0 then and both firms charge a price of R.
From (3) it follows that the market shares of firm A and B for the newcomers in period
1 are given by:
B
A_+Pt
P1
' 2
2t

A

(4)

and
(5)

In addition, old-timers will buy from A in the first period. Thus, first period profits for firm

A in state i can be written as:

= (p—cj)[a+Oa]
=

(p - ci)[a
9

64 + PNP))

(6)

(7)

and analogously for B.

Firm A chooses pt given its conjecture about p to maximize the discounted value of
its profits over two periods. Assuming the discount rate is zero, this amounts to maximizing:
(pçt —

+ (11 — c3)aj4.

ci)[cx +

(8)

The first-order conditions for this problem are:
(9)

This equation defines firm A's pricing reaction curve as a function of firm B's price:

A_at t+c, pf R—c2

2 +2

29

1O

As is standard, firm A's optimal price is increasing in its rival's price; in the terminology of
Bulow, Geanakopolos, and Klemperer (1985), prices are "strategic complements."

In a symmetric equilibrium, pj = pf, cj = o. We write the equilibrium price as
p(eA,ea), where ek = 1 if the firm k needs external financing and ch = 0 ii firm k does not
need external financing. Thus, the equilibrium price when both firms are internally financed

2a1

R—c2

a

(11)

The markup of price over marginal cost, which we write in analogous fashion as m(CA,e3) =

pt(A, e8) — c1, in this case is just tn;(0,0) = p;(O, 0)—c1 = 2at/O -- t — (R —
In a one period model with newcomers only, each firm would charge a price of I + C1.

However, in our model prices can be greater or less that I + c1 depending on the relative

importance of old-timers and newcomers. If there are many old-timers (a large), firms
charge higher prices because old-timers have relatively inelastic demand due to switching

10

costs. This effect raises prices by 2at/O. II there are many newcomers (a low), firms tend
to charge lower prices as they compete for market share of newcomers who they can later
charge the monopoly price, I?. This effect lowers prices by (R — c2)/8. In fact, this effect
can be so strong that firms charge prices below marginal cost in the first period.
In this model, markups can be countercyclical or procyclical depending on the param-

eters. If we think of p as measuring the level of demand, then given that price is additive
in marginal cost, markups will be countercyclical if dp,(O, 0)/dp c 0 and procyclical if the
inequality is reversed. Differentiating (11) with respect to p we have:

dm(0,0) = 4'(O,O) =
[—2a( + R — c2]°

0

'.

(12)

The first term in brackets tells us that markups tend to fall during booms because the

increased demand of newcomers makes it more important to price for market share than

to take advantage of old-timers. The second term in brackets tells us that markups tend
to rise during booms because the increase in the current demand of newcomers relative to
their future demands makes it tess attractive to price low to increase future monopoly profits.
Whether markups are countercyclical or procyclical depends on the relative strength of these
effects. In the next section, we show that capital market imperfections tend to make markups
more countercyclical.

B. Equilibrium with External Financing
In this section, we investigate the effect of external financing in an imperfect capital

market on product-market equilibrium. There are many ways to introduce such imperfections. We choose a variant of Bolton and Scharfstein (1990,1993) and Hart and Moore (1989)

because it allows us to analyze optimal financial contracts in a simple model.'2 The basis

of these models is the assumption that corporate cash flow is observable to the manager
'2This discussion of the model closely follows the simpler version in Gertner, Scharfstein
and Stein (1993).
11

and investors, but is not "verifiable" — i.e. it cannot be observed by outside parties and

therefore contracts cannot be made contingent on its realization. Moreover, the manager
can, if he chooses, costlessly divert all of the cash flow to himself. This formulation captures

the notion that managers can spend corporate resources on perks, pet projects, etc. and that
such spending cannot be directly controlled through contractual means. Therefore, there is
an agency problem associated with external financing.

The only way to get managers to pay out cash flow is to threaten to liquidate the
firm's assets if they do not. However, liquidation is inefficient in that the firm's assets are
worth less if owned and managed by the investors. In particular, the firm's assets are worth

a fraction, A c

1,

of the remaining cash flow. Thus, for example, if the firm k is liquidated

at date 1, it would be worth Xr(4) in the hands of the investor.
As Hart and Moore (1989) and Bolton and Scharfstein (1990, 1993) have shown, the

optimal contract in this case calls for a repayment of D at date 1; if no such payment is
made, the investor has the right to seize the project's assets. This contract gives the manager
some incentive to pay out D if he has the cash to do so. If the manager fails to pay, the asset

may be liquidated and he will lose out on any cash that he can divert to himself at date 2.
If the assets have not been seized at date 1, then the investor has no further leverage

over the manager and he will therefore divert all of the period-2 cash flow of 7r(a) to
himselt Working backwards this means that the maximum payment than can be extracted

from the manager at date 1 is 4(o); incentive compatibility requires that D

i4(a).

If, however, the manager does not have enough cash to make the payment D, say

because irt(c4) .c D, then the manager would instead choose to pay nothing and have the
asset liquidated. His first period payoff would therefore be ir(a) c D and he would receive
no cash in the second period.

To make the problem interesting, suppose that in high demand states cash flow is
enough to cover the payment D and in low demand states cash flow is less than D i.e.,

12

lrt(OH) > D > irt(Ot). The manager's expected payoffs over the two periods, Vk, can be

written as:

= p[ir(9y) — D + ir(ot)] + (1 —

(13)

The investor will be willing to lend provided his expected payoffs are non-negative:
(14)

Competition among investors ensures that condition (14) is met with equality. Note
that D is chosen taking into account the product market equilibrium that follows in periods

1 and 2. However, if this value of D, D =

[I —(1— )r]/p, is greater than 4(o'), then the

contract would not be incentive compatible. Thus, there would be no incentive compatible

contract that earns non-negative profits for the investor and the firm would not be able to
finance the requisite investment. We assume for the remainder that the parameters are such

that D < r(ot), i.e., incentive compatible contracts are feasible.
Before characterizing the product-market equilibrium, we should note three assump-

tions of our model. First, we have assumed that contracts cannot be made contingent on
product-market prices. This seems like a reasonable assumption in many cases, particularly

for supermarkets (the focus of our empirical study) where the range of products is large
and price flexibility is important. Second, we have assumed that the investor will actually
follow through with liquidation if the firm defaults, even though it is cx post inefficient for
the investor to do so. In some situations the investor and the manager will be able to rene-

gotiate around the cx post inefficiency and the threat of default is not credible. However,
the same qualitative results go through if the investor has some of the bargaining power
in renegotiation. These issues are taken up in more detail in Hart and Moore (1989) and
Bolton and Scharfstein (1993) and are not essential for the purposes of this model.'3 Finally,

'31n particular, efficiency would be increased by (1 — AP4(ct) if the manager and the
13

our assumption that the actual realization of demand, Qy or 6, is firm-specific eliminates
the possibility of making the repayment amount for one manager dependent on whether the
other manager repays.

Suppose that firm A needs to raise I externally. After the financial contract is signed,

firm A chooses p' taking D and p as given. The first-order condition for p is:

8V' =
+ 37r(a) ]+(1—u) thr'(Ot)
a+p[ 32rj(OH)
=

(15)

(16)

The first-order condition (16) resembles the first-order condition with internal financing, (9), with one exception. With internal financing, firms are never liquidated and receive

all of the second-period profits. Therefore, a marginal increase in p reduces second period
profits by (R — c2)12i. However, with external financing, the firm is liquidated with probability 1 — p, so that the manager only gets second-period profits with probability p. Thus,

a marginal increase in p only reduces second-period profits by p(R — c2)/2t. This means
that for each pf, firm A will charge a higher price when it is externally financed than when
it is internally financed. With external financing, firms are less interested in building market

share because they get less of the gains from doing so; in effect, they are more "short-term
oriented."

investor could reach some agreement not to liquidate. For example, if the firm defaults in
high demand state, then the investor might agree not to liquidate in exchange for some
payment from the manager. Thus, the payoff to the manager from defaulting would exceed
rt(Bn). This in turn lowers the maximum value of D that is incentive compatible. The
exact amount depends on the relative bargaining powers of the two parties. The contract
analyzed above is optimal if the investor has all the bargaining power and the qualitative
results go through provided the manager does not have all of the bargaining power. Thus, we
continue to characterize the contract along the lines discussed in the text on the assumption
that either renegotiation is infeasible or that the investor has all the bargaining power in
renegotiation.
14

Thus, the reaction curve is given by:

at

t+c1 pf
2

R—c2
29

(17)

If both firms need external financing, then the symmetric equilibrium price, p(1, 1) is given
by:

(18)

Thus, equations (11) and (18) imply that for all p c I the equilibrium price is higher when
firms are externally financed than when they are internally financed.
One can see this in Figure 1 which shows both firms' reaction curves under the two
financing regimes. Point (*) is the equilibrium when both firms are internally financed. If
firm A is externally financed, its reaction curve shifts upward and to the left while if firm

B is externally financed its reaction curve shifts outward and to the right. This shifts the
equilibrium to (**), at a higher price.
If only one of the firms, say firm A, is externally financed, then only its reaction curve

shifts and the equilibrium is at (***). The equilibrium price for firm A, p(1,O), and for
firm B, p8(1,O) are given by:

p(1,0) =
p8(1,0) =
where p7'4(I,O)
Prices
are

>

+ t + c, —

P+

—

— c2)

(19)

2at++P+(i_P)(R)

(20)

p8(1,0).

are lowest when both firms are internally financed; highest when both firms

externally financed; and in between these prices when only one of them is externally

financed. That is, p7(1,1) > p;4(1,0) > ;B(1,o) > p7(0,0). Note that even if firm B can
l5

finance internally, its price will be higher when A is externally financed because prices are
strategic complements.

C. Comparing Markup Cyclicality
When both firms are internally financed, the markup moves with demand (as measured

by p) according to equation (12) in Section 2.A. We saw that the markup could be countercyclical or procyclical depending on the relative importance of old-timers and newcomers.
When both firms are externally financed our measure of markup cyclicality is given by:

2at
dm(1,1) = dp(1,1)
(H—c2)
=—-—(Ou—O)—
0
02

(21)

Thus, when both firms are externally financed, markups are countercyclical. More-

over, markups are always more countercyclical when both firms are externally financed:
dp(1, 1 )/dp < dp;(01 O)/dp. Recall, that even in the absence of external financing, there are
two effects at work that could make markups procyclical or countercyclical. First, markups

tend to be countercyclical because a reduction in newcomer demand relative to old-timer
demand makes pricing for market share less attractive. Second, markups tend to be procycli-

cal because a decrease in current demand relative to future demand increases the incentive

to invest in market share to increase future monopoly profits. When firms are externally
financed and demand (p) is low, firms have less incentive to price for market share; they are

more likely to be liquidated and be unable to take advantage of their locked-in customers.
This effect tends to make markups more countercyclical.
There are similar effects when only firm A is externally financed.
dpj'(l,O) =

2cxt

(H—c2)

—-r(On—OL)+

16

O2

1

(9—

]

( 22

dp'(1,O) =
d

2at

— OL) +

(B—c2) 2
92

— OLI.

(23)

There are a number of points that follow from (22) and (23). First, markups could be

countercyclical or procyclical, but in either case they tend to be more countercyclical than

when both firms are internally financed and less countercyclical than when both firms are
externally financed. Second, these equations tell us that the markup of A — the externally
financed firm — is more likely to be countercyclical than B's. But, it is interesting to note

that even though B is not externally financed, its markup could be countercyclical and is
certainly less procyclical than if none of its competitors were liquidity constrained. Thus,

markup cyclicality depends on both the firm's own liquidity as well as its rivals' because
prices are strategic complements.

D. Discussion and Implications
The model, narrowly interpreted, suggests that firms are less inclined to invest in
market share during downturns because the increased probability of liquidation makes them

care less about the future. However, in many cases complete liquidation is unlikely. The
essence of the model does not depend on this extreme assumption. In fact, it only requires
that when firms have difficulty making debt payments they are unable to take full advantage
of their locked-in customers. For example, they may be forced to scale back their operations

or Limit their expansion into related product lines.

We have shown that external financing leads to countercyclical markups because ex-

ternally financed firms tend to increase markups when demand is low. The model takes
as fixed whether or not a firm is externally financed. Yet, during a downturn, firms tend
to rely more heavily on external financing as cash flow tends to fall faster than investment
needs. Because externally financed firms have higher markups, an increase in the number of
externally financed firms during a downturn will make markups even more countercyclical.

There are a number of empirical implications that emerge from the theoretical model.
17

1. A firm's markup should be more countercyclical if it is more liquidity constrained.

2. A firm's markup should be more countercyclical the more liquidity constrained its
rivals are.

3. Average industry-wide markups shou.dd be more countercyclical if firms are more liquidity constrained.

We will first present evidence on industry-wide markups (implication 3) in Sections 4
and 5 and then present evidence on firm-level markups (implications 1 and 2) in Section 6.

3. The Empirical Approach
In our empirical analysis, we examine the interaction between liquidity and pricing in

the supermarket industry at the local level. The most direct approach would seem to be
to measure markups and then see whether they are related to measures of the liquidity of
firms in the local market. There are two difficulties with this approach — one conceptual
and the other practical. The conceptual difficulty with this approach is that while liquidity
may affect prices — the mechanism explored in the model — prices almost certainly affect

liquidity. This endogeneity problem makes it difficult to establish a causal link between
prices and liquidity.

The practical difficulty is that to measure markups one has to observe both prices and

marginal costs. While a number of studies try to measure markups, they rely on strong
assumptions about the form of the production function."
We take a different approach. We undertake three "experiments", examining events
which reduced supermarkets' liquidity and were likely to have had differential impacts on
firms with different characteristics.
First, we study supermarket prices during the deep recession in the oil-producing states

brought on by the halving of oil prices in 1986. We would expect the liquidity of local and
"See, for example, Bus (1987) and Rotemberg and Woodford (1992).
18

regional supermarket chains to have been more adversely affected by this shock than the

liquidity of national supermarket chains with operations in non-oil-producing states. If
liquidity affects pricing in the way predicted by our model, then average supermarket prices

in a city should fall less if a city is dominated by local and regional chains.
We also examine supermarket pricing during the macroeconomic recession of 1990-91.

Many supermarket chains undertook leveraged buyouts (LBOs) during the 1980s, increasing

their leverage dramatically. We would expect the recession to have impacted the liquidity of

these firms more than the firms that did not undertake LBOs. Thus, city-wide prices should
fall less (or rise more) in local markets dominated by LBO chains.
FinaLly, we examine supermarket pricing in the period following the macroeconomic

recession of 1990-1991, a period when many states were still experiencing downturns. We

again compare the pricing behavior of LBO and non-LEO chains, this time utilizing firmspecific pricing data. We examine whether LEO firms in depressed cities cut prices less than

their less-leveraged rivals (implication 2 above) and whether firms in depressed cities cut
prices less when their rivals were LBO firms (implication 3 above).

Our approach avoids the conceptual and practical difficulties discussed above. By
measuring how prices change during these events, we are examining the relationship between

pricing and totally exogenous changes in liquidity, thus avoiding the endogeneity problem.

Our approach also does not require us to measure marginal costs, a feature of other
attempts to measure markup variation over time. We are studying whether price changes
across cities vary with the liquidity of chains in the city. While costs clearly change over time

and across cities, these changes should be uncorrelated with whether firms are national or
local, LBO or non-LEO. Thus, ignoring costs may introduce some noise into the estimates,

but not any biases.
There are four potential difficulties with our approach. First, we are on]y examining a
single industry so it is difficult to draw macroeconomic conclusions from our results. Second,

19

this approach does not allow us to determine whether markups are countercyclical, only that

liquidity constraints move prices in the direction of being countercyclicaL
A third concern is that switching costs — the basis of the incentive to price for market
share— may not be applicable to the supermarket industry. While there is no direct evidence

of switching costs in this industry, there is some evidence that firms can raise prices in the

short run without losing all of their customers. Devine and Marion (1979) reports on an
experiment in which they place advertisements in local newspapers in Ottawa-Hull, Canada,

listing representative prices charged by local supermarkets. They find that many consumers

switched supermarkets in response to the new information. This suggests that consumers
have imperfect information about prices; therefore, as in our model with switching costs,
firms can raise profits in the short run by increasing prices.'5

A final concern is that the industry may not be particularly cyclical. It is probably
true that individual demand is not very income elastic. However, at the local level, demand
may vary a lot with economic conditions as individuals migrate into the area during booms

and out of the area during busts. Indeed, this is why Blanchard and Katz (1992) find
that regional unemployment seems to be mean reverting as workers move out of regions in
recession to seek employment elsewhere.

4. The Oil Shock
We start by examining the regional downturn which occurred when oil prices dropped
by half in the first half of 1986. This caused severe recessions in the oil-producing states —
Texas,

Louisiana, Oklahoma, Colorado, Montana, Wyoming, and Alaska. The rest of the

country was expanding during this period. We chose the oil shock because it is the cleanest

'5This raises the question of why supermarkets themselves did not publish price comparisons. Unlike the researchers in this study, supermarket chains would have an incentive
to publish information only on those products for which they had lower prices. Therefore,
the published information would not credibly communicate overall price differences between
supermarkets.
20

example of a regional shock. Other regional shocks include the farm crisis and the decline
of the Rust Belt. We do not examine these, however because the farm crisis had little effect

on cities and because the Rust Belt was more of a sustained decline than an unanticipated
shock.

We will examine price changes in cities in oil-producing states over the period of the oil-

price collapse. Oil prices declined dramatically in the first and second quarters of 1986. We
examine supermarket price changes beginning with the quarter before the decline, the fourth

quarter of 1985. We choose the first quarter of 1987 as an endpoint because employment

troughs in Texas, the biggest of these states in population, in that quarter. Oil prices are
recovering somewhat at this time and climb to a local maximum in 1987:2.16 We hypothesize

that supermarket chains that operate only in the oil states would have been severely affected

by the downturn, while supermarket chains that have some of their operations elsewhere

would still have had significant cash flows from their other operations. These national
supermarket chains are not likely to have been liquidity constrained during the regional
downturn. We test this idea by estimating the relationship between price changes in a city
and measures of the extent to which chains in the city have operations outside the oil states.

A. Data
For this analysis, we use two types of data: price data at the city level, and measures
of the relative importance of local and national chains at the city level.

Prices. Quarterly price data are drawn from the American Chamber of Commerce
Researchers Association Cost of Living Index. The ACCRA data is collected in surveys by
Local chambers of commerce under guidelines set by the American Chamber of Commerce
Researchers Association. Included in these data are quarterly prices for 27 specific grocery
'6The LBO of Safeway, an important competitor in the oil states, occurs in 1986:4. How.
ever, Chevalier (1993) suggests that effects of LBOs are not apparent in prices until three to
four quarters following an LBO.

21

products (for example, 18 oz. Kellogg's Corn Flakes, a 12 oz. can of Minute Maid frozen
orange juice). The recorded price is the average price of a sample of supermarkets in the

city. We use ACCRA's index of grocery prices which is composed of a weighted basket of

grocery products. The index for a city is the weighted sum of the price of each item in the

ACCRA basket divided by the price of that item in all cities in the ACCRA sample. For
each sample period, ACCRA covers approximately 260 cities. The dependent variable in the

specifications below is the percentage change in the price index over the period. That is, the

dependent variable is the price index in 1987:1 less the price index in 1985:4 divided by the
price index in 1985:4.

Chain locations. The annual publication Supermarket News Distribution Study of Gmcertj Store Sales lists the supermarkets operating in all Metropolitan Statistical Areas in the

United States as well as the number of stores they operate in each of those MSAs. In our
examine of the oil shock, we use the 1986 edition of the Supermarket News, which contains

data from 1984. Later, when we examine the 1981-82 recession, we use the 1982 edition of
Supermarket News, which contains data from 1980. From these data, we calculate the share

of stores in a city owned by national chains in each MSA. We define a national chain as a
supermarket chain that operates in more than two of the nine U.S. Census Regions. We de.
termine the number of regions in which a supermarket chain operates using the Supermarket

News data. Thus, for each city j,

we

calculate NATSHARE, the share of the total stores

in the city which are operated by national chains.

We also construct a crude measure of each supermarket chain's exposure to the oil
price-induced regional recession. For each chain i, we calculate NOIL1, the share of the
total stores that each firm has listed in Supermarket News that are located outside the oil-

producing states. This measure is a crude one because we cannot measure the total share
of a firm's stores which are located outside the oil-producing states, only the share of stores

in MSA5 which are located outside the oil-producing states. To calculate a measure of the

99

degree to which the supermarkets operating in city j are exposed to the regional shock, we
sum the NOIL1's weighted by the market share of chain i in city j, in11 Thus, this variable,
which we call NOILSHARE1 is given by:

NOILSHARE1 m1NOIL1
There are a total of 42 MSAs in the oil states. Price data are not available for all of
these MSAs. There are 20 cities in these states which have price data for the fourth quarter

of 1985 and the first quarter of 1987. There are data br another 2 cities if we substitute
data from 1985:3 for data from 1985:4. We could add no observations by extending the
period to 1987:2. We calculate one price index per MSA by averaging the price indices of all

observations within the MSA that are available for both 1985:4 and 1987:1. The price data
for a given MSA are comparable in the two quarters because information from a constant set
of cities is used to construct the quarterly data. For the majority of MSAs in the Supermarket

News data, the only price data available were from the central city of the MSA.

Q uarter!y data on employment at the state level are obtained from DRI. We use em-

ployment data to measure the state of the economy for two reasons. First, very few measures are available quarterly at the state level. Second, Blanchard and Katz (1992) argue
that changes in employment are the best measures of regional fluctuations. An alternative
measure which is also available quarterly is unemployment, but Blanchard and Katz show

that this measure is mean reverting as workers leave the state during a downturn. For the
regressions which examine the oil shock period, we construct the percent change in state
employment, aEMP, between 1985:4 and 1987:1.' For the regressions which examine the
1981-1982 recession, we construct the percent change in state employment between 1981:2
'7The percent change in employment from 1985:3 to 1987:1 is used for those observations
for which 1985:3 price data were used.

23

and 1982:4.

The means and standard deviations for all variables used in this section are shown in

Table 1.

B. Regression Results
Table 2 reports regression results for various specifications. The first column reports the

regression of the percent change in the price index, APRICE on NATSHARE, the share
of total stores accounted for by national firms in the city. The coefficient on NATSHARE

is negative with a t-statistic of 2.84. The estimated coefficient implies that a one standard

deviation increase in NATSHARE from its mean value of 0.44 to 0.62 would decrease
the expectS percentage change in the price index from its mean of -0.035 to - 0.066. For
reference, the standard deviation of percentage price changes for all cities in the ACCRA
data base is 0.048. The results are essentially unchanged when we control for the change in

employment in the state over the period.

We repeat the regressions in columns 1 and 2 in columns 3 and 4, except that we
substitute NOILSHARE for NATSHARE. NOILSHARE is intended to measure more
directly the importance of operations outside the oil states to the chains in each city. The

coefficient for NOILSHARE is negative and significant at the one percent level. The
coefficient implies that a one standard deviation increase in NOILSHARE, from its mean
of 0.29 to 0.41 would decrease the expected percentage change in the price index from its
mean of -.035 to -0.068.

We interpret the NATSHARE coefficient as measuring liquidity effects. However, a
possible objection to this interpretation is that the coefficient of NATSHARE could simply

be capturing secular price decreases of national chains over the period. For example, if
national, but not regional chains were adopting cost-saving technologies over this period,
then prices might be expected to fall in cities dominated by national chains.
We can check for this possibility by examining the relationship between national share
24

variables and supermarket price changes during the same period in 82 cities outside the oil

region. We repeat the specifications of Table 2, columns 1 and 2, using data for the same

time period for cities outside the oil region. The results for this regression are shown in
Table 3. The coefficient of NATSHARE for these regressions is negative, but the t-statistic

is only -0.264. The results are unchanged when one controls for employment changes, as
shown in column 2. Thus, there is no evidence that the significance of NATSH.4RE in the
regression equations for the oil states is due to secular price decreases of national chains.

We also check the results against another alternative hypothesis. We interpret the
results of Table 2 to suggest that national supermarket chains use funds generated in other
parts of the country to buffer them from the regional shock. However, it may be that national

chains have better access to the private and public sources of capital than do regional chains.

Thus, the importance of "nationalnas" in our results could be due to the ability of national
chains to mitigate liquidity constraints by using the capital markets.'8
To explore this explanation, we estimate the relationship between price changes and

NATSHARE during a national recession. If prices in cities with large national chains fall
more in a national recession than prices in cities with smaller regional chains, this would
suggest that are results are driven by the greater access to capital markets of national chains,

rather than the greater access to internal funds from operations outside the oil states.
In columns 3 and 4 of Table 3, we report the results of regressing price differences in
102 MSAs from the second quarter of 1981 to the fourth quarter of 1982. This is the quarter

prior to the peak of the cycle in July 1981 and the quarter of the trough of the cycle as
determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). We find that the coeffi-

cient of NATSHARE is negative1 but insignificant at standard confidence levels. Column 2

shows that adding AEMP to the specification leaves the results essentially unchanged. We

'8Kashyap, Lamont and Stein (1992) find an effect along these lines: firms with greater
access to capital markets tend to cut back less on inventory investment during recessions.

25

conclude from these results that national chains are able to keep prices low during downturns

because they can reallocate internal cash flows from better performing divisions outside the

oil states.

5. LBOs and the 1990-91 Recession
The second episode that we examine is the recession of 1990-91. Prior to this recession,

many supermarket chains had undertaken LBOs. One of the main effects of an LBO, (or
even one of the functions of an LBO, according to Jensen (1986)), is to constrain the amount

of cash available to the firm's managers. A firm with high leverage and little cash would
presumably be more affected by shocks to its cash flows than less leveraged firms. While
the recession would presumably reduce the cash flows of all firms, we expect the recession

to have a larger impact on LBO firms. Thus, we test whether prices fall less (or rise more)
in MSAs dominated by LBO firms.

A. Data
The peak of the cycle according to the NBER was July 1990 and the trough was March
1991. As with the other episodes, we calculate the price changes from one quarter before the

peak to the quarter of the trough. Thus, we examine price changes over the period 1990:2

to 1991:1) The price data, as before, are from ACCRA.
For information about supermarket locations, we use the 1992 edition of Progressive

Grocer's Market Scope, which contains data for 1991. Progressive Grocer lists all of the
supermarkets operating in each of the 100 largest MSAs in the United States and lists the

number of stores in each chain. The Progressive Grocer data lists store names, not the
names of parent companies. Store names were matched to parent company names using the

Retail Tenants Directory, Thomas's Grocery Register, and supermarket firms' annual 10-K
'9Some have argued that the recession should really be dated from 1990:2 to 1991:4 because
the recovery in 1991:1 and 1991 :2 was minimal. The results presented here are very similar
for that time period.
26

disclosures.20 Progressive Grocer only covers the 100 largest MSAs.

The information on LBOs was obtained in two ways. First, we searched for listings of

supermarket LBOs in quarterly editions of Mergers and Acquisitions, which contains information on all ownership transactions (including LBOs) of greater than $1 million. Second,
we also searched all references to transactions involving the supermarket parent companies

in the sample using indices to Supermarket News, Supermarket Business, and Progressive

Grocer. From these sources, a list of LBOs was assembled. All of. the LBOs examined in
this study were consummated between 1981 and 1990.

To match the price and location data, we extracted ACCRA data for all cities within
the Progressive Grocer MSAs. We calculate one price index per MSA by averaging the price

indices of all observations within the MSA that are available for both 1990:2 and 1991:1.

The price data for a given MSA are comparable in the two quarters because information

from a constant set of cities is used to construct the quarterly data. For the majority of
MSAs in the Progressive Grocer data, the only price data available were from the central
city of the MSA.

We construct the variable LBOSHARE which is the share of the total stores in city
owned by firms which undertook LBOs prior to the second quarter of 1990. Means and
standard deviations of all variables used in this section are in Table 4.

B. Regression Results
We regress the percent change in the price index in 54 MSAs from 1990:2 to 1991:1

on LBOSHARE. These results are reported in Table 5, column 1. The coefficient of
20The Progressive Grocer data was used in this part of the study rather than the Supermarket News data because it is higher quality data. Supermarket News, however, publishes
data for all MSAs, while Progressive Grocer has data for only the 100 largest MSAs. We use
the Supermarket News data for the oil episode for two reasons: we needed to obtain data
for as many cities in the oil producing states as was possible; and we needed to measure the
nationalness of the supermarket chains.

27

LBQSHARE is positive, but statistically insignificant at standard confidence levels. The
coefficient suggests that, as LBOSHARE increases one standard deviation from its mean
of 0.25 to 0.44, the predicted price index change in the city increases from its mean of 0.006
to 0.008.
The poor explanatory power of LBOSHARE may be due mereiy to the fact that there

was a considerable amount of heterogeneity across cities in the severity of the recession; in

cities that were doing relatively well we would not expect LBOSHARE to have much of
an effect. Column 2 reports the results of including the percent change in 'employment in
the state over this recessionary period, AXE/VIP. The coefficient of LBOSH ARE remains
positive and statistically insignificant.
This specification, however, does not completely capture the effects of the heterogeneity

across cities, because LBOSHARE may only matter in cities which were severely affected

by the recession. Thus, we include an interaction term, EMPLBO, which is LBQSHAR.E
multiplied by the zXEMP. We expect a negative coefficient of EMPLBO if the LBO share
leads to higher prices in MSAs that suffered most during the recession. Column 3 shows that

the interaction term is indeed negative, and is statistically significant at the 6% confidence
level. The coefficient for LBOSHARE itself remains statistically insignificant, but becomes
negative.

If employment growth is held at its mean of -2.2%, then a one standard deviation
increase in the share of LBO firms from its mean of .25 to .44, raises the expected price
increase from 0.6% to 1.0%. However, in a city which is badly hit by the recession, the effect

of an increase in the LBO share is considerably larger. In a city with employment growth
of -3.8% (one standard deviation below the mean), a one standard deviation increase in the
LBO share from its mean more than doubles the expected price increase, from 0.7% to 1.7%.

Thus, the effects are both statistically and economically significant.

28

6. LBOs Following the 1990-91 Recession: Firm-Specific Data
The theory outlined in Section 3 has implications for firm-level prices in addition to
its implications for market-level prices analyzed above. First, it predicts that a firm's price
will be more countercyclical if it is more liquidity constrained. And, second it predicts that

a firm's price will be more countercyclical if its rivals are more liquidity constrained; this
follows from the fact that prices are strategic complements.
In this section, we use local firm-level data on supermarket pricing. The data we have

begin in the first quarter of 1991. According to the NBER, this is the end of the 1990-91
recession. However, the recovery from this recession was weak for several quarters following

the trough. In fact, many states in the northeast and in California experienced negative
growth in employment until the fourth quarter of 1902. Thus, even though our price data
do not coincide with the macro recession, we can use the geographic heterogeneity in the
recovery to investigate the impact of liquidity constraints on the pricing of LEO and nonLBO firms.

A. Data
The data on supermarket prices are from Information Resources, Inc.. IRI collects these

data from electronic product scanners. The IRI data are firm-specific, but average together
prices for all of a firm's stores within the market area defined by lit!. An IRI market area is

generally somewhat larger than an MSA, and in some cases, an IRI market area covers an

entire state.
The Progressive Grocer data described in Section 5 also contains data on store locations

for IRI market areas. We used the 1992 edition of Progressive Grocer's Market Scope, which
contains data for 1991, to measure the number of stores of different types in each !Rl market.

In the analysis, we use a price index that is a quarterly average of prices for a basket of

product types. A product type is a category such as dry pasta, ready to eat cereals, diet soft

drinks, etc. The price of a product type observed for a supermarket chain in an IRI market
29

area for a quarter is the average price of a unit of the good, averaged across all sales in the

quarter. For example, prices for boxes of cereal of different brands and sizes are recorded

in dollars per pound and averaged over the quarter. Out of the 50 product types with the
highest dollar sales, 38 were scanned by all supermarkets in the IRI sample. We use these
38 product types for our sample.
We examine price changes over two periods: the period from 1991:1 to 1991:4 and the

period from 1991:1 to 1992:4. We have 110 observations of firms in local markets for the
shorter time period. We have a smaller set of firm-market pairs with complete data for the
longer time period (89 observations).
To test the prediction that cash-constrained firms charge higher prices, we construct

LBO, a dummy variable which equals one if the firm is an LBO firm. To measure the
second effect, whether firms charge higher prices when their rivals are cash-constrained, we

construct the measure OLBOSHARE. For each firm i in local market j, OLBOSHARE1
by LBO chains other than firm i.
is the share of stores in market
owned
j
As mentioned, neither of the periods examined here coincide with a macro recession.

However, overall economic growth was slow over this period, and some local areas were

in recession. As in Section 5, we would expect the effects of cash constraints to be more

pronounced in local economies which were doing poorly. As a measure of local market
conditions, we use the percent change in employment in the state of the market area, EMP.
In some cases, the flU market areas include counties from several states. In these cases, we
construct zEMP as a weighted average of the percent change in employment in each of the

states included in the market area. The weights are the share of the population in the IRI
market area accounted for by residents of each state.

In addition, we construct LBOEMP, an interaction term between the LBO dummy

and AEMP, the percent change in employment over the time period. OLBOEMP is an
interaction term between OLBOSHARE and AEMP. These variables will enable us to

30

see whether the effects of liquidity are more pronounced in market areas that are doing less
well. Summary statistics for two time periods are shown in Table 6.

B. Regression Results
We regress the percent change in the price of the food basket in each of the 110 fIrm-

market pairs from 1991:1 to 1991:4 on LBO, OLBOSHARE, LBOEMP, OLBOEMP,
and AEMP. The estimates are OLS with OLS standard errors. Because there are multiple
firm observations for a single city and multiple city observations for a single firm, OLS

standard errors could be biased due to a correlation of the disturbance term across related
observations. Moulton (1986) proposes a version of the Breusch and Pagan (1980) Lagrange

multiplier method to test for the appropriateness of OLS standard errors in contexts very
similar to ours. Following Breusch and Pagan (1980), we extend the test to allow for the
possibility of two types of error correlation: intra-firm and intra-city. The test statistic which

is distributed x2 is 1.7 for the shorter period and 2.3 for the longer period. Thus, in both
cases, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that there is no intra-city or intra-firm correlation

at the 25% confidence level. Therefore OLS estimates and standard errors are not subject
to this potential problem.

The results for this regression are reported in the first column of Table 7. First,
the regression shows that LBO firms tend to raise prices more than non-LBO firms; the
coefficient of LBO is positive and statisticaily significant. This is also true of the coefficient

of LBOEMP. Thus, LBO firms tend to raise price more relative to non.LBO firms in
markets in which business conditions are worse.

The estimated coefficients imply that in an average city — one with average employment growth and an average share of other LBO firms — an LBO firm increases its priced
by 2.7%, while a non-LBO inaeases its prices by only 2.0%. In a city with less than average
economic growth, the differences are even larger; with employment growth one standard deviation below the mean, (a city with .5% employment growth), an LBO firm increases prices
31

by 3.8% while a non-LBO increases prices by 1.4%.

This regression also shows that firms tend to raise prices more when their rivals are
highly leveraged. The coefficient of OLBOSHARE is positive and statistically significant.

This is evidence both that leverage leads to higher prices (for rivals) and that prices are
strategic complements. In addition, the coefficient of OLBOEMP is negative and statisti-

cally significant. Thus, firms tend to raise price more when their rivals are leveraged and
they are competing in a local market that is experiencing low economic growth.
The size of this effect is also economically significant. The coefficients imply that in an

average city, a non-LEO firm would increase its prices by 2.0% if LEO chains have a 14.9%

share, but by 2.6% if LBO chains have a 30.0% share (a one standard deviation increase in
the LEO share). The effect is even larger in markets with low employment growth; with an
employment growth is 0.5%, an increase in the LBO share by one standard deviation from
14.9% to 30.0% would more than double the non-LBO firm's price increase, from 1.4% to
2.9%.

The second column of Table 7 repeats this specification for the longer time period,
1991:1 to 1992:4. The results are qualitatively similar, except that the coefficient OLBOEMP

statistically significant only at the 12% level. The rest of the coefficients continue to be sta-

tistically significant at greater than the 10% level?'
7. Conclusion

-

The theory and evidence presented here suggest that capital-market imperfections in-

duce liquidity-constrained firms to increase markups during recessions and lower them during

booms. This, in turn, may amplify the effects of demand shocks on output. One might argue,
2tThe basic results in Table 7 are robust to the inclusion of other controlling variables, such

as the store share of the firm, the store share of the firm interacted with the LEO dummy,
the store share of the firm interacted with the employment change, and the store share of
the firm interacted with both the LEO dummy and the employment change. None of these
other variables had statistically significant coefficients in either time period, however.
32

however, that capital-market imperfections are not likety to have an effect on the macroecon-

omy because firms which are not liquidity constrained will take up the slack. Our model and

evidence points to the limitations of this argument. Since prices are strategic complements,
unconstrained firms increase their markups during recessions in response to their constrained

rivals. Thus, in essence, even though some firms are not liquidity constrained, they act as

if they are constrained. This suggests that shocks to one set of firms — rather than being
stabilized by other firms in the industry — are transmitted to other firms in the industry.
Of course, it may be difficult to apply our results to the economy as a whole because
we study only one industry. It remains to be seen whether liquidity constraints can explain
countercyclical markups for the macroeconomy. The fact that we find evidence of countercyclical markups in an industry that is not particularly cyclical suggests that the effects may

be even more important in other industries.
Our results also point to another way in which shocks can be transmitted through the

economy. We find that firms with high cash flows in divisions outside the oil states were
better able to invest in market share during the recession in the oil states. By analogy, one
would expect firms with low cash-flow divisions to invest less in their other divisions. Indeed,

Lamont (1993) finds that the non-oil divisions of oil companies cut investment following the

large drop in oil prices in 1986. Thus, a shock to one sector of the economy was transmit-

ted to other sectors of the economy through the internal capital allocation mechanisms of
corporations. Of course, the higher cash flows of the non-oil divisions may have reduced

the effects of the shock to the oil sector. Whether, on net, conglomerates tend to transmit
shocks or stabilize them is an empirical issue.

Finally, we note that this paper fits into a large body of work indicating that liquidity constraints can also have real effects on capital investment, inventory investment, and
employment.22 The studies tend to look at each of these factors separately, without attempt22See, Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1993) for a review.

33

ing to relate the findings to each other. However, one would expect, for example, that if
firms cut back on inventory investment during recessions because of liquidity constraints,
they would also increase markups for the same reason. This suggests that one should look
not just at the movements of inventories, but also look at the the co-movements of invento-

ries with markups. This is a standard approach used to test other macroeconomic theories
and it should be applied to these theories as well.

34

Table I
Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for three samples we analyze in Tables 2 and 3 —
cities Ifl 911 states durinz the period 1985:4 to 1987:1; cities in non-oil states during the
same penod; and cities in the macroeconomic recession of 1981:2 to 1982:4. APRJCE is
the percentage change itt price over the relevant period. NATSHARE is a market-share
weighted measure of the fraction of a city's chains that are national. NOILSHARE is a
market:share weighted measure of the fraction of a city's chains that operate outside the oilproducing states. iEMP is the percentage change in employment in the city's state over
the relevant period. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses below the means.

Variables

Oil

Non-oil

States

States

81-82
Recession

a.PRICE

-0.035
(0.057)

0.000
(0.043)

-0.002
(0.044)

LEMP

-0.048
(0.035)

0.008
(0.019)

-0.026
(0.024)

NATSJIARE

0.445
(0.181)

0.315
(0.231)

0.314
(0.197)

NOILSHARE

0.295
(0.125)

82

102

Number of Observations

22

35

Table 2

Regression Results for the Oil States
This table reports the results of regressing the percentage change in a city's price index over

the period 1985:4 to 1987:1, APRICE, on measures of the types of stores that are in a
particular city. NATSHARE is a market-share weighted measure of the fraction of a city's
chains that are nationaL NOILSHARE is a market- share weighted measure of the fraction

of a city's chains that operate outside the oil-producing states. AEMP is the percentage
change in employment over the period in the city's state. t-statistics are in parentheses
below the estimated coefficients.

Variables

NATSHARE

1

2

-0.170
(-2.840)

-0.154
(-2.493)

AEMP

E2

Number of Observations

4

-0.257
(-3.178)

-0.352
(-1.089)

NOILSHARE
Constant

3

-0.271
(-3.254)

0045

-0.45 1

(-1.539)

0.041
(1.433)

0.017
(0.461)

(1.701)

0.019
(0.613)

0.287

0.329

0346

0.419

22

22

22

22

36

Table 3
Regression

Results for the Control States and the 1981-82 Recession

This table reports the results of rçessing the percentage change in a city's price index over
two different time_periods, zXPRIC,E, on the state employment change during the period,

z2iEMP and NATSHARE a market-share weighted measure of the fraction of a city's
chains that are national. The regressions for the non-oil states refer to the states during

the period 1985:4 to 1987:1 that are not oil producing states. The 1981-82 recession covers
1981:2 to 1982:4. t-statistics are in parentheses below the estimated coefficients.

Variables

NATSHARE

Non-Oil
States

Non-Oil

-0.006
(-0.264)

-0.008

AEMP

States

(-0.403)

81-82
81-82
Recession Recession

0.009
(0.408)

P2

Number of Observations

(0.115)

0.266
(1.440)

0.360
(1.458)

Constant

0.003

0.004
(0.440)

0.002
(0.187)

-0.004
(0.530)

0.005
(0.448)

0.001

0.027

0.002

0.017

82

82

102

L02

37

Table 4
Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the sample of 59 Metropolitan Statistical Areas for
which we have price data in 1990:2 and 1991:1. LEOSHARE is a market-share weighted
measure of the fraction of a city's chains that undertook leveraged buyouts during the 1980s.
AEMP is the percentage change in employment in the city's state over the relevant period.

EMPLBO is LBOSHARE multiplied by AEMP. Standard deviations are reported in
parentheses below the means.

Variables

Price Change

0.006
(0.029)

AEMP

-0.022
(0.016)

LBQSHARE

0.246
(0.194)

EMPLBO

-0.005
(0.006)

Number of Observations

38

59

Table 5
Regression Results for the 1990-91 Recession

This table reports the results of regressing the percentage change in a city's price index from
1990:2 to 1991:1, zPR ICE on the state employment change during the period, De1taEMP,
and measures of the market shares of supermarket chains that undertook leveraged buyouts,

LBOSHARE. EMPLBO is LBOSHARE multiplied by AEMP. t-statistics are in parentheses below the estimated coeffidents.

Variables

LBOSHARE

1

2

3

0.014
(0.710)

0.015
(0.742)

-0.031

(-1.016)

-0.076
(-0.321)

0.492
(1.333)

aLEMP

EMPLBO

-2.171

(-1.974)

Constant

R2

0.002
(0.347)

0000

0.013

(0.029)

(1.242)

0.009

0.011

0.076

59

59

59

Number of Observations

39

Table 6

Summary Statistics for 1990-91 Recession: Firm-Specific Data
This table reports summary statistics for the firm-specific data around the time of the 199091 recessions, from 1991:1 to 1991:4 and from 1991:1 to 1992:4. APRJCE is the percent-

age change in a firm's price index for a particular city; aEMP, the state employment

change durinA the period; LEo a dummy variable epaal to one if the firm is undertook an
LBO; LEOEMP, LEO multiplied by AEMP; OLEOSHARE, a measure of the market
shares of the other supermarket chains that undertook leveraged buyouts; OLBOEMP,
OLBOSHARE multiplied by zXEMP. Standard deviations are reported below the means.

Variables

1991:1-1991:4

1991:1-1992:4

zPRICE

0.023
(0.028)

0.080
(0.031)

.382

.393

LBOEMP

0.007
(0.012)

0.010
(0.021)

OLBOSHARE

0.149
(0.151)

0.152
(0.146)

OLBOEMP

0.002
(0.004)

0.004

(0.007)

0.020
(0.015)

0.030
(0.028)

110

89

LBO

zSEMP

Number of Observations

40

Table 7
Regression Results for the 1990-91 Recession: Firm-Specific Data
This table reports the results of regressing APRICE, the percentag change in a particular
firm's price index for a particular city on the following regressors: A±JMP, the state employment change during the period; LBO a dummj variable eQual to one if the firm is undertook

an LBO; LBOEMP, LBO multiplied by zbMP; OLBOSHARE, a measure of the market shares of the other supermarket chains that undertook 1everaed buyouts; OLBOEMP
OLBOSHARE multiplied by iEMP. There are two time periods: 1991:1 to 1991:4 and
1991:1 to 1992:4. t-statistics are in parentheses below the estimated coefficients.

Variables

1991:1-1991:4

1991:1-1992:4

M30

.026
(2.703)

LBO

(3.233)

LBOEMP

-1.116
(-2.936)

(-1.712)

OLBOSHARE

0.109
(3.472)

0.122
(3.542)

OLBOEMP

-2.851
(-2.209)

(-1.591)

AEMP

O712
(2.588)

0.382
(1.839)

Constant

-0.003
(-0.440)

0.049
(4.972)

0.178

0.192

110

89

A2

Number of Observations

41

-0.414

-1.293

Bibliography

American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association, Inter-City Cost of Living Jndez,
and Cost of Living Index, various issues.

Barsky, R. and G. Solon, "Real Wags Over the Business Cycle," NUER working paper,
1989.

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler, "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations," American Economic Review, 1989, pp. 14-31.

Bernanke, B., M. Gertler and S. Gikhrist, "The Financial Accelerator and the Flight to
Quality," Princeton University, working paper, 1993.

Bus, NI., "Pricing in a Customer Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1989, 104, pp.
699-7 18.

Blanchard, 0. and L. Katz, "Regional Evolutions," Broo/cings Papers on Economic Activity,
1992:1, pp. 1-74.
Bolton, P. and D. Scharistein, "A Theory of Predation Based on Agency Problems in Financial Contracting", American Economic Review, 1990, SO, pp. 93-106.

Bolton, P. and D. Scharfstein, "Optimal Debt Structure with Multiple Creditors," MIT,
working paper, 1993.

Borenstein, S. and A. Shepard, "Pricing Dynamics in Retail Gasoline Markets," Stanford
University, working paper, 1993.

Brander, J.A. and T.R. Lewis, "Oligopoly and Financial Structure," American Economic
Review, 1986, 76, pp. 956-970.

Bresnahan, T., "Empirical Studies of Industries with Market Power," in Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 2., ed. R. Schmalensee and R. Willig, North-Holland, New York,
NY, 1989, p. 1011-1057.

Breusch, T- and A. Pagan, "The Lagrange Multiplier Test and its Applications to Model
Specification in Econometrics," Review of Economic Studies, 1980, 47, 239-253.

Chevalier, J., "Capital Structure and Product Market Competition: Entry, Exit, and Expansion Decisions of Large Supermarket Chains," Harvard University, working paper, 1993a.

Chevalier, J., "Capital Structure and Product Market Competition: An Empirical Study of
Supermarket Pricing," Harvard University, working paper, 1993b.
42

Devine, G. and B. Marion, "The Influence of Consumer Price Information on Retail Pricing
and Consumer Behavior," American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 1979, 61, pp. 228237.

Domowitz, I., R. Hubbbard and B. Petersen, "Business Cycles and the Relationship between
Concentration and Price-Cost Margins," Rand Journal of Economics, 1986, 17, pp. 1-17.

Farrell, 3. and C. Shapiro, "Dynamic Competition with Switching Costs," Rand Journal of
Economics, 1988, 19, pp. 123-137.

Fazzari, S., R. G. Hubbard, and B. Petersen, "Investment and Financing Reconsidered",
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988, pp. 141-195.

Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole, "A 'Signal-Jamming' Theory of Predation," RAND Journal of
Economics, 1986 17, pp. 366-376.

Gertler, NI. and R. Hubbard, "Financial Factors in Business Fluctuations," 1988, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Gertner, R., D. Scharfstein, and J. Stein, "Internal versus External Capital Markets," MIT,
working paper, 1993.
Gottfries, Nils "Customer Markets, Credit Market Imperfections, and Real Price Rigidity,"
Economica, 1.991, 58, pp. 317-323.

Greenwald, B. 3. Stiglitz, and A. Weiss, "Informational Imperfections in the Capital Market
and Macroeconomic Fluctuations," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
1984, pp. 194-199. 207-260.
Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap, and D. Scharistein, "Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and Investment:
Evidence From Japanese Industrial Groups," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106, pp.
33-60.

Jensen, M., "Agency Costs of Free-Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers," American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 1986, 76, pp. 323-329.

Kashyap, A., 0. Lamont, and 3. Stein, "Credit Conditions and the Cyclical Behavior of
Inventories: A Case Study Of the 1981-82 Recession," MIT, working paper, 1992.

Keynes, J., "Relative Movements of Real Wages and Output," Economic Journal, 1939, 44,
pp. 34-51.
Klemperer, P. "Markets with Consumer Switching Costs," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1987, 102, pp. 375.394.

Klemperer, P.,"Competition in Markets with Consumer Switching Costs: An Overview,"
43

Oxford University, working paper, 1993.

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica,
1982, 50, pp. 1345-1370.

Lamont, 0., "Cash flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets," MIT,
working paper, 1993.

Long, J. and C. Plosser, "Real Business Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 1983, 91, pp.

Maksimovic, V., "Capital Structure in Repeated Oligopolies," Rand Journal of Economics,
1988, 19, p. 389-407.

Moulton, B., "Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates," Journal
of Econometrics, 1986, 32, pp. 385-394.
Murphy, K., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, "Building Blocks of Market Clearing Business Cycle
Models," Macroeconomics Annual, 1989, 4, pp. 247-287.

Myers, S. and N. Majiuf, "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When Firms Have

Information That Investors Do Not Have," Journal of Financial Economics, 1984, 13, p.
187- 22 1.

Okun, A., Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis, Washington, DC: The Brooklags Institution, 1981.
Phelps, E. and S. Winter, "Optimal Price Policy under Atomistic Competition," in Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory, E. Phelps (ed.), New York: W.W.
Norton, 1970.

Phillips, G.M., "Increased Debt and Product Market Competition: An Empirical Analysis,"
Krannert School of Management, Purdue University, working paper, 1992.
Pigou, A., Industrial Fluctuations (London: Macmillan and Co.), 1927.
Progressive Grocer's Annual Report of the Supermarket Industry, April 1989 edition of Progressive Grocer
Progressive Grocer's Market Scope, MacLean Hunter Media, White Plains, NY, 1986.

Retail Tenants Directory, National Mall Monitor, Clearwater, Florida, 1988 edition.
Rotemberg, J. and G. Saloner, "A Supergame Theoretic Model of Business Cycles and Price
Wars during Booms," American Economic Review, 1986, 76, pp. 390-407.

Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford, "Markups and the Business Cycle," Macroeconomics An.
nual, 1991, 6, pp. 63-129.
44

Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford, "Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of Aggregated Demand on Economic Activity," Journal of Political Economy1 100, 1992, pp. 1153-1207.
Stiglitz, J., "Price Rigidities and Market Structure," American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 1984, pp. 350-355.

Supermarket News Distnbution Study of Grocery Store Sales, various editions, Fairchild
Publications.

45

