NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FLEXIBILITY: A PARTIAL ORDERING

Kala Krishna
Marie Thursby

Working Paper No. 4615

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January, 1994

This paper was prepared for the festschrift conference in honor of John Chipman, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. We wish to thank John Chipman. Ron Jones, Vijay Krishna, Dan McFadden, Jim
Moore, Jerry Thursby, and Henry Wan for useful comments. ibis paper is part of NBER's
research program in International Trade and Investment Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4615
January 1994

FLEXIBIUTY: A PARTIAL ORDERING
ABSTRACT

We use an approach developed by Krishna and Young to examine the ability of
economies to adjust to exogenous shocks. While, in general, economies cannot be ranked in

terms of their flexibility, we provide a partial ordering for certain types of economies. In
particular, properties of the revenue function are used to show that placing restrictions on factor

mobility and on production in certain sectors reduces the flexibility of a small open economy
with respect to all price, endowment, and technology shocks of small enough magnitude. Since

one can think of these restrictions as distortions, we would expect them to reduce the level of
ON? in the economy. The insight provided by the analysis of flexibility is that, not only is the
level of GNP affected, but also the intrinsic ability of the economy to adjust to shocks is reduced.

Kala Krishna
Depamnent of Economics
Penn State University
State College, PA 16802
and FIBER

Marie Thursby
Department of Economics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and FIBER

1. Introduction

The term 'flexibility' in the Oxford English dictionary is defined as
adaptability to various purposes. In economic usages it carries connotations of an

ability to adjust. The flexibility of an economy is often thought of as a desirable
characteristic as a flexible economy is thought of as being able to adapt its resource
use, and change its production patterns, in response to exogenous shocks more than

an inflexible one. The presumption is that this responsiveness to exogenous shocks
would then result in greater national income and could foster growth. For example,

Young (1989) argues that it was the ability of Hong Kong to adapt to changing
opportunities in the world market that enabled it to grow much faster than other
similar countries.

Yet, the term is relatively badly defined in the literature. In common usage,

there is a tendency to confuse actual adjustment of an economy, as reflected in
changes in its resource allocations and thereby in its production composition, with
the ability to adjust. For example, Young (1989) measures flexibility by computing

an index of change in value of output from different sectors. In labor economics, a

measure of actual adjustment often used is an index of gross job creation and
destruction as in Davis and Haltiwanger (1992). While such measures are related to
actual adjustment, it says little about the ability to adjust. The adjustment may have
occurred because the economy was subjected to shocks. Another economy with less

actual adjustment may really be more intrinsically flexible if it was not subject to
significant shocks and hence did not need to adjust. Moreover, one economy may
respond more than another to a given shock, given one set of base conditions, and

less at some other set of base conditions. Thus, flexibility must, in general, be
defined relative to a given shock and at some given existing situation.

This distinction between ex-ante and ex-post measures is essential. We shall

2

refer to measures of the former as measures of flexibility, and the latter as measures
of adjustment. In this paper we are concerned with measures of flexibility.
We adopt an approach to flexibility recently developed by Krishna and Young

(1992) in our analysis of the ability of different types of economies to adjust to

external shocks. Their approach is a dual one in which flexibility can only be
defined relative to given shocks and for given initial conditions. Their definition is

based on a metric which defines the distance from a baseline economy which is
either perfectly flexible or perfectly inflexible. It provides a microeconomically well

based definition of flexibility. It is appealing because it relates flexibility to the

responsiveness of the economy, as measured by the derivatives of the revenue
function, to exogenous shocks.1 They develop measures of flexibility in response to

price, factor endowment, and technology shocks, and they point out that an
economy can be flexible in response to one kind of shock and not another. For
example, they show that the standard Heckscher Ohlin 2 x 2 x 2 model with fixed
coefficients in production and incomplete specialization provides an example of an

economy which is perfectly inflexible in its response to price shocks, but perfectly

flexible in response to endowment shocks. It is empirically implementable by
estimating the revenue function, and so provides a basis for empirical estimates of

flexibility that are easily interpreted. The approach is particularly fitting for this
paper since Chipman (1972) was one of the early papers examining the propertities

of the revenue function.

However, since Krishna and Young's measure is dependent on the shock
itself as well as the initial conditions, art implication is that economies cannot in
general be ordered in terms of their flexibility. We build on their work and show
that some kinds of economies can be so ordered. We thus provide a partial ordering

of such economies in terms of their flexibility. In particular, we argue that
permitting capital mobility in a baseline economy enhances the flexibility of an
3

economy in response to all price, endowment, or technology shocks, which are

'small enough' in magnitude. We then argue that command economies, that
target production levels in some, but not in all, sectors similarly reduce the
flexibility of the baseline economy.

It is worth emphasizing at the outset that the approach used here and in
Krishna and Young (1992) is static and atemporal. The measure of flexibility does

not capture another common usage of the term, namely that a flexible economy

adjusts faster to any given shock than an inflexible one. This interpretation of
flexibility is certainly a valid one, but to our knowledge is not well based as yet in
terms of the technology underlying it.

It is certainly possible to capture slow or incomplete adjustment to shocks by

reduced form estimates such as in 1-lammermesh (1988). However, it is not quite

clear what the estimated parameters measure and how they can be interpreted in
terms of a general underlying technology. In contrast, the measures of Krishna and
Young (1992) are related to the matrix of the relevant own and cross elasticities. For

example, flexibility in response to price shocks is shown to depend on price
elasticities of supply and so is intuitively appealing.

It is worth noting that some temporal aspects can be incorporated into the
static approach used here. Revenue functions in the short run, when some factors

of production are fixed, as well as revenue functions in the long run, when all

factors of production are mobile, can both be estimated using the appropriate
restrictions in the estimation process. This would permit measures of short run and
long run flexibility in response to given shocks.

There is also a large literature relating flexibility to adjustment costs which is

microeconomically well based. Fixed adjustment cost models lead to s, S type
models where adjustment occurs once pressures are sufficient to warrant the cost of

adjustment. Variable adjustment models, which have the property that adjustment
4

costs are bounded away from zero at the origin also lead to such regions of inaction.2

Variable adjustment cost models, which use quadratic adjustment costs, have zero

adjustment costs at the origin and result in slow adjustment over time. Increasing

hazard models, such as Cabalero and Engel (1992) relate the probability of
adjustment to the level of pressure for adjustment.

There are even models which aggregate to the macro level in remarkably
clever ways, and provide insights into macroeconomic behavior such as Caplin

(1985) and Caplin and Leahy (1991) among others. However, the cost of such
aggregation is the special assumptions that need to be made to permit it. For this
reason, they are not well suited as a base for empirical work as yet.

Another strand in the literature focuses on the value of flexibility for a firm
in the face of uncertainty. Stigler (1939) in a classic paper describes one plant as being

more flexible than another if it has a flatter average cost curve. He points out that
with uncertainty, a firm may well choose a technology which is not efficient for any

given level of output, but is optimal for the uncertain environment it faces. Jones
and Ostroy (1984) provide a masterful summary of the history of flexibility as an

economic concept and formalize the notion of flexibility in a sequential decision

context and relate its value to the amount of information an agent expects to
receive. Fuss and McFadden (1978) argue that neglecting uncertainty in estimating

revenue or cost functions can seriously bias the resulting estimates. They
distinguish between ex-ante and expost technological possibilities and provide
econometric specifications which permit this distinction to be made in practice.
Their work is of great importance in refining and developing ways of implementing
the definitions of Krishna and Young (1992) which neglect uncertainty.

The next section develops the results on capital mobility. Section 3 contains

the main results for a command economy, while Section 4 has some concluding
remarks and directions for future research.

5

2. Capital Mobility and Flexibility

It turns out to be convenient to use the dual approach and describe
technology using the revenue function. We will first define the revenue functions
we use and then derive some properties we will rely on in the following sections:3
The revenue function is denoted by r(P,V) where P and V denote exogenously

given vectors of prices and endowments, respectively. There are n goods and m
factors.

The revenue function is defined to be:4
r(P,V)

max P'X subject to (X,V) being in the feasible set.

(1)

x

The reader is reminded that, given constant returns to scale, the revenue function is

homogeneous of degree one in both prices and endowments. It is convex in prices
and concave in endowments. Its derivative with respect to prices equals the vector

of equilibrium outputs. rp(P,V) = X(P,V), while its derivative with respect to
endowments equals the shadow prices (i.e. equilibrium returns) of the factors of
production, rv(P,V) = W(P,V). Of course, these derivatives are homogeneous of
degree zero in both prices and endowments.

The revenue function can also be defined as the value function for the
program that minimizes factor payments subject to the constraint that price weakly
falls short of costs:

r(F,V) Mm W'V such that P c(W)5

(2)

w

In Theorems I and 2 below, we examine the effect of permitting capital

mobility on flexibility. In this we build on the work of Neary (1985). For this
purpose we will divide the factor endowment vector V into two component vectors,

K and I.., of dimensions mKxl and mLxl, respectively. The mK factors in K are

6

mobile internationally and so can be acquired at given world factor prices denoted by

the vector p. In this case factors can be thought of as negative traded intermediate
goods.
Define:
(3)

R(P,p,L) = Max P'X — p'K subject to (X,K,L) being feasible.

X,K

It is convenient to think of this as a two stage process where X is chosen first and K
is chosen afterwards. Let X() denote the solution to the first stage, that is, for a given

K. Note that P'X() = r(P,K,L). At the second stage, K is chosen. Thus:
(4)

R(P,p,L) = Max r(P,K,L) — p'K.
K

Let K(P,p,L) solve this problem. The work of Neary (1985) shows that when m n,

these choices are well behaved functions of their arguments.6 National Income
therefore equals:
G(P,p,K,L) = r(P,K(),L) — p'(K() — K) = R(?,p,L) + p'K

(5)

where K(S) denotes the choice of K in (3) and K denotes the vector of domestic
owned factors which are mobile. The first equality shows that GNP equals GD? less
factor payments for net imports of mobile factors.

We will call K(S) the virtual quantity vector for the mobile capital since

having a capital stock of K() will generate the same output choices as having
availability to factor markets at the factor price vector p or X(?,K(),L) = X(P,p,L).

The measure of flexibility with respect to price changes in Krishna and Young

(1992) is related to the matrix of second order derivatives of the GNP function with

and without capital mobility. Our results will be valid for comparisons of the same
baseline economy, with and without capital flexibility. Thus, we wish to relate the
matrix of second order derivatives with and without capital mobility
7

the capital

stock, K, given by the virtuai quantity K(P,p,L). At this point,GM' equals:
(6)

G(P,p,K,L) = r(P,JC(),L)

Therefore:
G(P,p,K,L) = R(1',p,L), and G(P,p,K,L) = R(P,p,L)

(7)

However, by definition:
RU'.p,L)

(8)

rU",K(P,p.L),L) — p'KU',p,L)

so that:

R(P,p,L)

rp(P,K(P,p.L).L) + rK()'Kr()

—

p'Kp()

(9)

rpU',K(P,p,L),L)

and
Rp(P,p,L) = rppU',K(),L) — rpK(P,K(),L)Kp()

(10)

Moreover, since by definition of K(), rK(P,K(P,p,L)IL) = p. so that
r,Q(P,K(P,p,L),L) + r(P,K(P,p,L),L)Kp() =0. Hence:
(11)

= — r(P,K(),L)rKp(P,K(),L).
Substituting back gives:

R(P,p,L) — rpp(P,K(),L) = — rp()rJç()rgp().

(12)

This is the key result relied on in Theorem 1: This result is not new by any means.
It is identical to that obtained in Neary (1985) and reproduced here for completeness.
Neary points out that since (12) defines a positive definite matrix7, it implies that

the baseline economy with capital mobility has a greater own supply elasticity than

the one without capital mobility. In this way it is more flexible than the other.
8

Below, we go further and use this result in conjunction with the definition of
Krishna and Young (1992) to generalize this insight of Neary's.
Krishna and Young (1992) define flexibility in response to price changes as:

I(P =

r(P0, V) - r(P', V) — (p0 — p1)' rp(P', V)
r(P°, V)

(13)

The index is the actual change in nominal national income less the change in
income that would have occurred if the economy had kept on producing base period
outputs (that is. if it had been totally inflexible), divided by first period income. The

numerator can be interpreted as the error from a first order approximation of the
revenue function. By the mean value theorem, the numerator of this index is also

equal to the second order terms evaluated at some point, F", between the two
prices:

—
1(P°) —

"°

PlYrpp(P**, V) (P°—P')
2r(P°, V)

(14)

for P" e (p0, F1)

Their measure of flexibility is thus fully defined by the price changes and the matrix

of second order derivatives with respect to price of the revenue function at some
point between the two prices.

Using this definition of flexibility in conjunction with the definitions of
national income above gives the indices of flexibility with and without capital
mobility to be:
Jm(pO) = ((p0 — Pl)'(R(P*,p,L) )(P°— P'))12G(P°,p,K,L)

(15)

1(P°) = [(P° — PI)'(rpp(P**,K,L) )(p0 — P1)]J2I-(P0,K,L)

(16)

and

respectively at K =K(•), the virtual quantity, and P and ** somewhere in the open
interval (P°. p1)
9

Using (6) and (12) gives the difference in the two, (p*, p**), evaluated at P* =

—
iMP°, I'°) = [(P° — PI)'(—rpK()r()rgy()}(P° P')]/2r(P01K,L).

(17)

This expression is positive since rKK() is negative definite. Since * and F"' lie in
the open interval (P°. P0. by continuity, MP*P**) > 0 for 1 close to P°. This results
in Theorem 1.
Theorem 1.
International factor mobility increases the flexibility of the baseline economy
with respect to all small price changes.
Similarly, flexibility with respect to factor endowment changes will be related

to the matrix of second order derivatives with respect to factor availability of the

baseline economy, with and without factor mobility. Again we use the identity
given in (8). Differentiating gives:
R1(P,p,L)

rL(P,K(P,p,L),L) + rK()ICL() — p'KL(•)

(18)

= rL(P,K(P,p.L),L)

and
R(P,p,L) = r,(P,K().L) — r(I',K(),L)KL().

(19)

Again by definition of K(), rK(F,K(P,p,L),L) = p. so that rKL(P,IC(P,p,L),L)
+ r(P,K(P,p,L),L)KL() = 0. Hence:
KL() — — rgj<(P,K( ),L)ra(P,K(

(20)

),L)

Substituting back gives:

RjP,p,L) — r(P,K(),L) = —rLKOrKK()rlcJ).

10

(21)

This is the key fact used in Theorem 2. Again, this result is due to Neary (1985) and
provided for completeness.

Krishna and Young (1992) define the flexibility with respect to factor
endowment changes in terms of the ability of the economy to absorb additional
factors without the need for factor price adjustments. Consider the function:
I(

—
—

.—[r(P, V0) —

r(P, V') — (V0 — V')t rv(P, V')I
r(P, V0)

(fl)

This function can be interpreted as the difference in the response of an economy
which is perfectly flexible (that is, an economy which can absorb factors at given

wages so that the change in national income is the change in endowments times

original wages), and that of an economy which can only fully absorb factors of
production if wages change. Note that it is not an index of structural flexibility, but
of the loss due to imperfect flexibility. It is easily seen that it is the error from a first

order expansion of the revenue function, i.e. it equals the negative of the second

order terms evaluated at some endowment, Vt between V' and V0 and hence
corresponds to a positive definite quadratic form:

I(V0) = _[i.
2

(V° — V')

'rvv (P, V*) (V0 — V')

r(P,V°)

(23

The indices of inflexibility with respect to endowment shocks, with and
without capital mobility, are thus given by:
Im(vo) = — [(L° — LI)'(RjP,p,L*))(LO_ L'))12G(P°,p,K,L°)

(24)

1(V0) = — [(L° —

(25)

and

L')'( ra,(P,K,L**) (1) — L')]J2r(P°,K,L°)

respectively at K =K(•), the virtual quantity, and L* and L** somewhere in the open
11

interval CL°, L').

Using (6) and (21) gives the difference in the two, a(L*, L**), evaluated at L* =

L** = L° to be:
à(L°, L°) = ((L° — L1)'(r(.)rJ@rKL() J (L° — L')]/2r(P,K,L°).

(26)

This expression is negative since rKK() is negative definite. Since L* and L** lie in
the open interval (L°, L'), by continuity, ML*,L**) c 0 for J,1 close to L°. This results

in Theorem 2.
Theorem 2.
international factor mobility reduces the loss from inflexibility of the baseline
economy

with respect to all small endowment changes.

Note that Theorems 1 and 2 can also be interpreted as dealing with technical

change as the exogenous shock as in Krishna and Young (1992). The effects of

technology changes which are Hicks Neutral are equivalent to those of price

changes, while factor augmenting technical change is equivalent to factor
endowment changes.
Caution should be exercised in interpreting the above results. They deal with

comparisons between economies at a given baseline. At this baseline, there would

be n capital inflows or outflows actually occurring. All we get is the pure effect on
flexibility which is related to the curvature of the revenue function.

The intuition behind our results is easily understood by looking at them in
terms of the Le Chatelier principle. Note first that in our model of a small country,
the absence of capital mobility is the only distortion. Thus, removing the distortion
must raise GM'. Formally, GNP without capital mobility is given by r(P,K,L). Also,
approximating this about K = K(P,p.L), the virtual quantity defined above gives:
12

r(P,K,L) = r(P,K(),L) + (K—K(-))'rK(P,K().L)
+ (1 /2)(K_K(.)Yricx(P,K',L)(K—K())
=

(27)

r(P,K(),L) + (K—K())'p

+ (1 /2)(K_K())FrKK(P,K*,L)(K_K(.))

for K* in the interval (K, K()). Thus:
G(P,p.K,L) — r(P,K,L) = - (1/2)(K_K())rKx(P,K*,L)(K_K(.)) > 0

(28)

Hence. GNP must rise when capital mobility is permitted. Since it is the same
when K=(), the GNP function without capital mobility is tangent to that with capital

mobility at this point and lies below it everywhere else. The GNP function is

convex in prices and concave in endowments. This results in the curvature
relations depicted in Figure 1(a) and (b) which are at the heart of our results.

3. Command Economies and flexibility

In this section, we examine the effect of targeting the level of production in
some, but not all, sectors of the economy. To do this we divide the output vector, X,

into two component vectors, '1 and Z of size n and n, respectively. Competitive
behavior determines the levels of outputs in Y, while the levels of output in Z are

exogenously determined and are denoted by Z. How or why these levels are
determined is unimportant for our purposes, but it is natural to think of their being
set to satisfy development goals or more general political objectives.
Before considering the command economy, it is useful to rewrite the revenue

function when all outputs are competitively determined as:

13

r(P, Q, V) = Max 1"? + Q'Z subject to (Y, Z, V) being feasible

(29)

Y, Z

where P and Q denote exogenously given vectors of prices for Y and Z. respectively.

As usual this function is convex in prices and concave in endowments. Its
derivatives with respect to prices. rp(P, Q, V) = Y(P, Q V) and rQ(P, Q, V)

Z(P, Q,V),

give equilibrium output choices, and these derivatives are homogeneous of degree
zero in prices and endowments.

We define the revenue function for the command economy as:
RU', Q, Z. V) = Max F'? + Q'Z subject to (Y,Z, V) being feasible
Y

(30)

where production targets determine outputs in Z. In this case, R(P, Q, 4 V) =

Y(P,

Q Z. V) gives equilibrium outputs in Y and RQ (P. Q, Z, V) = Z.
We want to examine the economys flexibility with and without production
targets, and, as before, our measures of flexibility are those defined in Krishna and

Young (1992). Thus we need to relate R(-) to r(P,Z,V), where Q(P,Z,V) denotes
virtual prices for Z. Q(P, 2, V)1 is implicitly defined as the solution in Q to Z = Z(P,
Q, V). It is called the virtual price vector for the command economy since the

competitive economy would choose to produce the targeted levels of Z at prices
given by P and Q(P,Z,V).8

Using the definition of virtual prices, (29) can be written as
RU',Q, Zt, V) = P'Y(P, Q(P, Z,V), V) + Q'Z(P, Q(P, Z,V), V).

(31)

Adding and subtracting Q(P, Z, V)'Z(P, Q(), V) and using the fact that Z(P,Q(),V) =
this expression becomes:
R(P, Z, V) = r (F, Q() V) ÷ (Q — Q())7

(32)

Thus for Q = Q(), GNP is the same in the competitive and command economies:

14

(33)

RU', Z, V) = r(P, Q(), V).

As in the preceding section, our results on flexibility rely on the second order

derivatives of the revenue function, with and without targeted production, at this

point. Theorem 3 states that targeting production in some, but not all, sectors
reduces the economy's flexibility in response to price changes in the nontargeted
sector. The result relies on:
R(P, Z, V) — rpp(P,Q('), V) = —rpQ () r () rQp ()

(34)

which follows from differentiating (32) and using the definition of the virtual price

vector. That is,
Rp(P, Z, V) = rp (F, Q(), V) + rQ(F, Q(), V)1 Qp(.) - Z'Qp()

(35)

= rp (F, Q(), V)

since rQ = Z (F, Q(), V) = Z. Therefore,

Rpp (PJ.Z, V) = rpp (F, Q(), V) + rpQ () Qp()

(36)

But QU',Z, V) is the solution to Z = Z(F, Q, V), so that

Qp() = — Zp()/ZQ()
= — rQp() r

(S).

(37)

Substituting gives Rpp(F, Z, V) = rpp (F, Q(•), V) — r () r (.) rQp() and hence (34).

We use these results in conjunction with our earlier definitions of price and
endowment flexibility. With and without production targets, these indices are

15

jC(pO) = [(P°—P'Y {Rpp (p*Z, V)) (P°—P')]/ZR(I', Z, V)

(38)

l(P°) = [(P°—F')' (rpp(P**, Q(), V)) (P°-P'flI2r (P. Q.(),V)

(39)

and

respectively, where P and fl are both in the open interval (p°. ii),
Using (33) and (34) gives the difference in the two, (p* **) evaluated at P"
=

= P° to be:

A(P°, P°) = [(P°—P')' (—rpQ() r(.)rQp(.)}(P0_P1)]I2.r(P0, Q(), V).

(40)

This expression is negative since rQQ() is positive definite. Since P" and P"' lie in
the open interval (p0, Pt), by continuity, A(P*, )S*) c 0 for 1" close to P°. This results

in Theorem 3.
Theorem 3.

Setting production targets in some sectors decreases the flexibility of the
baseline

economy with respect to a! I small price changes.

Theorem 4 states that the command economy is also less flexible with respect

to endowment changes.

Again the result relies on differentiating (32).

Differentiating with respect to V gives:
Rv(P, Z, V) = rv(P, Q('), V) + rQ(P. Q(.), ¶7)' Qv(•) - Z'QV()

(41)

= rv(P, Q(.), V)1

and
Rvv (P. Z, V) = rvv m, Q() V) + rQv() Qv(.)

But Q*) = — Zv()/Z<) = —rQv()

(42)

r().

Substituting gives
Rvv(P, Z. V) — rvv(P.Q(), V) = —rvQ()

r() rQ%'.

(43)

The indices of inflexibility with respect to factor endowment changes, with

16

and without production targets are given by
Ic(V0) = — [(L°—L')' {Rvv(P, Z, L*)) (L°—L')J12R (I', Z, L°)

(44)

and
I(V°) = — [(L°—L')' (rvv(P, Q(.),

L)} (L°—L'fl/2r (F, Q(), L°)

(45)

respectively for Q=Q() and Lt and L** in the open interval (L°, L').
Using (33) and (43) gives the difference in the two, ML*, L**), evaluated at Lt

= L** = L° to be:
A(L°, L°) = (L°—L')' (rQv() r() rQv()) (L°—L')]12r(P, Q(), V)

(46)

This expression is positive since r®() is positive definite. Since L* and L** lie in
the open inten'al (L°, L'), by continuity, A(L*, L**) > 0 for L' close to L°. This results

in Theorem 4.
Theorem 4.
Setting production targets in some sectors increases the loss from inflexibility
of the baseline economy with respect to all endowment changes.

Theorems

3 and 4 are subject to the same types of qualifications and

interpretation as Theorems 1 and 2. In particular, our comparisons are made at a

given baseline, where the economy faces prices for Z given by the virtual price
vector. Thus we are comparing the curvature of the revenue function with and
without production targets in certain sectors. Introducing production targets places

additional constraints on the economy's resource allocation problem. In terms of

the Le Chatelier principle, introducing production targets cannot increase GNP.
Formally, GNP without targets is given by r(P, Q V). Approximating this about Q(P,
Z, SO, the virtual price vector, gives:

17

r(P,Q,V) = r(P,Q(),V) + (Q —

for Q*

÷ (Q Q(.))' r(P,Q,V)(Q —

(Q, Q()). Thus

R(P,QS.Z,V) — r(P,Q,V) = —

(Q — Q ())' r (P Q V)(Q — Q ()) <0.

Since r(P, Q, V) = R(PI Q, Z, V) at Q(P, Z, V), the CMI' function for the
command economy is tangent to r() at that point and lies below it elsewhere.

18

4. Conduding Remarks
In general, economies cannot be ranked in terms of their ability to adjust to
exogenous shocks. Nonetheless, properties of the revenue function can be used to
provide a partial ordering in which certain types of economies are compared. In this

paper we showed that placing restrictions on factor mobility and on production in
certain sectors reduces the flexibility of a small open economy with respect to all
price, endowment, and technology shocks of small enough magnitude. Since one
can think of these restrictions as distortions, we would expect them to reduce the
level of GNP in the economy. The insight provided by the analysis of flexibility is

that, not only is the level of CNP affected, but also the intrinsic ability of the
economy to adjust to shocks is reduced.

Our results are straightforward applications of the le Chatelier Principle in
that we examine the impact of restrictions when the constraints were just binding.
They are more general than the usual le Chatelier applications since they deal with

small but noninfinitesimal changes. In future work we plan to examine other Le
Chatelier applications, such as the effect of quotas, which have more complex effects

than the simple restrictions considered here. We also plan to examine flexibility in
non Le Chatelier contexts, that is, when the relevant distortions are substantial (as,

for example, in the literature on piecemeal policy reform)9. In the applications
above, the effects on GNP and the effects on flexibility are in the same direction. An

additional question of interest is under what conditions these effects are opposing.
Finally, we have assumed differentiability throughout, and it is of interest to know
if this assumption can be relaxed.

19

ENDNOTES

I

Another strand of literature examines response of domestic prices to external
price shocks. For example, Jones and Pervis (1983) relate the divergence of
equilibrium exchange rates from purchasing power parity to the ability of an
economy to adjust to external shocks, Chipman (1981) examines the responses of
domestic prices to external price shocks for the West German economy.

2 Kemp and Wan (1974) provide an early analysis.
3 A good reference source for those unfamiliar with the general approach is Dixit
and Norman (1980).

'

Note that this specification is valid only when there is no joint production.

5 Throughout we define vectors as column vectors, and the notation 'denotes
transpose.

6 Throughout we assume the revenue function is differentiable, so that we invoke

the required conditions on the number of goods and factors (mobile and
immobile, constrained and unconstrained).
Note that [ZRpK]Rj[RrJ'ZJ = -Z RpKRjRgJ(RRIcyZ >0.

In this we owe an intellectual debt to Neary and Roberts (1980) who used the
concept of virtuai prices in their analysis of consumer behavior in the face of
quantity constraints.
9 See M.igrom and Roberts (1992) for a general approach to comparing equilibria of
models when changes are discrete.

20

References

Caballero, R. J. and E.M.R.A. Engel, 1992. "Miaoeconomic Adjustment Hazards
and Aggregate Dynamics." Mimeo, MIT.
Caplin, A., 1985. 'The Variability of Aggregate Demand with (S,s) Inventory
Policies." Econometrica 53: 1395-1410.

_____ and J. Leahy, 1991: State-Dependent Pricing and the Dynamics of Money
and Output." Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:
Chipman, J.S., 1972. The Theory of Exploitative Trade and Investment Policies: A
Reformulation and Synthesis." In L.E. Di Marco (ed.), International Economics
and Development. New York: Academic Press; 209-242.
1981. "Internal-External Price Relationships in the West German
Economy, 1958-79," in R. Richter and W. F. Stolper (eds), Zeitschrift Fri die

Chipman, ......,

gesainte Staata wissenschaft 137: 612-637.

Davis, S. J. and J. Haltiwanger, 1992. "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
Employment Reallocation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 819-863.

Dixit, A. and V. Norman, 1980. Theory of International Trade. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Fuss, M. and D. McFadden, 1978. "Flexibility Versus Efficiency in Exante Plant
Design," in Fuss and McFadden (eds.), Production Economics: A Dual Approach
to Theory and Applications, Vol. 1, New York: North-Holland Publishing, 311364.

1-lammermesh, D., 1988. "Labor Demand and the Structure of Adjustment Costs."
N.B.E.R. Working Paper #2572.

Jones, RA. and J. M. Ostroy, 1984. "Flexibility and Uncertainty." Review of
Economic Studies 51: 13-32.
Jones, R. W. and D. D. Purvis, 1983. "International Differences in Response to
Common External Shocks: The Role of Purchasing Power Parity," in E.
Claassen and p. Salir (eds,), The Theory of Flexible Exchange Rates.
Amsterdam: North Holland, 33-55.
Kemp, M. C. and H. Y. Wait, Jr., 1974. 'Hysteresis of Long-Run Equilibrium from
Realistic Adjustment Costs," in C. Horwich and P. A. Sainuelson (eds.), Trade
Stability, and Macroeconomics. Mew York: Academic Press, 221-242.
Krishna, K. and A. Young, 1992. "Conceptually Based Measures of Structural
Adaptability." NBER Working Paper #4039.
Milgrom, P. and J, Roberts, 1992. "Comparing Equilibria," Mimeo, Stanford
University.

21

Stigler, C., 1939. "Production and Distribution in the Short Run." Journal of
Political Economy 47: 305-357.

Neary, J.P., 1985. "International Factor Mobility, Minimum Wage Rates, and Factor
Price Equalization: A Synthesis? Quarterly Journal of Economics 100: 551-569.
______ and K.W.S. Roberts. "The Theory of Household Behavior Under

Rationing.' European Economic Review 13: 25-42.

Young, A., 1989. Hong Kong and the Art of Landing on One's Feet: A Case Study
of a Structurally flexible Economy." Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis. fletcher
School of Diplomacy.

22

Figure 1 (a)

Figure 1 (b)

