NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MINIMUM WAGE EFFECTS AND
LOW-WAGE LABOR MARKETS: A
DISEQUILIBRIUM APPROACH

David Neumark
William Wascher

Working Paper No. 4617

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January, 1994
Neumark is Assistant Professor in the Economics Department at the University of Pennsylvania,

and a Faculty Research Fellow of the NBER. Wascher is Senior Economist at the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The views in this paper do not n'ssariIy represent
those of the Federal Reserve Board or its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
We thank David Card, Frank Diebold, Chris Hanes, and seminar participants at the NBER
Summer Institute, Penn State, Michigan State, Johns Hopkins, Maryland, CUNY and the BLS
for helpful discussions. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.

NBER Working Paper #4617
January 1994
MINIMUM WAGE EFFECTS AND
LOW-WAGE LABOR MARKETS: A
DISEQUILIBRIUM APPROACH

ABSTRACT

We present a new approach to estimating minimum wage effects on employment. In
contrast to most previous research, we account for the possibility that the relationship between

minimum wages and employment depends on the magnitude of the minimum wage relative to

the equilibrium wage in the absence of the legislated minimum. In particular, estimating the
employment effects of binding minimum wages requires separation of sample observations into

those that are on the labor demand curve but off the labor supply curve, and those that are at
labor market equilibria. The paper implements an endogenous switching regression model with

unknown sample separation that yields these estimates. The approach also yields estimates of
the impact of labor market characteristics on the probability that minimum wages are binding.

We also extend the disequilibrium approach to monopsony, which introduces a third
regime, between the equilibrium monopsony wage and the equilibrium competitive wage, in
which observations are on the labor supply curve but off the labor demand curve and minimum
wages are therefore positively related to employment. Minimum wage effects under monopsony

are estimated in a three-regime endogenous switching regression model with unknown regimes,
and the monopsony characterization of low-wage labor markets is tested against the competitive
characterization.

David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER

William Wascher
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
20th and Constitution, NW
Washington, DC 20551

I. Introduction

The competitive view of minimum wages, enshrined in numerous textbooks, is that

they reduce employment. This paper presents a new approach to testing this prediction. In
contrast to many previous studies, which estimate a single regression of the employment

rate on a minimum wage variable (as well as other controls), we use the predictions of
standard theoretical models to take explicit account of the possibility that the relationship
between minimum wages and employment depends in a discrete fashion on the magnitude

of the minimum wage relative to the equilibrium wage in the absence of the legislated
minimum. Specifically, we attempt to distinguish observations for which the legislated
minimum is below the equilibrium competitive wage--and thus unrelated to employment-from observations for which the minimum wage is above the equilibrium competitive wage

and negatively related to employment. To achieve this separation, we implement an
endogenous switching regression model with unknown sample separation, with the switch

point defined as the intersection of the labor demand and supply curves.
In addition, we extend this disequilibrium approach to account for the possibility of
monopsony power in low-wage labor markets.1 In the monopsony model, as in the

competitive model, the minimum wage should be unrelated to employment when the
legislated minimum is below the equilibrium monopsony wage. Similarly, in either model,

the minimum wage is predicted to be negatively related to employment when the minimum

wage is above the equilibrium competitive wage. However, the competitive and monopsony

'The plausibility of monopsony power in low-wage labor markets has generally been
dismissed in the past (see, e.g., Brown, 1988). But recent evidence of positive effects of
minimum wages on employment has renewed interest in the monopsony model (Card,
1992b; Rebitzer and Taylor, 1991).

models differ in their implications for minimum wage effects when the minimum wage is
between the equilibrium monopsony wage and the equilibrium competitive wage (Stigler,

1946). In this region, a minimum wage can increase employment by moving the labor
market away from the monopsony outcome--where the labor demand curve intersects the

marginal cost of labor curve--along the supply curve. In contrast, the competitive model
predicts that minimum wages should be unrelated to employment over this range.
To assess the relevance of monopsony power in low-wage labor markets, we set up a
model of minimum wage effects on employment with three regimes, with each

corresponding to the alternative possibilities implied by the monopsony model. Given
specifications of the labor demand and labor supply curves, and given an assumption

regarding the relationship between the marginal cost of labor curve (under monopsony) and
the labor supply curve, the switch points again arise naturally as functions of the parameters

and variables in the labor demand and labor supply curves. We estimate the resulting
three-regime endogenous switching regression model with unknown regimes, and test the
monopsony characterization of low-wage labor markets against the two-regime competitive
characterization.

One rationale for our approach stems from the recent round of studies on the
employment effects of minimum wages, some of which challenge the prediction of the

standard textbook model. This recent research has greatly expanded the types of data used
to estimate minimum wage effects, including: extending time-series data into the 1980s
(Wellington, 1991); focusing on minimum wage increases in particular labor markets (Card,
1992b; Spriggs, 1992; Katz and Krueger, 1992; Taylor and Kim1 1993; Card and Krueger,

1993); conducting panel data experiments on state-level observations (Card, 1992a;

2

Neumark and Wascher, 1992; Williams, 1993), and using individual-level data (Currie and

Fallick, 1993). Compared with the earlier time-series studies which, by and large, found

similar effects, the findings from this recent research have been quite varied, with some
studies finding the conventional negative employment effects of minimum wages, some

finding no employment effects, and some even finding positive effects.

A potential explanation for the more disparate findings from recent research may be
that the samples used in this research vary with respect to whether minimum wages are
binding. For example, even if low-wage labor markets are competitive, it is possible that
some studies will reveal no effects of minimum wages on employment simply because they

are based on samples in which most of the variation in minimum wages is in the range for
which minimum wages are non-binding, while the reverse may be true of studies revealing
negative effects. Similarly, if low-wage labor markets are characterized by monopsony, we
might nonetheless generally expect to find negative effects of minimum wages on

employment, in samples that do not capture minimum wage movements over the perhaps
narrow range for which a higher minimum wage raises employment, but instead capture

variation along the binding demand regime. On the other hand, we might sometimes expect
to find a positive (or non-negative) association between minimum wages and employment.2

Thus, the approach developed in this paper offers at least three potential advantages
relative to existing single-equation estimates: it leads to estimates of the employment effects
of minimum wages when they are binding; it yields a (probabilistic) classification of

3This also implies that we cannot test the monopsony model by asking whether
minimum wage increases are associated with increases in employment (as claimed, for
example, by West and McKee, 1980).
3

observations based on whether or not minimum wages are binding; and it provides a test of
the monopsony characterization of low-wage labor markets.

IL The Data and Single-Equation Results

The data used in this paper are the same as those used in Neumark arid Wascher
(1992), a panel data set on the 50 states and Washington, DC, covering the period 19771989, as well as the subperiod 1973-1976 for those states separately identified in the CPS

before 1977. The data set includes information on federal arid state minimum wage levels,
estimates of coverage by federal minimum wage statutes,3 and state averages of wages,

unemployment rates, employment rates, and age composition variables. In that paper, we
followed the literature and estimated regressions of the form

(1) E aMW + R,j3

+

E is an employment-to-population ratio either for teens aged 16-19 or young adults aged
16-24. MW is a coverage-adjusted relative minimum wage, constructed as federal coverage
for the state, multiplied by the higher of the federal or state minimum wage level, divided
by the average wage in the state. Rd is a vector of control variables, possibly including
fixed state and year effects.
Numerous specification issues arise with respect to equation (1), which we explored

in our earlier paper, and which have been further discussed by other researchers and
ourselves (Card, et al., 1993; Neumark and Wascher, 1993). In this paper we are interested
in highlighting an econometric approach that is an alternative to that commonly used in

3Published coverage estimates refer to all workers, not the young age groups usually
considered in minimum wage studies.

4

research on minimum wages, not in revisiting these specification issues. Consequently, we

focus on a set of specifications and an age group that are, in our view, least controversial.

One issue that has been raised in this context is the appropriate use of supply
variables in single-equation estimates. In our case, we explicitly specify the labor demand

and labor supply curves in a disequilibrium model. We therefore have a way to introduce
supply variables, even when workers are homogeneous and there is no uncovered sector,
because supply variables will affect employment when the minimum wage is non-binding.4

However, we include only the proportion of the population in the age group being studied,
and Omit the more problematic school enrollment rate, since it may be partly endogenous

with respect to labor market conditions. We also work with contemporaneous minimum
wage variables, although our earlier paper indicated that specifications using laggedvalues

of the minimum wage variable provided stronger evidence of disemployment effects. In

addition, in our earlier paper we allowed for fixed state and year effects. In this paper,
though, the econometric approach that we use precludes the inclusion of these effects,

although we give some attention to the heterogeneity problem that may arise from their
omission. Finally, we study young adults (aged 16-24), for whom the results in our previous
paper were much less sensitive to these specification issues than were those for teenagers

(aged i6-i9).
To see the consequences of these specification choices, Table I reports estimates of

4Brown, et al. (1982) argue that supply variables affect employment in the presence of
minimum wages when workers are heterogeneous and there is an uncovered sector.

5This may be in part because for the broader young adult age group we have larger cell
sizes with which to estimate employment rates and other control variables.
5

equation (1) for young adults aged 16-24. The top panel reports the basic specifications
with which the estimates from the disequilibrium models will be compared. The estimated
coefficient of the minimum wage variable is significant and negative. The demand variable
--the prime-age male unemployment rate--also has an estimated coefficient that is negative

and significant. The supply variable measuring the proportion of the age group in the
population has the expected negative coefficient, although the estimate is not significantly

different from zero.6 Note that fixed state and year effects are excluded from these
specifications.

The lower panel presents the estimated minimum wage coefficients for specifications

that alternatively include fixed state and year effects, and substitute the lagged minimum
wage variable for its contemporaneous counterpart. The first row shows, as did our 1992
paper, that including fixed state and year effects leads to some diminution of the minimum
wage effects. The second row shows that the estimated disemployment effects of minimum
wages are stronger when the lagged minimum wage variable is used. Broadly speaking,
however, the estimated minimum wage effects for young adults are not especially sensitive

to these specification issues. All of the specifications indicate a significant (or nearly so)
negative effect of minimum wages on the employment rate.7

6The expected coefficient is negative because this variable measures relative supply.
Higher relative supply reduces the equilibrium wage, resulting in a lower employment tai
(but not level).

7The estimates for young adults are also insensitive to the inclusion of measures of
enrollment rates. In contrast, for teenagers the estimated minimum wage effect is very
sensitive to these specification issues (Neumark and Wascher, 1992 and 1993).
6

Ill. Disequilibrium Models of Employment Effects

I/l.a. The Comtitive Model
We consider first the two-regime model corresponding to the competitive model of

minimum wage effects. Let the labor demand equation be given by
(2)

ED=aW+X+eD

and let the (inverse) labor supply equation be given by
(3)

W=yEs_Y6_yeS

where the "it" subscripts have been dropped. Consistent with most minimum wage
research, W is interpreted as a relative wage measure, in particular the wage of young
adults relative to the average wage for all workers. Also, following most existing minimum
wage research, we assume that the coverage-adjusted relative minimum wage measures the
effective minimum wage. Then if the minimum wage (MW) is binding, employment is
determined by the demand curve with W set to MW,
(4)

E=aMW+X13+€'

if instead the minimum wage is non-binding, then employment is given by the intersection

8The inverse supply equation is specified with the vector 6 having a negative coefficient
so that the signs of the coefficients of the supply variables Y in the reduced-form
employment equation (given below) agree with those in equation (1). (Note that equation
(3) can be rewritten as E = (1/y)W + (ô/y)Y + €.) in addition, throughout the ensuing
discussion, we assume that the labor supply schedule is positively sloped. This is because
the empirical work focuses on the employment rate, on which, at least in a one-period
model, wage increases exert a positive substitution effect, but not a negative income effect.

7

of the demand and supply curves, or the reduced-form expression for employment

(5)

E=
1-czy

(y

+

X3)

+

The error term e in equation (5) could be specified as the reduced form error term
involving ED and fS However, we use a less restrictive specification, which allows for the

possibility that in the non-binding regime other factors affect employment, and for the
possibility that

and

do not necessarily reflect demand or supply factors that carry over

into the reduced form in the same way as the observable variables. This woi.ild be the case,
for example, if

and fS contain measurement

error in the employment rate.

Finally, an observation will be classified on the binding regime (equation (4)) if the
minimum wage is greater than the competitive equilibrium wage given by the intersection of

the labor demand and labor supply curves (i.e., the reduced form for the wage), and vice

versa. Thus, an observation is on the binding regime if

(6)

MW>

(X - Y8) +

1-wy

and is on the non-binding regime otherwise. Again, the error term & is not restricted to

have the form implied by the reduced form for the wage, in terms of D and
we do allow for E1 to be correlated with both €' and

i.

However,

€, and these correlations can reflect

the appearance of (1) and e in the reduced form for the wage.

Equations (4), (5), and (6) constitute a disequilibrium model with unknown regimes.

The model differs from standard cases in the literature (see Quandt, 1988) in that the
switching equation (6) depends on the minimum wage and the variables and parameters in

the labor demand and labor supply equations. The availability of the minimum wage as an

8

"indicator' of the regime in which an observation lies makes the application of
disequilibrium models to minimum wage effects unique.9 In addition, because the

dependent variable in the switching equation is not a latent variable, the variance of E' is
identified.

Letting f denote density functions, and Zip > €' be a short-hand for the switching

equation (6), we can write the likeithood for an observation as
Zip) + fle,e'

(7)

fle'>)fle'

< Zip

I e') + fle)jte'

Zip) =
Zip

I

Assuming that f1), NI3, and €' have a tnvariate normal distribution, we can use results for

conditional distributions of bivariate normal random variables to obtain the likelihood
function

z* -

—

(8)

'€1)
0(0

0(0

0(0

)

+

__—4(--)[1 -

-

-

" )J

0(0

Note that the coefficients of the demand function are identified regardless of which

variables appear in the demand and supply functions, since the parameters of the demand
function are identified from the binding regime. In contrast, the supply function parameters

are not identified without some exclusion restrictions. Variables that appear in both the

9In most of the standard market disequilibrium literature, the question is whether a
market is in excess supply or excess demand, and the "indicator" of these alternatives is
whether prices are rising or falling (Quandt, 1988). Bowden (1978) considers the
implications for such models of taking an approach closer to ours, by specifying the
equilibrium price in terms of the underlying demand and supply curves.

9

demand and supply equations have coefficients (-cr6

+ 13)7(1 -

ay) in the reduced-form

employment equation, and (y13 - c5)/(1 - ay) in the switching equation. Thus, while a and B

are identified from the binding regime, some simple algebra shows that y and 6 are not
separately identified unless there is at least one variable that is excluded from the supply

function but appears in the demand function; the coefficient of such a variable in the
reduced-form employment equation, for example, is 137(1 - cry), which identifies y. This, of

course, is the necessary condition for identification in the usual simultaneous equations case.

In this particular model, we identify y and 6 by excluding the prime-age male
unemployment rate from the supply function.1°

In addition to obtaining estimates of employment effects of minimum wages (a) in
the binding regime, the model can be used to estimate the probability that observations are
on the alternative regimes, as functions of the minimum wage variable and the variables

that determine the equilibrium wage. For example, the probability that minimum wages are
binding is

P( MW>
Such

1-ay

(yX - Y)

+

e) = PC Z* > €1) =

probabilities are informative as to how the overall minimum wage effect is likely to

vary with changes in the minimum wage and other labor market variables.'

10We also follow the existing literature in assuming that the variable measuring the
proportion of the age group in the population is a supply variable, and does not appear in
the demand function, although this is not necessary for identification.

"In the multiple-regime approach, minimum wage effects vary depending on labor
market characteristics that affect the probability that minimum wages are binding for an
observation. In this sense, heterogeneity across workers is introduced. However, this
heterogeneity is limited to variation in minimum wages and labor market conditions across
10

Finally, the two-regime model can be tested against two nested alternatives, one in

which all observations are on the demand curve, and one in which all observations are on
the reduced form for employment (i.e., at equilibrium employment).'2
III.b. The Monopsony Model

In contrast to the competitive model, there are three regimes implied by the
monopsony model. The first regime is that in which the minimum wage is non-binding, so

that minimum wages have no effect on employment. The second regime, which arises
uniquely in the monopsony model, is one in which minimum wages increase employment.

This regime corresponds to the labor supply curve, between the monopsony wage (the wage

along the labor supply curve at the employment level where the marginal cost of labor
curve intersects the labor demand curve), and the competitive equilibrium wage. Finally,
the third regime is the demand curve above the competitive equilibrium wage, along which
minimum wages decrease employment, as in the competitive model.

In addition to the supply regime (in which the minimum wage effect is lIy), we need
to specify a switching equation between the non-binding regime and the supply regime.

states and years; within a state and year labor is treated as homogeneous, with an
observation assumed to be on one regime or the other. A richer approach, which is beyond
the scope of this paper, would attempt to account for the fact that minimum wages are
binding for some individuals but not for others. As it now stands, our approach should not
be interpreted as equivalent to one with heterogeneous workers, in which the cumulative
probability expressions in equation (8) measure the proportion of workers in a state on one
regime or the other.
'2The coefficients of the reduced form involve all of the coefficients of the labor
demand and supply curves. However, if all observations are on this regime these
coefficients cannot be identified solely from the employment equation. Thus, in testing this
restriction employment is specified simply as a linear function of the demand and supply
variables.
11

(Equation (6) continues to describe switches between the supply regime and the demand

regime, at the intersection of the demand and supply curves.) If we assume that under
monopsony the inverse labor supply curve facing firms is the aggregate inverse supply curve,
then the marginal cost of labor curve is13

MC=2yE-Y6

(9)

Using this, we can solve for the employment level at which marginal cost equals marginal

product (the wage on the labor demand curve)
(10)

E=- a

1

1-2ay

1-2ay

Then we can find the wage that prevails at this level of employment, from the labor supply
curve, which is

w=

(11)
Thus, an observation

lies on

- (1-ay)

+

1-2ay

1-2ay

the demand regime if

(12)

MW

-

1

(yX3 -

1 -ay

Y)

>

An observation lies on the supply regime if
(13)

MW

—

1

I-ay

(yX - Y6)

13th contrast to the standard monopsony model, the Rebitzer and Taylor (1991)
efficiency wage model does not suggest any simple relationship between the labor supply
and marginal cost of labor curves. In that model, the supervisory input is assumed to be
fixed, so that, ceteris paribus, shirking increases with employment. Thus, the marginal cost
of labor curve rises above the labor supply curve, because as employment increases firms
must raise the wages of all workers to increase the cost of job loss in order to deter
shirking.
12

and
MW +

(14)

(1-uy)Y — yXI
1 -2ay

>

Finally, an observation lies on the non-binding regime if
MW +

(15)

(1-ay)Yô 1-2ay

yX

It is straightforward to verify that the equilibrium monopsony wage lies below the

equilibrium competitive wage as long as a < 0 and the equilibrium competitive level of

employment is positive. This ensures that equations (12) and (15) cannot hold
simultaneously.

Paralleling equation (7), and expressing equations (14) and (15) as Zqi' >
e',

and Zqx'

we can write the likelihood for an observation as

je',e' < Z) + fle,e1 Z4r) + fleS,Zi, <Z) =
ftD)flI < Zp I e°) + fle)fte' Z$' I e) + fl?)jZ9i <Z4 I S)
(16)

Collecting results for the monopsony model, again assuming that the errors (now fI),

(S (NB and f') have a multivariate normal distribution, and using an expression paralleling
equation (7), we obtain the likelihood function

(17)

4(!)(

OeD On

2

2

(°

-

Ld(.!)U —

)

.2
0,,

(

zip' - ___

2-

o
0,,,

13

)) +

Z4' - ..ef:€S
2
1

a

(3

a

2-

)

2
1

S0(I

Z4r

-

-

(3

2-

2

)]

0(3

In contrast to the two-regime competitive model, the parameters are identified in the

three-regime monopsony model even if all variables appear in both equations, since we
have separate observations (with some probability) along the demand and supply regimes.
Nonetheless, to maintain comparability we impose the same exclusion restrictions as in the
two-regime case.

Because the two-regime and three-regime models are not nested, testing the
competitive model against the monopsony model is not as straightforward as testing whether
a second regime is needed, relative to a single-regime model.14 Thus, to compare the

models we use the non-nested test procedure developed by Vuong (1989). The applicable
test statistic is n"2(L3 -

L-2)/ , where L3 and L2 are the log-likelihoods for the three- and

two-regime models respectively, evaluated at the maximum likelihood estimates. 2 is the
sample variance of the difference between the log-likelihoods for the three-regime and two.
regime models evaluated at each data point. This statistic is distributed asymptotically as

N(O,1). Thus, if both models have the same number of parameters, then at the five-percent
significance level, if this test statistic exceeds 1.96 we reject the two-regime model in favor

see that the models are non-nested, note that although the three-regime model
involves more parameters than the two-regime model, the three-regime model may be more
restrictive than the two-regime model because observations are forced to be on the supply
regime, and hence to be unaffected by the demand variables, with some non-zero
probability.
14

of the three-regime model, and vice versa if it is below -1.96. Between these critical values,
the models have statistically indistinguishable fits. However, the three-regime monopsony
model has two more parameters than the two-regime competitive model, necessitating an

upward adjustment of the lower and upper critical values by 2/(2 . n"2).
IV. Results
IV.a. Results from the Disequilibrium Endogenous Switching Models

Results for the two-regime model corresponding to the competitive model of low-

wage labor markets are reported in column (1) of Table 2. The estimated minimum wage
effect in the binding regime is -33, considerably stronger than the corresponding single-

equation estimate in Table 1. However, it is important to recognize that this effect applies
to different observations with probabilities depending on the value of the minimum wage

and other labor market variables, and that a sizable proportion of the observations may
come from the non-binding regime.15 Calculations based on the estimated model

parameters indicate that the estimated mean probability that an observation is on the
binding regime is .48. Another metric, the proportion of observations for which the
probability of being on the binding demand regime is higher than the probability of being
on the non-binding regime, shows a similar value of .46.

The two-regime model can be tested relative to two nested models, one in which all
observations lie on the binding regime, and one in which all observations lie on the non-

binding regime (the reduced form for employment). These nested models are based on the

15This is similar to what Brown (1988) calls the "fallacy of the inflated denominator," by
which he means the possibility that standard minimum wage equations convey small
minimum wage effects because many of the workers for whom they are estimated are not
affected by minimum wages.
15

exclusion restrictions discussed previously. Thus, the binding regime includes the minimum
wage variable and excludes the supply variable(s), while the non-binding regime includes all

variables except the minimum wage variable. The log-likelihoods for these alternative

models, and the number of restrictions implied, are also reported in the table. Likelihoodratio tests indicate that both nested models are rejected at less than the five-percent
level.16

Finally, we can use the estimated parameters to solve for the mean competitive wage
above which minimum wages are binding. The estimate, expressed relative to the average
wage for all workers, is .35.

Column (2) of Table 2 reports estimates of the three-regime model, adding the
supply regime implied by the monopsony model. The estimated minimum wage effect
along the binding demand regime falls to -.21, while remaining significant. The minimum

wage effect along the binding supply regime is equal to 1/y, the estimated value of which is
1.75. The other signs are as expected.17

Even if the monopsony characterization of low-wage labor markets is correct, we

would not expect a large number of observations to be classified on the supply regime with

16We also tested the restriction that the proportion of age group in population variable
could be excluded from the demand curve, by estimating the model without imposing this
restriction, in which case the parameters are still identified. The estimated coefficient
(standard error) of this variable in the demand curve was -.01 (.11).

"Partly as a specification check, we also estimated the model including the proportion
of population in the age group in the demand function, and the prime-age male unemployment rate in the supply function, in which case the parameters are still identified. The
estimated coefficient (standard error) of the population proportion variable was .06 (.11),
and that of the unemployment rate was .38 (.24). The log likelihood was 1071.5, compared
with a value of 1070.7 in the table, so the exclusion of these variables is not rejected.
16

a high probability. This turns out to be the case. The mean probability that an observation
is on the supply regime is .20, and for only one observation is the probability of being on

the supply regime higher than that of being on one of the other regimes. This is also
reflected in the mean competitive and monopsony wages implied by the estimates of the

structural parameters. At .34 and .31 respectively, these estimates indicate that the region
over which minimum wages might increase employment is relatively small. Corresponding

to these findings, the likelihood for the model restricting all observations to lie on the
supply regime is extremely low compared to the three-regime model. The two other nested
models restricting the observations to lie solely on the demand regime or solely on the nonbinding regime are also rejected at the five-percent level.

We can also assess the fit of the monopsony model relative to the competitive model

by means of the non-nested test outlined above. As the table shows, the likelihood is in
fact higher for the three-regime monopsony model than for the two-regime competitive

model. However, the Vuong test statistic (1.34), along with the critical values reported in
the table, indicate that the statistical fit of the three-regime model is not significantly better.
Nonetheless, the data clearly do not reject the restriction that, for some observations,
employment is best characterized as determined only by the minimum wage and supply
variables.'8

IV.b. Accounting for Stare and Year Effects

The results in Table 2 ignore the possibility that heterogeneity across states and years

'8As an additional specification check on the modeL we computed the implied
equilibrium competitive and monopsony wages for each observation. This is potentially
informative since nothing restricts these wages to be positive. For both the two- and threeregime models, no observations had implied equilibrium wages that were negative.
17

may bias the estimated minimum wage effects. In single-equation estimates this issue has
typically been dealt with by including fixed state and year effects in the regression equations
(e.g., Neumark and Wascher, 1992). Thus, to assess the importance of heterogeneity bias in

these results, we add a set of dummy variables for the nine Census regions to the demand

equation, and a time trend to the supply equation. We include the Census dummies in the
demand equation, since the standard argument is that demand shocks may generate a
negative correlation between employment rates and the minimum wage variable, through a
positive correlation between employment rates and wage levels (Freeman, 1982). We put

the time trend in the supply equation because we assume that this trend stems from supply
facto rs.9

The results are reported in Table 3. For the two-regime model, but not the threeregime model, the negative minimum wage effect falls by about one-half relative to the

estimate in Table 2, to -.18, but remains negative and significant. For both models, the
proportion of observations classified on the binding demand regime is well above that in

Table 2. Finally, for this specification, the Vuong test statistic indicates that the likelihood
for the three-regime monopsony model is significantly higher than that for the two-regime

19Not surprisingly, we could not get the models to converge with dummy variables for
each state or each year. Specifications with Census region dummies introduced into both
the demand and supply equation also led to convergence problems. Substituting a time
trend for year dummies seems appropriate because the estimated coefficients of year
dummies in single employment equations fit a linear trend relatively well. For the purposes
of comparison, when the standard minimum wage equation reported in Table I (Panel A)
was estimated using these region dummy variables and the time trend, the estimated
minimum wage effect (standard error) was .01 (.05). Thus, the inclusion of these variables
does at least as much as the inclusion of fixed state and year effects to reduce the negative
employment effects of minimum wages.
18

model.2°

IV.c. Variation in Minimum Wage Effects and the Probability that Minimum Wages are
Binding

The disequilibrium framework for estimating minimum wage effects emphasizes that
the employment effects of minimum wages may vary ui systematic ways depending on

whether the minimum wage is binding. This suggests that if we estimate the single
employment equation using observations with a relatively higher probability that minimum
wages are binding, we should find relatively stronger disemployrnent effects of minimum

wages. On the other hand, when we apply our multiple-regime approach to subsamples of
observations with different probabilities that minimum wages are binding, we should find

two results: the estimated probability that minimum wages are binding should reflect this

difference; and estimated minimum wage effects along the binding regime (a) should differ
less across the subsamples than do the single-equation estimates.
We carry out this experiment using subsamples with high and low probabilities that

minimum wages are binding, based on estimates of the two-regime model for the whole

sample. We restrict attention to the two-regime model, since in the estimates of the threeregime model, there were virtually no observations for which the probability that
observations were on the binding supply regime were highest.

Table 4 reports results for subsamples of observations based on whether the
estimated probability of being on the binding demand regime was greater or less than .5.
As expected, in the subsample with high probabilities that minimum wages are binding the

20For these specifications, there was one observation for which the three-regime model
implied a negative equilibrium monopsony wage.
:19

single-equation estimate of the minimum wage effect (-.56) is negative and significant. In
contrast, in the subsample with low probabilities that minimum wages are binding, this

estimate is actually positive and significant. The multiple-regime approach satisfies both of

the predictions described above. First, the two-regime estimates for each subsample
produce very different estimates of the probability that minimum wages are binding. These
estimates exceed .9 for the high probability subsample, and are less than .1 for the lowprobability subsample.2' Second, the estimated minimum wage effects for the two
subsamples on the binding regimes are much more consistent than the single-equation
estimates, as both are negative and significant.
Finally, it seems worthwhile to assess the validity of the estimated probabilities of

lying on alternative regimes. One way to do this is to compute for each state and year the
proportion of young adults paid hourly wages equal to or less than the prevailing minimum

wage. This proportion should be positively related to the probability that minimum wages

are binding. This is confirmed, with an estimated correlation of .31 between the estimated
probability from the two-regime model, and the proportion at or below the minimum.22

More generally, the estimates from the multiple-regime models can be used to

21The mean estimated probabilities of being on the binding demand regime based on the
estimates for the full sample are .80 and .21 for the two subsamples.

This exercise may also suggest the possibility of estimating the two-regime employment
model with the proportion paid at or below the minimum wage replacing the probability
that a state's minimum wage is binding. However, this approach is invalid, since it fails to
account for the employment at or below the minimum wage that would have occurred in
the absence of the minimum. This same argument explains why we cannot make any
prediction as to the magnitude of the correlation between the estimated probability that
minimum wages are binding, based on the two-regime model, and the proportion at or
below the minimum wage; in particular, it need not be near one.
20

compute minimum wage effects for alternative scenarios regarding minimum wages and

labor market conditions, which in turn may be useful in interpreting variation in single-

equation estimates of minimum wage effects across different samples. In this context, Table
5 reports the average probabilities that observations are on the binding regime and the

average elasticities of employment rates with respect to minimum wages, for each year in

our sample period and for each Census division, based on the estimates in Table 2. The
elasticity for each observation is estimated as the product of the probability of being on the
binding regime, the estimated minimum wage effect, and the ratio of the minimum wage
variable to the employment rate.
For the two-regime model, the estimated average probabilities of being on the
binding regime, shown in column (2), vary considerably over both years and regions, ranging

from .05 to .87. Reflecting this variation, the average elasticities shown in column (3) also
vary considerably, ranging from -.01 to -.24. The estimated minimum wage elasticities rise

(in absolute value) as the federal minimum wage increases (relative to the mean wage)
through 1982, and then fall as the federal minimum wage declines in real terms over the
remainder of the 1980s. The variation in the elasticities across regions also corresponds to
variation in the coverage-adjusted relative minimum wage (to which it is related by

construction). In the low-wage East South Central, West South Central, and South Atlantic
states the relative minimum wage variable is high, and the estimated minimum wage
elasticity ranges from -.15 to -.24. In contrast, in the high-wage Pacific region the relative
minimum wage variable is lowest, and the estimated minimum wage elasticity is only -.05.

These calculations, coupled with the single-equation estimates in Table 4 for the subsamples
of observations with high and low probabilities of binding minimum wages, suggest that
21

estimated minimum wage effects are quite sensitive to the probability that minimum wages
are binding.

As a final exercise, the last two columns of Table 5 report results based on the threeregime monopsony model. Column (4) reports the estimated probabilities that observations
are on the binding demand regime, along which minimum wages are estimated to reduce

employment. These probabilities are similar to those estimated from the competitive

model. Column (5) reports the estimated probabilities of being on the regime that is unique
to the monopsony model, namely the binding supply regime along which minimum wages

are estimated to increase employment. Except for 1973, the average estimated probability
of being on the binding supply regime never exceeds the average estimated probability of

being on the binding demand regime. Nonetheless, the probabilities of being on the binding
supply regime are clearly non-negligible, and in many cases are above .2. Thus, our results
admit the possibility that some minimum wage studies produce positive effects of minimum
wages on employment because they use samples for which observations are concentrated
along the monopsony regime.
IV.d. A Non-Structural Approach
To gauge the dependence of our results on the assumed structure for the demand,

supply, and marginal cost curves, we also consider a non-structural approach that allows the
parameters of the standard minimum wage-employment equation (1) to vary depending. in

a simple way, on how likely the minimum wage is to be binding. As an analog to the tworegime competitive model, we first allow the coefficient estimates of equation (1) to take on
two distinct sets of values, one for observations for which the coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage is relatively low, and one for observations for which it is relatively high.
22

Rather than specify a priori "high' and "low" values, we use a grid search over the possible
range of the coverage-adjusted relative minimum wage, and select the 'switch point" for this
variable that maximizes the likelihood for the sample.23

Estimates in which the equations in each of the two regimes are unconstrained are

reported in the first column of Table 6. For the binding regime, which refers to those
observations with values of the coverage-adjusted relative minimum wage above the switch
point chosen by the grid search, the estimated minimum wage effect is -.4 1, more than

double that from the single-equation estimates, and is significant. For the non-binding
regime the estimated minimum wage effect is positive and significant. 58 percent of the
observations are classified as being on the binding regime, and the remaining 42 percent as
being on the non-binding regime.

In columns (2) and (3) we constrain some of the parameters in each of the regimes
in ways suggested by theory, to attempt to increase the correspondence between the theory

and the regimes chosen by the grid search procedure. First, in column (2), we constrain the
minimum wage effect to be zero in the non-binding regime (and recompute the grid search).
The chosen sample separation is the same as in column (1), with, accordingly, the same

estimated minimum wage effect in the binding regime. In column (3) we further constrain
the model to exclude the supply variable (the proportion of population) from the binding
regime, which is supposed to be the demand curve. Since the non-binding regime is the

For each iteration of the grid search, we define a dummy variable B,, = 1 if the
minimum wage variable was above the switch point, and 0 otherwise, and then estimate the
model

E=

(aBMW + RBB)•Bfl +

(aNBMWI, +

23

RB)(1 - B)

reduced form for employment, it should include both demand and supply variables, so no

further constraints are imposed on this regime. The estimates are again little changed with
this additional restriction. The likelihood-ratio tests of any of the two-regime models in

Table 6 relative to the constrained one-regime model in Table I lead to rejection of the
latter.

The two-regime estimates from the non-structural approach correspond to those from

the structural approach along a number of dimensions. First, the classification of
observations on the binding vs. the non-binding regimes is similar, with the non-structural

approach assigning .58 of the observations to the binding regime (for all three models in
Table 6), while the structural estimates imply that the probability of being on the binding
regime exceeds one-half for .46 of the observations. Second, the estimated switch point for

all three models in Table 6 is .34. This is close to the mean equilibrium competitive wage
of .35 implied by the structural estimates in Table 2. Finally, the parameter estimates for
the binding regime from the non-structural approach should correspond to the labor demand
curve, and hence can be compared directly to the estimated parameters of the demand

curve from the structural approach. These parameter estimates are quite close, as can be
seen from comparing the estimated coefficients of the minimum wage variable and the

unemployment rate in the top panel of column (3) of Table 6 with the demand curve
estimates in colunm (I) of Table 2. Together, these similarities boost our confidence in the
structural approach.

Next, we extend the non-structural approach to three regimes, corresponding to the
monopsony model, by allowing two switch points for the coverage-adjusted relative

minimum wage. Results for unconstrained equations are reported in the first column of
24

Table 7. As the monopsony model would lead us to expect, there are positive minimum
wage effects in the middle regime, on which 39 percent of the observations are classified.

As in the two-regime model, 58 percent of the observations are classified on the binding
regime above the higher switch point (i.e., the demand curve), so the estimated minimum

wage effect for this region is again -.41. Finally, only three percent of the observations are
classified on the non-binding regime (below the lower switch point); the estimated minimum
wage effect for this regime is positive but not significant.

In column (2) the model is constrained so that there is no minimum wage effect in

the non-binding regime. The estimates are little changed. In column (3) the proportion of
population variable is again excluded from the regime that should correspond to the
demand curve, and the unemployment rate is excluded from the regime that should

correspond to the supply curve. This results in a substantial reduction (to .06) in the
proportion of observations classified on the supply curve. In addition, the estimated
positive minimum wage effect in this regime is now insignificant, with the standard error
rising more than ten-fold.

Again, the estimates from the non-structural approach can be compared with those

from the structural approach along a number of dimensions. First, using the column (3)
non-structural estimates, the classification of observations on the alternative regimes is

similar. The non-structural approach assigns .84 of the observations to the upper binding
regime, and .06 to the lower binding regime, while the structural estimates imply that the
probability of being on the binding demand regime is highest for .70 of the observations,
and the probability of being on the binding supply regime is highest for .001 of the
observations. Second, the estimated switch points of .31 and .30 correspond closely to the
25

mean equilibrium competitive and monopsony wages implied by the structural estimates,

reported in Table 2, of .34 and .31. Third, the parameter estimates for the upper binding
regime from the non-structural approach should correspond to the labor demand curve, and
those from the lower binding regime should correspond to the labor supply curve.
Comparing the non-structural estimates in column (3) of Table 7 with those in column (2)

of Table 2, the correspondence holds in terms of the estimated signs of all of the
parameters, and many of the estimated coefficients are quite close.
Finally, the structural and non-structural approaches can be compared with respect to
testing the monopsony vs. the competitive model. In the non-structural approach, for the
constrained model the likelihood-ratio test of the three-regime model vs. the two-regime

model (which has two fewer parameters) leads to a rejection of the two-regime model at
the ten-percent significance level, but not the five-percent level. Thus, the non-structural
approach provides a bit more support for the monopsony characterization of low-wage labor

markets than did the structural approach, although the structural approach also rejected the
competitive model in the specifications including region and year effects.

Although we have presented results from the nonstructural specification for purposes
of comparison, in our view this approach has several weaknesses as compared with the
structural approach on which the endogenous switching model is based. First, the
nonstructural approach classifies observations as unambiguously on one of the alternative
regimes, whereas the structural approach produces a probabilistic classification of being on
the alternative regimes, which captures the inherent uncertainty in classifying observations.

Second, the classification indicated by the nonstructural approach depends solely on the

value of the minimum wage variable. Although whether or not the minimum wage is
26

binding should depend only on the minimum wage relative to the market-determined wage

for affected workers in the absence of minimum wages, the latter is of course unobserved.
Therefore, factors affecting the demand for and supply of young workers are likely to
provide some information on the likelihood that the minimum wage is binding. The
structural approach incorporates this information explicitly by specifying the switching

equation in terms of the minimum wage relative to the equilibrium competitive (and
monopsony) wage, which are functions of the demand and supply determinants. Finally,
while the non-structural approach is intended to identify switch points associated with the

structural regimes in the model, we cannot rule out the possibility that it has instead
identified switch points associated with nonlinearities in the equation or outliers. The
structural approach, in contrast, explicitly specifies the "switch points" in terms of

intersections of the demand, supply, and marginal cost of labor curves.
V. Conclusions

In the competitive model of low-wage labor markets, a legislated minimum wage

below the equilibrium competitive wage should be unrelated to employment. In contrast, a
minimum wage higher than the equilibrium competitive wage should be negatively related

to employment. Like the competitive model, the monopsony model implies that there is a
region below which minimum wages are non-binding and do not affect employment, and a

region above which minimum wages trace out the labor demand curve and reduce
employment. In addition, there is a region between these two, along which minimum wages

trace out the labor supply curve, and raise employment. We therefore may learn more
about minimum wage effects by separating sample observations into these various regimes,

and estimating minimum wage effects along the appropriate regimes. This paper develops
27

and implements such an approach, using methods adapted from the market disequilibrium

literature.
We claimed at the outset that this approach has three potential advantages relative to
existing single-equation estimates: it leads to estimates of the employment effects of
minimum wages when they are binding; it yields a (probabilistic) classification of

observations based on whether or not minimum wages are binding; and it provides a test of
the monopsony characterization of low-wage labor markets. We summarize the results in

terms of each of these potential advantages.
First, the two-regime competitive model and the three-regime monopsony model
yield significant negative estimated effects of minimum wages on employment in the
binding demand regimes, under a variety of alternative specifications. Not surprisingly,
these estimated disemployment effects are generally stronger than single-equation estimates.
Second, calculations using the estimated probabilities of lying on alternative regimes

implied by the models suggest that the effects of minimum wages on employment may vary
considerably depending on the prevailing minimum wage and other labor market conditions.
This may help to explain some of the variation in estimated minimum wage effects in
recent research.
Third, estimates of the three-regime monopsony model suggest that a small fraction
of observations may lie on a supply regime along which minimum wages increase

employment. The three-regime monopsony model never fits the data worse than the tworegime competitive model, and sometimes fits the data significantly better.
Finally, the sensitivity of minimum wage effects on employment to the relative

magnitude of the minimum wage, and to other labor market conditions, implies that the
28

multiple-regime, disequilibrium approach is useful even if we simply want to predict the

employment effects of minimum wages, rather than to uncover the structural estimates of
the labor demand and supply curves. In particular, single-equation estimates may be
unreliable when the minimum wage and other labor market conditions diverge from those

prevailing in the sample from which the estimates are computed. In contrast, the
disequilibrium approach can provide a richer set of information about the effects of
minimum wages, including whether or not minimum wages are likely to be binding, how

changes in other labor market conditions influence minimum wage effects, and how
minimum wages are likely to affect employment under a variety of scenarios regarding the
minimum wage and other labor market characteristics.

29

References
Bowden, Roger J. 1978. "Specification, Estimation and Inference for Models of Markets in
Disequilibrium." international Economic Review 19(3): 711-26.
Brown, Charles. 1988. "Minimum Wage Laws: Are They Overrated?' Journal of Economic
Perspectives 2(3): 133-46.

_____ Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1982. 'The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature 20: 487-528.
Card, David. 1992a. "Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the
Federal Minimum Wage." industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1): 22-37.

_____ 1992b. "Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California,
1987-1989." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1): 38-54.
Card, David, Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1993. "An Evaluation of Recent
Evidence on the Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum Wages." NBER
Working Paper No. 4528.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1993. Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study
of the Fast Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania." NBER Working Paper No.
4509.

Currie, Janet, and Bruce Fallick. 1993. 'A Note on the New Minimum Wage Research."
NBER Working Paper No. 4348.
Freeman, Richard B. 1982. "Economic Determinants of Geographic and Individual
Variation in the Labor Market Position of Young Persons." in Richard B. Freeman and
David A. Wise, Eds., The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its Nature. Causes. and
Consequences (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 115-54.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. 'The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the
Fast-Food industry." industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1): 6-21.
Neumark, David and William Wascher. 1993. "Employment Effects of Minimum and
Subminimum Wages: Reply to Card, Katz and Krueger." Economic Activity Section Working
Paper No. 144, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.

_____ 1992. "Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum Wages: Panel Data on
State Minimum Wage Laws." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1): 55-81.
Quandt, Richard E. 1988. The Econometrics of Disequilibrium (Oxford: Basil Blackwell
Ltd.).
Rebitzer, James B. and Lowell J. Taylor. 1991. 'The Consequences of Minimum Wage
Laws: Some New Theoretical Ideas." NBER Working Paper No. 3877.
Spriggs, William. 1992. 'The Effects of Changes in the Federal Minimum Wage: Restaurant

Workers in Mississippi and North Carolina." Unpublished Paper, Economic Policy Institute,
Washington, D.C.
Stigler, George J. 1946. 'The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation." American
Economic Review 36(3): 358-65.
Taylor, Lowell J., and Taeil Kim. 1993. 'The Employment Effect in Retail Trade of

California's 1988 Minimum Wage Increase." Heinz School of Public Policy and Management
Working Paper No. 93-16.

Vuong, Quang H. 1989. 'Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and Non-Nested
Hypotheses." Econometrica 57(2): 307-34.
Wellington, Allison, J. 1991. "Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment Status of
Youths: An Update." Journal of Human Resources 26(1): 27-46.
West, E. G. and Michael McKee. 1980. "Monopsony and "Shock" Arguments for Minimum
Wages." Southern Economic Journal (January): 883-91.
Williams, Nicolas. 1993. "Regional Effects of the Minimum Wage on Teenage Employment."
Unpublished Paper, University of Cincinnati.

</ref_section>

Table 1: Estimates of Minimam Wage-Employment Equation for Young Adults (16-24)

Panel A. Minimum Wage-Employment Equation Estimates
-.14

Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage

(.05)

Proportion of population
in age group

(.08)

Prime-age male
unemployment rate

-.11

-1.17
(.08)

1049.4

Log-likelihood

Panel B. Esti'naied Minimum Wage Coefficients from Alternative Specifications
Including fixed state and
year effects

-.11

Substituting lagged minimum wage
variable for contemporaneous
variable

-.21

(.07)

(.05)

There are 751 observations covering the period 1977-1989 for all states, and 1973-1989 for 22 states
identified in the CPS beginning in 1973, except in the specification using the lagged minimum wage variable.

Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Estimated intercepts arc not reported. The ratio of the means
of the employment rate to the minimum wage variable, which yields the employment elasticity when
multiplied by the minimum wage coefficient, is .64.

Table 2: Estimates of Two- and Three-Regime Disequilibrium Models for Young Adults (16-24)
Two Regimes
(1)

Labor demand curve:
Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage (a)
Prime-age male
unemployment rate

Intercept (l3)

(2)

-33

-.21

(.13)

(.08)

-1.28

(B)

Three Regimes

(.12)

-1.22

(.09)

.74

.69

(.06)

(.03)

.71

(24)

.57
(.12)

-.54

-.63

(.19)

(.17)

.16
(.15)

(.08)

Inverse labor supply curve:

Employment rate (y)
Proporlion of population
in age group (ó)
Intercept

(à)

00

.06
(.005)

(.004)
.03
0

(.01)

.11

.06

(.004)
.05
(.01)
.05
(.01)
04
(.01)

-.0003

-.001

(.001)

(.005)
-.001

(.001)
.001

.002

(.001)

(.001)

1065.6

1070.7

Log-likelihood (# restrictions)
All observations on demand regime

10483 (7)

All observations on non-binding regime

...
1045.9 (7)

1048.5 (9)
951.8 (9)
1045.9 (9)

Log-likelihood

All observations on supply regime

Mean probability on demand regime
Mean probability on supply regime
Proportion with probability on
demand regime highest
Proportion with probability on
supply regime highest

Equilibrium competitive wage
implied by structural estimates
Equilibrium monopsony wage
implied by structural estimates
Vuong Lest statistic vs. two-regime model
(lower and upper 591 critical values)

.48
...
.46

.55
.20
.70

.001

35
(.01)
...

.34
(.01)
.31

(.01)
1.34

(1.43,2.49)

Table 2 (continued)

There are 751 observations covering the period 1977-1989 for all states, and 1973-1989 for 22 slates identified in the CPS
beginning in 1973. Standard errors are reporied in parentheses. Probabilities of observations lying on alternative regimes
are based on unconditional probabilities. Implied equilibrium competitive and monopsony wages are computed at sample
means. Standard errors are computed by linearizing the expression for the equilibrium wage, treating the means as fixed,
and applying the estimated variances and covariances of the parameters. The critical values for the Vuong test statistic arc
not centered around zero because they have been adjusted for the greater number of parameters in the three-regime model.

Table 3: Estimates of Two- and Three-Regime Disequilibrium Models,
Including Regional Demand Dummy Variables and Supply Time Trend
Three Regimes
(2)

Two Regimes
(1)
Labor demand curve:
Covcragc-adjustcd rclative
minimum wage (a)
Prime-age male

unemployment rate (3)
Intercept (B0)

Inverse labor supnlv curve:
Employment rate

-18

-.20

(.06)

(.06)
-1.27

-1.12

(.08)

(.07)
.67

.69

(.02)

(.02)
1.02

.95

(.22)

(.12)
Proportion of population
in age group

()

Intercept (à)

00

05

34

(24)

(.36)

.21

.04

(.06)

(.12)

.05

at0

.08
(.01)

0D1

.05
(.01)

a,
a,'

.003

(.0005)

.05

(.002)

(.002)

0S1

.05
(.01)
.07
(.01)
.08
(.02)
.004
(.001)
-.003

(.002)

Log-likelihood
Log-likelihood (# restrictions)
All observations on demand regime
All observations on supply regime
All observations on non-binding regime
Mean probability on demand regime
Mean probability on supply regime
Proportion with probability on
demand regime highest
Proportion with probability on
supply regime highest
Vuong test statistic vs. two-regime model
(lower and upper 5% critical values)
See footnotes to Table 2 for details.

-.002
(iJOl)

-005

1220.9

1234.2

1186.6 (8)

1186.6 (8)
962.1 (17)
1211.9 (8)

..

121L9 (8)
.91
.
95

(.001)

80
.15
.91

.06

2.32
(-1.61,2.31)

Table 4: Estimates of Single-Equation and Two-Regime Models for Observations with High and Low
Probabilities that Minimum Wages are Binding, Based on Estimates in Table 2

Pbinding)>.5 (N=343

P(bindin2.5 (N=4438)

(1)

(2)

Single equation:
Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage
Log-likelihood

-56

.34

(.12)

(.12)

472.7

593.1

Two regimes:
Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage (a)
Log-likelihood

Mean probability on demand regime
Proportion with probability on
demand regime highest

-.52

(.12)
473.0
.97
.99

(.08)
601.2
.09
.00

Sec footnotes to Table 2 for details. The covariance terms For the errors were restricted to zero. Without
this restriction the models did not converge for the two subsamples.

Table 5: Estimated Elasticities oF Employment Rate with Respect to Minimum Wagc,
Based on Results in Table 2

Avg. cov..adj.

rclaiive
minimum
(1)
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

.31

35
.34

.35
.35
.38
.314
.314

1981

.314

1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989

.35
.34
.33
.35
.34
.34
.33
.32

Competitive Model
CFwo Regimesl
Avg. prob.Avg.
wcightcd
pith. on
elasticity
binding regime
(3)
(2)

Monopsony Model
(Three Regimes)
Avg. pith.
Avg. prob.
on binding
on binding
demand regime
supDty regime
(4)
(5)
.10
.36
.49

.114

.51
.41

.22

.57
.59
.70
.72
.65
.65

.20

.05
.27
.44
.44
.35
.50
.52
.65
.67
.61
.62

-.01

.40
.55

-.09
-.12

32

-.11

.45

56
50

29

-.10
-.08
-.06

.61

-.13

37
30

-.08
-.10

.38

-.06

-.10
-.10
-.08
-.12

-.12
-.15
-.16
-.14
-.14

.414

.64
.62

.43

.25
.22
.16
.21

.17
.15
.17
.17

22
.19

20
22
.23
.25

Census Geographic
Division (1977-1989)

New England
Middle Atlantic
East North Central

.37
.33

West North Central

.35
.34

.40

-.08

35

-.07

.69
.46
.58
.50
.44

.31
.39

.26

-.05

34

.87

-24

.90

.37

.63

.69

.07
.18

.36

39

-.15
-.15

.66

.16

Mountain
Pacific
East South Central
West South Central
South Atlantic

34

.16

22
22
25
25
23

Nunsbcrs reported in columns (2) and (3) are based on average effects for the availablc observations based on probabilities
and elasticities evaluated at the state-by-year level. The increased coverage-adjusted relative minimum wage in 1985 is
partly attributable to a rise in coverage owing to a court ruling that state and local government workers were subject to the
minimum wage. For some of the earlier years, minimum wage level is for workers previously covered under the ELSA,
whereas ncwly covered workers came in at lower minimum wages. All means are unweighted.

Table 6: Estimates of Two-Regime Model, Single Switch Point, Grid Search Results

(1)

(2)

Binding regime:
Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage

-.41

-.41

(.10)

(.10)

Proportion of population
in age group

.07
(.11)

(.11)

Prime-age male

unemployment rate

-1.34

.07

-1.34

(3)
-.40
(.10)

0.0

-135

(.11)

(.11)

(.11)

Proportion of observations

38

.58

.58

Non-binding regime:
Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage

(.15)

.35

0.0

0.0

Proportion of population
in age group

-.33

-.33

-33

(.11)

(.11)

(.11)

Prime-age male
unemployment rate

-.88

(.12)

-.93
(.11)

(.11)

Proportion of observations

.42

.42

.42

Estimated switch point

34

34

34

Log-likelihood

1064.0

1061.4

10613

-.93

Standard errors are reported in parentheses. For each column, the switch point was selected from a grid
search over the range of the ratio of the coverage-adjusted minimum wage to the mean wage (.24-48), in
steps of .01. Estimated intercepts are not reported. See Table 2 for additional details.

Table 7: Estimates of Three-Regime Model, Two Switch Points, Grid Search Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

Binding regime above
second switch point:
Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage

Proportion of population

-.41

-.31

(.10)

(.10)

(.07)

.07

.07
(.11)

0.0

(.11)

in age group
Prime-age male
uncmployment

-.41

rate

-1.34
(.11)

-1.34

-1.26

(.11)

(.09)
.84

Proportion of observations

.58

.58

Binding regime below
second switch point
above first switch point:
Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage

.53
(.23)

33

1.14

(.23)

(3.07)

Proportion of population
in age group

-.49

-.49

-1.11

(.13)

(.13)

(.33)

Prime-age male
unemployment rate

-.99

-.99
(.13)

0.0

(.13)

Proportion of observations

39

.39

Non-binding regime:
Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage

(.88)

Proportion of population
in age group

.16

.14

.01

(.28)

(.27)

(.21)

Prime-age male
unemployment rate

-.55
(.29)

-.56

-.85

(29)

(21)

Proportion of observations

.03

.03

.10

Estimated switch points
Log-likelihood

28,.34
10683

28,.34

30,31

1068.2

1064.0

.65

0.0

.06

0.0

Standard errors are reported in parentheses. For each column, the switch points were selected from a grid

search over the range oF the lagged ratio of the coverage-adjusted minimum wage to the mean wage (.24.48), in steps of .01, with the second switch point constrained to be equal to or greater than the first.
Estimated intercepts are not reported. See Table 2 br additional details.

