                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE ROLE OF EXCLUSWE
                             TERRITORIES IN PRODUCERS'
                                    COMPEl. IUON




                                         Patrick Rey
                                        Joseph Stiglitz




                                  Working Paper No, 4618




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January, 1994

We would like to thank Jean Tirole for his remarks on an earlier draft and Ken Judd, Bruno
Jullien, Steve Salop and an anonymous referee for useful comments. Comments from
partici;.iits to seminars at MiT, Paris and Princeton arc also gratefully acknowledged. Patrick
Rey acknowledges financial support from NATO and CNET. Joseph Stiglitz acknowledges
financial support from the National Science Foundation, the Hoover Institution and the Olin
Foundation. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Industrial Organization. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4618
                                                                                 January 1994

                                 THE ROLE OF EXCLUSWE
                               TERRITORIES IN PRODUCERS'
                                      COMPETrTION


                                           ABSTRACT

       The central objective of this paper is to show how vertical restraints, which affect intra-
brand competition, can and will be used as an effective mechanism for reducing inter-brand
competition and increasing producer profits.
       We show how exclusive territories alter the perceived demand curve, making each
producer believe he faces a less elastic demand curve, thereby inducing an increase of the
equilibrium price. The use of exclusive territories may increase producers' profits, even if the
producers cannot charge franchise fees, and so cannot recapture, from the retailers, the monopoly
rents they earn from their exclusive territory: we show that "double marginalization" effects can
be overcome by the strategic effect on producers' competition.
       We provide a model in which we can clearly specify the full range of feasible contracts
between producers and retailers, and show that it is always a dominant strategy for firms to use
exclusive territories (so that exclusive territories are used in equilibrium) and that the best
situation from the producers' viewpoint may or may not entail franchise fees. In all cases,
exclusive territories hurt consumer surplus and reduce total welfare, which yields a different light
on vertical restraints from a competition policy perspective.


Patrick Rey                                                         Joseph E. Stiglitz
Centre de Recherche en Economie et Statistique                      Department of Economics
Laboratoire d'Econornie Industrielle                                Stanford University
242, Avenue Marx-Dormoy                                             Stanfoni, CA 94305-6072
92120 Montrouge, Paris                                              and NBER
FRANCE
             THE ROLE OF EXCLUSIVE TERRITORIES

                   IN PRODUCERS' COMPEITHON


        While vertical restraints have traditionally been viewed with some
suspicion—as trade practices which serve to restrain trade--in recent years
they have been looked upon with considerably greater favor. Economists,
using the two polar models of perfect competition and pure monopoly, have
argued that such restraints will be employed if and only if they provide a
more efficient way in which producers can distribute their goods to
consumers. For instance, a producer might give a distributor the exclusive
right to sell his product within a territory (a vertical restraint called
exclusive territories) because retailers provide "public goods" such as
product information, and with many retailers within a territory, there will
be an undersupply of such public goods—from the perspective of the firm.
This has led to the view that these vertical restraints should be per se legal.'


        These analyses are flawed in two critical ways. First, they ignore
one of the central reasons that firms do not distribute goods themselves:
retailers and wholesalers have specialized information. This gives rise to
problems of adverse selection and moral hazard, and in this context,
contracts which maximize the profits of the producer do not necessarily
maximize the welfare of the consumer2. Secondly, in most markets there


    'See Posner [19811.

    2Private and social objectives may in particular diverge on the level of
effort and/or insurance. See for instance respectively Rey-Tirole [1 986b],
and Mathewson-Winter [1983, 1984], Caillaud-Rey [1987], for an analysis
of adverse selection and moral hazard problems; Rey-Tirole [1986a1
provides an introduction to this literature on vertical control.
is some competition among producers (so that the pure monopoly model is
not relevant), but not perfect competition: firms do not face a horizontal
demand curve for their products. In imperfectly competitive environments,
a central concern of firms is to decrease the effectiveness of (inter-brand)
competition—an issue which simply does not arise in either of the polar
models, where the degree of inter-brand competition is assumed given.3
 The central objective of this paper is to show how vertical restraints,
which affect intra-brand competition, can and will be used as an effective
mechanism for reducing inter-brand competition and increasing producer
profits.
           We show how exclusive territories alter the perceived demand
curve, making each producer believe they face a less elastic demand curve,
thereby inducing an increase of the equilibrium price. The use of exclusive
territories may increase producers' profits, even if the producers cannot
charge franchise fees, and so cannot recapture, from the retailers, the
monopoly rents they earn from their exclusive territory: we show that
"double marginalization" effects can be overcome by the strategic effect on
producers' competition.4


    3Throughout the paper, interbrand competition or producers'
competition will refer to competition between firms producing substitute
goods, while intrabrand competition will refer to (retail) competition
between the distributors of a given good.

     4Earlier proponents of the legalization of exclusive territories have
argued that there must be significant public good aspects of distribution to
justify a producer granting an exclusive territory, since in the absence of
such efficiency benefits, producers are harmed by "double marginalization"-
-because retailers, with limited competition, will charge a greater mark-up
over the wholesale price, meaning that the producer is hurt by the reduced
sales. Our analysis clearly provides a less optimistic explanation.
                                     2
        With franchise fees, the double marginalization problem does not
impose any loss on the producers' profits; then not only are profits
increased, but they can be increased even more by adding successive layers
to the distribution chain.
        We provide here a model in which we can clearly specify the full
range of feasible contracts between producers and retailers. In this context,
it will be a dominant strategy for firms to have exclusive territories with
franchise fees, even though, under certain conditions, profits are higher
without franchise fees than with. This result itself may seem somewhat
surprising: producers seem paradoxically better off if they cannot capture
the rents that their distributors earn, simply as a result of the grant of an
exclusive territory. This comes from the fact that if a producer cannot use
a franchise, rivals will follow a different pricing strategy, and the
equilibrium prices will, accordingly, differ; they may be higher without
franchise fees than with, and this may offset the loss of profits from the
failure to capture the distributors' rents.
        The paper is divided into three parts. In the first, we show how the
presence of exclusive territories can serve to facilitate collusion among a
fixed set of producers raising market price and joint profits. The fact that
exclusive territories increase the joint profits of the firms in the industry
does not imply, of course, that in the absence of tacit or explicit collusion,
exclusive territories will characterize market equilibrium. Part II tackles
this issue. We conclude in Part III with some general remarks concerning
methodology and policy.


I.       Exclusive Territories as a Device to Reduce Competition
         We consider a model where manufacturers produce imperfect


                                       3
substitutes and distribute them via retail networks. We compare two
situations. In the first, there is perfect competition among retailers. In the
second situation, each retailer has an exclusive territory. This obviously
reduces intra-brand competition, but may also reduce inter-brand
competition as well.
        Let us describe the model. There are two manufacturers, each
producing a single good at the same constant marginal cost c. The two
products are assumed to be imperfect substitutes. These manufacturers
distribute their products via retailers who have no retail costs. The final
demand for good i depends on retail prices q1 and q and is given by:
D'(q1,q).
        We initially formalize the competition as a two-stage game: in the
first stage, given the vertical arrangements which have previously agreed
upon, manufacturers simultaneously propose contracts to their retailers (later
on, the choice of the vertical arrangements will itself be considered as
endogenous); in the second stage the retailers choose their retail prices. We
characterize the (subgame) perfect equilibria of this two-stage game.
        Of course, the players' strategies, and particularly the contracts
proposed by the producers, depend on the information structure of the
game. We will adopt the following assumptions:
        i)      costs and demand functions are common knowledge;
retailers observe all contracts signed by each producer.
        ii)     producers observe the quantity bought by each retailer; they
do not observe either the quantities sold by the retailers nor their profits or
the prices they charge.
        iii)    producers serve many markets, between which transportation
costs are negligible.


                                      4
        iv)     consumers have no search cost; they buy a product at the
lowest possible price within the market in which they reside.
        These assumptions are quite natural. The asymmetry in information
between retailers and producers seems particularly realistic; the difficulties
of detecting hidden subsidies is one way of justifying, for instance, the
assumption that the "true" retail prices are not observable by producers (see
Rey-Tirole [1986b] for an extensive discussion of this assumption).
        From 1), all retailers play the game with complete information.
Assumption ii) determines the set of admissible contracts between a
producer and its retailers: they can only be based on the quantity bought by
the retailers, and thus correspond to (possibly non-linear) tariff schedules.
Assumption iii) rules out non-constant marginal prices, because of retailers'
arbitrage. Whether the producers observe or do not observe who sells their
products, they can impose franchise fees on the retailers. We will consider
the two possible situations (with or without franchise fees).
       These informational assumptions complete the description of the
game: to recap, in the first stage, producers simultaneously choose their
wholesale prices, Pi and P2 (plus, where relevant, the franchise fee); in the
second stage, the retailers observe both wholesale prices (and fees if any)
 and choose their retail prices simultaneously.
         Letting -(p,q1,q) denote the retail (variable) profits for product
 i (i= 1,2):      (qj-pjD(q1,q), we will assume the following throughout
 the paper:


         - for i= 1,2, ij(p,q1,q) is twice continuously differentiable w.r.t.
 (p1,q1,q) and single-peaked w.r.t. q1: the reaction function q(p1,qj) (j = 1,2,
 j i) is thus continuously differentiable and characterized by the first-order

                                        5
condition: ôr(p1,q1,q) I 8q1 = 0;

       - products are substitutes: aDVaq 0 and ô1Y/öq 0 (i,j =1,2,



         demand functions are symmetric:



                    " PiPz R÷, D'(p1,p2) = D2(p,p1)                      (1.1)


        In the absence of any vertical restriction, pure intra-brand price
competition leads the retailers to charge zero mark-ups; given the wholesale
prices p and P2' in the second stage the retail prices will be: q1 Pi and
q2=p2. (This in turn implies that franchise fees, even if available, must be
equal to zero). In other words, the retail price of a product is completely
responsive to any change of the corresponding wholesale price. At the first
stage, the anticipated producer i's profit is therefore just a function of
wholesale prices:


                    ir(p1,p2) = (p1-c)D'(p1,p2)        i=   1,2.         (1.2)


        The (symmetric) equilibrium, if it exists, is thus characterized by the
first-order condition (where the superscript c refers to retail "competition"):


                    Pt =   P2
                                =   PC:   (pC_c)/pC = lkj(pC,pc)         (1.3)


where e denotes the direct price elasticity of demand:



                                            6
                  1(q1,q2) — -ô1ogD1(q1,q)/Ologq1.                            (1.4)


        This situation is formally identical to the situation where producers
fix the consumers' price and therefore compete directly against each other:
in both cases, the equilibrium mark-up is inversely proportional to the
(direct) elasticity of the final demand, €.
        As a benchmark, let us denote by qm the monopoly price, which
maximizes total (joint) profits. Assuming that the total profit function is
single-peaked, this profit is maximized for:


                  q1 =           = qm: (qm-c)/qm = 1IE(qm),                   (1.5)


where E is the elasticity of the "big DD curve", in the familiar terminology
of Chamberlinian monopolistic competition theory—the demand curve
generated by a simultaneous decrease in both prices--i.e., E(q)          1(q,q) +
2(q,q), where 2 denotes the cross price elasticity of demand:


                   2(q1,q2) = -slog D1(q1,q)      / ölog q2.                  (1.6)




        The price associated with competitive retailers is below                the

monopoly price    (2   <   0),   and the more the two goods   are   substitutes, the
bigger is the gap between these two prices. We now show that vertical
restrictions can be used to fill this gap. We suppose that at the beginning
of the game, producers have assigned (symmetric) exclusive territories to
their retailers, so that each retailer has a monopoly position over some fixed




                                          7
fraction of the final demand for his product.5 These territorial agreements
are supposed to be common knowledge.
        Given the producers' prices p1 and P2' at the second stage the
equilibrium retail prices, (q(j1,pJ)12, are functions of the two producers
prices and characterized by:


                     (q =   qt(p1,qP),   i,j=1,2 and                       (1.7)


        Note that franchise fees would alter the retailers' decisions about
whether to distribute a product, but not these response functions, provided
that the retailers agree to sell the product. Also, from the symmetry of the
demand functions, these response functions are symmetric, too:


                    V P1'l)2   R., q(p1,p2) =     q2(p2,P1)                (1.8)


1.1     Exclusive territories without franchise fees
        If franchise fees are not available, the introduction of exclusive
territories generates double marginalization problems and leads to higher
retail prices; it thus hurts consumers and, since prices were already above
marginal cost in the absence of exclusive territories, total welfare is
decreased. The producers may however benefit from the introduction of


    5Firms sometimes allow several retailers within geographical territory,
but one may be restricted to the set of customers that it can approach, e.g.
there may be one department store, one firm that may receive mail orders,
one that may engage in door to door solicitations, etc.
        Note that assigning exclusive territories supposes that producers can
observe which consumers are served by a retailer, but does not exclude the
possibility of arbitrage from retailers, so that as before only linear tariffs are
available.

                                         8
exclusive territories, if it tends to increase the prices they receive.
          In the first stage, producer i's profit is now:


               p,p2) = (p1 c)D(q         1,p2),q(p1,p,J), i =   1,2.       (1.9)


          In equilibrium, with Pi= P2 =pe and q1 = q2 = qC (e standing for
"exclusive territories"), first-order conditions take the simple form:


                               (pe)/pe   = 1I_E(pc),                      (1.10)


where:


          (p)      m1(p,p)e1(q, + m2(p,p)e2(q,q), with q=q(p,p), (1.11)



          m1(p1,p2)     alog   q(,p1,p2)IOlog Pi'                         (1.12)

the   own elasticity of retail price response to a change in producer's price,


          m(p1,p2) — ôlog q(,p1,p2)/ôlog P2'                              (1.13)

the cross elasticity of retail price response to a change in (the other)
producer's price.
       The equilibrium mark-up thus is altered from the standard one by
two effects:
          - First, the direct effect of a price increase on the reduction in
demand is altered by the transmission channel       between the wholesale price

and the retail price. Normally, we might expect that competitive pressures
result in the elasticity m1 being positive but less than one: retail firms that
find that their costs have increased, while their competitors' costs have not

                                         9
changed, do not simply pass on the cost increase with the usual mark-up,
but rather absorb some of the cost increase themselves.
         - Secondly,   there is an indirect effect: if retail prices are strategic
complements, we would expect in2 to be positive: the rival's retailers, now
facing a higher price, find it optimal to increase their prices, which tends
to reduce the producer's perceived loss in sales.
         More precisely, we can state:


Lemma 1:         If the retail price equilibrium is stable,6 then:
                           vpR,m1(p,p) 11m2(p,p)II.
         If, moreover, the retail prices are strategic complements,7 then:
                           v p R, 0 m2(p,p) m1,p).
         If, moreover, the demand elasticity       does not decrease when both
retail prices increase at the same rate, i.e. if E(q), defined by (q) —
does   not decrease with q, then:
                           VpR÷,m1(p,p) 1.

         Proof: See Appendix.


         When the conditions of Lemma 1 are satisfied, the two effects
described above tend to decrease the elasticity perceived by the producers.
The assumptions are quite reasonable. The last one in particular states


    6We will say that the retail price equilibrium is stable if for any pair of
wholesale prices (Pj,P2) and any retail price q, the sequence(q)
defined by q=q and q1 = q71,(,p,q)) converges towards q(p1,p2).
    7That is, an increase in one retailer's price gives the other retailer
 incentives to increase their own price (see Bulow et al. [1985]).

                                         10
roughly that when prices are "high", the demand for the good responds
more drastically to an increase of 1% in its price; this assumption will in
particular be satisfied if second-order derivatives of the demand are not too
large in absolute value.8 Under this assumption, however, another indirect
effect tends to increase the elasticity of the demand perceived by the
producers: the elasticity e has to be evaluated not at producers' prices, but
at retail prices, which are higher. We can nonetheless establish:


Proposition I. i)       If the retail equilibrium is stable, then qe > qC
                ii)     If moreover producers' profit functions are single-
peaked w.r.t. their own prices, then pC > pC       qC   so   long as m77+m
<.      In particular, pC > pC when:
                         a)      demand functions are linear with respect to
                         prices (by continuity, this remains valid if second-
                         order derivatives are not too large, since the
                         characterization of the equilibrium prices do not
                         involve higher-order derivatives),
or:                      b)      the retail prices are strategic complements,
                         €(q) does not decrease with q, and the goods are
                         close substitute,
or:                      c)      the retail prices are strategic complements,
                         e(ci) decreases with q, and for any p, m1(p,p) is
                         lower than 1;



    8More precisely, the assumption is satisfied if the demand for one good
is not too convex with respect to the price of this good and/or if an increase
of one price does not greatly increase the slope of the demand for the other
good.
                                       11
Proof:                (i)     Clearly, wholesale prices are always higher than the
unit cost c (choosing p < c is a strictly dominated strategy, and increasing
p slightly above c generates positive profits as long as the market is viable,
i.e. as long as D'(c,c) is positive). The conclusion follows from
m1+m2 > 0 (Lemma 1), using the fact that qe = q(pe,pe) and
qC = q(c,c).
                      (ii)    If producers' profit functions are single-peaked, the
above first-order conditions characterize the equilibrium.
                      (ha)    If demand is linear, computations show pC >      qC•

The analysis of the linear model is presented in the Appendix.
                      (iib)   If e(q) increases with q, then a sufficient condition
for pe >   pC   is:


                                      (p) < dsp)                            (1.14)


         To show that (1.14) is a sufficient condition, suppose pe <            pC•

Using the monotonicity of e and first-order conditions (1.3) and (1.10), we
have:


                                (pC) < (pC)     < (ps),                     (1.15)


in contradiction with (1.14). It remains to study when condition (1.14) is
satisfied. Under the conditions of Lemma 1, for any p. m1(p,p)1(p,p) +
m2(p,p)2(p,p) is lower than                     It thus remains to check that the
elasticities do not vary too much when jumping from p to q(p,p). This is
likely to be the case when the goods are close substitutes, since then retail
prices are close to wholesale prices. In the Appendix, we derive analytic

                                           12
expressions for (p) and show that it is indeed lower than (p) when the
goods are close substitutes, i.e. when      is high.
                (lic) If retail prices are strategic complements, m2 > 0;
if moreover m1 < 1 and €(q) decreases with q, then:


                (pe_c)/pe = 1/(m11(qe,qe)+m2(qe,qe))                     (1.17)
                           > l/(qe)
                                    1/(pe)
                                                                             N

        The above proposition stresses that exclusive territories are an
effective device for raising not only retail prices, but also equilibrium
wholesale prices, provided that the demand elasticity does not increase too
much when both prices increase, or that the second-order demand
derivatives are not too large in absolute value, or that the two goods are
close substitutes. The intuition is simple. If direct collusion is not possible,
a producer would like their rival to match price increases, so that as they
increase their own price, the rival does not get any price advantage. In
general, it will not be in the self interest of the rival to do this. In the
standard Bertrand-Nash equilibrium, a producer considers the consequences
of changing their price assuming their rival does not alter their own price.
At the equilibrium, each producer charges the same price, but would like
a coordinated price increase. Here, as in the usual Nash equilibrium, the
rival producer does not change its price, but this implies that the rival's
retailers will. In other words, by restructuring the competitive interactions
between retailers, one obtains a situation where indeed one's rivals
(retailers) increase their prices when one producer (and his retailers)

                                       13
increase their prices. This leads to a lower perceived elasticity of demand,
even though demand itself is lower, and hence to higher prices.
        This increase in equilibrium prices does not assure that profits are
higher, since though margins are higher, double marginalization means that
sales are lower. (Also, there may be some overshooting: prices could rise
above monopoly prices—see the linear example in the Appendix.) It is easy
to see, however, that if   is large, exclusive territories are likely to increase

profits since then, producers' prices are higher and double marginalization
problems are small. Thus it is precisely in cases where the differentiated
products are close substitutes that exclusive territories may be effective.9
        In other circumstances exclusive territories can clearly decrease the
producers' profits. If, for instance, the demand is multiplicatively separable
in the two prices (i.e. D'(q1,q)=D(q1)d(q)), an increase in one producer's
price does not induce an increase in the price of the other good (n=O),
and thus double marginalization problems are likely to dominate. In the
limiting case of constant elasticity (D(q)q), equilibrium wholesale prices
are the same with and without exclusive territories, but retail prices are
higher and sales are lower in the former case: exclusive territories thus
work in that case against the interests of the consumers and of the


    91f the demand is linear, producers' profits are higher with exclusive
territories if the goods are close substitutes, and they are higher with
competitive retailers if they are only imperfect substitutes. See, for
instance, McGuire-Staelin [1983], which analyzes the related role of
intermediaries in a linear-demand model, and the discussion of the linear
case in the Appendix.
    In one recent case, exclusive territories employed by two major beer
producers were claimed to be restraints on trade; the above line of
reasoning stresses that the defense claim that the market was competitive,
because each beer had close substitutes, is clearly not depositive.

                                       14
producers.
        Alternative organizations of the retail sector have, of course,
different implications both for the magnitude of retail margins and for the
magnitude of rivals' responses to price increases (and hence the perceived
elasticity of demand). In a previous version, we have studied the impact of
the design of exclusive territories in a spatial differentiation model with
linear demands. We compared three situations:           competitive retailers
(retailers face strong intra-brand competition for each product), brand
exclusive retailers (each retail outlet sells only one brand and for each brand
there is only one outlet in a given territory) and common exclusive retailers
(each outlet sells both brands and for each product there is still only one
outlet in any given territory). As expected, the elasticity of the producers'
perceived demand is lower with brand retailers than with competitive
retailers. It is moreover shown that this elasticity is lower with brand
exclusive retailers than with common exclusive retailers (a common retailer
realizes that increases in sales from lowering the price of one brand are
partly at the expense of reduced sales of other brands), and that double
marginalization may be higher in the latter case (because of the lower level
of competition). Hence the producers unambiguously prefer some
competition among retailers (brand exclusive retailers) to no competition
 (common exclusive retailers), but they prefer the limited competition
 afforded by exclusive territories to perfect competition.


 1.2     Exclusive territories and franchise fees
        We show that when producers can require franchise fees, in most
 plausible cases they are better off with exclusive territories: they do not
 lose profits as a result of double marginalization and, so long as retailers'


                                       15
prices tend to respond positively to each other (i.e., if retail prices are
strategic complements), perceived elasticities of demand are lower and
equilibrium prices are higher.
        Anticipating the retail price equilibrium, the maximal sum of
franchise fees received by producer i, F, is given by:


             F(p1 ,p2) = (q(p1,pJ-p1)D1(q(p1 ,p2),q(p1 ,P2))           (1.18)


        Producer i's profits are thus now given by:


        ;(p ,p2) = (q(j1,p)-c)D'(q(p1 ,p2),q(p1 ,p2)).                 (1.19)


        Remember that since the franchise fee should be viewed as a fixed
cost, it has no effect on the retailer equilibrium, and hence on the price
functions q[(p1,p,J.
        First-order conditions yield in equilibrium, with Pi =p2=pt and
q1 =q2=q (the superscript f referring to the use of franchise fees):


        (q-c)/q = 1I[1(q,q1) +                                         (1.20)


        It therefore follows that:


Proposition 2: If producers' profit functions are single-peaked, then under
the conditions of Lemma 1: qC < qf•
        If moreover E(q) does not decrease w.r.t. q, then: q° < qf < qm•
        If moreover i(a) —       w1(q,q)+i-2(q,q) is concave w.r.t. q, then
profits are higher with exclusive territories and franchise fees than with


                                      16
competitive retailing.


Proof: (i)     If the retail equilibrium is stable and retail prices are
strategic complements, then from Lemma 1: 0 < m2 < m1. If producers'
profit functions are single-peaked, first-order conditions (1.20) characterize
the equilibrium wholesale prices, and we thus have:


         lfE(q15           =       1/[€1(q,q+E2(q,q]                   (1.21)
                           >       1/[e1(q,q) +

                           =       (q-c)/q
                           >       1k1(q,q1')
                           =       1Ie(q)


         If (q) does not decrease w.r.t. q, then the last above inequality
implies qC <   qf•   If this was not the case, one would have:
                   (q-c)/q >   1/(q)> 1IE(qc) = (qc)/qc,
a   contradiction. Similarly, it can be shown that the first inequality in
(1.21), together with the monotonicity of E(q), implies qf <     qm.

                                                                           a
         The same argument can be used to establish that profits are
increased with successive layers of distribution, provided that the
assumptions on the strategic complementarity of prices and on the demand
elasticity are preserved at successive levels. That is, producers' profits can
again be increased if producers do not deliver the goods directly to retailers,
but sell the good to wholesalers (under an exclusive contract), who then sell
to retailers (under exclusive contracts). In the limit, as the number of
 distribution layers is increased, profits may approach those of the collusive


                                        17
outcome (ignoring, of course, the costs associated with operating each of
these distribution layers); this is the case, for instance, for linear demand
functions.10
        This analysis again shows that vertical restraints may be used in
order to decrease effective competition among producers. Retailers play the
role of "black boxes" which serve as "response machines" and enable the
producers to act in a way which facilitates (implicit) collusion; vertical
restraints constitute a tool that may help in improving the performance of
these response machines.
        We should emphasize that in this model, in the absence of imperfect
competition at the upper level, there is no motivation for using exclusive
territories: a monopoly producer or perfectly competitive producers would
achieve the integrated optimum by dealing with competitive retailers. This
stresses the importance of the nature of competition at the producer level for
analyzing the role of vertical restraints.
        Proposition 2 also stresses that the effect on equilibrium prices is
likely to be higher when franchise fees are not available. The basic intuition
is that, though retailers' response functions are the same whether fees are
or are not allowed, producers' reaction functions induce higher prices when
fees are not available: producer l's profit is equal to the product of the
"perceived" demand, which is the same whether fees are allowed or not, by
the mark-up, which is (q(p1,p)-c) if franchise fees are allowed, but only
(p-c) if they are not allowed; as a consequence, producer i's reaction


    '°If the demand for good I is D'(q1,a =d-aq+fiq (O<B<a) and
(without loss of generality, rescaling prices if necessary) c=O, the mark-up
between the monopoly price and the equilibrium price, (qrnqc)/qc, is divided
by more than two when adding an extra layer; in particular: (qm..qf)/qf =
(cr/(2a + )(qrnc)/qc.

                                      18
function p(,p) 0=1,2,           is "higher" when franchise fees are not
allowed, leading to higher equilibrium wholesale prices (see Figure 1.1) and
also, thus, to higher equilibrium retail prices. This suggests that when
double marginalization problems are not too important, producers prefer the
situation where franchise fees are not available.11
        The following section addresses more precisely the issue of the
producers' choice of the contractual type of arrangement.'2




     "This is true for linear demand functions, as computations show; it can
also be seen very clearly in the case of multiplicative demand functions
introduced earlier, where in2 = 0: then the equilibrium with exclusive
territories and franchise fees coincides with the equilibrium with competitive
retailers, while the equilibrium with exclusive territories and no franchise
fees may in some cases entail higher profits when double marginalization
problems are not too important.

    12Similar arguments can be used to explain why contracts which provide
for exclusive dealings may increase profits. Assume there are two firms,
one of which has a small fraction of the market. Assume there are scale
economies in distribution (within any locale). Then, the manufacturer of the
commodity with the larger market can raise his rival's costs by forcing his
rival to establish his own distribution network, rather than using the
established retailer. At the higher marginal cost of distribution, the
equilibrium price which will emerge in the market will be higher, and hence
the large producer's profits will be higher.
        Note that this argument holds even if the two commodities are
"almost" perfect substitutes, so long as it takes time for the new commodity
to replace the established commodity in the market place.
        If there are economies of scope, e.g. between distributing the
product in one market and in another, or between distributing one product
and another, then the provisions for exclusive territories may interact with
exclusive dealing provisions. A new retailer cannot attempt to lower costs
by selling both products.


                                      19
II.     Equilibrium Marketing Arrangements
        So far, we have compared market equilibria associated with different
contractual territorial arrangements. However, whether these territorial
agreements will be signed is itself a question which the theory should
address—in particular, the fact that the profits of one or even all of the
producers are higher or lower when assigning exclusive territories does not
necessarily imply that such contracts will be signed.
        The natural way to tackle this issue is to introduce in the previous
model a first stage, where producers choose to sign or not sign a territorial
agreement with his retailers. We will thus consider now a three-stage game:
        - In the first stage, producers choose their contractual type of
        agreement. We will suppose that they have three options:
              - option C: sell to a very large number of competitive
                (intra-brand) retailers;
                - option E: assign exclusive territories to their retailers,
                without requiring any franchise fees;
                - option F:       assign exclusive territories and require
                franchise fees.
        - In the second stage, producers choose their wholesale tariffs: a
        wholesale price p pIus (if authorized by the contractual form chosen
        in the first state) a franchise fee F.
        - In the third stage, retailers choose their retail prices.


        The assumption here is that producers can commit themselves in the
 first stage to assign exclusive territories and, for instance, to require no
franchise fee, and that this first choice is publicly observed and known by
the other producers and the retailers at the beginning of the second stage.


                                      20
We will look for the (subgame) perfect equilibria of this game. This extra
layer in the game and the associated commitment enable the producers to
choose among different retailers's reaction functions; Table II.! gives, for
each possible choice of marketing arrangements, the producers' profits as
functions of their wholesale prices (with q — q(p1,q), for i,j =1,2 and




  Player2           C                      E                     F
Player 1

           (p1-c)D'(p1,p2)         (pic)Dl(pi,q2a)        (p1-c)D'(p1,q2)
 C
                                  (p2-c)D2(pj,q)                ( q 2'
c)D2(p1 ,q2')



           (,p1-c)D' (q1',p2)      (p1c)D1(q1',q)         (p1c)Dl(q1r,q)
 E
                                                                      r -
        (P2-cOD(q1,p2)                     ()121r,q2r)           (   q2
c)D2(q1t,q)


            (q1'-c)D1 (q1',p,J      (q1r..c)Dl(qir,q)     (q1r_c)Dl (q1F,q)
  F
      (p2c)D2(q1,p2)                                             (q2 a -
c)D2(q1,q)

                                  Table II.!


           We can establish the following result:




                                      21
Proposition 3:

        i) If retail prices are strategic complements and profit functions are

quasi-concave, then (F,F) dominates (C,C) and: a) (C,C) cannot be an

equilibrium;     b) if (C,C) dominates (E,E), (E,E) cannot be an

equilibrium.'3

        ii) F may be a dominant strategy and (F,F) the unique equilibrium,

even though the producers would be better off with (E,E).



Proof: i) The first part is in Proposition 2; we prove here ia and ib.

        ia) Starting from (C,C), producer 1 is better off by playing F:

        In subgame (C,C), producer i's best response to its rival's price is

p1 = q(c,p) (i,j= 1,2,           In subgame (F,C), producer l's best response

is to set Pi = c, which induces its retailers to choose q1 = q(c,p2) and
gives him the same profit as in subgame (C,C).

         Setting Pi = c, producer 2's marginal profit in subgame (F,C) is:



 (P2 -c)D(q1(c,p2),p2)
                         + D2(q11(c,p2),p2)   +
                                                  (p2-c)D (q1'(c,p2),p2)(aq11/3q2)(C,P2)



    i3j the following, "(A,B)"—where A,B = C, E, or F—represents the
equilibrium achieved in the subgame where the first producer has chosen
marketing arrangement A while the second producer has chosen
arrangement B. (A,B) is said to "dominate" (A',B') if both producers
prefer (A,B) to (A',B').
                                         22
                                                                                (2.1)

           The last term of this marginal profit is positive if retail prices are

strategic complements and the first two terms are zero for

                (= q(c,p C) i = 1,2). Therefore, if the profit function is quasi-
           C
P2 =   P


concave, producer 2's equilibrium price is higher in subgame (F,C) than in

subgarne (C,C), which concludes the argument.

               ib)    We show that producer 2 prefers (E,C) to (C,C), which by

assumption it prefers to (E,E): producer 2 would hence deviate from (E,E),

e.g. by playing C.

               Let us denote by       and i- producer i's equilibrium price and profit

in subgame (E,C). We have:



                                  =

                                      (p e_)D2(q1*1,p e)p C)
                                                                                (2.2)
                                      (pe_c)D2(q1&(c,pC),pC)
                                  = (pe_c)D2(pe,pc)
                                  =_e




where the first inequality uses the fact that p is producer 2's best response


                                              23
to P2 in subgame (E,C), the second inequality uses            c (which is

obviously satisfied, since in subgame (E,C) producer l's profit is of the

form (p1-c)D1), and e    denotes   producer 2's profit in subgame (C,C).

        ii)      We exhibit such a case using a linear example, in which the

demand functions are given by:                D '(q1,q2) = d-aq1+q, with


              0. In this case, which is presented in more details in the

Appendix, the only relevant parameter for our purpose          is b 3Ia,   an


indicator of the substitutability of the two goods:        in all subgames,

equilibrium profits are of the form "f(b).ll" where fl = [d-(a-i)c]2Ia.

Producers always prefer (F,F) to (C,C), and they also prefer (F,F) to (E,E)

when b is small (bE [0,6], where 6          0.8), but (E,E) to (F,F) otherwise

 (bE[,1]); however, F is always a dominant strategy (for any b in [0,1])

 and even a strictly dominant strategy for b >0 —in which case (F,F) is the

 unique equilibrium.
                                                                           a
         Proposition 3 stresses that exclusive territories necessarily emerge

 from the non-cooperative choices of vertical arrangements. Moreover,


                                       24
firms may require franchise fees, even in cases where they would prefer not

to if they could cooperatively agree to dispense with them; there may thus

exist a standard prisoner's dilemma problem, in which each producer would

like its rival to use a fee, since this would yield higher prices, but in which

each of them, given their rival's strategy, unilaterally prefers to impose such

a franchise fee and recover their retailers' profits.



III.     Methodological Discussion

         This paper has had two major objectives. First, we sought to

develop a general methodology for the analysis of market equilibrium in

which goods are sold not directly by producers, but through intermediaries.

It was our belief—supported by the analysis of this paper--that retailers and

wholesalers are important, and that their presence significantly modifies the

market equilibrium. The second objective of this paper has been to

investigate in detail one particular aspect of retail/producer relationships, the

use of exclusive territories. We now make some comments on these two

points, before concluding with some remarks on the implications of this

analysis for anti-trust policy.



ifi. 1   General remarks



                                       25
        Our analysis modelled the market equilibrium as a three-stage

game, with the rules of the game (the contractual form) being chosen in the

first, the wholesale price in the second, and the retail price in the third. We

showed that:

        a)      the perfect Nash equilibrium (and, in particular, the Nash

equilibrium choice of the contractual form) may not be joint profit

maximizing; but:

        b)      retail structure provides, in effect, a way for the producer

to commit itself (or more accurately, his retail ouflet) to increase prices in

response to a price increase of its rival; and to decrease prices in response

to entry. Both of these responses are anti-competitive, leading to higher

consumer prices.

         This result is an example of a more general result. Assume we

have two firms with a vector of decision variables, say {x,y}, with profits

a function of the levels chosen by both firms:



                            = r'(x',y',x2,y2).                          (111.1)




         Then clearly by choosing an adequate time structure (for instance,

choose the x's first, and then the y's given the x's), one induces certain



                                      26
responses which facilitate cooperative behavior.

        The problem presented to the modeler is choosing a "reasonable"

set of structures to investigate. Assume for example that one of the firms

can create an artificial machine which has the following property: if the

rival takes jointly cooperative action, then the machine will too; but if the

rival does not, the machine engages in ruthless behavior. Such a machine

will clearly support cooperative behavior, but the artificiality of the
construct make this "solution" unpersuasive (see Katz [1987] for a general

discussion of the possibility of supporting collusion in this way; this

problem has been investigated by Fershtman and Judd [1984], [19861, in a

rivairous agency framework and by Bernheim and Whinston [1 985a] in a

common agency framework).

        We have investigated here the natural structures associated with

retailing.'4 We have shown that even in the absence of any technological

advantages, retailing structures have a distinct advantage in facilitating


    '4Severai other studies have noted the possible use of delegation as a
form of commitment, though most of these studies have not been in the
context of the imperfectly competitive environment studied in this paper.
Stiglitz (1985), for instance, showed in the context of a spatial imperfect
competition model that a manufacturer who sold goods through franchises
could more effectively deter entry than one who owned his own retail
stores. The opportunity of "delegation", mentioned in Vickers [1985], has
been further analyzed by Bonanno-Vickers [1988], while Bernheim-
Whinston [1985b1 emphasize the possibility of achieving collusion with
common agents.

                                     27
collusion--even a succession of distribution layers can successively raise

profits.



ffl.2. Ouantitv Forcing Contracts

           Some care needs to be taken in modeling the feasible contracts

between retailers and wholesalers. We have been quite explicit about the

informational assumptions underlying our game theoretic analysis;            in

particular, we have assumed that the producer cannot observe the price

charged by the retailer, and therefore cannot specify the price which the

retailer charges. We believe that, in many contexts, this is a plausible

assumption. Giving the producer the power to specify the price would seem

to give it more power, and thus would be to its advantage; but in fact, it

limits the possibility of delegation; if contracts can specify price, then it is

as if the producers are competing directly against each other, and exclusive

territories would be ineffective.

           Under our informational assumptions, producers also could not

make the price they charged depend on the quantity sold. Allowing this

may increase the ability of exclusive territories to facilitate collusive

outcomes. This can be seen most forcefully in the context where the two

producers produce identical products. In that case if the manufacturers deal



                                      28
with perfectly competitive retailers, all firms get zero profit. Suppose now

that the manufacturers can agree in assigning the same exclusive territories

to each retailer. In this case, each retailer is now in monopolistic position,

in some territory, in the trading of the two goods; they will therefore

obtain some positive profit at the new equilibrium. In exchange for their

positive profits, the manufacturers can require positive sales of their

products (i.e. the retailers commit themselves to effectively sell some

quantity of each product to consumers, even if the two manufacturer's

prices are different). In that case, the manufacturers perceive a less elastic

demand and, at the new price equilibrium, they also achieve positive profits.

(Note that the quantity forcing requirement need not be used at the actual

equilibrium). Producers thus have strong incentives to assign exclusive

territories to retailers, rather than directly compete against each other. Of

course, the simple framework we considered is a very extreme one, but the

analysis could be generalized to cases where retailers are not perfect

Bertrand competitors in the absence of exclusive territories, so long as

assigning exclusive territories do increase retail profits. Note, also, that

 quantity forcing requirements quite often accompany exclusivity agreements.




                                      29
111.3    Timing and observability

         We have analyzed market equilibrium within a game theory

framework, with particular assumptions about the sequence of moves and

the set of admissible strategies. It is always a reasonable question to ask,

how well do our assumptions capture what actually occurs in the market,

and are our results solid enough to encompass alternative plausible assumptions?

         We believe that the most important assumption of our analysis, that

retail prices are set after the producer prices are set, is plausible. Retailers

do not have long-term contractual arrangements with their customers, and

typically adjust their prices quickly in response to changed market
conditions, and in particular, to changed costs of the goods they purchase.'5

         Another important assumption, which we believe is also reasonable,

is that producers choose the contractual types of arrangements before they

fix their prices.'6 More questionable may be our assumption that wholesale


    15There may be some lag, e.g. when the goods are sold out of
inventory, but this is unimportant for our purposes.

    16We could, however, consider alternative assumptions.For instance, in
a previous version we have analyzed the case where producers
simultaneously choose their marketing arrangements (exclusive territories or
pure competition) and their tariffs (franchise fees and wholesales prices).
Then, given any (pure) rival's strategy, each producer is indifferent with
regard to assigning exclusive territories—and charging a franchise fee equal
to his retailers' profits—or not. This leads to a multiplicity of equilibria,
including four pure strategies equilibria. In the first one, both producers
choose "competition" and charge p=pC In two other equilibria, one
                                     30
tariffs are observed by the rival's retailers. However, this assumption,

which simplifies the analysis, is not necessary for our purpose. Consider

for example the same three-stage game as before, but in which wholesale

prices—and fees, when available—are private information. Then the rival's

retail price does not respond to a change in one's wholesale price.

Nonetheless, assigning exclusive territories—without franchise fees—may still

reduce competition between producers. More precisely, the options "C"

and "F" are formally identical in this modified game. If in the first stage

of the game producer 1, say, chooses NCN, then in the second stage he will

set his wholesale price p so as to maximize (p1-c)D1(,p1,q), where q2 is the

retail price he expects for product 2; that is, he will choose p1=q(c,q.).

If instead he chooses "F" in the first stage, then he will choose Pi SO as to

maximize (q(j1,q}c)D'(q(p1,q),q2), that is he wilt choose Pi c, leading
to q1 = q7(c,q), as when he chooses "C" in the first stage. But if producer



producer acts as a Stackelberg leader and the other one follows: for
instance producer 1 chooses "competition" and the Stackelberg leader price
(which maximizes (q1-c)D1(q1,aj(c,q1)), while the other one chooses
"exclusive territories" and charges p=c (which indeed leads to
=q(c,q1)). In the last equilibrium, both producers choose "exclusive
territories" and charge p=p1.
        It can be shown, however, that the equilibrium where both
producers use exclusive territories dominates (from the producers' point of
view) the equilibria where they do not employ exclusive territories.
Exclusive territory assignments are thus likely to appear even with this
alternative structure of timing.

                                     31
1 chooses "E" in the first stage, he then sets Pi so as to maximize

(p1-c)D'(q(p1,q),q), leading toP1> c and to q1 > q(c,q). Thus, choosing

E instead of C leads to higher prices. If both producers choose NCN, the

equilibrium price qCpC is the same as in the previous section. If both

producers choose "E", the equilibrium prices pC and qC, are such that

qe=q(pe,qe) and pC maximizes (p1c)Dl(q7(p1,qe),qe). The wholesale price

pC can again be higher than the equilibrium price q' and, if double
marginalization problems are not too important, producers profits can be

higher than in case CC. The analysis of the linear case provided in the

Appendix exhibits such an example, and also shows that EE can be a

marketing equilibrium when it is preferred to CC (that is, producers may

not want to deviate from EE to, say, CE). Therefore, if producers can

commit themselves not to use franchise fees and make this commitment

known to their rivals17 or, alternatively, if franchise fees are not available

for institutional or other exogenous reasons, then assigning exclusive

territories has real effects on producers' competition even if wholesale


    '7This is the case in France, where producers are required by law to
make public their "general conditions" they propose to their distributors;
these "general conditions" must in particular stipulate the rules used for
quantity discounts, fees, royalties, etc. Thus, although, the precise
wholesale price given to one particular wholesaler or retailer may not be
public—since the application of the rules may depend on variables which are
not publicly known—, whether franchise fees are being used or not j public
information.

                                     32
prices are not publicly observable.



IV.      Conclusions

         This paper has a simple point: the effects of vertical restraints,

such as exclusive territories, may be markedly different in the two polar

cases of pure competition and monopoly, from that in markets—virtually all

markets—in which there is imperfect competition; for such markets, vertical

restraints may be a device for reducing the degree of competition, and thus

raising prices and profits. By contrast, in the two polar cases (monopoly

and pure competition), the degree of competition is, by assumption, fixed.

In addition, of course, such vertical restraints may be efficiency enhancing

as they presumably must be in perfectly competitive markets;'8 and, as in

pure monopolies, they may also be used as devices to facilitate
discrimination19


      18Advocates of this position often seem to adopt the motto "Ours is not
to question why...". If businesspersons sign such a contract, they must
have a good reason for doing so.

    19Under the Robinson-Patman Act, producers in the United States
cannot engage in price discrimination. However, retailers or wholesalers
in different markets can charge different mark-ups, reflecting the degree of
competition in those markets; and if there are franchise fees, the producer
can recapture these profits, achieving exactly the same results they could
have received with price discrimination. For this to be effective, there
cannot be arbitrage, and this requires exclusive territories.
          The objective of this paper has been to focus on the role of
                                      33
        The multiplicity of objectives which vertical restraints may serve

poses a problem for anti-trust policy. Certainly, a policy of per se legality

as proposed by Posner rests on false assumptions concerning the purpose of

vertical restraints in imperfectly competitive markets. The possibility of

efficiency-enhancing effects may make one cautious about a policy of per

se illegality. If a rule of reason standard is proposed, one still needs to ask

what should the presumption be? Where should the burden of proof lie?

        In our perusal of the literature on efficiency enhancing effects we

have been impressed with the almost total reliance on theoretical arguments,

showing the possibility of such effects, and the paucity of cases providing

persuasive evidence of their importance. While we have focused on the

theoretical arguments establishing the ability of such restraints to reduce

competition, an examination of the relevant formulae reveals that even with

products which are close, but imperfect substitutes, exclusive territories can



exclusive territories in reducing the effective degree of competition among
firms. We have not explored the other roles of exclusive territories, e.g.
in generating rents that are an important part of providing incentives for
maintaining reputation. In Stiglitz-Rey [1988] we discuss this and other
aspects of exclusive territories. We show, for instance, that equilibrium
may entail exclusive territories with excessive advertising, so that exclusive
territories actually lower producer profits. Also, exclusive territories may
be used to deter entry: an independent retailer who has an exclusive history
is likely to have a tougher response to entry, since he does not take into
account the effect of a decrease of his own price upon the producer's profits
in other territories.

                                      34
have significant effects on prices and profits.       These effects are so
significant that not only do retailers benefit from the lack of competition,

but also producers gain, even in the absence of the franchise fees with

which they might capture the retailer profit.

        It should be emphasized that we have analyzed in detail only one

of the channels by which vertical restraints may serve to reduce competition.

Other, more traditional, mechanisms may operate. We have noted that if

the two producers use a common agent in any locale, joint profits can

clearly be enhanced. Though in many markets, there may be more than one

agent (retailer or wholesaler), the limited number of such agents competing

against each other, as a result of exclusive territories, may enable them to

engage in forms of tacit collusion, which in more competitive markets

would not be feasible.

        These considerations suggest a policy in which vertical restraints

were considered presumptively illegal, unless there can be can be shown to

be significant efficiency-enhancing effects:

        (a)     which could not be obtained (at reasonable cost) in other
                       20
                ways


    20Brewers  speak, for example, of the freshness of the beer, while auto
mechanics invoke security, etc. In the former case, however, it could be
possible to put the date of production upon beer bottles. In the second one,
mechanics' effort seems (at least imperfectly) verifiable ex-post. The recent

                                     35
without the ensuing anti-competitive effects, and

        (b)     which outweigh any anti-competitive effects.

        The implementation of such a policy will not be easy. In the

imperfectly competitive environments with which we are concerned here,

even the Posner test of the presence of "efficiency enhancing" effects—a

shift in the demand curve—may not have the intended effect. The demand

curve may shift out, yet welfare may be decreased.

        Moreover, firms have the ability to work around any simple rules

that might be established. Restraints in the use of exclusive territories lead

firms to device "Areas of Primary Responsibility" which had much the same

effect. But they impose a burden on anti-trust prosecutors to show that this

is the case, a burden which, at the very least, increases the cost of anti-trust

enforcement.

        While our paper has focused on exclusive territories, it raises more

general methodological issues. We have shown that the behavior of markets

cannot be ascertained by simply looking at producers and their technology.

While there appear to be few significant economies of scale in bottling soft

drinks, the market is far from competitive. It is highly concentrated, and

the leading firms enjoy what appear to be monopoly profits. The same is


example of airline deregulation showed that competition does not always
lower security expenses.
                                      36
true in many other industries, including beer. It is common lore that

monopoly profits and market power in these industries arise from the

arrangements by which the goods are marketed. We have seen precisely

how having a multiple-tier system—producers selling to wholesalers selling

to retailers, with exclusive territories—reduces the effective degree of

competition, raising prices and profits. We have also seen how pricing

behavior and the effective degree of competition depends on whether there

are franchise fees. When producers sales are mediated through wholesale

and retail intermediaries, the demand curve they face is not the same as that

derived in the standard theory of consumer behavior. We have seen how

the elasticity of the demand is reduced. In general, even the shape of the

demand curve may be altered—much of the complexity of the analysis of this

paper derives from this observation. By the same token, it implies that

unless econometric studies include the prices of all relevant products in the

market, the estimated elasticities may well be biased estimates of the

elasticity of the consumers' demand curve. Also, focusing on the elasticity

of consumer demand—a function of retail prices—may not suffice for the

study of producers' (wholesale) pricing behavior.

        The Theory of Market Structure with Marketing poses a rich

research agenda for the future.



                                     37
                              APPENDIX A



        In this appendix, we first derive the retail Nash (price) equilibrium,

and prove Lemma 1 (Section I). We then present the effect of exclusive

territories on manufacturers' prices in the case of linear demand functions.



I.      Retail Nash Equilibrium

        Some general preliminaries are useful before proving Lemma 1.

Recall that D'(q1,q) denotes the final demand for good i (i= 1,2), that the

two goods are substitutes: D'2 0, D 0, and that we assume
symmetry: D'(q1,ci.) = D2(q2,q1). Given the wholesale prices Pt and P2'

the retail prices q1, q are defined as the Nash equilibrium prices of the

retail game, where retailer i's profit is given by:



                      ..r(p.q1 ,q2) = (a-p)D'(q1,q).                    (A. 1)



         If the demand functions are not too convex, retailer l's and 2's

answers to its rival's price, q(p1,qJ and q(p2,q1), are characterized by the

following first-order conditions respectively (dropping the arguments in the

response functions and using subscripts to indicate partial derivatives of the



                                      38
demand functions):



(q-p1)Dq,ci2) + D1(q,q) = 0 and (q-p2)D(q1,q) + D2(q1,q) =           0.

                                                                   (A.2)



        The second-order condition for retailer l's profit function, for

instance, yields:



                          (q7-p1)D1(q,q) + 2D(q,q) 0               (A.3)



         (using first-order conditions)



                    <=>                                   + 2D}(q,q) 0
                    <=>                         + 2e1(q,q) 0
                    <> p1(q,q) + E1(q,q) -l


where p1 denotes the direct elasticity of the demand elasticity:



                      p1(q1 ,qJ = Olog€1(q1 ,q)/31ogq1.            (A.4)




                                      39
         The retail prices are strategic complements if q1ft increases with

respect to q2 and vice versa. For retailer 1, for instance, this is equivalent

to:




                            j(p1,q1,q2)/ôq1q2                           (A.5)

                <(q-p1)D2(q,q2) + D(q,q2)


        (using first-order conditions)



                                              + D(q,q)
                              p2(q,q2) 0,


where p2 denotes the cross elasticity of the demand elasticity:



                     p2(q1,q2) = ôlog1(q1,c/ôlogq2.                     (A.6)



        The retail price response functions, q(p1 ,p2) and cj(p ,p2), are then

defined by:



      q(p1,p2) = q(p1,q(p1,p2)) and C1(P1,P2) = q(p2,q(p1,p2)).



                                     40
                                                                          (A.7)

        From the symmetry of the demand functions, the price response

functions are also symmetric: q(p1,p2) = q(p2,p1). Given this symmetry,

the retail equilibrium is stable if and only if:



                            Haq1,o/8qII < 1                               (A.8)



         (using (A.3) and (A.5))



                                < p1(qi,q2) + 1(q1,q) -1

         (prices being evaluated at their equilibrium levels).



         We can now prove Lemma 1.



Proof of Lemma 1: We introduce some more bits of notation:                 will

denote the elasticity of demand for good i with respect to the price of good

j                                     and thus =€')          will denote the

elasticity of the direct elasticity of good i with respect to the price of good

j (q1,qJ=olog€i(q1,q)Iologq, and thus p=t)' and                  will denote the

elasticity of retailer i's retail equilibrium price with respect to p3


                                       41
(m'(p1 ,p2) = älogqf(p1 ,p2)I8logp, and      thus m = m         The first-order

condition for retail equilibrium price q can be written:



             (q[(pi ,p2)-p1)/q(p1 'P2) = 1/1(q(p1 ,p2),q(,p 'P2))        (A. 8)




         Taking the log-derivative of this equation with respect to p leads,

after some rearrangements, to (where the Kronecker index, ôj', is equal to

1 if i=j and to 0 otherwise, the 's and the p's are evaluated at (P1,P2), and

the m's are evaluated at (q(p1,p2),q(p1,p2))):



                 (m1 - &)   (1 - 1) =   - (p11.mt   + p12.m2)             (A.9)



         Considering (A.9) at the (symmetric) producers' equilibrium prices

gives:



                     =   (p1+€1—1)(1—1) I [(p1+e1—1)2-(p2)],             (A.1O)

                         = P2(L) I L(pl+l—1)2-(p2)21.                    (A.11)



         From the above, retail equilibrium stability implies that the
denominator is positive in the above equations, and first-order conditions



                                        42
imply that   is higher than 1. From second-order conditions, the numerator

is positive in (A. 10) and thus, again using retail equilibrium stability, higher

than the numerator in (A.11). We thus have: m1 HmII.

        Strategic complementarity implies that (-p2) is non-negative. With

the above, this leads to: 0 m2 m1.

         Moreover, m1 is lower than 1 if:



                     (pi+i-l)(1-l) (p+e1-1)2-(j)2                         (A.12)

                 <> (-pJ2 (p1+€1-l)p1


         Given stability (i.e. p1 + €-1 > -p2), a sufficient condition for (A. 12)

to hold is: Pi +P2 0, which amounts to saying that the direct demand

elasticity does not decrease when both prices increase (i.e., c(q) does not

decrease with q).

                                                                              U
Proof of part iib of Proposition 1:

         Using the above formulas, the sufficient condition             can be

written as (with e1(q 1,p2),q(p1,p2)), 1 E1(p,p), and p1 p,p)):



             (1-1)[(p1+E1-1)1 - p2e21    < 1[(p+1-1)2 -                    (A.13)


                                       43
        Let p be an upper bound of p1(p,p)+p2(p,p) in the relevant range

of prices. A sufficient condition for (A. 13) to be satisfied is:



        (€1—l)[(p1+1—1)1 — p2e21    <   (1—1/e1Y1[(p1+1-1)2
                                                               —
                                                                   (p2)21 (A.14)



        Let the p's and be constant, and let        increase. In the limit, the

above condition is satisfied, since it boils down to:



              (l—l/e1)(l +   (.i—l)/i) < (l-i/i)(1 +2p1—l)k1)

                                   p<pl,                                 (A.15)



and in the limit the bound p can be chosen as close as desired from p1 +p2,

(recall that P2 is negative when retail prices are strategic substitutes).

                                                                             R
II.     Linear Demand

        We now assume: D(q1,q) = d - crqj +              (a>>O).        Without

loss of generality, we will posit c=O and ad= 1 (it suffices to move

downwards the demand function by an amount of d-(c+w) to 'eliminate'

c in this linear model, and the parameters a and d can be normalized to 1

through adequate rescaling of the units used for prices and quantities). In



                                        44
the absence of such normalization, in the following all profits would be

multiplied by [d-(cx-j3)c]21a, and the parameter should itself be multiplied

by •21     Tedious computations then lead to the following (subgame)

equilibrium profits (the following table can be completed by symmetry):




    211f there are (constant) unit retail costs, w, they can also be normalized
to zero; in the absence of normalization, however, profits should in that
case be multiplied by [d-(a-)(c+w)J2/a.
                                      45
 Player2         C                 E                        F
Player 1


                     1       (4 +3$)2(2 _2)               (2 +)2
                (2   _)2       2(8 _52)2                 4(4 _22)
 C

                     1        (4 ÷2 _2)2                 (4 +2    _2)2
                (2 _)2         2(8 _52)2                  16(2    2)2

                              4   + .-
                                    —2$             (4   + _2)2(8 _6$2 +9)
                             (2 -)(4 — _22)2             (32 _322   +7)2
 E

                              4 +2 _22              2(2 +)2(2 _2)(4      + -2
                             (2 —)(4 — _22)2              (32 _32$2 +22)2



                                                            f')
                  •                 •
                                                          (4 —2 _2)2
 F

                                                            2(2_$2)
                                                          (4 —2 +2)2


                                  Table A.1




           It can be checked that for any     between 0 and 1, playing F is

                                        46
always a dominant strategy, and even a strictly dominant one whenever
>O. (When fl=O, C and F are strictly equivalent, and strictly dominate
E.)
          Simple computations also show that profits are higher in the cell FF
than in the cell CC (except when j=O, in which case they are equal). Thus
the equilibrium (FF) is symmetric, entails exclusive territories (and
franchise fees) for both producers, and yields higher profits (and lower
consumer surplus and aggregate welfare) than in the absence of vertical
restraints.
          The comparison of the profits achieved in EE with those achieved
in the other two symmetric situations (CC and FF) show that EE may be
preferred by both producers: profits are higher for EE than for CC as soon
as                    and higher than for FF as soon as >9O.8l.
          Lastly, in cells CC, EE and FF the retail price is respectively equal

to qC =         1
                      , qe   =       2" ' '      and   qf =      2
                                                                        , whereas   the
              (2 -)              8 -6 _32 +2                  4 -2 _2

                                                              It can be shown that
monopoly       price is given by qm
                                                 2(l-
qC <   q< qm (except for 9=O, in which case qc=qf< qm'), and that qe
TMovershootsM when $ is          small: qe>qrn as long as
          Let us now assume that wholesale tariffs are not publicly observed.
As argued in the text, the two options C and F are identical: choosing C
leads producer ito q=p1=q(c,q), where q is the retail price that producer
i expects for product j,         whereas   choosing F leads to pc and the same
retail price q = q(c,q). We therefore focus on the two options C and E.
         The price equilibrium associated with CC is the same as before:


                                            47
qepe, s.t. (qc_c)/qe=    1(qC,qC)•     For EE, the equilibrium prices, pe and

qe, are characterized by qc=q(c,pe) and
pe = argmax(p_c)Dl(qi*p,qe),qe).            If producer 1 chooses C while
         p

producer 2 chooses E, equilibrium prices (p1,q)12 are characterized by

q1=p1=q(c,p2), q2=q@2,q1)           and     p2 = argmax(p-c)D2(q1,q'(p,q1)).
                                                   p

Computations lead to the following table:




              Player 2      C                                 E
             Player 1


                                1                      2(2+2)
                           (2 _$)2                     (8 _3$2)2
              C

                                1                        (4+3)2
                           (2 _)2                       (8 _32)2



                                                          2
                                                       (4 _3)2
              E
                                                          2
                                                       (4 ..3)2


                                    Table A.l


                                       48
       The comparison of the profits shows that EE is preferred to CC by

both producers as soon as > O.74. Moreover, for              very large
(fl> O.99), producer 1 prefers EE to CE, and thus EE is an equilibrium.




                                  49
                            REFERENCES


Bonanno, G. and Vickers, J. [1988], "Vertical Separation", Journal of
Industrial Economics, Vol. 36, No. 3, pp. 257-65.


Bulow, J., Geanakoplos, J.D. and P.D. Klemperer [1985], "Multimarket
Oligopoly: Strategic Substitutes and Complements", Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 93, No. 3, pp. 488-511.


Bernheim, B.D. and Whinston, M.D. [1985a], "Common Agency",
Econometrica, Vol. 54, No.4, pp. 923-942.


Bernheim, B.D. and Whinston, M.D. [1985b1, "Common Marketing
Agency as a Device for Facilitating Collusion", Rand Journal of Economics,
Vol. 16, pp. 269-281.


Caillaud, B. and Rey, P. [19871, "A Note on Vertical Restraints with
Provision of Distribution Services", INSEE Discussion Paper No. 8702.


Fershtman, C. and Judd, K.L. [1986], "Strategic Incentive Manipulation
in Rivalrous Agency", mimeo.


Fershtman, C. and Judd, K.L. [1987], "Equilibrium Incentives in
Oligopoly", American Economic Review, 77, pp. 927-940.


Katz, M. [19871, "Game-Playing Agents: Contracts as Precommitments",
Princeton University Discussion Paper, February.


                                    50
Mathewson, G.F. and Winter, R. [1983], "The Economics of Vertical
Restraints in Distribution", in I.E.A. Conference Volume, New
Developments in the Analysis of Market Structure, New York: Macmillan.


Mathewson, G.F. and Winter, R. [1984], "An Economic Theory of
Vertical Restraints", Rand Journal of Economics, 15(Spring), pp. 27-38.


McGuire, T.W. and Staelin, R. [1983], "An Industry Equilibrium
Analysis of Downstream Vertical Integration", Marketing Science, Vol. 2,
No. 2, pp. 161-191.


Posner, R. [1981], The Rule of Reason and the Economic Approach:
Reflections on the Sylvania Decision", University of Chicago Law Review,
Vol. 45, pp. 1-20.


Rey, P. and Stiglitz, J. [1988], "Vertical Restraints and Producers'
Competition", European Economic Review, Vol. 32, pp. 561-568.


Rey, P. and Tirole, J. [1986a], "Vertical Restraints from a Principal-Agent
Viewpoint", in Marketing Channels, L. Pellegrini and S.K. Reddy eds.
Lexington: Lexington Books, pp. 3-30.


Rey, P. and Tirole, J. [1986b], "The Logic of Vertical Restraints",
American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 5, pp. 921-939.


Salop, S. [1979], "Monopolistic Competition With Outside Goods", Bell
Journal of Economics, 10, pp. 141-156.


                                    51
Vickers, J. [1985], "Delegation and the Theory of the Firm', Th
Economic Journal, Economic International Conference Supplement.




                                  52
</ref_section>
