NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A ThEORY OF GRADUAL TRADE
LIE ERA UZATION

Robert W. Staiger

Working Paper No. 4620

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMiC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
Januaiy, 1994

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Conference on New Directions in Trade

Theory, Ann Arbor, October 29-30. 1993. I thank Kyle Bagwell. Robert Baldwin, John Kennan,
Guido Tabellini and seminar participants at The University of Wisconsin for helpful discussions.
and Max Corden, Marie Thursby, and conference participants for very helpful comments. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research,

NBER Working Paper #4620
January 1994

A THEORY OF GRADUAL TRADE
LIBERALIZATION

ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a theory of gradual trade liberalization. I consider countries that arc
limited to self-enforcing arrangements in their trade relations. I argue that enforcement problems

associated with the maintenance of low cooperative tariffs are exacerbated by the presence of
resources in the import-competing sector that are (or potentially could be) earning rents from
their sector-specific skills. Intuitively, by being able to transform into rents a portion of what
otherwise would be dead weight loss under a tariff hike, the presence of such resources makes
deviation from a low cooperative tariff to a high tariff more desirable for the deviating country,
and makes punishments under reciprocally high tariffs less painful. Hence, the presence of rentcollecting resources in an import-competing sector acts as a deterrent to trade liberalization. But

if an initial "round of liberalization can induceat least a portion of these resources in the
import-competing sector to relocate to the rest of the economy, and if by not using their sector-

specific skills these resources stand to lose them, then the enforcement issues associated with
their presence will also diminish over time, and further rounds of liberalization are made possible

by the effects of the initial round. I formalize this gradual process of trade liberalization, and
explore the consequences of a failed round of liberalization for the ability to maintain current

levels of cooperation.

Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
The University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER

I. Introduction
There are many questions that arise in the theory of trade policy which presuppose the
view that trade liberalization is a gradual, dynamic process. An example of great current
interest is the question of whether the proliferation of regional trade agreements might slow
down or speed up the process of multilateral trade liberalization under the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), but other examples abound. Trade adjustment assistance is
often defended on the grounds that it helps to facilitate the process of trade liberalization.
Political lobbies and labor unions representing import-competing interests are seen as

retarding the process of trade liberalization, while GAITs most-favored-nation principle is
perceived as spurring it on.
There are even important questions about the dynamics of the liberalization process

itself The GAiT process of on-going repeated 'rounds" of liberalization has been credited
with generating the momentum for the successful multilateral tariff-cutting experience of the

post-war period, and has lead to an informal "bicycle" theory of GAiT: unless you keep

pedalling, you will fall off (Bhagwati, 1988, p. 41). The bicycle view of GAiT also
underlies the concern shared by many regarding the likely consequences of a failure to bring

the (finally completed) Uruguay Round of GAiT negotiations to a successful conclusion (see
for example, Economic Report of The President, 1992, p. 193). This concern amounts to the

view that a failure to conclude the Uruguay Round would not simply have meant a
continuation of the status quo, but rather a retreat from existing levels of international
cooperation in trade policy.

While the perception of trade liberalization as a gradual process is pervasive, and
while answers to many of the central questions in the theory of trade policy require that the
process be thought of in this way, we have no satisfactory theory that would yield a gradual
process of trade liberalization as an endogenous outcome. The purpose of this paper is to

provide a theory of trade liberalization in which the process of liberalization is inherently
time-consuming. In the model I present below, partial liberalization today builds the
foundation for the possibility of further liberalization at some point in the future.
My starting point is the presumption that, among countries that are attempting

reciprocally to lower trade barriers, the inability to commit to policies that are jointly optimal
but individually suboptimal is a key ingredient which gives rise ultimately to a gradual trade
liberalization process. The idea that government commitment problems can lead to

gradualism in the reform process is not new. Dewatripont and Roland (1992) argue that a

governments inability to commit to its domestic agents not to use information revealed in a
partial reform for the design of later reforms can lead to gradualism in the optimal reform

path. Matsuyama (2990) shows that if a government lacks commitment to an announced

liberalization schedule in a game of timing between it and a domestic industry over when to
invest (the industry) and when to liberalize (the government), then equilibrium liberalization
may be delayed. However, neither paper focuses on the commitment problems that arise
internationally across governments, a focus which I adopt here and which seems particularly

appropriate when considering gradualism in multilateral trade liberalization.
In focussing on the commitment problems across countries associated with

international cooperation in trade policy, I ani building on the work of Jensen and Thursby

2

(1984), Dixit (1987), Bagwell and Staiger (1990, 1993a, 1993b), and others. This work
adopts the view that enforcement issues are central to the dynamic behavior of trade policy in
a world where countries attempt to maintain cooperative trade policies and that, in practice.

the enforcement of agreed-upon behavior under GAiT is limited by the severity of retaliation
that can be credibly threatened against an offender by its trading partners. I therefore model

international cooperation in trade policy as necessarily self-enforcing, in that it involves
balancing the current gains from deviating unilaterally from an agreed-upon trade policy

against the future losses from forfeiting the benefits of multilateral cooperation that such a

unilateral defection would imply. What differentiates this paper from those before it and
what, when combined with issues of international policy commitment, leads to a model of
gradual trade liberalization, is that (i) I allow resources to change sectors in response to

changing tariff levels, and (ii) I consider the possibility that the sector-specific skills of
import-competing workers displaced by tariff reductions may depreciate over time!

In an unpublished paper that was brought to my attention after presentation of the first
draft of this paper at the Michigan conference, Devereux (1992) explores the two-way
interaction between trade liberalization and economic growth in a setting in which production
technologies are characterized by learning-by-doing and governments set tariffs in a repeated
game. Although Devereux's focus is on the relationship between economic growth and trade
liberalization, trade liberalization is characterized by a gradual process in his model. However,
gradualism does not emerge as an inherent part of the liberalization process itself, but rather
derives from the gradual process of learning by doing that is central to his model. That is, in
Devereux's model, while the maximal rate of trade liberalization is gradual, it is independent
of the actual rate of liberalization, depending fundamentally only on the dynamics of the
underlying learning-by-doing process in production: There is thus no link between the depth
of trade liberalization undertaken today and liberalization possibilities in the future. In the
model I develop here, the degree of current liberalization conditions future liberalization
possibilities at each point in time, so that.liberalization is an inherently dynamic and gradual
process. I thank Scott Taylor for bringing Devereux's paper to my attention.

3

Within this setting, I explore how the government's incentive problem associated ssth
maintaining tow cooperative tariffs is exacerbated by the presence of resources in the importcompeting sector that are (or could potentially be) earning rents from their sector-specific

skills. Intuitively, by being able to capture the rents created by the government under a tariff
hike, the presence of such resources enhances the government's temptation to deviate from a
low cooperative tariff to a high tariff while it also reduces the pain of the reciprocally-high
tariff punishment that would follow such a deviation. Hence, the presence of rent-collecting

resources in an import-competing sector acts as a deterrent to trade liberalization. But this
suggests in turn that some initial progress in trade liberalization, which is sufficient to lead to
the relocation of a portion of the existing import-competing workers out of the import-

competing sector, might eventt1ly pave the way for greater trade liberalization in the future,
as the workers who leave the import-competing sector eventually lose their industry-specific
import-competing skills -- and hence their ability to earn rents in the import-competing sector

were the government to return to a higher tariff. It is this dynamic coinplementarity which I
attempt to formalize in what follows.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section Il, I formalize the basic
incentive problem for trade liberalization that is created by the presence of rent-earning
import-competing workers in a stationary environment in which workers keep their import-

competing skills even if they are not currently working in the import-competing sector.
Section III then introduces the assumption that import-competing workers who leave the
sector face the possibility of losing their sector-specific skills, and characterizes the non-

stationary, gradual, process of trade liberalization that results. In Section IV, I apply the

4

model to explore the notion that the failure of a round to achieve further liberalization may
lead

to a retreat from existing levels of tariff' cooperation. Section V concludes.

II. A Stationary Model of Trade Liberalization
I consider two symmetric countries, a home (no*) country and a foreign(') country.
Each country chooses import tariffs for its import-competing industry, while its export
industry must operate under the import tariffs chosen by its trading partner. Countries share

identical linear demands (a-P) for the product of each industry. Pmduction technologies in
these two industries are linear, using labor as the sole input: in each industry and in each

and f

country, one unit of output can be produced by one unit of effective labor input. With t

denoting the (specific) impediments to trade into the import-competing industry of the home
and foreign country, respectively, with Wm

W,,,, and

denoting the local wage per unit

of effective labor in the import-competing and export sector of the home arid foreign country,

respectively, and with Pm F',, P,, and P denoting the local price of the import-competing
and export good in the home and foreign country, respectively, I have

Wrn

=m
=

provided

=

=

+ t;
that t

=

and r • are

(1)

=

(2)

+

non-prohibitive. Finally, in addition to its export and import-

competing industries, each country has a large rest-of-economy sector.

5

There are three types of labor in these economies. First, there are workers that are
particularly well-suited to work in the import-competing sector of their economy. Each of
these workers is endowed with I efficiency unit of labor which is equally productive in the

import-competing sector or in the rest-of-economy sector, but each such worker is also

endowed with y efficiency units of labor reflecting sector specific skills, i.e., worth nothing

outside the import-competing sector. I assume that there are e/(l +y) such workers in each
economy (and thus that their effective supply when employed in the import-competing sector

is e), and refer to them as "import-competing" workers. In addition, each economy has a
large supply of workers endowed with no sector-specific skills, which I refer to as 'rest-ofeconomy' workers, who are endowed with I efficiency unit of non-sector-specific labor, and
whose supply into the import-competing sector is infrnitely elastic at the fixed rest-of-

economy market wage

.

Finally, production in the export sector of each economy also

requires special skills. I assume that each economy is endowed with E effective workers with
such skills, and that there is no possibility of intersectoral labor movement in or out of this
sector.

These assumptions allow me to focus on resource movements into and out of the
import-competing sector, and in particular on the issues raised when such resource

movements are an integral part of the process of trade liberalization. I ignore for now the
analogous resource movements that would arise into and out of the export sector, and
comment on their importance in the conclusion.
Each country's effective labor supply curve into its import-competing sector--and

hence its supply curve for the import-competing good--will look as depicted by the dashed
6

tine in Figure I labeled S. The e effective import-competing workers will choose to locate in
the import-competing sector at an import price of w/(1÷y) or greater, and would choose to
locate in the rest-of-economy sector otherwise. Rest-of-economy workers would choose to

enter the import-competing sector at an import price of; or greater. Figure 1 also depicts
the linear product demand curve for the import-competing good by the dashed line labeled D,

drawn for the case in which the price of the import-competing good would rise to w in the
absence of trade. The difference between these two is the country's import demand, and is
represented in Figure 1 as the solid line labeled M.
I will be interested in the case where, facing free trade, a portion of a country's
import-competing workers would choose to locate in the rest-of-economy sector. In fact,
though inessential, it will prove convenient to assume that free trade would be just sufficient

to induce all import-competing workers to locate in the rest-of-economy sector. This amounts
to the assumption that each country's export sector is endowed with enough labor to satisf'v

the demand from both countries at a world price of w/(1 +y), or

.8? =

— I——)

(3)

1y

Figure I depicts the export supply curve under (3) by the solid line labeled X. The other

cases, in which (3) is violated with an inequality in either direction, are analytically messier
but not qualitatively different.

It is now straightforward to establish that equilibrium domestic prices as functions of

t

and

r are given by
7

1;

1y
for e/13 t e/P

+

=

(1+y)

+

(4)

(1+y)

1y
P(e) ={

fore/n C s e/P +

—

._1i?4

(5)

W

(1.y)
where

-

(E

a

+

p;;)/ is the prohibitive tariff, and with P,,(r) and P;(t) defined

symmetrically. Finally, domestic welfare is measured as the sum of consumer surplus,

producer surplus, and tariff revenue in the import sector, and consumer and producer surplus
in the export sector, or

P(t)

= f {u—pP)dp+ f edP÷ tEE- (a-PP(tfl]
f(1.t)

Pm(t)

(6)
+

f

(a-P)dP+ f EdP
0

with foreign welfare W(t,c) defined symmetrically.

A.

Static Tariff Setting
1 am now ready to derive each country's optimal tariff. For simplicity in what follows.

I restrict my attention to situations where a country's optimal tariff leads to import prices of

S

w, i.e., prices which would bring a portion of the (infinitely elastically supplied) rest-of-

economy labor force into the import-competing sector. This amounts to a restriction on the

maximum size of e and y , in particular that

e

<a —
2

1+37 p

(7)

2(1+y)

Under (7), a countiys optimal tariff will be equivalent to that which maximizes tariff revenue,

and is given by
=

E-a+i =1/2.

(8)

Moreover, with the two goods markets independent and with export taxes ruled out by

assumption, optimal tariff choices are independent of the tariff choices of one's trading

partner, as (8) indicates. Thus, defining the static tariff game to be.the game in which each
country simultaneously selects an import tariff to maximize its own welfare, the Nash
equilibrium of the static tariff game occurs when each country selects
=

1/2.
Despite

(9)

the simplicity of this set-up, it still yields the essential elements that I will

need to study the process of cooperative trade liberalization. In particular, it is readily

established using (6) that W(r=t','r'=t') is strictly decreasing in t' for ttE(O,t) , so that the
static tariff game leads to a Prisoners' Dilemma: both countries are better off with symmetric
free trade, and monotonically better off with any symmetric move toward free trade, but in

9

the Nash equilibrium both countries impose positive tariffs and suffer the consequent drop in

welfare.

This is illustrated in Figure 2, where the domestic gains from trade associated with the
import and export good are depicted in the iop left and right panel, respectively, and the
lower panel depicts domestic and foreign tariff reaction curves. Under reciprocal free trade.

the gains from trade for the domestic country amount to the area under its import demand
curve (m1m,m6m, in the top left panel) and the area above its export supply curve (x1x1x, in

the top right panel). Under the domestic optimal tariff, the additional gains from importing
are given by the net tariff revenue collected from abroad minus the dead weight loss
(m2m3m4m5 minus m5m6tn,m! in the top left panel). Facing the optimal tariff abroad, the

reduction in the gains from exporting are given by the net import taxes paid toexporters and
the dead weight loss (x1x,x4x7 plus x7x4x5; in the top right panel). Taken together, when

both countries impose their optimal tariffs, the losses in each country's export market
outweigh the gains in its import market, with the net loss for the domestic country amounting

to the sum of the dead weight losses it incurs in each market (m5mm,m! plus x7x4x,x). The
lower panel of Figure 2 depicts domestic and foreign tariff reaction curves, with domestic
indifference curves reflecting the relative welfare rankings associated with reciprocal free

trade, unilateral optimal tariff setting, and Nash equilibrium tariffs in the static tariff game.
B.

Dynamic Tariff Setting
Suppose now that, starting from their Nash tariffs, countries were given the

opportunity to cooperate in tariff policy, subject only to the condition that this cooperation be

self-enforcing. Such an opportunity might arise with the establishnent of an international

10

organization such as GAiT, which has the ability to coordinate multilateral reductions in
tariffs but no independent ability to enforce the agreed-upon reductions. I analyze such an

opportunity by considering now a stationary dynamic tariff game, which is defined by the

infinite repetition of the static tariff game just described. I refer to this games as stationary
because none of the model's parameters change through time. In particular, I maintain the
assumption for now that import-competing workers who choose to leave the import-competing

sector as a result of falling levels of protection nevertheless maintain their y units of importcompeting sector-specific skill if ever they wish to return to the import-competing sector,
I focus on a particular class of subgame perfect equilibria for the stationary dynamic
tariff game, in which (1) in equilibrium, the two countries select the same import tariff in each

period, and (ii) if a deviation from this common tariff occurs, then in the next period and
forever after, countries revert to the Nash equilibrium tariffs of the static tariff game. I define
the most-cooperative equilibrium of the stationary dynamic game as the subgame perfect
equilibrium which yields the lowest possible equilibrium tariff while satisfring (i) and (ii).
The corresponding tariff is called the most-cooperative tariff for the stationary dynamic tariff
game?
In a dynamic model, countries have the possibility of supporting a cooperative tariff.
c

, since any attempt to raise one's current-period tariff will be met with the retaliatory

2

Forms of punishment other than infinite Nash reversion might be considered, some of

which could support greater levels of cooperation. However, the qualitative nature of the
non-stationary behavior of cooperative tariffs derived below is unlikely to be affected.
Moreover, infinite reversion is not entirely implausible as a representation of actual tariff
wars. As one example, the high U.S. tariffs on imports of light-duty trucks imposed as a
result of the 'chicken war" with the European Community in 1963 are still in place 30 years
latcr.

II

(Nash) tariff from one's trading partner in future periods. Thus, a cooperative

tariff t

can

be

supported in an equilibrium for the stationary dynamic tariff game if the one-time incentive to

cheat is sufficiently small relative to the future value of maintaining a cooperative relationship
with one's trading partner.

If a country cheats, it will deviate from tc and select its best-response Nash tariff, t".
With this, the fundamental "no defect" condition which formalizes the intuition above can be
written as

W(v__tN, ttc) _W(t=tC, v'=tc)

[W(t=tc, f=t°)

where ôc(O,1) is the discount factor between periods.

-W(t=r, t'=ti)

(10)

It will be convenient in what follows

to write this condition in the slightly different form of

w(t=tc,ts=tc) (1—8) w(t=eN,t*=tc) + 8w(t=t',e=t")
The

V(C=rc, 6)

(11)

right-hand-side of(Il), which I denote by flrrt,ô), is decreasing in rt for 6 < I

and r <

f, and decreasing in 6 for r' <

rN because a country's welfare is decreasing in

the tariff of its trading partner.

In what follows, I will be interested in cases where the most cooperative tariff

satising (11) leads to the relocation of at least some of the e import-competing workers, all
of whom by (7) are content to stay in the import-competing sector under tN. This requires
that the equilibrium domestic import price under the most cooperative tariff be equal to

w/(l +y) which, according to (4), implies that the most cooperative tariff must satis&
12

(12)

cc <

This will amount to a restriction on the minimal size of 6 which I will characterize
momentarily. Under the restriction (12), it is easily checked from (6) that

W(ttc,t*tc)

p((a)2

— _____

—

+ ._L.f — (j)2

= Put)2 —

W(t=,t*tc)

=

(13)

(14)

p1(S)2+Y22 e)2 + _-!-_?(e-a) + ___
P

2(1+y)2

1-'-y

(15)

..(aJf)C+
2
P iy (tc)2)
The determination of the most-cooperative tariff i[0,i] is now illustrated in Figure

3. From (13), W(r=rC,t*=t5 is decreasing and concave in cC over t¼[0,], while from

(II), (14) and (15), P1c'=rC,a) is decreasing and convex in tt over this range. For
8 = 1,

and flc'=t',6) must intersect the y-axis of Figure 3

below W(t =0,r =0). For 6 of this magnitude, free trade can be supported in the stationary
dynamic game, since the incentive constraint (11) is met with strict inequality for t =r =0.

As 6 is reduced from I, FtttC,6) shifts up in Figure 3, and its intersection with the y-axis
rises above W(t =t Nt. N) The critical 6 below which free trade cannot be supported is

defined implicitly by W(t=0,t=0) = 1'r'=t"=04). As 6 is reduced from !, V(t=rc,a)

'3

continues to shift up in Figure 3, and its intersection with W(r=tC,r*=tc) yields
monotonically increasing values

for .

defined implicitly by VCv=i,r=) =

It can be shown that there exists a critical

i'lt=t'=tj) such that the most cooperative tariff in

the stationary dynamic game with discount factor

is

= t. Figure 3, then, depicts the

determination of te(O,t) under the assumption that 8c(o,ô).
In what follows, I concentrate on discount factors in this range, because I am

interested in trade liberalization which (i) would induce some of the resources originally

located in the import-competing sector to relocate (which requires 8 > 8) and, (ii) cannot be

'completed' in a single "round" of tariff cuts (which requires 8 < 8). The next section
introduces non-stationarity into the model in an attempt to remove the quotes from (ii) above.

ILL A Non-Stationary Model of Trade Liberalization
The movement from N to t illustrated in Figure 3 could be thought of as
representing the process of trade liberalization that comes about when countries move from a

non-cooperative to a cooperative trading regime. The problem is, it's not much of a process.
or at least not one that ought to take any time.
However, the elements of a non-trivial process of trade liberalization, with current

liberalization setting up the prospects for further liberalization sometime in the future, do

14

suggest themselves if one considers the impact of a drop in the supply of import-competing

workers (e) on the sustainable stationary cooperative tariff t. Using (13), (14), and (15),

defining t

e1 /f3 in analogy with (12), and refening to Figure 3, W(r=tt,c'=t5 is

unaffecteU by a change from e1 to e2, e1 > e2, for rtE[O,2] while

V(ttc,o) would shift

down with the drop in e, leading to a fall in t. Recalling that V( ) is simply a weighted
average of welfare under defection and under Nash punishments, the downward shift in V(

as e drops reflects the fact that high tariffs become less desirable as their capacity to generate
rents diminishes.
Thus, in this stationary dynamic model, resources in the import-competing sector that
are (or could potentially be) earning rents from their sector-specific skills limit the degree of

attainable trade liberalization. The intuition for this result is that, by being able to transform
into rents a portion of what otherwise would have been dead weight loss under a tariff hike,
the presence of such resources makes deviation from a low cooperative tariff to a high tariff
more desirable for the deviating country, and makes punishments under reciprocally high

tariffs less painful. But this in turn suggests that liberalization, which leads to the relocation
of some of the existing import-competing workers, might eventually feed back upon itself and

pave the way for further liberalization, if the workers who leave the import-competing sector
eventually see their industry-specific skills from the import-competing sector--and hence their

ability to earn rents in the sector should the government return to a higher tariff--depreciate

over time from lack of use. This is the logic underlying what follows.

IS

I now assume that each country's import-competing sector begins with e1/(1 +y)
workers, each of whom owns I unit of effective labor equally efficient in either the import-

competing or rest-of-economy sector, and y units of effective labor tailored for use only in
the import-competing sector. In any period, alter observing the foreign and domestic tariff

choices for that period, any worker currently in the import-competing sector may choose to
leave the sector and work in the rest-of-the-economy sector where he would receive the

market wage w. However, should a worker choose to leave the import-competing sector,

then in every period that he is gone from the import-competing sector, there is a constant

probability A that his specific skill in the import-competing sector will depreciate to zero.
Once this depreciation occurs, the worker's effectiveness in the import-competing sector

becomes like that of all other workers currently in the rest of the economy, and he amounts
to 1 unit of effective labor in either the import-competing or rest-of-the-economy sectors. I
assume that the possibility of skill depreciation occurs at the beginning of each period; that all
workers currently in the rest-of-the-economy sector who ended the previous period with their

import-competing skills in tact either loose or keep their y units of import-competing skill
together; that whether these workers keep or loose their skills becomes common knowledge
immediately after it is determined; that, after observing this, foreign and domestic

governments then set tariffs for the period simultaneously; and that, observing those tariff
choices, workers then choose where to locate for the period's production.
If equilibrium protection in the import-competing sector moved non-monotonically
through time, an import-competing worker's sectoral location decision would now involve

16

potentially complex intertemporal calculations, since the possibility of sector-specific skill

depreciation while outside the import-competing sector creates an option value to staying in

the sector. To avoid this complication I will stick to cases of monotonic trade liberalization,
leaving nonmonotonic movements as an interesting area for future work.

In order to characterize this nonstationary model, I now define the stt of the importcompeting sector by the effective import-competing labor supply, e, remaining in the

economy at a point in time, i.e., the effective labor force in the economy that, at a moment in

time, still retains the import-competing skill. Let i =

1,2,...

index the history of states, so that

e1 denotes the initial state of the import-competing sector, and e denotes the state after i-I

episodes of skill depreciation. By an episode of skill depreciation, I am referring to a period
in which the most recent cohort of import-competing workers who have chosen to work
outside the import-competing sector as a result of the preceding "round" of liberalization lose
their sector-specific skills.

In analyzing this non-stationaz dynamic tariff game, I then examine a class of
subgame perfect equilibria in which (i) along the equilibrium path, and for any given state of
the import-competing sector, the foreign and domestic countries select a common import tariff <
at all dates associated with that state; and (ii) if at any point in the game a deviation from the

equilibrium tariff for the corresponding state occurs, then in the next period and forever
thereafter the two countries revert to the Nash equilibrium tariffs of the static tariff game.
To solve this non-stationary model recursively, I will restrict my attention to cases in
which free trade is achievable in a finite number of states, or "rounds" of liberalization, with

17

the number denoted by n.3 Once again, this amounts to a restriction on the minimum value of 5

for a given e1, and it ensures that ; will also satis' (12) for each i = 1,2,...,n-1 (if e didn't
satis& (12) for iE(1,2,...n—1}, then liberalization would end after the P" round with a positive

tariff). Given this, I look for the most-cooperative equilibrium, and solve for the

corresponding most-coooerative liberalization path,{tf,i,..t), in a recursive fashion starting
with round n-I and requiring that each incentive constraint bind back to round I.
As before I restrict e1 to satisfy (7). Since e,>1 can only decline from e1 (1 do not
allow workers to obtain the import-competing skill if they don't have it, nor would they have

an equilibrium incentive to do so), this means that the Nash tariff, to which a country would
defect if it so chose and to which both countries would revert after a defection, is stateinvariant and continues to be defined by (8). Finally, note that, given these restrictions and
the monotonic liberalizations on which I focus, import-competing workers who contemplate

leaving the import-competing sector in a given period need only base their equilibrium
decision on that period's tariff choices, since equilibrium tariffs will only fall in subsequent
periods.

I now need to distinguish between the effective supply of workers with importcompeting skills who are employed in the import-competing sector and the economy-wide

effective supply of such workers (e1). Denoting by e the effective force of workers with

Hence, for a period in state i, the i round of liberalization has occurred, and
governments are waiting for the state to change, i.e., for an episode of skill depreciation, so
that the ihil round can proceed.
18

import-competing skills that choose to remain in the import-competing sector for a given
period in state i after domestic and foreign governments have set their tariffs for the period, it

is direct to calculate that

I = 1,2

=

n

(16)

along the equilibrium path. Moreover, since these c workers will be the only ones to retain
their import-competing skills when the state of the import-competing sector advances to 1+1,

i.e., when the skills of the c -

c

workers who chose to leave the import-competing sector

as a result of the liberalization in round i depreciate, they define that state:

I = 1,2

=

n—i

(17)

Substituting (16) into (17) yields
=

I = 1,2

n—i

(18)

While (16) and (18) depict the allocational decisions of import-competing workers and

the state of the import-competing sector as a function of current and lagged equilibrium
tariffs, respectively, I also need to consider the behavior of workers if either country were to

deviate from the equilibrium tariff t

and

play '. If workers observed a government

playing pq, then all workers with import-competing skills in the deviating country would
return to enjoy the rents in that period and in all future periods. However, all workers with
import-competing skills in the other (non-deviating) country might not return in that period to
the import-competing sector, since their government is still (for that period) playing a low

19

cooperative tariff at which they can not all earn the reservation wage. However, if these
workers choose not to return until their government reverts to tt" next period, they risk
loosing their import-competing skills. In what follows, I assume that this latter effect

dominates, so that in the event that either country is observed to play tN, all importcompeting workers with import-competing skills in both countries return to their import-

competing sector. This assumption allows me to avoid asymmetries across countries that
would add further to the complexity of the problem, but the assumption is otherwise

inesscntial. I thus have
=

e if t=t" and/or t=ehl.

(19)

Now consider the welfare associated with the various tariff choices. In the stationary

model of the previous section 1 defined W(t=t',r=t'), W(r=V,t=tM), and
W(t =t",c ' =tc) in (13), (14), and (15), respectively. In that model, e played the role of e1 in
the present setting. Everything else is the same. Thus, using (13), (14). (15), (18) and (19), 1
have

=

—

(')2
—

—

t)8

(t)2

—

(20)

1+r) +
(21)

i— 2
]

20

=w(tNfN
' In_i
C)
—

p((a)2+
P
+

(1)2
4

—

-

W

1+y

2(1+i)

(ti)2

+

(22)

2

To derive the incentive constraint analogous to (10), 1 now define Z1, the discounted welfare

under cooperative tariffs into the infinite future as viewed from a period in state i. by

ôX(w11 (t',1, $.) + 6A(w12 (ti.2, ti,2)
+ 8Mw1,3

.1 + 8 (1—A) (w142 (ti,2, t7,2) +

+

+ o i— {w1, (ti,1, 4.)
+ 8(1—A) {w441
+ 8Mw1,1

+ 8Mw1,2 (4.2,4.2)

(ti,i,ti.i)

+ .

+ 6Mw142

+

.

.

I I 1+ 8 (i—A) {w1 (4,4)

(4.2, ti,2) + .

+ 8(1—A){w1,1(t7,1,tI,1) + ... H + 8(1—A) {w1(4,t)
+

6Mw1,1 (ti,1, 4,) + . . . I + 8(1—A) {w1 (4,4) + . . .

= t and

where I adopt the convention that

constraint

for t, ic{I

Wi (e", 4, t1) — W1

= W for jn-i. The

incentive

n} is then

(4,4)

z1——1w1 (1N, eN, t51)

Starting with round n, (23) defines the range of

(23)

t1 that is consistent with

t:(ti)=o. For i=n, future tariffs are stationary (at zero) along the equilibilum path, arid

is simply ___W(r=O,t=O). Thus,

(23) becomes

21

4

(24)

Wn(tO,tO)(1_6)Wo(tuJ,tnC,tnCl)+ 6w0(V,ttl,t..1)

Using (24), and noting that the left-hand side of (24) is independent of t1 while the right-

hand side is increasing in r1, t(t_1)O is attainable for r_1E(O,ti], with t_1 defined
implicitly by

W0(eg=O,trO) = (1—6) Wfl(t",f=O,C..L) +
To characterize the most-cooperative tariff for earlier rounds, it is useful to rewrite the

incentive constraint in an alternative form:
—

w1(t7,tff)
(1-A) w1 (t7,

—

6

4) + A (P11,1 (4,, t7)

+

ZJ,1])

(25)

r,faNaN C

With some manipulation, (25) can be shown to be equivalent to (23).

For inI, (25)

becomes

P1,,1 (4.1, 41)

(

1—6(1—A)

] ((1—6) fr?0.1 (t", 4.1 t2) +6w,,1 (IN, V'. t2)
(26)

—

Using (26), and noting that the left-hand side of (26) is

independent of t2 while the right-

hand side is increasing in t.2, the maximum r..2 consistent with

by r2 is defined implicitly by
22

(t1(r..2))=O, denoted

].

=

i—o

]

I (1—6)

W1(t',x..11t..2) +ow,,1 (eN, eN,t2)

—

Then for t2c[t_1,;_2j,1 t_1(r_2) is defined by

W,,1 (t°1

C)

1-6 (1-A)

=

1-6

c t2)
[(1-6) Wn—i (fl •'n—I

1 I
I, I fcO
— _2Wn(tc=O

+ÔW,,1 (t", eN, t2)]
(27)

Since the right-hand side of (27) is increasing in r2 while the left-hand side is independent

of t.2, and since at t..1 the right-hand side of (27) must decline in t1 at a faster rate than
the left hand side of(27), t1(t2) is increasing in r2.
Finally, for ic {n-2,...I }, I use the fact that (23) must hold with equality at t(r..1) for

ie {n-I

1} along the equilibrium most-cooperative liberalization path. Thus, evaluating (23)
6A

for i+l at tt.1(r), multiplying both sides by

1-6(1—A)

with ie{n-2

1), yields

23

, and subtracting it from (25) for i,

I [Pt1 (t", t, 4) — P?1 (4,4) +

1 (V'. fN, 4)

(P?1,1 (, tf,1 (4) , 4) + __w1,1 Ct1, ?", 4)1

—

U1

(4,
(28)

for i€{n-2,..., 1). Starting with i=n-2 and working back to 1=1,1 can then define

for ti1c(ri,t7i]

W5(tI,?7) = Uj(tjC,tji)
with

t(t1) by
(29)

t defined by

W1($,4)

=

U1

Again, since U1(

U1(

(4.

) is increasing in t..1 while F$(t,t) is independent of r1, and since at

) must decline in t at a faster rate than

W(r7,t), £7(t..1) is increasing in t1.

as Figure 4 depicts. It can also be shown that

t7(t1)

?71(t51)

for

.1 E

C

,n

2,

)

(30)

This ensures that e7(r71) is continuous over the entire interval [O4].

Figure 5 depicts the most-cooperative trade liberalization path starting from a tariff to,

under the assumption that free trade is achievable from r3 in n rounds of liberalization. The

left hand quadrant depicts t(t1) as a continuous and increasing function lying below the

24

45 line. The figure illustrates a t0 which can be liberalized in 6 rounds. The right hand
quadrant displays the most-cooperative path of liberalization, starting from t0, that is implied

by £ (t,1).

The

initial liberalization from to to f

induces a portion of the import-

competing workers to leave the sector and move to the rest of the economy, where their
import-competing skills are at risk of depreciating. Once their skills depreciate, and the
workers lose their ability to seek rents in the import-competing sector in the event of a return

to high tariffs, the enforcement issues associated with sustaining the tariff level t are
mitigated, making possible the next round of liberalization, which results in tariff reductions

to t. This round of liberalization induces a portion of the remaining import-competing
workers to leave the sector and move to the rest of the economy, placing their importcompeting skills at risk of depreciating, and the process of liberalization continues,

LV. The 'Bicycle' Theory
In the previous sections, 1 developed a model of trade liberalizing rounds in which the

process of trade liberalization is gradual. All else equal, the greater the amount of rentgenerating resources that will be displaced when the liberalization is completed, the longer
will be the process of liberalization, and the greater will be the number of rounds required to

bring it about. In this section, I return to one of the central questions which motivated this
paper, and examine the implications of the "failure' of a round for current levels of
multilateral tariff cooperation. As discussed in the Introduction, there is a widely held view

25

that failure to move forward in multilateral liberalization will not simply mean the end of
further liberalization, but must lead as well to a retreat from present levels of cooperation. 1
now examine that view within the context of the model developed above. In particular, I ask
whether the achievements of the previous round can be sustained in a period in which the
(premature) end of the liberalization process becomes apparent.

In the model developed thus far, new rounds occur whenever import-competing
workers who have left the import-competing sector as a result of the previous round's
liberalization lose their import-specific skills, and hence lose their ability to earn rents in the
import-competing sector in the event the government were to renege on the promise of low

cooperative tariffs to which it agreed in the previous round. This reduction in the rentgenerating potential of tariff hikes relaxes the incentive constraint that defines the most
cooperative tariff in any period, and allows countries to liberalize further.

I now introduce the assumption that both governments must also have the political
will" to engage in a new round of tariff liberalization: without this political will, the slack
created in the incentive constraint by the process I have modeled above would go unused in

supporting further liberalization. While admittedly ad hoc, the introduction of political vill in
this way allows me to consider the possibility that the necessary conditions for a successful

round might one day fail to materialize. In particular, I assume that governments begin the
process of liberalization in possession of this political will, but that in each period, after the
state of the import-competing sector for the period is revealed, there is a constant probability
p that the political will for further liberalization in future rounds is permanently lost, and
therefore that there will be no further liberalizing rounds in future periods. i.e.. tariffs will

26

remain stationary at the lowest level sustainable at that time. The timing of events and

decisions in the rest of the period is otherwise as before: first the state of the import-sector is
determined; then the state of political will is observed; then, governments set tariffs for the
period; and finally, workers make their allocation decisions.

It is apparent that I can no longer restrict my focus to monotonic liberalizations, since
the question I address now is whether a retreat from the progress of previous rounds is
inevitable when it becomes known that future rounds are impossible. However, I continue to
restrict my discussion to cases in which such a retreat, if it were indeed to occur, would be
sufficiently small to leave some of the import-competing workers whose import skills remain

intact still choosing to work outside the import-competing sector. This will ensure that, along
the equilibrium path, domestic import-competing prices continue to be fixed at w/(1 +y), and
therefore that workers' allocation decisions continue to depend only on the present-period's
tariffs.4

Suppose, then, that with p> 0 and fixed, the initial e1 was such that the mostcooperative liberalization path would take n rounds to complete (reach free trade) if it did not
end "prematurely" (if governments did not loose their "political will" before the last round

was completed). I continue to define t as the most-cooperative tariff sustainable in the ilh
state of the import-competing sector, given that political will for further liberalization still

That is, I characterize cases where any equilibrium retreat from liberal trade policies is
sufficiently small that it does not undo more liberalization than was achieved in the preceding
round. This will ensure that workers who would care to reverse their allocation decisions and
return to the import-competing sector are limited to those that were displaced by the
preceding round and therefore still possess their import-competing skills.
27

exists. With t denoting the stationary cooperative tariff that can be supported in the event

that the process of liberalization ends prematurely in state i, t(t1) is defined implicitly by
the incentive constraint that must hold in a period when political will has been lost, but the
import-competing sector is stilt in state i:

W (V', t, cT1) —
—

W

(t1, t)

[W

(t, t1)

(31)

W1(tN,tIQ,ti_i)]

Defining K1 analogously to Z in the previous section, the incentive constraint for

t,

i

C 1,...n , given that the import-competing sector is in state i and governments still

maintain political will for further liberalization, is given by

w

t51) - W(t,ti)
+ (i—A) p??1 (

(t1)

+ AC 1—p) Lw1,1

,

]{(1-A) (1-p) W1

(rf_1) ) +

(tin, 4.i) +
—

1C C

ApP?141 (IsCi,i

K1,1]

}—

.A P.T1 (t". t".

C

= 4tj itj ,tj_1 ,tj,i,
Written in a form analogous to (28), (32) becomes

28

(4) ,

A1,1

(t, ti)

(4)

(32)

(C) ?;., (vi)

P/1 (ci, i) + —2-— -1-w141

[

JEW1 (t". C. 4) — W1 (C, C)
(33)

+

W1

('e" N r..1) J

• ___. W1+1 C?",

[W11 (tN,

—

r) ] —

_P_ w (t

(?f1) t51 (ef) )

As in the previous section, t(r..1)=O and

while t(t1)for I E

(

(C) C)

.1(t2) can be characterized using (32).

n—2,...,1 ) can he derived recursively using (33). starting with i=n-2

under the knowledge that free trade is reached in the th round. Figure 6 depicts f(t71) in

art analogous fashion to its depiction in Figure 5. But (31) determines t(t1), and the
question of whether existing tariff levels can be sustained when the liberalization process

arrives at a premature end amounts to whether (r..1) -

(r1)

for i c ( l,...,n I. or,

using (31) and (32), whether

R1(?1(r_1) ,t..1,ff,1(t1) ;k141(tff) ) 2 X1(t1=I(t5.1) ,ti_j)
since at

(34)

t, R,( )must decline in t more slowly than the left-hand side of(32).

It is ctcar that the maximum t1 from which free trade can be reached in the th

round, t1, is equal to the maximum t1

from which free trade could be sustained in the flth
29

round in the event political will for future liberalizations were lost, denoted by t in Figure
6. This reflects the fact that, with the nth round achieving free trade, the political will for
future rounds of liberalization is irrelevant. However, under my assumption that any
equilibrium retreat from liberal trade policies does not undo more liberalization than was

achieved in the previous round, it is straightforward to prove by contradiction using (34) that

> 7(t) for t1€[t1,rJ, since the discounted expected benefits of maintaining

cooperation along the equilibrium path, given that future liberalization from t(t71)is
expected--the left-hand side of (34)--must be greater than the discounted benefits of

maintaining stationary cooperation at t(4..1)--the right-hand side of(34). This is depicted in
Figure 6. The right-hand panel depicts the most cooperative liberalization path for a

hypothetical case taking three rounds to complete by the solid line, while the implications of
a loss of political will after the second round are depicted by the dashed line. Hence, the

political will for undertaking further liberalization is required to sustain current levels of
liberalization. Put differently, a premature end to the liberalization process must lead to a
retreat from the levels of tariff cutting achieved in previous rounds.

V. Conclusion
I have presented a model of trade liberalization in which "gradualism' is an
endogenous outcome. In order to do this, I have adopted many simplifying assumptions
along the way. Some of these assumptions are inessential for the results, but others are

30

clearly more substantive. In this section. 1close by commenting on two of the more
substantive.

First. I have focused on the resource movements in and out of import-competing
sectors

during the process of liberalization, but have ignored the analogous resource

movements with regard to export sectors. If resources moving into the export sector must
attain sector specific skills from which they then cam rents, the process I have modeled in the
import sector could run in reverse in the export sector, eventually putting a halt to
liberalization when the rent-earning resources in the export sector grow sufficiently large

relative to the shrinking rent-earning resources in the import-competing sector. This
possibility might be attenuated somewhat if one thinks of investments in the skills of the
expanding industry as less industry-specific than those tailored to what is now a declining

industry. But it is still an important consideration that I have ignored.
Second, I have maintained the assumption throughout that the resources moving out of

the import-competing sector over time are atomistic. This is important, since knowing that
today's departure of workers from the import-competing sector will set the stage for

tomorrow's liberalization would generally give those workers who remain in the sector today

an incentive to prevent the departure of their co-workers. In the formal model developed
here, there are no workers earning inframarginal rents along the equilibrium liberalization

path, but more generally such rents would be earned, and those earning them would have an
incentive to "organize' to reduce the rate at which workers leave the import-competing sector,

and thus the rate of future tariff liberalization. Consideration of non-atomistic import-

31

competing resources would surely complicate the model, but would provide an interesting and
important extension.

32

References

Bagwell, Kyle. and Robert W. Staiger, "A Theory of Managed Trade," American Economic

Review 80, September 1990, pp. 779-795.

Bagwell. Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger, Multilateral Tariff Cooperation During the Formation
of Free Trade Areas,' NBER Working Paper No. 4364. 1993a.
Bagweli, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger, "Multilateral Tariff Cooperation During the Formation

of Customs Unions," NBER Working Paper No. 4543, 1993b.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, Protectionism, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1988.
Devereux, Michael B.. "Growth, Specialization, and Trade Libera1ization" mimeo, August
1992.

Dewatripont, M., and G. Roland, 'Economic Reform and Dynamic Political Constraints,"
Review of Economic Studies 59, 1992, pp. 703-730.
Dixit, Avinash, "Strategic Aspects of Trade Policy," in Truman F. Bewley, ed.. Advances

in Economic Theory: Fifth World Congress, New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1987. 329-62.

Economic Report of the President, Transmitted to the Congress, February 1992.
Jensen, Richard, and Marie Thursby, "Free Trade: Two Noncooperative Approaches."
Ohio State University Working Paper, 1984.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, "Perfect Equilibria in a Trade Liberalization Game," American
Economic Review 80, June 1990, pp. 480-492.

33

•1

---

—---—--S

'2<

a

re2
'.3

.1

I.,

ItY

Ia

Oomed:c '-ri G044

,tp.,t oad

N
UI')

L.

t(r)

)

L/CTrI' r!-o)

S

wo, o)

v(t:C r';l')

V ( I :7' 1)

S

/

C'

C

t_t

\
N
77

r;ie ::i_

rf

'C

1:3

1'
to

0

•j

2

4

1

)

UI)
I. ••—j

tt I

-

to

—C-

La.,
I'

0

1

2.

