NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PREDICTABLE RISK AND RETURNS
IN EMERGING MARKETS

Campbell R. Harvey

Working Paper No. 4621
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January, 1994

Comments welcome. I have benefited from the comments of Warren Bailey, Aijun Divecha,
Vihang Errunza, Wayne Ferson, Pierre Hillion, Antti Ilmanen, Kees Koedijk, Harry Markowitz,
James Moser, Jay Ritter, Rudi Shack, Simon Wheatley and Fernando Zapatero as well as seminar

participants at the University of California at Los Angeles, Virginia Polytechnical Institute,
Stockholm School of Economics, Columbia, Carnegie-Mellon, Chicago, Michigan, Dartmouth,

CEPR Workshop in International Finance, Maastricht, May 1993 and the Western Finance
Association, June 1993. Ahktar Siddique provided valuable research assistance. Peter Wall at
the International Finance Corporation provided answers to a number of questions. I am
especially indebted to Robert Stambaugh and an anonymous referee for their detailed suggestions.
The emerging markets data are provided by the World Bank. This research is supported by the
Batterymarch Fellowship. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any

opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research

NBER Working Paper #4621
January 1994

PREDICTABLE RISK AND RETURNS
IN EMERGING MARKETS

ABSTRACT
The emergence of new equity markets in Europe, Latin America, Asia,

the

Mideast and

Africa provides a new menu of opportunities for investors. These markets exhibit high expected

returns as well as high volatility. Importantly, the low correlations with developed countries'

equity markets significantly reduces the unconditional portfolio risk of a world investor.
However, standard global asset pricing models, which assume complete integration of capital
markets, fail to explain the cross-section of average returns in emerging countries. An analysis

of the predictability of the returns reveals that emerging market returns are more likely than
developed countries to be influenced by local information.

Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0 120

and NBER

1. Introduction
In recent years, a number of new equity markets have emerged in Europe,
Latin America, Asia, the Mideast and Africa. Little is known about these markets
other than the fact that the expected returns can be impressive and these markets
are highly volatile. Importantly, the correlations of these equity returns with
developed countries' equity returns are low. As a result, it may be possible to
lower portfolio risk by participating in emerging markets.

This paper has a number of goals. First, the average or unconditional risk
of these equity returns is studied. While previous authors have documented low
correlations of the emerging market returns with developed country returns, I
test whether adding emerging market assets to the portfolio problem significantly
shifts the investment opportunity set. I find that the addition of emerging market
assets significantly enhances portfolio opportunities.

Second, I explore reasons why the emerging market equities have high expected returns. In the framework of asset pricing theory, high expected returns
should be associated with large exposures to risk factors. However, I find that the
exposures to the commonly used risk factors are low. The asset pricing model, as
specified, is unable to explain the cross-section of expected returns. One possible
reason for this failure is the implicit assumption of complete integration of world
capital markets. Some evidence is offered that suggests that this assumption may
he violated.
Third, the time-variation in the emerging market returns is studied. Emerging markets contrast with developed markets in at least two respects. I offer
evidence that the emerging market returns are generally more predictable than
the developed market returns. In addition, it is more likely that the emerging
market returns are influenced by local rather than global information variables.
One interpretation of the influence of local information is that the emerging
markets are segmented from world capital markets. A second interpretation is
that there is important time-variation in the risk exposures of the emerging markets. For countries with stable, developed industrial structures, many researchers
studying time-varying asset returns have assumed that risk loadings are constant.
1

This is a far less reasonable assumption for developing countries. The country risk
exposure reflects the weighted average of the risk exposures of the companies that
are included in the country index. As the industrial structure develops, both the

weights and the risk exposures of the individual companies could change. This
may induce time-variation in risk exposures. In addition, the risk exposures are
likely influenced by local rather than global information variables.

I study a conditional asset pricing model where the expected returns are
functions of global and local information variables, the world risk premiums are
dependent only on global information and the conditional risk is a function of
both global and local information. In contrast to the unconditional models, this
specification allows for time-variation in the risk exposures and the expected returns.

Tests of the conditional asset pricing model suggest that the risk exposures
significantly change through time for a number of the countries. An examination
of the time-varying risk functions suggests that the exposures in some countries
move with the time-varying conditional correlations of the countries' returns and
a benchmark world return. However, the asset pricing model's restrictions are
rejected which means that this formulation is unable to explain the predictability
of the returns nor the cross-section of expected returns.
The paper is organized as follows. The second section provides a description
of the data and some summary statistics for the 20 emerging market index returns.

In the third section, an analysis of the cross-country correlations of the emerging
and developed returns is presented. The section includes tests of whether adding
emerging markets to the portfolio problem significantly changes portfolio opportunities. The average risk exposures to prespecified world economic risk factors

are also presented and interpreted. The rejection of the asset pricing theory is
characterized in mean-variance space. The fourth section details the predictability
of the emerging market returns. Conditional asset pricing models are estimated

with the goal of trying to explain the predictability and to understand the sources
of model rejection. Some concluding remarks are offered in the final section.

2

2. Characterizing the returns and volatility of emerging markets
2.1 Data sources
Data on more than 800 equities in six Latin American markets (Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Venezuela), eight Asian markets (India, Indonesia, I<orea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand), three European markets
(Greece, Portugal, Turkey), one Mideast market (Jordan) and two African markets
(Nigeria, Zimbabwe) form the Emerging Market Data Base (EMDB) of the Inter-

national Finance Corporation (IFC) which is part of the World Bank. Monthly
value-weighted index returns are calculated, with dividend reinvestment, for these
20 countries. These markets are labeled "emerging" as a result their low or middle
income status by the World Bank. In 1991, a per capita GNP of US$635 or less
implied low income, and per capita GNP between US$636 and US$7,910 defined
middle income status.
Table 1 provides some basic statistics regarding the composition of the indices. For each market in June 1992, the market capitalization in U.S. dollars is
provided.' First, the emerging markets are small relative to the U.S., Japan and
U.K. equity markets. However, some emerging markets are larger than one might
think. For example, capitalizations of Mexico and Taiwan are similar to those of
the markets in Italy and the Netherlands. There are ten emerging markets that
are larger than the smallest European market (Finland US$13.6 billion). The total capitalization of the emerging markets is US$747.1 billion. This represents 8%
of the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) world capitalization.

Similar to the MSCI method for calculating country equity indices, the IFC
uses a subset of the stocks trading in the emerging market. Stocks are selected for
inclusion in the index based on size, liquidity and industry. The IFC targets 60% of
the total market capitalization of the country and 60% of the total trading volume.

For most markets, the exchange conversion is based on a rate quoted on
the last day of the month in the Wall Street Journal or the Financial Times.
When a number of exchange rates exist, the IFC uses the nearest equivalent "free
market" rate or a rate that would apply to the repatriation of capital or income.
In some cases, even the newspaper rates are not used and the IFC relies on their
correspondents in the particular market. See IFC (1993).
3

The indices do not include stocks whose issuing company is headquartered in an
emerging market but listed only on foreign stock exchanges. In addition, if several

stocks meet the size and liquidity hurdle, the IFC selects stocks that represent
industries which are not well represented in the index. A detailed description of
the selection criteria and the index construction is contained in IFC (1993).
Table 1 contains the number of stocks used for each of the IFC country indices
which ranges from 77 for Korea to 17 in Zimbabwe. These numbers seem small

compared to the U.K., Japan and the U.S. However, these portfolio sizes are
comparable to the MSCI portfolios for developing countries. For example, Harvey

(1991) reports that 15 of the 20 MSCI developed markets have fewer than 77
companies included in their indices.

Naturally, one might be concerned with the possibility of some biases being
introduced as a result of infrequent trading of the some of the index stocks. However, the trading activity of many of the emerging markets is impressive compared
to the developed markets. For example, Harvey (1993a) reports that 5 emerging
markets have higher turnover than the average turnover in the U.S., Japan and
the U.K. and 10 emerging markets have higher turnover than the U.K. However,
to mitigate the possible influences of infrequent trading, I concentrate the analysis
on monthly rather than weekly data.

2.2 Analysis of monthly returns
Some summary statistics of the 20 emerging market returns are presented in Table
1. In the first panel, all returns are calculated in U.S. dollar terms (translated using

the effective rate on the last trading day of the month). Annualized arithmetic
mean returns range from 71.8% for Argentina to -11.4% for Indonesia (whose
sample only begins in February 1990). High average returns are often associated
with high volatility. For example, both Argentina and Thrkey have annualized
standard deviations over 75%. Taiwan, whose average return is 40.9%, has a
standard deviation of 53.9%.
Given the high volatility, there will be a sizable divergence between the geo4

metric and arithmetic average returns. The geometric mean represents the average

return to a buy and hold strategy in the particular market with dividend reinvestment. The geometric mean return for the Latin American Index is 27.6%
compared to the arithmetic mean of 35.7%. A less dramatic difference is found
for the Asia index, 19.3% arithmetic and 15.7% geometric.

In the overall sample, the arithmetic average return on the emerging markets
composite index is 20.4% with a standard deviation of 24.9%. The average returns
are roughly 50% higher than the MSCI world composite index (13.9% arithmetic,

same sample) and the standard deviation is about 80% higher than the MSCI
world index (14.4%).

Although this study concentrates on U.S. dollar returns, it is informative
to consider the magnitude of the local currency returns which are reported in
the second panel of table 1. In many countries, especially in Latin America,
these returns are dramatically different as a result of high inflation. For example,
the average annual return in Argentina is 228.8% in local currency terms with a
volatility of 155.2%. The average return in local currency for the Brazilian index
is 155.5%.

Table 1 also reports the serial correlation of the monthly returns. In contrast
to the developed markets, the first-order serial correlation coefficients are higher
for the emerging markets. 12 of the 20 emerging markets have serial correlation
coefficients greater than 10% and 8 of the markets have coefficients above 20%.
The first-order autocorrelation in Colombia is an astonishing 49%. The approximate standard error for those countries whose data begins in 1976:02 is 7.1%.
These statistics are in sharp contrast to the three developed markets reported at
the end of table 1 whose first-order serial correlation averages less than 1%.2
To further investigate the properties of the data, the coefficients of skewness
and excess kurtosis are reported. If the data are normally distributed, then these
coefficients should be equal to zero. To test for normality, the following system of

2

correlation can
Harvey (1993a) finds that some of the cross-section of serial

be explained by measures of the asset concentration within each index.
5

equations is estimated for each asset i:

eit =rit —

e2 =(r1g p)2 —
e3 [(rt — p)3J/V2

(1)

—3
e4 =[(Tjt —
where p is the mean, V is the variance, e = {eit e2 e3 e4t} represents the
disturbances and E[e] = 0. There are two parameters and four orthogonality
conditions leaving a x2 test with two degrees of freedom. The test statistic re-

suits from setting the coefficient of skewness and excess kurtosis equal to zero in

the third and fourth equations. This forms a joint test of whether these higher
moments are equal to zero.3

The results suggest that null hypothesis normality can be rejected at the 5%
level in 14 of the 20 emerging markets. However, normality cannot be rejected in
any of the three developed markets reported. Multivariate tests [not reported in
the table] suggest that the emerging markets are not normally distributed. For
the eight emerging countries with data from 1976:02, the test statistic with 16
degrees of freedom is 68.52 (p-value<0.1%). For the three developed countries
over the same sample period, the statistic with 6 degrees of freedom is 9.36 (pvalue=15.4%). When the data are sampled from 1986:03, there are 18 emerging

market indices and the test statistic is 75.79 (p-value<0.1%). Over the same
period, the test statistic for the developing countries is 12.99 (p-vaiue=4.3%).
The summary statistics provide a number of contrasts between emerging markets and developed markets. Emerging markets have higher average returns and

volatility than developed markets. Many of the markets have serial correlation
which is much higher than one would expect on the basis of developed markets.
Finally, the returns in the emerging markets depart from the normal distribution. These findings will be important in later sections when interpreting both
the cross-section of average returns and the predictability of the returns.
A related test is presented in Richardson and Smith (1993). Their system is
contains parameters for the coefficients of skewness and excess kurtosis and the
test statistic is analytically solved imposing the null distribution when calculating
the asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of the estimators.
6

2.3 Survivorship bias in the emerging markets sample

There are two potential sources of survivorship bias in the sample of emerging
markets. The first concerns the general composition of the countries in the sample.
The second source has to do with the way the indices are constructed.

In general, there are many possible countries that might have been included
in the sample. Indeed, the World Bank considers any stock market in a developing country as an "emerging market." However, the small number of countries
that are included the sample are the winners. While the survivorship problem has
been extensively studied in biometrics [see, for example, Miller (1976)], the work
in finance on this difficult problem is very recent. For example, Brown, Goetzmann, Ibbotson and Ross (1992) study the impact of survivorship on mutual fund
performance.

The second source of bias has to do with the way the country indices are
constructed. While the IFC does not explicitly select stocks on the basis of historical financial performance or expected future performance, their size and liquidity
criteria implicitly reveal information about the past history of the company. This

type of survivorship bias in the index stocks, however, will also hold for more
conventional indices, such as the MSCI or FT-Actuaries. Kothari, Shanken and
Sloan (1992) examine the impact of survivorship bias in asset pricing tests.

A more blatant problem is the backtracking of some of the indices. The
EMDB was established in early 1981 and the initial indices were based on stocks

selected in 1981. For a number of countries, these indices were backtracked to
December 1975. The first sixty months of data are potentially plagued with a
lookback bias. That is, to be selected in 1981, the companies had to be successful
(or at least solvent). As a result, one might expect the first five years of data to
reveal high average returns. Indeed, some firms that may have existed in December

1975 and that dropped out of the market by January 1981, are not included in
the IFC index.
The backtracking problem is isolated to the pre-1981 data. In addition, it is
not obvious that the problem is that severe. I compared the average returns for
1976—1980 to the average returns over 1981-1992. For the eight largest markets
7

that have data back to December 1975, five have mean returns in the first period
that are greater than the second period (when measured in U.s. dollars). This is
consistent with survivorship bias. However, if the average returns are computed in
local currency terms, only two countries have mean returns in the first period that
are greater than the second period. While the importance of survivorship bias is
not clear, careful attention is paid later in the paper to separately analyzing the
full sample (1976—1992) and a 'no backtracking' sample.

3. Average returns and risks
3.1 Frontier intersection tests
A number of researchers have suggested that the low correlations between emerg-

ing markets and developed markets imply portfolio investment opportunities.4
However, one obvious question arises: does the addition emerging markets to the
portfolio problem significantly shift the investment opportunity set?
First, consider the cross-country correlations of the emerging market stock
returns in table 2. The sample period is 1986:03—1992:06 (75 observations) for 18

markets and shorter samples are reported for Indonesia and Turkey. In contrast
to the cross-country correlations of the developed market returns, most of the correlations are low and many are negative. Harvey (1991) reports that the average
cross-country correlation in 17 developed markets is 41% over the 1970:02—1989:05

sample. The average cross-country correlation of the emerging country returns is

only 12%. Argentina, Venezuela, Korea, India, Pakistan, Jordan, Nigeria and
Zimbabwe have about zero average correlation with the other emerging countries.
Surprisingly, Brazil has a negative correlation with Argentina, Venezuela and Mexico. Perhaps not surprisingly, India and Pakistan are negatively correlated.

Table 2 also reports the average correlation of each of the emerging country
returns with the 18 MSCI developed market returns. Similar to the results among

' For example, see Errunza (1983), Errunza and Padmanabhan (1988), Stone
(1990), Divecha, Drach and Stefek (1992), Speidell and Sappenfield (1992) and
Wilcox (1992).
8

the emerging markets, there are many low average correlations between developed

and emerging markets. Argentina, Colombia, Venezuela, India, Pakistan, Nigeria
and Zimbabwe have effectively zero average correlation with developed markets.
The overall average correlation between emerging and developed markets is only
14%. The final line reports the correlation of the emerging country returns with
the MSCI world market return. Similar to the results which equally-weight the
correlations in the 18 developed markets, the average correlation of the emerging
markets and the world market return is only 15%.

Figure 1 presents unconditional minimum standard deviation frontiers based
on data from 1986:03—1992:06. In the first panel, the dotted curve is based on
18 MSCI country indices. The solid curve shows the effect of adding 18 emerging

country indices to the problem. Indonesia and Turkey are not included in the
sample because of their short histories. At the global minimum variance portfolio,
the standard deviation is reduced by 6% (from 13% to 7%) by adding the emerging
market assets.

The second panel of figure 1 repeats the minimum standard deviation analysis with the constraint of no short selling imposed. This may be a particularly
appropriate constraint for the emerging market sample where it could be operationally difficult to short a basket of securities. Interestingly, the analysis does not
substantially change. The minimum variance portfolio with 18 developed returns
has a standard deviation of 14.5%. When the 18 emerging market returns are
added, the minimum variance portfolio has a standard deviation of 7.5%.
The graphical analysis does not answer the question of whether the frontier
significantly shifts when the emerging market assets are added to the problem.
Following Shanken (1986), Huberman and Kandel (1987) and Jobson and Korkie
(1989) let r {ri, r2} where r1 is the matrix of returns in 18 developed markets
and r2 represents the returns in the 18 emerging markets. The test whether one
set of assets (developed returns) spans the frontier of both developed and emerging
markets by estimating the following moment condition:

m = ?2t — a —

— trot,

(2)

where r0 is the return on the minimum variance portfolio constructed from r (all
9

36 assets), a and 6 are 1 x 18 parameter vectors, /3 is a 18 x 18 parameter matrix, i
defines the disturbances and E[iiIl, r1, rcj] = 0. Let the set of minimum-variance

portfolios generated by r1 be efficient with respect to the assets r. From Roll
(1977), we know that a regression of r2 on r1 and the global minimum variance
portfolio return should yield zero intercepts if r2 intersects the efficient set. The
slope coefficients should also sum to unity.
The test statistic due to Shanken (1986) and Jobson and Korkie (1989) is
—

(T—N—1) (a—a21)

3

(N—Ni—i) (i+à1)'
where

a,, =
a,,1

= (F1 — F,,Li)'Vj'(F1 —

= (—1)/(e—e1)

=

= L'VL
and F represents the mean returns, V is the variance-covariance matrix and t

a
vector of ones. The test statistic follows an F-distribution with (T — N 1) and
(N — N1 — 1) degrees of freedom where T is the number of observations, N is the
total number of assets and N1 are the assets in r1. The intuition behind the test
is that a line originating from F,, in mean-variance space should have the same
slope when it is tangent to the frontier of r1 assets and when it is tangent to the
frontier of all r assets. The test statistic essentially measures the difference in the
slopes. A more detailed description can be found in Jobson and Korkie (1989).
is

Table 3 reports the results of the intersection tests. I report three different versions of the test statistic. The first is the statistic detailed in (3) with a
heteroskedasticity-consistent variance-covariance matrix. The second and third
versions correct for a moving-average process of 15 months using Bartlett weights

[Newey and West (1987)J and Parzen weights [Andrews (1991)J. Given the evidence of nonnormality of the emerging market returns, it is important to assess the
sensitivity of the intersection test to different assumptions on the error structure.5
An alternative version of the test involves estimating (2) with the generalized
10

The results in table 3 unambiguously reject the null hypotheses that the two
frontiers intersect. The first version of the test statistic provides evidence against
the null with a p-value <0.1%. The correction for a possible moving-average
structure has little effect on the inference. The p-values for the statistics are still
<0.1% which supports the evidence against the null hypothesis. The intersection

tests tells us that the shift in the frontier in figure 1 is genuine rather than an
artifact of sampling variation.6

The previous analysis assumes the portfolio manager had knowledge of the
complete history of the returns in computing mean-variance efficient portfolios.
Consider an alternative exercise. The investment in month t is determined by
the weights of the unconditional minimum-variance portfolio estimated using five
years of data ending in month t —1. The portfolio weights are updated each month
and no short selling is allowed. Any survivorship bias in the pre-1981 data due to
the backtracking of the indices is eliminated because the first investment occurs
in March 1981.

If the investor is limited to the 18 MSCI developed markets, this portfolio
strategy delivers a 16.6% average return with a 15.8% standard deviation. If
the emerging markets are added to the sample, the strategy produces a slightly
higher return, 17.4%, but the standard deviation is much less, 11.4%. This outof-sample analysis suggests that the main benefit to emerging market investment
is not the increasing of returns but the lowering of the portfolio volatility for
minimum variance strategies.7

method of moments. However, the dimension of the weighting matrix is over 300
which makes this method infeasible unless simplifying assumptions are made on
the covariance structure. See the discussions in Ferson, Foerster and Keim (1993)
and Ferson (1993).
6

This consistent with recent results of De Santis (1993) who investigates

whether the stochastic discount factor that prices the developed country returns
also prices the emerging country returns.
The minimum-variance portfolio strategy does not use the mean return vector
[see Roll (1977, A.12—A.14)J. Harvey (1993c) considers alternative strategies that
target 16% conditional volatility with information affecting all the moments. The

results indicate that reward to risk ratios are greatly increased when emerging
market investments augment developed market portfolios.
11

3.2 The issue of integration

What is the risk of investing in emerging markets? How are these risks rewarded
in equilibrium? Is it appropriate to consider emerging markets as additional assets
that can be inserted into some well-known international asset pricing paradigm?
These questions cannot be answered without some discussion of international capital market integration.

There are numerous international asset pricing models that take complete
market integration as the null hypothesis. Stulz (1981) proposes a model where
expected returns are linear in a measure of world consumption risk. Solnik (1974)
pursues a global Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Black (1972) capital asset
pricing model (CAPM) where investors in various countries differ in their consumption baskets and care about returns measured in their domestic currency.
Adler and Dumas (1983) build on this model by incorporating stochastic national
inflation. The single risk factor is the return on a value-weighted world equity
market portfolio, hedged against currency risk. A final approach is a multi-beta
specification in motivated by Merton (1973), Ross (1976) and Solnik (1983) in
which expected returns are determined by sensitivities to many sources of risk.
All of these models, assume that capital markets are integrated. Rejections
of model restrictions could be interpreted in many ways. The rejection could be
a result of some fundamental problem in testing the model such as improperly
specifying the factor mimicking portfolios. Inference is especially complicated by
Roll's (1977) critique. Rejection could also be due to the incomplete integration
of the national market into the global capital market.

There are reasons to doubt that some of the emerging markets are fully integrated into world capital markets. Complete integration means that two assets
with the same risk in different markets have the same expected returns. Factors
that contribute to market integration are free access by foreigners to domestic
capital markets and free access by domestic investors to foreign capital markets.
Potential barriers to integration come in the form of: access, taxes and information.

The appendix provides a country-by-country examination of the restrictions
12

that foreign investors face as of the Spring of 1993. The degrees of restrictions
vary from completely closed to foreign investors (Nigeria) to 100% investable (nine

countries). The appendix also provides some details on a new set of indices developed by the IFC called "investable" indices. While only a short history exists
(since 1988), these new indices explicitly account for access restrictions on foreign

participation.
There are many other factors that either enhance or decrease the chance that
the market is integrated. These issues include taxes, the timeliness of trading information, foreign exchange regulations, the availability and accuracy of accounting
information, the number of securities cross-listed on developed exchanges, political risk, and the institutional structures than protect investors. In general, there
is a trend towards relaxing the factors that contribute to segmentation in many
emerging markets.8 However, the degree of integration likely varies across different
countries. As such, it is unlikely that any asset pricing model which assumes complete integration of capital markets will be able to fully account for the behavior

of security prices in these different markets.

3.3 Risk erposure
In completely segmented markets where a one-factor model characterizes as-

set returns, expected returns are priced with respect to the covariance with the
national market portfolio rather than the world market portfolio. In this case, the
expected returns on the national index would be related to the volatilityof the national market portfolio. In completely integrated capital markets with purchasing
power parity, the covariance with the world portfolio determines the cross-section
of expected returns. It is reasonable to expect that some of the emerging markets
are segmented, however, the degree and effect of the segmentation is not obvious.
Even given this suspicion of some market segmentation, it is still informa-

tive to assess the exposure of these markets to known global risk factors. In a
completely segmented capital market, covariance with a global risk factor may be
8 See Bekaert (1993) and Harvey (1993a).
13

important. It is unlikely that the national economy is completely independent of
the world economy.

Table 4 provides two sets of linear factor model estimates. In panels A and
B, both full sample and the most recent subperiod estimates of a single factor
Sharpe-Lintner specification are presented. The single factor is the excess return
on the MSCI world market portfolio. All returns are calculated in U.S. dollars in
excess of an Eurodollar deposit with 30 days to maturity. This model is consistent
with the world CAPM investigated in Cumby and Glen (1990), Harvey (1991) and
one of the models in Dumas and Solnik (1993).
In the other panels, a two-factor specification, motivated by Adler and Dumas (1983), is presented adding the excess return on a trade-weighted portfolio
of 10 currency deposits. Adler and Dumas' model allows for deviations from pur-

chasing power parity. In their equation 14 with L countries, expected returns in
a numeraire currency are generated by the covariance with the world portfolio
and by the covariances of the asset returns and inflation rates in all the countries.
The weights on these inflation covariances depend on the wealth-weighted risk
aversion in each country. The usual way to implement this model is to follow the
Solnik (1974) assumption that the asset covariance with the numeraire country's
inflation is zero: Expected returns can then be written in terms of their covariance
with the world portfolio and their L — 1 covariances with exchange rate changes.9
Econometrically, this model is intractable unless a very small number of coun-

tries are examined. For example, Dumas and Solnik (1993) are able to estimate
the model for only four countries. One possible simplification pursued in a number
of papers'° is to aggregate the exchange rate factor. Given that it is impossible
to observe the wealth-weighted risk aversions of the L — 1 countries, trade weights

(exports plus imports) are used as an aggregation method.

The aggregation of the exchange risk factor departs from the asset pricing
theory but provides tractability. One may also view this as the prespecification of
See the discussion in Dumas (1993).
See Bodurtha (1990), Jorion (1991), Bailey and Jagtiani (1993), Brown and
Otsuki (1993), Ferson and Harvey (1993, 1994a) and Harvey, Solnik and Zhou
(1993).
10

14

factors in some general multibeta model. Empirically, Ferson and Harvey (1993,
1994a) and Harvey, Solnik and Zhou (1993) have found the aggregated exchange
risk factor to be significant in both conditional and unconditional asset pricing
tests. Indeed, Harvey, Solnik and Zhou show that the loadings from these first
two factors are able to explain 50% of the cross-section of expected returns in
developed markets.

In contrast to previous applications which use exchange rate changes, I calculate the excess return on the trade-weighted currency portfolio. The portfolio
return is a trade-weighted sum of investments in 10 currencies (G-10 countries
minus the U.S. and plus Switzerland). The investment includes both the change
in the value of the currency and the country's 30-day Eurodeposit rate. While the
measure does not include emerging markets, the trade-weight on these markets
would be very small." The foreign currency portfolio return is measured in excess of the 30-day Eurodollar deposit rate. This procedure ensures that the factor
return is a traded asset and avoids the two-step estimation problem for factor
mimicking portfolios inherent in the Ferson and Harvey (1993) approach.

In contrast to the results of Cumby and Glen (1990) and Harvey (1991)
for developed countries, the world market portfolio beta has little influence on
the expected returns in emerging countries. Only one country, Portugal, has a
beta greater than one.12 The world market portfolio is significant in only seven
countries: Mexico, Korea, Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, Greece and Portugal.
Of the emerging markets sample, many conjecture that these countries are the
most integrated in the world economy.
Looking across all the countries, the world CAPM is rejected. The interAlthough some emerging markets have had very large exchange rate swings,
the factor is intended to measure the return on a currency deposit in each country.
Presumably, a large depreciation in currency, say in Brazil, would be offset by a

large local deposit interest rate. Additional details of the construction and the
data used are provided in Harvey (1993b).
12
also estimated [not reported] betas following Scholes and Williams (1977)
using one lag and one lead of the world market return. In general, there is little
difference between the Scholes-Williams betas (and intercepts) and the OLS parameters. However, three countries over the full sample have betas greater than
one: Mexico, Philippines and Portugal.
15

cepts in five countries, Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Philippines and Pakistan, are
significant at the 5% level and the correlation of the stock returns in these countries is low. The multivariate intercept restrictions of Gibbons, Ross and Shanken
(1989) adjusted for conditional heteroskedasticity and tested on the 8 countries
with data from 1976:02 provides convincing evidence against the null hypothesis
that the intercepts are equal to zero.
The interesting finding is not just that the intercepts are significantly different

from zero; the significant intercepts are all positive. Even if we use a different
level of significance, say the one associated with t-ratios greater than 1.3 (10%
level, one-sided), all 13 countries have positive intercepts. If the single factor
CAPM describes world expected returns, this would imply that these countries'
returns greatly exceeded expected levels of performance. Indeed, some of the
pricing errors are massive. For example, Argentina's pricing error is 63.4% per
annum with a t-ratio of 2.4 and Chile has an annualized error of 29.7% with a
t-ratio of 2.9. Another possible interpretation is that the intercepts are telling us
something about the survivorship bias problem. While the IFC started collecting
data in 1981, the multivariate intercept tests reach back to 1976. However, an
examination of the subperiod which does not include to Iookback bias period,
suggests that survivorship does not completely explain the findings.
Panel B of table 4 considers the most recent subperiod, 1986:03—1992:06.
Five of the seven countries which had significant betas on the world index in
the full sample have significant betas in the most recent sub-period.'3 Intercepts
are significant at the 5% level in 7 of the 20 countries. 11 of the countries have
intercepts with t-ratios greater than 1.3 and all of these intercepts are positive.
Similar to the overall period, there are some countries with very large pricing
errors. For example, Chile has an error of 43.9% per annum with a t-ratio of 3.9.
The multivariate test of Gibbons, Ross and Shanken (1989) provides evidence
against the null hypothesis that the intercepts are zero for 18 countries at the
0.1% level.

The multivariate tests suggest that the world market portfolio is not uncon13 For some of the countries, the full sample and the most recent subperiod
sample are identical.
16

ditionally mean-variance efficient. This is in contrast to the findings of Cumby
and Glen (1990) and Harvey (1991) who consider only developed market returns.
The intercept tests suggest that the shift in the frontier documented in table 3
was large enough that mean-variance efficiency can be rejected. Another way of
interpreting this is finding is by examining the Kandel and Stambaugh (1989)
critical rejection region.
The solid hyperbola in first panel of figure 2 is the unconditional meanvariance frontierfor 36 assets from 1986:03—1992:06. The dashed hyperbola is
the critical rejection region for a 5% significance level. Notice that the world
market portfolio is well to the right of the critical rejection region indicating that
this benchmark portfolio is significantly off the efficient frontier. The exercise is
repeated in the second panel of figure 2 imposing the no short-sales restriction.
While this does not correspond to the multivariate tests in table 4, it demonstrates
that even if short-sale restrictions are imposed the world market portfolio is no
where near the efficient portion of the frontier.
The two-factor estimates over the full sample are presented in the right-hand
columns of table 4. The world market beta remains significant at the 5% level

in six countries: Mexico, Korea, Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand and Portugal.
The foreign exchange risk factor has some explanatory power eight countries. It is
especially important in explaining the aggregated index returns, Latin America,
Asia and the emerging markets composite.
The addition of this second factor, however, does not affect the intercepts.
Five of the intercepts are significant (and positive) at the 5% level. Eleven have tratios greater than 1.3 and all of these are positive. The multivariate test provides
evidence against the null hypotheses at the 1.4% level of significance.

The currency risk factor appears to have more of an influence in the most
recent sub-period. The right-hand columns of panel B show that this variable loads

significantly into 7 countries' factor models: Chile, Mexico, Taiwan, Malaysia,
Pakistan, Thailand and Zimbabwe. Both factors are important for the aggregated
indices with 29% of the variance of the composite index explained. However, seven
intercepts are significantly different from zero at the 5% level and 12 have t-ratios

17

greater than 1.3. All of these intercepts are positive. The multivariate intercept
test provides evidence against the null hypothesis of zero intercepts at the .1%
level of significance.

Figure 3 presents these results using the Kandel and Stambaugh (1989) critical rejection region for the two factor model. In the first panel, it is clear that
portfolios of the world market return and the exchange rate return do not cross
the critical rejection region drawn at the 5% significance level. With the shortsale restrictions imposed, the critical rejection region is intersected. However, as
noted earlier, the asset pricing tests presented in table 4 allow for unrestricted
short selling.
Two additional world risk factors were considered.'4 In contrast to developing

countries, many of the emerging markets have undiversified industrial sectors.
Given that many of these equities are resource based, the emerging market equities
may have significant exposure to price fluctuations in an index of natural resources.
Bivariate regressions are estimated using the percentage change in the Commodity

Research Bureau's (CRB) industrial inputs index in excess of a risk-free rate.
There was only one country, Indonesia, that had a significant exposure to this
factor.

The emerging economies also have larger proportional agricultural sectors
than the developed economies. Factor models were estimated using the percentage
change CRB food price index in excess of a risk-free rate. Similar to the industrial
input series, no country exhibited a significant sensitivity to this factor.
Although the tests indicate that world market portfolio is inefficient, what is
the cross-sectional relation between the expected returns and the risk sensitivities?
Roll and Ross (1993) and Kandel and Stambaugh (1993) have recently shown
that a small degree of inefficiency could result in no relation between expected
returns and risks. The first panel of figure 4 provides a scatter plot of the average
14

These factors were examined after the factor models were estimated in table
4, in response to a suggestion by a conference discussant, and, as such, should
not be considered factor snooping. Other specifications of global risk factors are

investigated by Ferson and Harvey (1994a,b). The general approach follows Chen,
Roll and Ross (1986).
18

returns and the world market betas over the recent subperiod. The cross-sectional

regression line is also plotted and is insignificant. None of the cross-sectional
variation is explained. If the loadings from the second risk factor are added to the
estimation, the regression is still insignificant at the 5% level.

The second panel of figure 4 presents the same average returns against their
standard deviations. The cross-sectional regression line of the average returns
on the volatilities is also presented with and without the influential Argentinian
observation. The regression using all countries is significant at the 0.5% level. The
own variance has more explanatory power than the beta with respect to the world

portfolio. These results support the interpretation that many of the emerging
markets are not fully integrated into world capital markets.'5
There are other reasons why the unconditional CAPM could fail aside from
the market integration issue. For example, the linear factor specification in table
4 assumes that the conditional risk exposures are constant over the estimation
period. The differences in the magnitude of the some of the risk coefficients in

the full and most recent subperiod suggest that exposures may be time varying.
Indeed, a rejection of the unconditional CAPM does not imply a rejection of the
conditional CAPM.

4. Analysis of conditional risk
4.1 Predictable returns in emerging markets

Table 5 presents an analysis of the predictable variation in the emerging market
returns. Linear regressions of the emerging market returns on three sets of information variables are detailed. The first set consists of common world information
variables. The second includes only variables that are specific to the country being
examined. The final set combines the local and country-specific information sets.
To provide a direct comparison to research on developed markets, the world
Bekaert and Harvey (1993) present a model where the time-series of expected
returns is generated by both the covariance with the world return and the variance
of the country return weighted by the probability that the market is integrated.
19

information set follows Harvey (1991).16 The set includes lagged values of the

MSCI world return, the return on the U.S. three-month Treasury bill minus the
one-month return, the yield spread between Moody's Baa and Aaa rated bonds
and the Standard and Poor's 500 dividend yield minus the one-month U.S. Treasury bill return. The only difference between this information set and Harvey's is
the exclusion of the January dummy variable.
The first column of adjusted R2s results from regressions on the world information variables. Notice that the sample periods are slightly different than the
table 4 regressiOns. This due to the unavailability of some of the local information
variables which will be used in later analysis. Heteroskedasticity-consistent tests

of significance (p-values) are reported beneath the R2. The expected returns in
9 of the 20 countries are significantly (5% level) affected by the world information variables. A multivariate heteroskedasticity-consistent test of predictability
based on the Pillai trace [see Kirby (1993)] provides strong evidence against the
hypothesis of constant expected returns.
The second column of adjusted R2s is obtained from regressions on the local
information variables. The local information set includes the lagged country U.S.

dollar returns, the change in the foreign exchange rate versus the U.S. dollar, the
dividend yield and a local short-term interest rate. 17
Local information is important for 11 of the 20 regressions at the 5% level

of significance. When the local information is combined with the world information, 12 regressions are significant at the 5% level and 14 at the 10% level. A
heteroskedasticity-consistent exclusion test of the local information variables provides evidence against the null hypothesis in 10 countries at the 5% level. That
16

Harvey's (1991) selection of variables was motivated by Keim and Stambaugh

(1986), Campbell (1987) and Fama and French (1988).
17
selected interest rates which were the 'most unregulated.' Deposit rates were
used for Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Venezuela, Thailand, Greece, Jordan, and

Nigeria. Call money rates were used in India, Indonesia, and Pakistan. Money
market rates were used for Korea, Malaysia, and Turkey. Treasury bills were used

for Mexico, Philippines, Portugal and Zimbabwe. The bank rate was used for
Brazil. The U.S. three-month Treasury bill yield was used for Taiwan who is not
a member of the International Monetary Fund.
20

is, in the 12 countries with significant regressions, 10 are importantly influenced
by local information. The variance ratios in the far right-hand columns suggest
that more than half of the predictable variance in these emerging market returns
is induced by local information.

From the evidence of serial correlation presented in table 1, it may seen-i
obvious that lagged country returns should predict future returns. Indeed, it is
possible that this type of predictability could be induced by infrequent trading.'8
However, using a monthly frequency should diminish this influence. Interestingly,

in the regressions with world and local information [not reported], only three
countries, Colombia, Venezuela and the Philippines, have significant coefficients

on the lagged country returns.

These results contrast with the results on developed countries in three respects. First, the degree of explanatory power is greater in emerging markets.
Using the combined information set, 7 of the regression adjusted R2 exceed 10%
and 3 exceed 20%. Over the same period, the predictability of the world market portfolio is limited to 5%. Over the 1970.02—1989.5 period, Harvey (1991)
reports that only 2 of 18 developed countries have adjusted R2s that exceed 10%
using world information variables. Using various combinations of world and local
information only three countries have R2s that exceed 10%.
The second difference concerns the importance of local information variables.

In almost all of the significant regressions, local information played an important

role. In contrast, Harvey (1991) found that most of the variation was being
driven by global information variables. Using a different sample and different
instruments, Ferson and Harvey (1993) report that local information is important
in only 6 of 18 developed markets.
Some are skeptical of the predictability in asset returns because of the collective data snooping by many researchers.19 While most of the snooping is focussed

18 Serial correlation could be induced by persistence in country risk exposures
or world risk premiums. It could also be induced by informational inefficiencies.
Unfortunately, there is no way to separate these possible causes and hence no
attempt has been made to filter the data.
19 See, for example, Foster and Smith (1993).
21

on U.S. returns, the use of international returns does not provide 'out-of-sample'
evidence of predictability because of the correlation between the international
returns and the U.S. return. For example, in Harvey (1991) the rank-order correlation between the predictive R2 and the squared correlation of the country
returns with U.S. returns is 57.9% which is significant at the 5% level (p-value

1.8%). That is, high correlation with the U.S. usually implies a high degree of
predictability.

The final contrast with developed markets is that there there is little or no
relation between the predictability or emerging market returns and their unconditional correlations with the U.S. or the world market return. The rank-order
correlation between the predictive R2 and the squared correlation with the U.S.
return is only 29.5% (p-value 22.0%). A similar result is obtained when one considers the squared correlation with the world market return. In this case, the
rank-order correlation drops to -3.7% (p-value 88.0%). While this evidence is
informal, it suggests that the predictability may be genuine.

4.2 Conditional asset pricing tests

Following the unconditional analysis in table 3, I examine the influences of two
sources of risk, the world market return and the foreign exchange portfolio return,
on conditionally expected returns. In this analysis, expected returns, risk premiums and betas change through time as a function of the information variables.

Let Z', Zt,

be the world information, local information and the combined information respectively. The following model is estimated:

=

ryW

— LIt—loi

ft — Zi9
U3it = [uu2t(Zr'K)' — fu1}'
tL2t =

(4)

4it — Pi — Lit_it/i
1-5it =

(i

+ Pi) —

Zi(Z1O)'

where r represents the return on asset i, ö are coefficients from a linear projection
of the asset returns on the information,
are the fitted conditional betas, f
22

are the factor returns, U are the coefficients from a linear projection of the factor

returns on the information, p is the mean asset return, and a is the difference
between the mean asset return and the model fitted mean asset return (pricing
error). Conditioning t and u3 on Zw,t, U2 Ofl ZD and u4 and u5 on ones produces
an exactly identified system of equations.2°

The following is the intuition behind the system. The first two equations
are regressions of the asset and factor returns on the information. These are
'statistical' models of expected returns. I let the country returns be influenced
by both local and world information variables. However, the world risk premiums are strictly a function of world information variables. Next the definition of
conditional beta is used:
/
we
wt —1
= (E[u2u2tIZ....,})
E[ftuiIZ_i].
F

(5)

The conditional beta in (4) is assumed to be a linear function of the combined
world and local information.2' The last two equations deliver the average pricing
error. Parameter p is the average expected return from the statistical model.
The parameter a is the difference between the average 'statistical' model returns
and the asset pricing model's fitted returns. It is analogous to the a reported in
table 3. However, in this analysis, both the betas and the premiums are changing
through time. Furthermore, the focus is on the predictable portion of the returns.
This complicated system of equations and can only be estimated one asset
at a time. As such, not all the cross-sectional restrictions of asset pricing theory
can be imposed. For example, it will not be possible to report a multivariate test
of whether the cx parameters are equal to zero. However, one important crosssectional restriction has been imposed. Because the system is exactly identified,
the world risk premium function, Z,9, is identical for every country examined.
20

For analysis of related systems, see Ferson (1990), Harvey (1992), Ferson and

Korajzcyk (1993) and Ferson and Harvey (1993). Importantly, I ask the model to
explain the predictability induced by both local and world information whereas
Ferson and Harvey (1993) only challenge the model to explain the predictability
induced by the world information.
21 The linear conditional beta formulation is used in Shanken (1990), Ferson
and Harvey (1991, 1993) and Jagannathan and Wang (1993).
23

The conditional risk function is simply Z,c,. Wald tests are conducted to
test for the significance of the beta and to test whether the beta changes through
time.

As this system is exactly identified, there is no general test of the model's
restrictions in the form of Hansen's (1982) J-statistic. However, the asset pricing
model implies that the coefficient c should not be different from zero and this
hypothesis can be tested. Another possible test involves analyzing the model
disturbance:
tt6it

Ttt —

(6)

According to the asset pricing model, E[u6itIZ} should be zero. Diagnostics

are reported by regressing V6jt on the three sets of information variables and
comparing the predictability of the model errors to the predictability of the asset
returns.
Estimates of (4) are provided in table 6 for the subset of eight countries with
data available from 1977:04 (there are 183 observations).22 Panel A details the
results of the one factor model. Consistent with the unconditional results in table
3, the annualized average pricing errors are more than two standard errors from
zero for Chile and India and 1.5 standard errors from zero for Argentina, Mexico

and Thailand. The average pricing errors are of the same magnitudes as the
average returns indicating that allowing for time-varying betas and premiums is
not enough to get the mean returns right.
The Wald tests show that, in four of the countries, the conditional betas are
significantly different from zero. In three of these countries, the betas exhibit
significant time-variation. However, the time-variation in the betas does not help
explain the predictability in the asset returns. For the countries that have significant time-variation in their expected returns, not only are the pricing errors
different from zero on average, they are correlated with the predetermined information. These correlations are sufficient to a provide rejection of the asset pricing
specification (4).
22 For some of the countries, the interest rate data was not available before
1977:03. Zimbabwe is not included because the interest rate data begins later.
24

The results of the two-factor estimation are presented in panel B. In six of the
eight countries, the average pricing errors are worse with two factors rather than
one. The betas are jointly significant in six of the countries. There is significant
time-variation in the betas of five of these six countries. The addition of the extra

factor reduces the residual R2 on the combined information in four of the five
countries with time-varying betas. However, the correlation between the pricing
errors and the combined information is still significant for three of the countries.
Figure 4 provides plots of the conditional betas from the single factor estimation along with 60-month rolling correlations calculated with and without the
October 1987 observation. For most of the countries, the general movements in
the conditional betas are reflected in the rolling correlation measure (which is
smoother due to the overlapping samples). This is especially true in the countries with the most significantly time-varying betas, Argentina, Mexico, India and
Thailand.

The behavior of the correlations and the relation between the correlations
and market betas is important because some observers interpret increased correlation as evidence of increased market integration. From figure 4, the numerical
magnitude of the correlation has increased in five countries: Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Korea and Thailand. However, there is no necessary link between correlation
and integration. A country can have zero correlation with the world market and
be perfectly integrated into world capital markets. The low correlation could be
caused by the weighted average of the firm betas in the country index equalling
zero.

Table 7 sheds some light on the relation between correlation and beta. Interestingly, the unconditional correlation is significantly different from zero in only
three countries: Mexico, Korea, and Thailand. A test of whether this correlation
is time-varying produces no evidence against the null hypothesis of constant correlation, however, the lowest p-values are found for Chile, Mexico, Korea, India
and Thailand.23

23 The test measures whether the unconditional correlation is constant. A different and more complex test is whether the conditional correlation is constant. This
is more complex because it is necessary to model the dynamics of the conditional
25

The correlation is related to beta by the ratio the world and country standard
deviations. Table 7 tests whether the ratio of variances is constant in the following
system:

= r2t — Z_161

2it =

—

Z1O

2

—

tt3it — (PiUljt

(7)

2

is the ratio of the variance of the world to the variance of country i's
excess returns. Conditioning u1 and u3 on ZL,t and u2 on ZL produces a x2 test
of whether this ratio is constant with 8 degrees of freedom.
where

This decomposition helps interpret the observation that correlations of the
emerging market returns and the world market return are shifting through time.
For three of the countries, Argentina, Chile and Thailand there is evidence in
table 7 against the null hypothesis that the ratio of variances is constant. For two
other countries, Mexico and India, the evidence in table 6 suggests that the conditional betas are changing through time. Each or both of these two effects could
cause time-variation in correlations — or they could cancel each other out. But,
importantly, the correlation measure, the ratio of volatilities, and the conditional
betas, are not sufficient to make inference about the degree of integration in these
capital markets.

4.3 Future directions for asset pricing in emerging markets

In contrast to the evidence in developed markets, the global unconditional asset pricing models are unable to explain the cross-section of expected returns in
emerging markets. Also different from the evidence in developed markets, the
analysis of conditional risk and risk premiums suggests that significant pricing
errors persist and the standard asset pricing models do not account for the predictability in the emerging market returns. One likely factor contributing to the
failure of these models is the lack of integration of the emerging markets into the
world capital markets.

variance processes for both the country and the world portfolio.
26

Indeed, there are significant barriers to free capital flows in many of the
countries in the sample. For example, foreigners could not directly participate in
the Korean equity market. While the strict controls were dismantled at the end
of 1992 [see Chuppe and Atkin (1992)], the Korean market is effectively off limits

throughout our sample.

There are other countries which have two classes of trading. For example,
in Thailand, identical stocks trade on Main (for domestic investors) and Alien
(for foreign investors) Boards. Foreigners are restricted to a certain proportion of

the capitalization (which depends on the industry). Bailey and Jagtiani (1993)
show that the Alien-Main premium is significantly different from zero and changes

through time.

The segmentation of these markets make it unlikely that expected returns
will adhere to a global asset pricing model. In a completely segmented market,
own volatility (which is usually idiosyncratic in a global asset pricing model) may
be priced.24 Indeed, the evidence in figure 4 is suggestive of a relation between
own volatility and the cross-section of expected returns. In a segmented market,
covariance with global factors may appear to be priced to the extent that there is

correlation between the local market volatility and global factors.

Empirical asset pricing research has either assumed complete segmentation
[for example, Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972), Fama and MacBeth (1973), Gibbons (1982) and Stambaugh (1982)], complete integration [for example, Harvey
(1991), Dumas and Solnik (1993) and this paper], or a combination — partial
segmentation. None of these models accounts for time-varying integration. A
reasonable prior (especially with emerging markets) is to expect a high degree of
segmentation early in the market history and increasing integration with world
capital markets as we approach present day.
An asset pricing specification that allows for time-varying integration should
let both the covariance with the world market and the covariance with the local

24 See, for example, Errunza and Losq (1985) and Eun and Janakiramanan
(1986) for models of partial segmentation.
27

market return to affect the conditional mean:

=

— &t).1Covt_i[rt,

r]

— (1

—

t))4_1Covt_i[rt, rt]

(8)

where r3 is the return on security j in country i, r1 is the return on the local
country index, cbt is the measure of time-varying integration (1= complete integration, 0=complete segmentation), and ) is a measure of risk aversion (w=global,
i=country specific). The key to estimating this type of model is the specification
This research direction is being pursued in Bekaert and Harvey (1993).

of .

5. Conclusions
This paper provides the first comprehensive analysis of 20 new equity markets in emerging economies. These markets have historically been characterized

by high average returns and large volatility. However, given the low correlation
with developed country returns, the evidence suggests that the emerging market
returns are not spanned by the developed market returns. As a result, inclusion
of emerging market assets in a mean-variance efficient portfolio will significantly
reduce portfolio volatility and increase expected returns.

Next, the risk of emerging market equities is analyzed. Risk exposure is
interlinked with asset pricing theory. That is, exposure is only meaningful if it is
rewarded in equilibrium. However, equilibrium models of global asset pricing take,

as given, the complete integration of world capital markets. Applying standard
one and two-factor global asset pricing paradigms leads to large pricing errors.
The betas are unable to explain any of the cross-sectional variation in expected
returns.

Finally, the predictability of the emerging market returns is investigated.
Both world and local information variables are used to forecast the returns. There

are three important differences between the predictability in emerging and in
developed markets. First, in developed markets, the market's correlation with the
U.S. return is closely linked to the degree of predictability. In emerging markets,
there is no significant association between correlation with the U.S. portfolio and
predictability. Second, the amount of predictability found in the emerging markets
28

is greater than that found in developed markets. Third, local information variables

play a much more important role in predicting emerging market returns. Indeed,
over half of the predictable variance in the emerging market returns can be traced
to local information.

Predictability can be induced by time-varying risk premiums, time-varying
risk exposures or a combination of the two. Given the nature of the predictability,
in that it is strongly influenced by local information, it is most likely driven timevarying risk exposures. When a model is estimated that allows for all of the
moments to change through time, there is some evidence of time-varying risk
exposures. However, the conditional asset pricing models fail to price the emerging
market assets correctly on average and are unable to account for the time variation
in expected returns.

The fact that much of the predictability is induced by local information is also
consistent with the possibility that some of these countries are segmented from
world capital markets. Future research will investigate an asset pricing framework

that allows for the possibility of incomplete integration and for the degree of
integration to change through time.

29

References
Adler. Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio selection and corporation
finance: A synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925—984.
Andrews, Donald W. K., 1991, Heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance
matrix estimation, Econometrica 59, 817—858.

Bailey, Warren and Julapa Jagtiani, 1993, Foreign ownership restrictions and premiums for
international investment: Some evidence from the Thai capital market, Working paper,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
Bekaert, Geert, 1993, Market segmentation and investment barriers in emerging equity markets, in Stijn Claessens and Sudarshan Gooptu, Eds., Portfolio Investment in Emerging
Markets (World Bank Discussion Series).
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, Time-varying world market integration, Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Black, Fischer, 1972, Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing, Journal of Finance
45, 444-455.

Black, Fischer, Michael C. Jensen and Myron Scholes, 1972, The capital asset pricing model:
Some empirical tests, in: Michael C. Jensen, Ed., Studies in the theory of cap ztal markets
(Praeger, New York).
Bodurtha, James N. Jr., 1990, International factors and U.S. equity excess returns, Working
paper, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
Brown, Stephen J., William Goetzmann, Roger C. Ibbotson and Stephen A. Ross, 1992, Survivorship bias in performance studies, Review of Financial Studies 5, 553—580.
Brown, Stephen J. and Otsuki, Toshiyuki, 1993, Risk premia in Pacific Rim capital markets,
Pacific Basin Finance Journal 1, 235—262.
Campbell, J. Y., 1987, "Stock Returns and the Term Structure," Journal of Financial Economics 18, 373—400.

Castelin, Mark and Douglas Stone, 1990, Fundamental factors affecting investing in emerging
markets, Working paper, Frank Russell Co., Tacoma, WA.

Chen, Nai-fu, Richard R. Roll, and Stephen A. Roll, 1986, Economic forces and the stock
market, Journal of Business 59, 383—403.

Chuppe, Terry M and Micheal Atkin, 1992, Regulation of securities markets: Some recent
trends and their implications for emerging markets, Working paper, International Finance Corporation, Washington, DC.
Cumby, Robert E. and Jack D. Glen, 1990, Evaluating the performance of international mutual
funds, Journal of Finance 45, 497—521.
Dc Santis, Giorgio, 1993, Asset pricing and porfolio diversification: Evidence from emerging
financial markets, Working paper, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA.

Divecha, Arjun, Jaime Drach and Dan Stefek, 1992, Emerging markets: A quantitative perspective, Journal of Portfolio Management 19, 41—56.
Dumas, Bernard, 1993, Partial-equilibrium vs. general equilibrium models of international capital market equilibrium, in Rick van der Ploeg, Ed.. Handbook of International Macroeconomics (London: Basil Blackwell, forthcoming).

30

Dumas, Bernard and Bruno Solnik, 1993, The world price of exchange rate risk, Working
paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Errunza, Vihang R., 1983, Emerging markets: New opportunity for improving global portfolio
performance, Financial Analysts Journal 39, 51-58.
Errunza, Vihang R. and Etienne Losq, 1985, International asset pricing under mild segmentation: Theory and test, Journal of Finance 40, 105—124.
Errunza, Vihang R. and P. Padmanabhan, 1988, Further evidence on the benefits of portfolio
investments in emerging markets, Financial Analysts Journal 44, 76—78.

Eun, Cheol S. and S. Janakiramanan, 1986, A model of international asset pricing with a
constraint on the foreign equity ownership, Journal of Finance 41, 897—914.
Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
Journal of Political Economy 81, 607—636.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1988, "Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns," Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3—26.
Ferson, Wayne E., 1990, Are the latent variables in time-varying expected returns compensation for consumption risk, Journal of Finance 45, 397—430.
Ferson, Wayne E., 1993, Theory and empirical testing of asset pricing models, in Robert A.
Jarrow, William T. Ziemba and Vojislav Maksimovic, Eds., (North Holland, forthcoming).

Ferson, Wayne E., Stephen R. Foerster and Donald B. Keim, 1993, General tests of latent
variables models and mean-variance spanning, Journal of Finance 48, 131—156.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1991, The variation of economic risk premiums,
Journal of Political Economy 99, 285—315.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, The risk and predictability of international
equity returns, Review of Financial Studies 6, 527—566.

Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994a, Sources of risk and expected returns in
global equity markets, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994b, An exploratory investigation of the fundamental determinants of national equity market returns, in Jeffrey Frankel, Ed., The
internationalization of equity markets University of Chicago Press and NBER, forthcoming.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1993, Do arbitrage pricing models explain the
predictability of stock returns, Working paper, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
Foster, F. Douglas and Tom Smith, 1993, Assessing goodness-of-fit of asset pricing models:
The distribution of the maximal R2. Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Gibbons, Micheal R., 1982, "Multivariate Tests of Financial Models: A New Approach," Journal of Financial Economics 10, 3—27.

Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ros3 and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency of a
given portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121—1152.

Gooptu, Sudarshan, 1993, Portfolio investment flows to emerging markets, in Stijn Claessens
and Sudarshan Gooptu, Eds., Portfolio investment in developing countries. (Washington:
World Bank).

31

Hansen, Lars P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators,
Econometrica 50, 1029—1054.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1991, The world price of covariance risk, Journal of Finance 46, 111—157.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1992, Conditional asset pricing with instrumental variables, Working
paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1993a, The cross-section of volatility and autocorrelation in emerging
stock markets, Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1993b, Risk exposure to a trade-weighted index of currency investment,
Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1993c, Conditional asset allocation in emerging markets, Working notes,
Duke University, Durham, NC.
Harvey, Campbell R., Bruno H. Solnik and Guofu Zhou, 1993, What determines expected
international asset returns?, Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Huherman, Cur and Shmuel Kandel, 1987, Mean-variance spanning, Journal of Finance 42,
873—888.

International Finance Corporation, 1993, IFC index methodology, Washington: World Bank.
.Jagarinathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang, 1993, The CAPM is alive and well, Working paper,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
,Tohson, 3. D. and Bob Korkie, 1989, A performance interpretation of multivariate tests of
asset set intersection, spanning and mean-variance efficiency, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 24, 185—204.

Jorion, Philippe, 1991, The pricing of exchange rate risk in the stock market, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 26, 363—376.
Kandel, Shmuel and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1989, A mean-variance framework for tests of asset
pricing models, Review of Financial Studies 2, 125—156.
Kandel, Shmuel and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1993, Portfolio inefficiency and the cross-section
of mean returns, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Keim, Donald B. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the bond and stock
market, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357—390.
Kirby, Christopher M., 1993 A multivariate analysis of predictability in stock and bond returns,
Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Kothari, S. P. Jay Shanken and Richard G. Sloan, 1992, Another look at the cross-section of
expected stock returns, Working paper, University of Rochester.
Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13—37.

?Ierton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econornetrica 41,
867—887.

Miller, ft. G., 1976, Least squares regression with censored data, Biometrica 63, 449—464.

Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite,
heteroskedasticity-consistent coariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703—708.
Richardson, Matthew and Tom Smith, 1993, A test for multivariate normality in stock returns,
Journal of Business 66, 295—321.

32

Roll, Richard, 1977, A critique of the asset pricing theory's tests, Journal of Financial Econornics 4, 129—176.

Roll, Richard and Stephen A. Ross, 1993, On the cross-sectional relation between expected
returns and betas, Working paper, University of California at Los Angeles.
floss, Stephen A., 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of Economic
Theory 13, 341—360.

Scholes, Myron and Joseph Williams, 1993, Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data. Journal of Financial Economics 5, 309—328.

Shanken, Jay, 1986, Testing portfolio efficiency when the zero beta rate is unknown: A note,
Journal of Finance 41, 269—276.

Shanken, Jay, 1990, Intertemporal asset pricing: An empirical investigation, Journal of Econometrics 45, 99—120.

Sharpe, William, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions
of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425—442.
Solnik. Bruno, 1974, An equilibrium model of the international capital market, Journal of
Economic Theory 8, 500—524.

Solnik, Bruno, 1983, International arbitrage pricing theory, Journal of Finance 38, 449—457.
Speidell, Lawrence S. and Ross Sappenfield, 1992, Global diversification in a shrinking world,
Journal of Portfolio Management 19, 57—67.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1982, "On the Exclusion of Assets from Tests of the Two Parameter
Model: A Sensitivity Analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 10, 237—268.
Stone, Douglas, 1990, The emerging markets and strategic asset allocation, Working paper,
Frank Russell Co., Tacoma, WA.
Stulz, René, 1981, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 9,
383-406.

Wilcox, Jarrod W., 1992, Taming frontier markets, Journal of Porfolio Management 19, 51—55.

33

Appendix: IFC Indices and Restrictions on Foreign Investors
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) began calculating market indices in
1981. The indices, known as the IFC Global (IFCG) Indices, do not take into consideration restrictions on foreign ownership. While there is a trend towards reducing the
barriers to foreign ownership, these constraints are binding in a number of countries.
Recently, the IFC has introduced a second set of indices, the IFC Investable (IFCI)
Indices. The IFCI indices reflect restrictions on ownership limits. For example, if a firm
had a market capitalization of US $300 million and the national law restricts foreign
ownership to 50% of any company, the IFC Global index uses the full $300 million as
the market capitalization while the IFC Investable index uses $150 million.
Since my paper studies the integration of the emerging markets into world capital
markets, I have chosen to use the IFC Global indices. An additional reason for using the
Global indices is the limited availability of the Investable indices (data begins in 1988).
However, it is important to understand the degree of restrictions in each market. The
following is drawn from the International Finance Corporation (1993a).25
Argentina. The market is considered generally 100% investable; some corporate statue
limitations apply.
Brazil. The market is considered generally investable. Since May 1991 foreign institutions may own up to 49% of voting common stock and 100% of non-voting participating
preferred stock. Some corporate statue limitations (e.g., Petrobras common are offlimits) apply.
Chile. Foreign portfolio investment is considered to enter Chile through Law 18657 of
1987 regarding Foreign Capital Investment Funds, which limits aggregate foreign ownership to 25% of a listed company's shares.
Colombia. The market is considered 100% investable from February 1, 1991.
Greece. The market is generally 100% investable.
India. A press release issued by the Ministry of Finance of the Government of India on
September 14, 1992 announced that foreign institutional investors (Fils) could henceforth
invest in all listed securities in both primary and secondary markets. FITs are required to
register with the Securities and Exchange Board of India before making any investment.
The market is considered effectively open from November 1, 1992. Investments are
subject to a ceiling of 24% of issued share capital for the total holdings of all registered
FIls and 5% for the holding of a single FIT in any one company. The ceiling includes the
conversion of fully and partly convertible debentures issued by the company.
Indonesia. Until December 1987, the market was closed to foreign investment. In December 1987, the government introduced deregulation measures that allowed foreigners to
purchase shares in eight non-joint venture companies. On September 16, 1989, the Minister of Finance of the Republic of Indonesia issued Decree Number 1055/KMK.013/1989,
which allowed foreigners to purchase up to 49% of all companies' listed shares, including
25

Also see Castelin and Stone (1990). Gooptu (1993) provides a comprehensive

analysis of portfolio investment flows to emerging markets.
34

forcigii joint ventures but excluding banks. The Bank Act, 1992, enacted on October 30,
1992, allowed foreigners to invest in up to 49% of the listed shares in three categories
of banks-private national, state and joint foreign. Currently only private national banks
are listed. %In a few markets, such as Indonesia, companies do not %list all the shares
outstanding. %For its indexes, IFC counts only the shares listed %at the stock exchange.
Jordan. The market is considered generally 49% investable.
Korea. Since January 1, 1992, authorized foreign investors have been allowed to acquire
up to 10% of the capital of listed companies; some corporate statue limitations apply

(e.g. POSCO and KEPCO 8%, and some are permitted up to 25%). The 10% limit
applies separately to common and preferred stock. Under the revised regulations of
June 22, 1992, effective in July 1992, companies whose foreign holdings already exceed
10% could apply to Korea's Securities and Exchange Commission to increase their limit
to 25%. As of March 1993, four companies had received permission: Korea Electronic
Parts, Korea Long-Term Credit Bank, Trigem Computer and Young Chang Akki. The
ceiling automatically declines when foreign-held shares are sold to domestic investors.
Malaysia. The limit on foreign ownership of Malaysian stocks is subject to some debate.
Bank Negara, the central bank, restricts the ownership of banks and financial institutions by foreigners to 30%. However, these limits do not appear to be strictly enforced.
Under the Bankings and Financial Institutions Act, 1989, the approval of the Minister
of Finance is required before foreign investors can buy or sell shares of a licensed bank of
finance company amounting to 5% or more. Certain non-bank stocks have different foreign share holdings limits for tax and other reasons. These are MISC, Proton, Telekom,

Tenaga Nasional, Tai Wah Garments and Yantzekiang. All other stocks are open to
foreign portfolio investment without any limits. However, the approval of the Foreign
Investment Committee is required for acquiring 15% or more of the voting power of a
company by any one foreign interest and for acquiring the assets of interests of a company when they exceed M$5 million, whether by Malaysian or foreign interests. Except
for a few specific cases, IFC uses 100% for most stocks and 30% for banks and financial
institutions.

Mexico. Foreign portfolio investment is permitted in designated classes of shares, and
since May 1989 in most other shares through the use of the Nafinsa Trust arrangement.
It is now considered generally 100% investable, except for banks, where foreign ownership
is restricted to 30%.

Nigeria. Closed to foreign investment.
Pakistan. The market is considered 100% investable from February 22, 1991.
Philippines. National law requires that a minimum of 60% of the issued shares of domestic corporations should be owned by Philippine nationals. To ensure compliance,
Philippine companies typically issued two classes of stock: "A" shares, which may be
traded only among Philippine nationals, and "B" shares, which may be traded to either
Philippine nationals or foreign investors and which usually amount to 40% of the total.
Mass media, retail trade and rural banking companies are closed to foreign investors.
Portugal. The market is considered generally 100% investable; some corporate statue
limitations apply, particularly regarding shares issued in privatization.

35

Taiwan. The market was opened to foreigners on January 1, 1991, though foreign investors must meet high registration requirements and total cash inflows much meet high
registration requirements and total cash inflows from abroad cannot currently exceed an
official ceiling of $2.5 billion. There is a 10% limit on aggregate foreign ownership of
issued capital. The domestic transportation industry is closed to foreign investors.
Thailand. Various Thai law restrict foreign shareholdings in Thai companies engaged in
certain areas of business. The Banking Law restricts foreign ownership in banks to 49%.
The Alien Business Law, administered by the Ministry of Commerce, restricts foreign
ownership of stocks in specified sectors to 49%. In addition, other laws provide similar
restrictions on foreign ownership. Restrictions are also faced by foreign investors through
limits imposed by company by-laws which range from 15% to 65%. The Foreign Board
was established in 1988 to facilitate trading in shares registered in foreign names.

Turkey. The market is considered 100% investable from August 1989.
Venezuela. Non-financial stocks are considered generally 100% investable from January
1, 1990, but some restricted classes do exist. Bank stocks are currently not available.
Zimbabwe. Effectively closed to foreign investment by virtue of severe exchange controls.

36

Table 1

Summary statistics for emerging and developed markets' returns through June 1992
Market

Country

Sample

Firms in

Cap.

Annualized --

Annualized mean
arithmetic

USS bill.

geometric td.ev.

Autocorrelatton

Pt

p

Coefficient

P-,'iur

Pt?
ikewnens

kurt,,:: rio,,:oj

returns

L,atu, America - US.

Arntiiia

1976.02

255

27

71.79

26.93

105.06

005

0.06

-010

192

Ilra.z,I

695

1976 02

50 7

21 71

3.73

60 70

0 03

-0.03

0.03

0 53

Ch,lr

0 99

197602
198502

370

3964

31.91

3964

0.18

092

40.69

32.54

0.49

0.04

1 till

3 11
3 90

u to

46.09

0.26
0.15

009

5.1

67
35
20

1976.02

128.9

56

30.52

19.04

44.99

0.25

-0.08

-0 01

0 05

1985.02

90

3 60

Venezuela

16

38.08

26 26

47.52

0,18

-007

3 18

Latin America

000

1985.02

256.2

221

35.67

27 59

39.39

027
025

-083
008

-0.04

-1110

-0.11

0 74

025

Colombia
Mexico

0).,)
)
01)0

Eai Asia - US. $ returns
Korea
Philippines

1976.02

85.9

77

18.52

13.80

31.3.8

0.01

007

0.11

000

15 8

30

49.90

38.64

0.34

0.02

006

2 07

0 111

Taiwan

1985.02

135.9

70

40.93

42.00
26 23

099
037

2 26

1985 02

53.99

0.06

004

0.13

0.15

081

°

South Asia - U.S $ returns
India
1976.02

69.9

16.94

26.56

0.09

-0.10

-0.09

0 74

2.11.5

1990.02

Il 7

60
66

20.45

Indonesia

-11.40

-1740

34.01

025

0 16

0.26

005

038

MaJsyia

1985.02

783

62

13.24

9.45

2689

-O 10

1985.02

8.3

54

25.86

23.40

22.37

0.05
0.27

0.07

Pakiztan

-0.24

0.13

11 04

Thailand

197602

438

43

21.75

1829

25.67

0.12

0.16

006

-062
261
-0.12

342

001
073
056
000
000

Asia

1985.02

4406

462

19.31

15.65

26 27

001

0.18

0 13

I -0.74

1 26

1) 20

1.98

Europe,' .5u,dcat,'A fri, a - U.S. $ returns
Greece

1976 02

13 3

32

9.43

3.40

36.25

0.12

0 18

-005

1.87

•7 :17

o 01

Jordan

1979.02

2.8

25

10.29

18 03

0.00

0.03

-0 01

0.47

0 91

7. igeria

1985 02

1.1

24

2.44

66
-6 19

37.19

0.09

-0 08

-1.76

10 90

000
000

Port ugal

1986.03

30

40 71

28.72

51.43

0.28

0 03

1 50

4 59

Turkey

1987.02

18.50

76.25

0.24

0 10

-0.18

0 98

0 68

1976.02

25
17

44.32

Ziitilnsbwe

116
116
0.9

-0.13
0.03

9 74

3 90

34.25

0.13

0.15

-0.04

0 26

I 93

1985.02

717.1

-071

1 27

ConipooiLe

{

20.36

8

J

17

II

f

24.70

0.07

]
0 07
0 00
0 14

- U.S 5 returns
197602
United l'ciigdon.

1,030 1

1.45

18.69

1600

22.80

-000

-0.08

-0.15

1976.02

2,119.7

266

17.69

14.91

23.35

0.01

-0.03

0.12

-002
022

197662

3,707.3

332

13.63

1239

IS 24

-0.00

-0.07

-0.00

-0.48

080
090
291

Benci.rnai-ks - U.S $ returns
MSCI World
197602
G-10 FX
1976.02

9,198 1
-

-

13.91

0.03
-0.05

-0.07
0 12

0.02
-0.01

-042
-002

1 71

- 033

11.36

1281
10.83

1436

-

029

063

Japan
United States

985

J.U

0 II
017

Table 1 (continUed)

Annualized mean

Couiitrv

Sample

arithmetic

Autocorrelation

Annualized

geometric

std. des.

%

%

Pt

P2

P12

of

Jvalui

Coefficient
of excess

test of

skewness

kurtosis

rioriiiil

3.03

12.90
1.87

(3.00

Latin America - Local currency returns

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia

1976.02
1976.02

228.80

155.22
123.82

14793
7953

018

155.52

197602

61.61

5348

0.17

1985.02

7238

Mexico
Venezuela

1976.02
1985.02

62 60
64 23

65.94
52.65
55.43

39.06
32 49
42.34

4024

0.37

East Asia - Local currency returns
Korea
1976.02
1985 02
Philippines
1985.02
Taiwan

Thailand

1985.02
1976.02

048
0.34

0.20
0.23
0.29
0.14
0.00
0.20

-0.02
0.20
0.15
0.05
0.06
-0.03

0.06
-0 03

003

0.12
0.04
0.13

-0.09

1.26
1.06
1.70

0.00
0.20
0.00
0.00
0.00

4.10
4.15

0.03
0.69

1 65

1.03

0.91
0.13

2.43
3.45
0.92

-0.01

1.25

53(1.

022

2.32

000

21 41

1679

54 41

46.02

30.98
40 40

33.35

19,86

5272

-0.05
0.28
0.05

27.93

0.1.1

3430

025
006

0.16

027

002

-032

081.

0.07

-0.06

-0.72
2.49

1961

-0.25
0.16

013

23.0(1

0 27
0 12

0.05

-0.15

2.45
10.19
3.76

05(3

32.47

24.02
.1.225
9.51
29.81

34.75

0 II
0.08
0.12
0.29
0.18

0.15
0.05

-0.06

17.35

8.40
1.45

-0.05

0.11

15.33

0.01
0.00
0.00

0.03
0.08
0.14

0.08
-0.18
-0.05

2.08
0.88
2.65
1.55
0.98

5.55

0.31.

072

000

037

2.98

0.05

South Asia - Local currency returns
27 UI
197602
India
-6 22
19150.02
Indonesia
13.l9
1985.02
(.Ialaysia
Pakistan

0.16

Europe/Mideast/Africa - Local currencv returns
1303
Greece
197602
lh 2
Jsrdan
197902
to 20
1985 02
'iiteria
108603
353i
Portugal
8565
198702
Turkey
21 79
Z,ti,ha1.,u'r
1976.02

0 01
0.2(1.

'

13.59
14.59

3502
2645

5007
16.33

26.46
22.49
25.35

12.00

51.29
76.59
3301.

0.10

I

-0.01

000
0.0(1.

developed market returns are from Morgan Stacks
monthly returns lot emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation. The
Ca1..sital International (MSCI) The world market return is the U S. dollar return on the MSCI value-weighted world market portfolio C-tO F is the (. 7s
dollar return to holding a trade-weighted portfolio of Eurocurrency deposits in 10 countries (G-I0 countries plus Switzerland) [details of construction an
found ix Harvey (1993b)]. Normality tests of the country returns are conducted using the generalized method of moments by imposing the restriction that
the coefficients of skewness and excess kurtosis are jointly equal to zero The chi-square test statistic has two degrees of freedom. The probability val'i
Irons the test statistic axe reported in the final column Multivariate tests were also conducted and are reported in the text.

-06

.01

.03

-.19
- 03
.02
.00

15

.13
-.02

8

.39
.12
.14

.07
-.05
.11
.81

00
.10

.07
.02
-.10

.05
07
-.10

02

.12
- .03

.06

04

.07

.05
.14

-.22

-04

-.03
.24
- 29

.03
-.16
- 10

II

-.02

.15

I4RA

.14
.14

- 03
.21

14

.15
.15
08

.09
.12
.07

.13
-.16
.05
.07

.11

.01

.02
- .09
.33
.38
.42

.22

.14

.06
.44

-.12
.25

.11

-.05
.13

.11

04)

CO!

.27
.12

.26
-.13

.04
.09

.31
-.24
.03
.15
.30

- .02

CIII

II

3

.47
.20
.24

.17
- 02
.44
.38

.35

—

- 02

13

.39

- 05

.46

.34
.06
.04

.09

20

- 10

Ml:x

-10

-.04
-.09

-.26
-.22
- 30

.11

-.10

.12
-.07

- 19
- .01
- 05

0!

- 13

.04
.0!

04

33

.26
.08
IS

14

.02
-.03
.27

.05
.10

31

24

.16
.15

.12
-.02
.20
09

.09
.02

17

12

- 13
-.14

28

.35
- UI

-.13
50

.03

- 03

17

.00

-.01)

16

.02

-.22

1<011

- 09
- 16

SEN

-06
.15

-fl

.04

06

.09
-.24
.05
.06

-.16
—II

.02
-.01

22

82

23

.17
-.01
.90

- IS
.39

.10
.16

07

- 12

- 07
43

1)7

.05

25

.31)

- 10

07

20
.26

3!

- 08

.28
.04
.32

-.10
.24

.20

36

05

46

55

.27
.45
.22
.44

48

.26
-.04

- 17
.24

.52
.08
.08

- 08

NI) IN)) MAL

.04
02

.01

-.01,

-.07
- 04

.03
.04
—II

01

.12

- 10

.0!

I'I\I<

.24
36

.49
20
.46

.35
29
-.10

- 12

15

30

'[HA

.15
15
.15

.03
05
.02
.07

.12
.41
.28

10

GRE

dat a Irons March 1 H86 to

.13

12

07

.00
.13
-.12
.08

-.12

-.03

- .03

JOlt

.1 usie

U

.02
.06

—.11

.05
-.14
-.02

.08

- .20

NCR
j

A0

.10
.20
25

.12
.29
.27

.27

POll

.05

.13
27
.17
.10

.24

01

'[1:15

j

-.02

-06

-.14
-.10
.00

-.10

ZIM

.22
.30

28
90
26

L-A

1992 (75 observations).

.31

.24

19

.63

Avia

36

28

.29

(nii

The monthly returns for emerging marketa are from the International l-'iiionr Corporation (IFC). L-A is the composite index for Latin American countries, Asia is the composite for ,ii,ian
countnes and Camp is the IFC emerging markets compositein4er Average denotes the average croso-correlution between the country and the oilier emerging markets Deveveloped is the average
cross-correlation between the Country and 18 Morgan Stanley Capitol liitrrn,nt,onal (MSCI) developed market remmirtim MSC/ world is the correlation with the MSCI value.vv-eighted world market
portfolio return All returns are calculated in U S dollmrs.

Average
Developed
MSCI world

TU 15
ZIM
b-A
Asia
Coma

FOR

NCR

GRE
JOR

PHI
TA!
ND
INO
MA L
PAK
TIl A

KOR

yEN

COL
MEX

II

10

CIII
•

15

-.05

BRA

A HG

ARC

Thbk 2
Correlations of the emerging market returns ret urits based nit ittont lily

Table 3

Frontier intersection tests
Errors

Moving average

Heteroskedastic 1

none

structure

F-statistic
{p-value}
6.943
{ <0.001 }

Heteroskedastic 2

15 lags

Heteroskedastic 3

8.0128

Barlett

{<o.ooi}

15 lags

8.183

Parzen
{<o.ooi}
The test statistic due to Shanken (1986) and Jobson and Korkie (1989) is
—

where

(T—N---i) (a —a1)
(N—Ni—i) (1+a1)

= (F—ft)'V'(—t)
= (Fi —t1)'V1'(F1 —t1)
= (I—1)/(e—e1)

=
=

r

= {r1,r2}, r1 are the returns in 18 developed markets, r2

the
returns in the 18 emerging markets, V is the variance—covariance matrix, t is
a vector of ones and r0 is return on minimum variance portfolio constructed
from r. The statistic follows an F-distribution with (T — N — 1) and (N —
N1 —1) degrees of freedom where T is the number of observations, N is the total
number of assets and N1 are the number of assets represented in r1. The monthly
returns for emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation. The
developed market returns are from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI).
and

The sample is 1986:03—1992:06.

are

Table 4
Tnconditiona1 factor model tests
Ofie factor model

Country

Sample

Intercept

(annualized)

Latin America
Argentina

1976.02

Brazil

1976.02

10.71
[0.73]

Chile

1976 02

29.66

Colombia

1985.02

Mexico

1976.02

Venezuela

1985 .02

Latin Amenca

1985.02

63.42
[2.40]

(3M1]

17.60

0.79

0.06

(1.60]

[3.18]

34.19

-0.38

[1.86)
32.54
[1.60]

(-1.1 21

L

6.93

0.51
(3.55]

0.64
[2.08]

Intercept
(annualized)

-0.00

-0.00

37.34

East Asia

-0.17

Two facto model

fl2

[-0.40]
0.39
[1.20)
0.17
(0.81]
0.15
[0.80]

(2.94]

I

/3

world return

64.06
(2.43]

0.00

11.38
[0.78)

29.4
(2.91
35.4
[2.84
18.70

-0.01

/32

world return

O 53
[1.59]
0.11
[0.47]
0.11
[0.60)
1.03

(3.94]
-0.46
(-1.31)
____________ ____________
31.84
0.84
(2.42]
[3.07]

0.06

1?

023

-0 00

-0.03
(-0.06]

[1.76]

0.01

/32

FX reLurn

1077]

023

-001

[0 72]

-1.03

0 10

[-2.67)

046

001

(2.32)

-110
[.2 89]

,

Korea

1976.02

Philippines

1985.03

(0.93)

Taiwan

1985.02

0.05

0.09

7.23
(0.97)

(3.84]

r792

[•O]

39.58

0.97
(2.51)

0.58

0.04

-0.00

10.96

-0.18

0.54

(1.68]

(-1.30)

-0.02

-12.97

027

(2 70]
1-0 56)

0.87

-0 73

[461)
-0.04

)-3 02)

0.05

(-0.57]
5.38
(0.65]
13.58
(1.76]
10.80

(0.66]

776

046

0.07

(0.77]

14.63

(1.98]

[-0 27]
0.43
(1 83]
0.62
[2.86]

[2 28)

[1.6.3)

-0.05
(-0.41]
0.21
(0.51]
0.74
(3.51]
0.05
(0.37]
0.40
[2.06]

1976.02

11.53
(1.73]

lndouiesia

2990.02

-1665

Malaysia

1985.02

Pakistan

[-0.78]
-0.81
f-0.09]

198502

18.02

Thailand

1976.02

Asia

1985.02

(2.14]

197902

\igeria

198502

Portugal

198603

Turkey

298702

Zimbabwe

197602
-

Composite

1

1985.02

L

0 11

0.71
[1.67)

lnda

Jordan

0 09

-1.47

37.17
(1.34]

197602

-026

[0.76

(2.01)

South Asia

Europe, Mideast/Africa
Greece

(-1.20]

5.69

10.67

1

-1.57

0.38

I

[-0.18]

[2.09)

-0.29

0.17

(-0.06]

[1.67]

-697

0.23

[-0.49]

(1.05]

2679

2.20

[1.44]

(4.84]

36.95

0.20

[1.13]

10.22]

-0.43
[.0.05)
8.44
[0.92]

0.21

0 20
-0.01

0.02

-2.30
(-0.26]
-0.23
(.0.05)
-9.98
[.0.64]
37.12
(1.41]
35.02
(1.07]

0.02

-000
0.15
-0.02

0.00

-1.13

[1.11]

0.50
(2.30(

(.0.13]

0.10

1

15.71

[-3 42)

1) 27

001

-0.22
.0 46]

004

-081

0 17

[.3.33]

[2.47]

0.16

036

0.08

0.04

0.37

0 05

(2.38]

-000

[1.21)

1.21

-0.05

(5.07]
0.05
[0.10]
0.06
[0.29]
0.66

[-0.12)

(3.58]

-00S

052

0.22
(2.05]
0.08
(0.78]
(0.8.3]

003

-041

0.14

0.38

-0 03

(0.40]

0.65
(2.62]
-0.86
[-3.84)

003
1

023

Dei'eloped markets

United Kingdom

1976.02

4.26
(1.06]

Japan

197602

United States

197602

2.92
(0.73]

0.47
[0.201

. Multivanate
intercept teats
8 countries

8 countries

Model

-sta6iat'

1 (actor

2.449

2 factor

(0.015)
2.493

(0.014)

1.11
(14.78]
1.18
(11.02)
0.81
[13.94)

0.49

0,53
0.63

3.97
(1.00]
2.46
(0.64]
0.98

1.05
[12.89]
1.08
[9.90]
0.95

0.27

050

(2.29]

0.43

0 56

[3.43]

-0.47

0 71

Table 4 continued)

Sample

Country

Two facto model

(actor model
/3
intercept
I (annualized)O1ieworld return

Intercept
(annualized)

i3

world return

FX return

-0.16
[-0.27]
0.93

-1.48
[-1.60)
-0.77
(-0.94)
-0.74
(-2.45)
0.38
[1.02]
-2.21
(-3.89)
0.59

2

Latin America
Argentina

198603

Brazil

1986.03

Chile

1986.03

77.06
(1.77)
00.36
(0.66)

43.8
[3.94]

Colombia

198603

Mexico

1986.03

Venezuela

1986.03

43.7
(3.20]
47.87
[2.49]
43.18
(2.25]

1986.03

Latin America

(1.42]

-037

-0.01

[-0.56]
0.82
(1.56)
0.23
(0.90)
0.16
(0.81)

0.02
0.01
-0.01

86.07
(2.04]
25.04
[0.81]
48.42
[4.57]

4t.4
(3.05]

€i3

0.96
[2.55]
-0.28
(-0.82]
0.69
(2.18]

0.10

0.08

28.66
(2.08]

0.57

0.09
0.08

01.04
(1.04)
39.24

0.00

[3.73]
39.59
(2.13]

(1.80)
0.34
[1.52]
0.11
(0.56]

1.28
[3.83)
-0.37
(-1.04)
0.87
[3.24)

-0.00
0.01

007
-0.01
0.30
0.00

(1.43)

-1.24
[.2.84]

0.17

-0.61
].1.81(

0.12

-037

0.08

East Asia
Korea

1986.03

7.95
[0.71]

Philippines

1966.03

0.6.96

(3.261
0.71

Taiwan

1986.03

(2.41]
31.23
(1.37)

[2.54]
0.72
[1.58]

0.03

India

1986.03

10.45
(0.75)

—0.43

0.03

10.11

(-2.00]
-0.02

[0.71]
.12.97
(-0.57)

(2.60)
41.36
(L90(

0.66
(3.26]
0.77
(2.66)
0.96
[2.38]

(-1.11]

-1.66

0.11

(-3.34]

South Asia
1990.02

Indonesia
Malaysia

198603

Pakistan

198603

-16.65
[-0.78]
7.75
[0.84)

Thailand

198603

Asia

1986.03

19.54
(2.04)

04.30
(2.05]
10.20
(0.92)

0.21

[051)
0.87
[4.27]
0.04
[0.24]
0.74
(2.47]
0.48
[1.97)

16.64

-0.43
[-1.98]
0.27
[0.66)
0.99
(5.63)
-0.05
(-0.34)
0.87
(3.19)
0.64

[1.68]

[3.03]

0 30

13.03

-0.01

15.71

1.57]
(1.81]

0.16

29.74

(2.79]
0.08

0.06

0.02

(0.16]

-0.41
(-0.56]

-0.05

0.86

0 40

(-3.64)
0.63
[2.20)

005

-0.89
[-2.81]

024

1.05
[-3.99]

022

,

Europe /,tlideast/Afnca
Greece

1986.03

Jordan

198603

Nigeria

1986 03

Portugal

198603

Turkey

1987.02

Zimbabwe

1986.03

Composite

T 1986 03

[

Developed markets
United Kingdom

198603

Japan

198603

Uiiited States

1986.03

Multivariate
intercept test.i
18 countries

Model

31.03
[1.56)
-4.85
(-0.70)
-7.64
[-0.47)
26.79
[1.44]
36.95
(1.13]

0.43

0.01

(1.43]
0.13
(0.96]

0.00

0.23

-0.00

11.04)

1.20
(4.84]

0.15

0.10

-0.02

(0.22]

-0.05

7.68
[0.72)

(-0.26]

8.92
)0.89(

[2.34)

5.08
(0.91]
-2.12
(-0.30]
2.73
[0.55)

0.5.3

1.06
[13.83]
1 39

-0.01
0.11

0.74

0.11
[0.80]

0.17

[-0.60]
27.12
[1.41)
35.02
(1.07)
4.28
(0.42]

(0.8.4)

0.05
[0.10]
0.13
[-0.72)

15.45
[1.78]

13.89]

3.94
10.71]

0.66

-5.06
(-0.81)

0.53

0.37
[1.14)

-10.32

0.63

)7.5l
(6.58)

08.77
[1.43)
-5.83
(.0.82]

1.21
(5.07)

0.69

1.04
(11.68]
1.32
[7.44]

6.31

0.82

(1.63)

[9.05)

0.00

0.37
[0.68)
0 16

-0.00

(0.741

0,44
(1.25)
-0.05
(.0.12)
0.38
(0.40]

-0 00

0.56

0.02

0 14
0.03

(2.04)

-1.07
(-4.28]
0.19
[1 26]

1

j

0.29

063

048

0 6i

(2.30]
-0 59
(-5.15)

0 64

E-statist'

(p-mlue

1 (actor

2.62$

{o.ool}
18 countries

2 (actor

3.012

{o.ooi)

The monthly returns (or emerging markets are from the international Finance Corporation. The developed market returns are from Morgan Stanley
Capital International (MSCI). AU returns are calculated in US, dollars and are in excess of the 30-day Eurodeposit rate. In the one (actor model,
the (actor is the world market return is the U.S. dollar return on the MSCI value-weighted world market portfolio in excess of the 30-day Eurodollar
deposit rate. In the two (actor model the excess MSCI world rtturn is used along with the U.S. dollar return to holding a trade-weighted portfolio of
Eurocurrency deposits in 10 countries (1)-la countries plus Switzerla.nd) (details of conitruction are lound in Harvey (1993b)) in excess of the 30-day
Eurodollar deposit rate. Hetroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in brackets. Hetroskedasticity-coiisistent multivartate tests are conducted with 8
assets over the full sampl. (Argentina, Brs.sii, Chile, Mexico, Korea. India. Thsiland and Greece). In the subsampl. from 86:03, 18 countries are used
(all emerging markets except Indonesia and Turkey).

[able 5
Analysis of predictable returns in emerging markets
Country'

Sample

world

2

Proportion of Proportion of l'roportionol
variance due variance due variance 'lu'

information

information

combined
information

exclude

0.003
(0.184]
0.006
(0.196]
0.098
(0.000)
0.001

-0 001

-0.000
[0 376)

2.499
(0.645)

0.551

(0.638)

0.076
[0.000]

0.078

46.210

[0 000)

[0.000)
18.054

IocaJ

local

to world

to local

to cova.r,ai,c,

0.456

-0007

0.235

0 sjt

00i'

0.441

0 349

0 211

0214

0856

-0070

0652

0 361

-o 014

0263

0853

-0 is

0.110

0 $6

0034

Latin .krnenra
Argentina

1977.04

Brazil

1977.04

Chile

1977.04

Colombia

195602

\lexico

197704

0.110

1985.02

(0.000]
-0.010
(0.422)

[0000]

[0.200)

\'enezuela

0.127
[0.000]

0.088
0.213
(0.001)
0.072
(0.053]

0212
[0001]

0062

0033

(0.039]

[0 064]

0.036
[0.013]
0 121
[0.000]
-0.019
0.679)

0021
(0040)

-0.003
(0.740)

-0,003
(0.405]

0.010

0227

(0.3.41]

0.046

(o.ooi]
13.852
(0.008]
12.021
[0.017]
9.698
(0 046]

0 145
(0.000]

1

Eant .4.uia

Korea

197704

-0.011
(0.711)

Philippines

1985.02

0.150
(0.005]

Taiwan

1985 02

0.018
(0.081)

11.837
[0.019)
15.016
(0.005)
1.246
)0.87l)

0.201
(0.000]

-0.018
(0.242]

0427

0512

0001

1.251

0213

-0 464

-0 401

South Asia

India

197704

li:donm,a

1990.02

\i,sluvsia

1985.02

-0.011
[0.846]
0.105
[0.002)
-0.014

Thailand

j

Europe 'Mideast/A tnta
Creete

197704

1977.01

Jordan

197902

Nienta

198502

-0 .136

[0.028]
5.842

0.067

0.003

0.055

[0.000]

[0.528)

0.000]

0.026
(0.004]
0.003
[0.335]
-0.018
[0.853]

-0.002
(0.288)
-0.024

[0 006]

(0.978]

(0.649]

-0.026

-0.056

(0.804)

[0.937]

0150
[0001]
0.094

)0.140(

10.589

[0.000]
0.159
(0.000)

(0.032)
24.384

0111
(0.005)
0.101
(0.001]

(0.03.3)

0.051

0.038

[0.016]

(0.016]

0.051

F

-

[0.002]

Multivariate
test of predictability
8 countries
world information

0 849

0.114
(0.369)

0.125

1977.04

0.346

[0067)

(0.003]
0.080

IX return

0 659

10.888

0.134

1986.03

197704

0 711

0045

(0.053)

1987.02

Global variables
World return

0.948

(0.000]

[0.2581

Turkey

197501

0 794

0.018

Portugal

Zimbabwe

0 607

(0.478]

(0.240)

1985.02

3.677
(0.451]
7.118
[0.130]

0.063
(0004]

)

0.018

-0020

f

j

-

-

0.144

0.719

0 13$

1.371
(0.849]

0795

0 117

0 08$

3.343
(0 502)

0.754

0 230

.1010

0.868
[0.929)
1.378
[0.848]

0.990

0 114

-0 103

0.587

0 391

0023

6919

0.456

0421

0124

0.278

0,467

0 255

0.946

0803

-0 749

.

.

.

-

[0.211]

(0.000)

1

.

-

F-statistic

.152

(0.000]
The monthly returns (or emerging markets age from the International Finance Corporation. The developed market returns are from Morgan Stanks

Capital International (MSCI). All returns are calculated in U.S. dollars and are in excess of the 30-day Eurodeposit rate. The world information
variables are: the MSCI world return, the US. three-month bill return minus the one-month return, the spread between Moody's Baa rated bonds and
Aaa bonds, and the Standard and Poor's 500 dividend yield minus the 30-day Tbaasury bill rate. The local information variables include: the local U.S
dollar return, the change in the foreign currency rate versus the US. dollar, the local local dividend yield and a local interest rate. Heteroakedaxticitycoiiaiatent p-value are i0 brackets. The propottioo of variance explained by the world information is the variance of th, fitted values generated from
the world infosm*tion variables in the regrson which includes both world and local inforutaton divided by the variance of the fitted values using
both world and local information variables. A similar variance ratio is calculated using the local information in the numerator. The first two variance
ratios do Oot sum to one becaus, of the coverienc, between lb. local and world information.

The global variables includ, the U.S. dollar return on the MSCI value-weighted world market portfolio in excess of the 30-day Eurodollar deposit rate
and the U.S. dollar return to holding a trade-weighted portfolio of Eurocw'reocy deposits in 10 countries (C-b countries plus Switzerland) [details of
constriction are found in Harvey (1993bfl in aca at lb. 30-day Eurodollar deposit rate.

Multivariate testS are conducted with 8 assets over the lull aample (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Korea, India, Thailand and Greece) The
heteroskedaaiicity-consistent test is based on PWai's trace. The F-statistic has degrees of freedom of 32 and 676.

Table 6
An analysis of the conditional risk of emerging market returns

Average
Excess

Country

Average

Pricing Error

betas=0

41.888
(27.426)

constant

returns

pricing errors pricing erots pricing errors

on Z"

on Z

on Z" 1

0.005

0.011

0.003

0.014

0.078

-0000

0.073

0075

0.127

0096

0.150

0 150

0.145

0.087

0.077

0.137

0.021

-0015

0.024

0010

-0.003

-0015

0002

-0.003

0.055

0.064

0.045

0 053

0.018

0025

0.002

0018

44.446
[0.000]
16.201
[0.439]
26.112
[0 052]
64.523
[0.000]
28.267
[0.029]
32.691
[0.008]

0.005

0 008

0.003

0011

0.078

0016

0078

0057

0 127

0075

0 132

0 123

0.145

0.091

0081

0 131

0.021

-0.005

0.032

0023

-0.003

-0.015

0003

-0003

104 588

0.055

0058

0039

0042

[0.000]
12.953
[0.676]

0.018

0.016

-0.002

0,007

betas

on Z'°"

11.678
(0.166]

11.566

8.755

6.39!

(16.020)

[0.700]

6.090
(0.637]
10.357
[0.241)

Return

A I (actor model
Argentina5

45956

Brazil

13.863

Chile

24.436

26.971

10.462

(10.724)

[0.314)
55.854
(0.000)
21.509
(0.011)
19.714
(0.020)
47.419
[0.000)
9.366
[0.404)

Mexico

24.624

23.593

Korea

7.609

(12.028)
9.998
(8.325)

India

11.513

Thailand

11.874

Greece

0.716

15.760

(7.324)
12.340
(7.391)
-1.599
(9.337)

[0116]

32.981,

[0.000]
9.655
[0.290]
19.380
(0.013]
45.730
[0.000)
3.143
[0.925]

13 2 (actor model

Argentina"

45.956

Brazil

13.863

Chile

24.436

Mexico

24.624

47.300
(27.580)
6.072
(16.967)
31.307

(9.638)
27.365

(12.552)

Korea

7.609

India

11.513

Thailand

11.874

Greece

0.716

6.351
(8.433)
16.806

(7.554)
12.683
(7.197)
3.405
(10.030)

44.891
[0.000]
19.723
(0.349]
26.842
[0.082)
114.147
[0.000)
74.269
[0.000]
65.568
[0.000)
120.290
[0.000)
32.248
[0.021)

The monthly returns for emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation. All returns are calculated in U.S dollars and
are in excess of the 30-day Eurodeposit rate. The world information variables, Z', are: the MSCI world return, the U.S. three-month
bill return minus the one-month return, the spread between Moody's Baa rated bonds and Ass bonds, and the Standard and Poor's 500

dividend yield minus the 30-day Treasury bill rate. The local information variables, z, include: the local U.S. dollar return, the change
in the foreign currency rate versus the U.S. dollar, the local local dividend yield and a local interest rate. The first factor is the U.S dollar
rot urn on the MSCI value-weighted world market portfolio in excess of the 30-day Eurodollar deposit rate. The second factor is the U S
dollar return to holding a trade-weighted portfolio of Eurocurrency deposits in 10 countries (G.10 countries plus Switzerland) [details of
construction are found in Harvey (1993b)] in excess of the 30-day Eurodollar deposit rate.
The following system is estimated for each asset v
Disturbance

Orthogonal to

= ri — Z5,
u2 = ft — Zt18

Z'11

ti1,1 = [u21u2e(Zt.1,)'
ti4fl = p, — Z11.5,
= (—o, + ii,) —

—

fu111]'
1

Zi,(Z.18)'

I

where r represents the excess return on asset i, Z is the predetermined information, 5 are coefficients from a linear projection of the asset
returns on the information, Z,c, are the fitted conditional betas, f are the factor excess returns, 0 are the coefficients from a linar projection
of ihe factor returns on the information, i ls the mean asset return and 0 is the difference between the mean asset return and the model ttt.'d
mean asset return (pricing error). The standard error of the pricing error parameter is reported in parentheses Heteroskedastic,ti-consistlnt
\Vald tests (with p-values in brackets) are reported for two hypotheses the conditional betas equal zero and the conditional beta is constant
The last three columns report model diagnostics in the form of linear regressions of the pricing errors on the three information sets world.
local and combined world and local. The sample is 1977.04—1992.06 (183 observations).

"[tesiilis are reported for a local information set that excludes the local short-term Interest rate

Table 7

The relation between emerging market returns and the world market return

Country
Argentina

Correlation
with
world

Test of
time-varv3ng
correlation

-0.013

4.330
[0.826]
7.337
[0.501]

(0.062)

Brazil

0.094

(0.077)
Chile

Mexico

0.052

11.741

(0,084)

[0.163]
10.072
[0.260]
11.637
[0.168]
9.080
[0.336]
12.134
[0.145]
7.476
[0.486]

0.241

(0.087)

Korea

0.235

India

(0.064)
-0.044
(0.072)

Thailand

0.236

Greece
____________________

(0.110)
0.153
(0.081)

Test of
me-varying
Variance ratio
15578
[0.035]
12.701
[0.123]
20 275
[0 009]
11.349
[0 183]

12191
0 130]

14882
[0.061]
16. 9 33

(0.031]
11.8.33

[0 159]

The monthly returns for emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation. All returns are calculated in U S
dollars and are in excess of the 30-day Eurodeposit rate. The world information variables, Zw, are: the MSCI world return, the
U.S. three-month bill return minus the one-month return, the spread between Moody's Baa rated bonds and Aaa bonds, and the
Standard and Poor's 500 dividend yield minus the 30-day Treasury bill rate. The local information variables, Z', include: the
local U.S. dollar return, the change in the foreign currency rate versus the U.S. dollar, the local local dividend yield and a local
interest rate. Correlation is measured against the U.S. dollar return on the MSCJ value-weighted world market portfolio in excess
of the 30-day Eurodollar deposit rate.

The test for constant correlation is estimated for each asset i:
Disturbance

U2,

—

—

U3tt — T — /.L,

t-4it

=

— o',

Orthogonal to
I
I
I

U5t = P0wOi — 1ttU3,
where r5 represents the excess return on asset i, r represents the excess return on the world market portfolio, Z is the
predetermined information, p is the mean asset return, O' is the variance of the asset return, Pw is the mean world return, c.
is the variance of the world return and p is the correlation. The correlation parameter reported in the first column is based on
an exactly identified version of the above system of equations where the fifth equation is conditioned only on a vector of ones
The heteroskedasticity-consistent standard error of the correlation is in parentheses. The test of the Constant correlation, in the
second column, is based on the overidentified system. The X2 statistic has 8 degrees of freedom
'l'lic' test for constant ratio of world variance to country i variance
Disturbance

Orthogonal to

U111 = Trt — Z_16.

= r,1 — Z19
U3t =

—

Z1

Z'

where d, is the ratio of the variance of the world to the variance of country l's excess returns. The ,.2 lest of whether this ratio
is i'onstant has 8 degrees of freedom. The sample is 1977:04—1992:06 (183 observations).

Figure 1
Minimum standard deviation frontier 1986.03 to 1992.06
A Shoit ulee stowed
1w 1$ d.oropsd

40
30
20

*

IS ews.g .

//

1w IS

sloced wwm1w

I

— 10

to
0

0

.to
•

30

a

35

40

45

50

I

2

20 f
.30

.40

.50

5nd.,d d.vtattOlI (ann*.I %I

B No tho1 sajes

50

SoCs 1w II d.o.loc..C w*I..

40

30

20

to

E0
10

.
2

20

25

30

-tO

-20

.30

I-

.40

-50

Bndard ds1itton isnnual %)

35

40

45

50

Figure 1
Minimum standard deviation frontier
The monthly returns for 18 emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation. The 18 developed

market returns are from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI). The world market return is the U S.
dollar return on the MSCI value-weighted world market portfolio. The sample is 1986:03—1992:06.

FIgurs 2
Minimum standard deviation frontier with critical rejection regIon for 1 factor model
A Shod $a4$ iSowid

— - dsW5 *wew
3 wa*.Ss

Ihot-i S4O*Sd

30

20

I':
.

30

35

40

45

50

35

40

45

50

-10

-20

.30

USCI - —
.40

-50

St.nd.id dsv$aon (.flni.I )

B No Ihod ,a$.i

50

40

.I0 i
-20

15

20

25

30

-f-

-30 -

-50

Sndatd d.vidon Inru

%)

Figure 2
Minimum standard deviation frontier with critical rejection region for one factor model
The monthly returns for 18 emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation. The 18 developed

market returns are from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI). The world market return is the U.S.
dollar return on the MSCI value-weighted world market portfolio. The sample is from 1986:03—1992:06. The

critical hyperbola follows Kandel and Stambaugh (1989). Define the efficient set constants a =
b = V't, c = 'V1L, and d = ac—b2 where are the expected returns, V is the variance matrix and L is a
be a target expected return and &2(fL) be the minimum variance for expected return
vector of ones. Let
Hence, (,o2(j,,)) is a point in the expected return—minimum variance space. Let tv' be a central-F
variate at a given significance level. }Candel and Stambaugh prove that w(p) > w, i.e. portfolio p's efficiency
is rejected if and only if

.

> ö(w1) + 52(t131)C2(/Lp)
where

is the variance of p and
w(w + 1)

Thus, &2

=

—d(w + 1)

82(w)= civ—d
61(w)= cw—d
i(w) + 62(w)ti2(f) defines a critical hyperbola in mean-standard deviation space. If the

given portfolio is to the right of the hyperbola, efficiency can be rejected at the significance level .,. The
critical hyperbola with short-sale restrictions uses the same method except the assets in the minimum variance
portfolios are must have nonnegative weights.

FIgure 3
Minimum standard deviation frontier With CritiCal rejeCtiOfl region for 2 factor models
A Sho.1 sales aSowed

oww — d

1w 36 *leS .5544aU 4
30

40
30

/ /T.
-

o5l hpstbO10 it 5% .9,5w
* two ladOti

igwCs.6 4ss ,.

20
36

IS

or

25

30

35

40

45

50

40

45

50

-20

.30 t

.50

Sindard dsyladOn (annual %)

10 shod sites

1w 36 esss W 1* shod 5110,

50•J

,::/—TTT...

20
36

3

A"1

MSCI world and eashange rite pOlfoS,e

•

to

5%

w two lodors

-

C
C
C

35

Lio
20

.30

•40

•50

Standard devIation (annual %)

Figure 3
Minimum standard deviation frontier with critical rejection region for two factor model
The monthly returns for 18 emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation. The 18 developed
market returns are from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI). The world market return is the U.S.
dollar return on the MSCI value-weighted world market portfolio. G-1O FX is the U.S. dollar return to holding
a trade-weighted portfolio of Eurocurrency deposits in 10 countries (G-10 countries plus Switzerland). The
sample is from 1986:03—1992:06. The critical hyperbola follows Kandel and Stambaugh (1989). Define the
b=
c = L'V1L, and d = ac — b2 where are the expected returns,
efficient set constants a =

'V',

V1t,

V is the variance matrix and i. is a vector of ones. Let j be a target expected return and
be the
minimum variance for expected return j. Hence, (,1,,,&2*(,)) is a point in the expected return—minimum
variance space. Let w be a central-F variate at a given significance level. Kandel and Stambaugh prove that
w(p) > w3, i.e. portfolio p's efficiency is rejected if and only if
> öi(w1) +62(w')o-2'(ji)
where
is the minimum variance achieved using the two factors
—d(w+1)
5i(w) = w(w+1)
62(w) =
cw—d
cw-d
Thus, &2 = 51(w) + o2(lu)o2*() defines a critical hyperbola in mean-standard deviation space. If the
given portfolio is to the right of the hyperbola, efficiency can be rejected at the significance level .s. The
critical hyperbola with short-sale restrictions uses the same method except the assets in the minimum variance
portfolios are must have nonnegative weights.

Figure 4
The cross-section of expected returns, betas, and standard deviations

A. Annual expected return vs. beta
100

80

Er32.6+2.2Be4a R'O%

C

a

<

40

*

= 20
C
C

0

-20

-0 5

-0 4

-0.3

-0.2

-0 1

0

0.1

02

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.1

1.2

Beta

B. Annual expected return vs. standard deviation
100

80

Era6.3.0.6std,devat$on R'36%

60
a
40

I
C

Er 11,3 0.5 std, dev,at,on

R' =11%

lwithout Argentina]

20

0

.20
10

20

30

40

70
60
50
Annual standard deviation (%)

90

100

110

Figure 4
The cross-section of expected returns, betas, and standard deviations
The monthly returns for 20 emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation. The 18 developed

market returns are from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI). The world market return is the U.S.
dollar return on the MSCI value-weighted world market portfolio. The sample is from 1986:03—1992:06 for
all countries except Turkey and Indonesia. In panel A, the betas result from the least squares regression of
the average returns on the world market return. The fitted line is a regression of the average returns on the
estimated betas. In panel B, the fitted line is a regression of the average returns on the estimated standard
deviations. The second line excludes the influential Argentinian observation from the regression.

Figure 5
Time-varying conditional betas and correlations with the world market return

Brizil

Argenlini

30

20
2

10

0j

to

-10

0c

!-.

.:

-20

.10

A

77 7* 79 80 II 82 83 14 *3 *6 *7 8* *9 90 91 92

-30

77 7* 79 80 II *2 *3 84 *5 86 *7 II *9 90 91 92
C ree

Chile
30
20
tO

0I

VI'

-l

.10

-1

-20

'3

.30

77 78 79 *0 II

*2

U

1

83 14 *5 *6 *7 II 89 90 93 92

*2*3 *4*3$6*788*994'91 9
Korra

mdii

..% •

2

;? •'

40

03

-03

IS

-20

77

75 79 80 II 82 *3 *4 *5 *6 *7 *8 *9 90 91 92
1hiiland

4lcx1co

50

40
30

20

I0
7

-In

—I

-2

Beta

Correlation
Correlation w/o Oct. 1987

78 79 *0 II *2 85 84 *5 86 87 8* 19 61 91 92

Figure 5

Time-varying conditional betas and correlations with the world market return

The monthly returns for 8 emerging markets are from the International Finance Corporation The world
market return is the U.S. dollar return on the Morgan Stanley Capital International value-weighted world
market portfolio. The sample is from 1977:04—1992:06. Correlations are rolling unconditional correlations using

a 60-month window. Correlations are also reported without the October 1987 observation. The conditional
betas result from the estimation of (6). The betas are assumed to he linear in the inforrnatioii variables.

