NBER WORKING PAPEF SERIES

SOURCES OF RISK AND EXPECTED
RETURNS IN GLOBAL EQUiTY MARKETS

Wayne E. Ferson
Campbell R. Harvey

Working Paper No. 4622

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02 8
January, 1994

This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4622
January 1994
SOURCES OF RISK AND EXPECTED
RETURNS IN GLOBAL EQUITY MARKETS

ABSTRACT

This paper empirically examines multifactor asset pricing models for the returns and
expected returns on eighteen national equity markets. The factors are chosen to measure global

economic risks. Although previous studies do not reject the unconditional mean-variance
efficiency of a world market portfolio, our evidence indicates that the tests are low in power, and

the world market betas do not provide a good explanation of cross-sectional differences in
average returns. Multiple beta models provide an improved explanation of the equity returns.
Wayne E. Ferson
Department of Finance and Business Economics, DJ-lO
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

Campbell R. Harvey
The Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27706
and NBER

1. Introduction

This paper studies the sources of risk and average returns in international equity
markets. We examine several measures of global economic risks and ask to what extent
these risk factors can explain the fluctuations in the stock markets of eighteen

countries. The monthly risk measures include the returns on a world equity market
portfolio, a measure of exchange risks, a Eurodollar - U.S. Treasury bill yield spread,
and measures of global inflation, real interest rates, and industrial production growth.
We find that the global risk factors can explain, ex-post, between 15% and 86% percent

of the variance of the monthly returns over the 1970-1989 period. The world market

portfolio is by far the most important factor. It alone can explain between 16% and
71% of the variance, depending on the country.
We examine the average return premiums associated with these global risks and
we find significant premiums associated with the world equity index and a measure of
exchange rate fluctuations, but no significant average premium associated with the other

variables. Previous studies [e.g. Cumby and Glen (1990) and Harvey (1991a)] do not
reject the unconditional mean-variance efficiency of the world market index. We

confirm this finding in our sample using a general test. However, we find that the
power of the world market betas to explain the average return differences across the
countries is low. The average pricing errors of the model are reduced by introducing

the additional global risk factors. The average performance of the Japanese equity
market, for example, is much better explained by a model which incorporates multiple
sources of risk.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the methodology.

Section 3 describes the country returns and the global risk factor data. The empirical

2
results are presented in section 4. Section 5 summarizes our conclusions.

2. Methodology

We first examine factor model regressions for the equity market index returns for
eighteen countries:

=

The excess return is

fl F + uj.

+

=

R11

-

R,

(1)

where R11 is the U.S. dollar return for country i at

time 1. Rft is the dollar return of a one-month U.S. Treasury bill. (We also report
results for excess returns in local currency units.) The
the K risk factors

are the betas of the r1 on

j=1,..., K. The error terms, u11 represent the "nonsysternatic"

excess returns, relative to the global risk factors.
We estimate most of our empirical models using Hansen's (1982) generalized

method of moments (GMM), which is valid under mild statistical assumptions. In
equation (1), we assume that the data vector, which is

i=1,...,N,

j=1,...,K},

t= 1,...,T, is generated by a strictly stationary and ergodic stochastic process. The cr
and the

are fixed regression coefficients, which implies E(u11)=E(u11F1)=O. The

error terms u11 are not assumed to be normally distributed, and the conditional
variances of the u11, given the

may depend on the values of the F1. We do not

specit the functional form of this possible dependence. Instead, we report the
asymptotic standard errors for the coefficients described by White (1980) and Hansen

(1982). Hansen shows that the GMM coefficient estimators are consistent and

3

asymptotically normal, derives their standard errors, and discusses the statistical
assumptions more formally.

The factor model regressions provide information about the usefulness of global

factors in controlling the risks of international equity investments. We are therefore

interested in the factor models for their own sake. We are also interested in the
relation between the risk sensitivities, 13 and the expected returns in the various
national markets.

Asset pricing models attribute cross-sectional differences in expected returns to

differences in betas. A general beta pricing model asserts the existence of expected
premiums A, j = 0,..., K; such that expected returns can be written as:

E(R1)= ) +
The

b1

(2)

are the betas (multiple regression coefficients) of the R11 on the K global risk

factors j=1,..., K. Equation (2) implies an expression for the expected excess returns:

r1j—

Where f3 =

-

=1 ,ij

3

b are the betas of the excess returns and the b are the betas of the

Treasury bill.

Beta pricing models for expected returns like equations (2) and (3) are familiar
in a domestic context and are developed for an international setting by a number of
authors. In order to apply a beta pricing model in a global setting, strong assumptions

4

are needed. The national equity markets are assumed to be perfectly integrated in a
global economy, with no barriers to extranational equity investments, no taxes, no

transactions or information costs. Such extreme assumptions are unlikely to provide a
good approximation to the actual complexity of international investments. Therefore,

we interpret our results as a baseline case. Further refinements of the models, to
incorporate additional considerations should produce even better explanatory power.

Such refinements remain an important topic for future research.
The number and identity of the global risk factors takes on special significance in
an international setting. We study models with a single factor and with multiple

factors. The single factor model is a global version of the Capital Asset Pricing Model
(CAPM) of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), which states that the world market
portfolio is mean-variance efficient. Stulz (1981b, 1984) and Adler and Dumas (1983)
provide conditions under which a single-beta CAPM based on the world market
portfolio holds globally. The sufficient conditions are strong, including no exchange risk

and a constant investment opportunity set, in addition to the assumptions described
above.

When strict purchasing power parity fails to hold, then consumers face exchange
risks for investing internationally, and exchange risks may be priced in a global asset

pricing model. Adler and Dumas [1983, equation (14)] present a model in which a
combination of the world market and measures of exchange risk is mean variance

efficient. The exchange risk can be broken down into a separate factor for each
currency, as in Dumas and Solnik (1992), or can be approximated by a single variable.

We take the latter approach and study a two-beta model, using the world market

5

portfolio and an aggregate of exchange risks as the two factors.
International equilibrium and APT models with several factors are described by
Stulz (1981a), Hodrick (1981), Solnik (1983) and Ross and Walsh (1983), among

others. A central intuition of such models is that the common sources of risk may
command an expected return premium, while risks that can be diversified internationally
should not. Korajczyk and Viallet (1989) and Heston, Rouwenhorst and Wessels (1991)
find evidence of several common sources of variation in individual U.S. and European

stocks. Given evidence for several common sources of variation, a number of world-

wide risk factors may be important determinants of national equity market returns. We
therefore study models with a number of global economic risk variables.

Equations (2) and (3) are stylized representation for a class of beta pricing
models, arid the content of the model is the discipline imposed in selecting the factors.

Our approach is to choose the variables a priori and to investigate their importance
using the factor model regressions (1). Then, we study the pricing of the most

important risk factors. Our focus in this paper is on the relation between risk and longrun expected returns. That is, we investigate unconditional versions of the beta pricing
models.1

We estimate and test the pricing equation (3) as a restricted seemingly unrelated
regression model (SURM):

r1 =

f (f + A) +

u,

i=1,...,N,

(4)

6
where the f are the de-meaned values of the risk factors (f =

F11

F1

and F1 is the

sample mean). The regression is restricted by assuming that the intercept is equal to

zero. The theoretical model, equation (3), implies that E(u)O in equation (4). The
parameters to be estimated are the unconditional betas, 13g and the expected risk

premiums, ).. Since E(ct)=O, we do not assume in equation (4) that the means of the

factors F1 are related in any way to the expected risk premiums X. This allows us to
use economic variables as factors and to estimate and test the model without the need
for mimicking portfolios for the factors.2 This is an advantage over the approaches of
Gibbons (1982), Gibbons, Breeden and Utzenberger (1989) and others, since the
estimation of mimicking portfolios in a separate step can complicate the statistical
inferences [see Wheatley (1989)].

We implement the SURM via the GMM. We therefore assume that the data
vector {r1, i=1,...,N,

j=1,...,K}, t=1,...,T, is generated by a strictly stationary and

ergodic stochastic process. As before, we avoid the usual assumptions of

homoskedasticity and normality, which are unlikely to hold in these data. We use a

vector of ones and the contemporaneous values of the factors, F1 as the instruments in
the GMM. The orthogonality conditions therefore state that E(u1 F11) = 0 and E(u1)

=

0,

for all i=1,...,N and j=1,...,K.3

3. The Data
A. The Asset Returns
We study equity returns in eighteen national markets using monthly data
provided by Morgan Stanley Capital International. The countries include sixteen OECD

7

countries plus Singapore/Malaysia and Hong Kong. The country returns are value-

weighted indices formed from a list of 1476 (as of December, 1989) companies. The

firms represent about 65% of the market capitalization of the countries' stock markets,
with some attempt to stratify the sample by industry groups, so that each industry is

represented in proportion to its national weight [see Schmidt (1990)]. The stocks are
generally those for which the total market value outstanding is large. Total monthly
returns are measured for 1970-1989 as the capital change component of a country index
plus the dividend yield, as provided by MSCI.4 When measured in U.S. dollars the

returns are in excess of the U.S. Treasury bill that is the closest to 30 days to maturity,
provided by the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) at the University of

Chicago. When measured in local currency units the returns are in excess of a local
short term interest rate from Citibase or the International Monetary Fund (IMF) [see
the appendix for details]. To convert from local currency values to U.S. dollar values,
the closing European interbank currency rates from MSCI are used on the last trading
day of the month. The world equity market index is a value-weighted combination of
the country returns.5

B. The Global Economic Risk Variables

Summary statistics for the variables are presented in Table 1. We include a brief
discussion of each global risk variable here; details are provided in the appendix.

WDRET is the U.S. dollar return of the MSCI world equity market in excess of

a short term interest rate. Asset pricing models usually include a role for a "market
portfolio" as a measure of risk. Cumby and Glen (1990) test and do not reject the

8
unconditional mean variance efficiency of the world market index. Harvey (1991a) does
not reject the unconditional efficiency of the MSCI index in the set of MSCI country

returns, but he does reject the conditional efficiency of the index. This raises the
likelihood that .previous tests are low in power. Fama and French (1992) find that
unconditional betas on market indexes in the U.S. do not provide a good cross-sectional

explanation of expected returns. It is therefore interesting to further examine the
usefulness of a world beta to explain the country returns.

dGIOFX is the log first difference in the trade-weighted U.S. dollar price of the
currencies of 10 industrialized countries. The G-10 countries are defined as the G-7 (not
including the U.S.) plus the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden and Switzerland. (The G-7

countries are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the

United States.) This series is taken from the IMF as reported by Citibase. A positive
change (dGIOFX > 0) indicates a depreciation of the dollar. In Adler and Dumas
(1983, equation 14), an exchange risk factor appears, which depends on exchange rates,

consumer price index changes, and risk tolerance in each country. This theoretical
measure is difficult to replicate empirically, so Dumas and Solnik (1992) break it down

into separate factors for each country. We use a single aggregate measure as a
parsimonious alternative to the approach of Dumas and Solnik (1992). Previous studies
examine the pricing of exchange risks in national equity markets. They find little
evidence that exchange risks are priced on average domestically, but we address a

different question. We examine the pricing of a global measure of exchange risk in a
multi-country asset pricing model.

9

Gull is the unexpected component of a monthly global inflation measure. The
G-7 inflation rate is a weighted average of the percentage changes in the consumer
price indices (CPI) in the 0-7 countries, using the relative shares of the total real, gross

domestic product (GDP) as the weights. Inflation risk can be priced in a multi-beta
model if inflation has real effects, in the general sense that global inflation is correlated
with a representative investor's marginal utility. For example, higher inflation may
signal higher levels of economic uncertainty which make consumers worse off. If

national equity market returns differ in their exposure to changes in the global inflation
outlook, there may be an inflation risk premium on global equity markets.

dG7ELT is the monthly change in a measure of long-term inflationary

expectations. Chen, Roll and Ross (1986) include a measure of U.S. unexpected
inflation and a measure of changes in expected U.S. inflation in their study for the U.S.

We examine the pricing of global inflation on world markets. dG7ELT is formed by
regressing a 48-month moving average of the G-7 inflation rate on a set of
predetermined instruments and taking the first difference of the fitted values.
cITED is the change in the spread between the 90-day Eurodollar deposit rate

and the 90 day U.S. Treasury bill yield. The 'TED spread' is a measure of the premium
on Eurodollar deposit rates in London, relative to the U.S. Treasury. Fluctuations in the
spread may capture fluctuations in global credit risks.

G7RTB is a weighted average of short-term real interest rates in the 07
countries, using the shares of G-7 GDP as the weights, minus the G7 inflation rate.

Real interest rates are often used in economic models to capture the state of
investment opportunities. For example, Merton (1973) and Cox, Ingersoll and Ross

10

(1985) develop models in which interest rates are state variables. Chen, Roll and Ross

(1986) and Ferson and Harvey (1991) include a real interest rate state variable in
models for the U.S. market.6

dOlL is the change in the monthly average U.S. dollar price per barrel of crude

oil. A number of studies have examined premiums for oil price risk exposure using a
cross-section of assets with a country. For example, Chen, Roll and Ross (1986) study

oil prices as a measure of economic risk in the U.S. market and Hamao (1988) and
Brown and Otsuki (1990b) study oil prices in the Japanese equity market. We study oil
prices as a potential source of global market risk, to which different national markets
may have differing exposures.

dG7IP is a weighted average of industrial production growth rates in the G7

countries, using a measure of relative production shares as the weights. Chen, Roll and
Ross (1986) and Shanken and Weinstein (1990) examine the average pricing of U.S.

industrial production in the U.S. market. Hamao (1988) examines domestic industrial

production risk in the Japanese equity market and Bodurtha, Cho and Senbet (1989)
study average risk premiums for domestic industrial production risks in several national

equity markets. No previous study has examined the average pricing of global industrial
output risks.

4. Empirical Results:

A. Factor Models
Table 2 presents factor model regressions (1) for each country using the eight global

risk factors. The right hand columns of the table show the adjusted R-squares for three

11

cases. In the far right column only a constant and the world market index are in the
regressions. In the other two columns additional factors are added. The increment to
the R-squares from including the other economic variables is small for most of the

countries.8 The world market portfolio is by far the most important factor from the
perspective of explaining variance.

The panel at the bottom of Table 2 presents heteroskedasticity consistent Wald

tests of the hypothesis that a risk factor has unconditional betas equal to zero for all of
the countries. We do not reject this hypothesis for the variables cITED, G7UI, dG7IP

and G7RTB; the hypothesis is rejected for the other four variables. If the beta
coefficients for a particular variable are not significantly different from zero in the
factor model regressions, this suggests dropping the variable from the analysis.

Obviously, if the beta is zero the factor is not useful for controlling variance. Similarly,

their can be no expected return premium for a factor whose betas are all zero.
However, a small nonzero beta could be associated with an important average risk

premium. For example a risk factor could have low correlation with asset returns but
high correlation with the aggregate marginal utility of wealth.

If a risk variable does not have different coefficients across the countries then it

cannot be priced even if the betas differ from zero. This is because unconditional
pricing implies that expected returns differ across countries depending on differences in

their sensitivities to the variable. The point estimates suggest that there are significant
differences in the countries' sensitivities to several of the variables. For example, the
Japanese stock market is significantly positively-related to changes in long term

inflationary expectations, while the Australian market is negatively-related to the same

12

factor. The equity markets of Hong Kong and Singapore/Malaysia are positively-related
to oil price changes, while in Spain the relation is negative.

The lower panel of Table 2 presents tests of the hypothesis that a given factor

has betas which are equal to a common value in all of the countries. We do not reject
this hypothesis for the same set of variables for which we do not reject that the betas
are jointly zero (and therefore equal). On the basis of these tests, we exclude the
variables dTED, G7UI, dG7IP and G7RTB from our empirical model and we retain the
other variables (WRDRET, dG1OFX, dG7ELT, and dOlL).9

B. Expected Returns and Global Economic Risks

Table 3 presents the results of the SURM, equation (4), for two cases. The three
columns on the left present a model where the world market index is the only factor.

The five columns on the right present a four-factor model. The first column reports the
excess return betas on the world market index, which vary from 0.38 (Austria) to 1.3

(Hong Kong). The beta in the SURM's are very close to the betas in the unrestricted
regression models. The two world market beta estimates never differ by more than one
standard error for a given country.
In the single-factor model with the world market factor, the factor is the excess

return of a portfolio. In such a case, Shanken (1992) shows that the best estimate of
the risk premium is the expected excess return itself. For the one-factor model we

therefore impose the restriction that the expected risk premium ) is equal to the
expected excess return of the world market index. The expression (f11 + A1) in (4) is

replaced by rmt, and the number of free parameters in the SURM is reduced by one.

13

The goodness of fit statistic for the restricted SURM implies a right-tailed p-value of
0.295, thereby not rejecting the hypothesis that the world market portfolio is
unconditionally mean-variance efficient. This is consistent with the tests in Cumby and

Glen (1990) and Harvey (1991a). However, further investigation suggests that such

joint tests are low in power.
The point estimate of the world market risk premium is 0.545 and its standard
error is 0.271, which seems reasonable. But the pricing errors of the one-factor model

for many of the countries are large. The average pricing errors are defined as the
difference between the average country returns and the expected returns predicted by
the model, evaluated at the sample estimates. The model leaves economically large

pricing errors of 0.8% (standard error = 0.3%) per month for Japan and 0.9%

(standard error = 0.7%) per month for Hong Kong. The standard errors for the
average pricing errors are calculated as in Hansen (1982, lemma 4.1), which accounts

for the fact that the pricing errors are evaluated at the GMM point estimates of the
parameters.10 Of course, it is hazardous to focus on the pricing errors which are the

largest in a group of estimates, and to apply these standard errors to judge their
significance. This is because the multiple comparisons implied by selecting the largest

values are not accounted for in the individual standard errors. Still, the pricing errors
suggest that the Japanese and Hong Kong stock markets out performed the world
market on a beta adjusted basis over this period, while Canada, Italy and the United
States have been poor performers on the same basis.
The panel below the individual country results in table 3 reports the mean
absolute pricing error and a value-weighted average absolute pricing error as alternative

14

summary measures. The value weights are the weights of the countries in the MSCI
world index as of the first quarter of 1989. The value-weighted average absolute pricing
error is larger (0.44% per month) than the equally weighted average (0.33% per month)
primarily because Japan receives a large weight, as we believe it should.

These economically large deviations from the model, as represented by the
pricing errors, are not sufficient to reject the efficiency of the world market index using
the standard goodness-of-fit statistic. The joint test statistic combines the squared
pricing errors together with the other orthogonality conditions, weighted by the precision

with which they are estimated. The pricing errors may be large, but their precision is
low, and the joint test statistic does not have enough power to reject the model.
Some additional exercises provide further evidence on the ability of the world

market betas to explain the average returns. We use the cross-sectional methods of
Fama and MacBeth (1973), estimating monthly regressions of the country returns on

their unconditional world market betas.11 The results differ depending on whether the
cross-sectional intercept is suppressed, as it is in the SURM, or included in the

regression. With the intercept suppressed the slope coefficient, an estimate of the

world market premium, is 0.819% per month (standard error= 0.085%). However,
when the intercept is included in the regression the slope coefficient is 0.469%

(standard error = 0.349%). The average of the adjusted R-squares in the monthly
cross-sectional regressions is only 4%. Although efficiency of the world market index is

not rejected, the relation between the country returns and the world market betas is
weak.12 This is also evident in figure 1, which plots the average returns against the

world market betas.

15

The right-hand columns of Table 3 present the pricing results using the four
global risk variables. The goodness-of-fit test does not reject the model, producing a
large right-tail p-valiie of 0.892. The average pricing errors for many of the countries

are reduced in the multiple-beta model, relative to the single beta model. For example,
the pricing errors are only 0.2% per month for Japan and 0.1% for Hong Kong. For a
number of the other countries the pricing errors are an order of magnitude smaller than
they were using only the world equity portfolio to measure risk. Furthermore, the mean
absolute error and the value-weighted mean absolute errors are substantially reduced.

This suggests that when the measures of risk are expanded to include the other
variables, then much of the seemingly abnormal average performance of the Japanese
and Hong Kong markets may be explained as compensation for global economic risk.

However, Canada, Italy and the U.S. markets still seem to have performed poorly on a
risk adjusted basis.

The average risk premium in Table 3 for the exchange risk variable dGIOFX is

0.602% and is 1.8 standard errors from zero using the SURM. The average premiums
for dG7ELT and dOlL are not individually statistically significant. Recall that dG1OFX

is measured in dollars per local currency unit. All of the betas on this variable are
positive (except for the US and Canada), indicating that when the dollar depreciates the
dollar excess return of foreign stocks tends to rise.13

The estimated risk premium for the world market index appears strongly

significant in the multiple beta SURM. Introducing the additional risk factors results in

a slightly larger point estimate of the premium for the world market index. The
standard error of that estimate is much smaller than in the single-factor model. The

16

results for the multiple-factor model in Table 3 appear to be different from the results
of Chen, Roll and Ross (1986) for the U.S., where the introduction of multiple risk
factors reduced the average premium for the U.S. stock market index to a small,
statistically insignificant number. We find that part of the explanation is a difference in
the methodologies.

Chen Roll and Ross (1986) used a cross-sectional regression approach which

allowed for a nonzero intercept. In the SURM, the intercept is suppressed, as it should
be zero under the null hypothesis. When we use cross-sectional regressions, similar to
Fama and MacBeth (1973), which include an intercept and thereby estimate the
multiple-beta model allowing an ad-hoc alternative hypothesis, the premium for the
world market index is not significantly different from zero.'4

C. Sensitivity Analysis

Our sample covers the decades of the 1970's and 1980's, a period in which the
international investment climate saw much change. Barriers to international investment

which had been in place were removed or weakened in the latter parts of the 1970's
and early 1980's in several countries. Some of the national market average returns are
remarkably different in the two subpenods. For example, the average excess dollar

return for Japan is 1.02% per month in the first half and 1.61% in the second half. For
Italy, the average is -0.67% in the first half and 1.27% in the second. It is interesting,
therefore, to see if the last half of our sample produces qualitatively different results

than does the first half. We estimate the SURM models for the first and second halves

of our sample. Similar to the full period results, the test statistics do not reject the

17

models. The average pricing errors are similar in the two subperiods. The valueweighted pricing error is 0.209% in the first half and 0.210% in the second half. The
average pricing error for Japan is 0.346% in the first half and 0.229% in the second.
The world market premium is significant in both subperiods; in fact the point estimate

using the SURM is slightly larger in both subperiods than over the full sample. The
premium for dOLL is 0.3 1% per month in the second subperiod and is significant, but

the estimate is negative and insignificant in the first subperiod. A similar result is found
for the foreign exchange risk variable. The premium estimate is positive in the first

period and negative in the second. These results may indicate time-variation in the
expected premiums.

To assess the sensitivity of our results to the use of US dollar excess returns, we
change the definition of the returns to local currency units, measured in excess of a

local short term interest rate. Such an excess return can be interpreted as a long
position in the local stock market financed by local currency borrowing, and is therefore

hedged against currency fluctuations to some extent. We find that the results on the
average pricing of the world market index are virtually unaffected.15 However, the
SURM estimates of the average premium associated with dGIOFX are closer to zero
and are not statistically significant. We examine univariate models with dG1OFX and
bivariate models with dGIOFX and the world market index, using Fama-MacBeth (1973)

methods. The average cross-sectional relation between returns and the betas on
dGIOFX are depicted in figure 2 (U.S. dollar returns) and figure 3 (local currency
returns). These experiments generally confirm the results of the SURMs.16

18

Measurement errors in the economic data may reduce the correlation of the
global risk measures with the country returns. We therefore conduct an additional set
of tests using maximum correlation portfolios for the economic risk factors, similar to

Breeden, Gibbons and Utzenberger (1989) and McCurdy and Morgan (1992). The
portfolio weights are the slope coefficients of the economic variable regressed on the

asset returns and are fixed over time. If there is measurement error which is unrelated
to returns, then the measurement error is captured in the residual when the maximum

correlation portfolios are formed. We do not form the portfolios from the same set of
national equity market returns that we are trying to "explain," which should reduce the
impact of the overfitting problem with mimicking portfolios [Wheatley (1989)]. We use

the MSCI international industry indices for this purpose. These are a set of 38 equity
indices, formed by industry groups and using the common stocks of firms from many

countries in each industry group. (These data are described in more detail in the
appendix.)

We examine factor model regressions for the country returns using the maximum

correlation portfolios as the factors. Compared with table 2, the explanatory power of
the regressions are slightly higher for most, but not all of the countries. The smallest
R-square is 11.8% and the largest is 85.9%. The higher R-squares are consistent with
the existence of measurement error in the economic data which is unrelated to stock
returns.
Given mimicking portfolios for the risk factors, the model implies that the

are

their expected excess returns. However, the MSCI industry indices do not include
dividends, so the average returns of portfolios formed from these indices are not good

19

estimates of the risk premiums. This is a problem similar to what Starnhaugh (1983a)
calls "mean deficiency." We handle the mean deficiency by treating the proxy portfolios

the same way as we do the economic risk variables in the SURM; namely, we use their

de-meaned values and we estimate the risk premiums as separate parameters. As the
dividend component of the return is relatively smooth, its absence from the industry
indices should not much affect estimates of the covariances. Comparisons with the
previous tables provides further evidence on the robustness of our results.
For pricing purposes the proxy portfolios should be maximally correlated with the

state variables in the universe of test assets [Breeden (1979)]. However, since we do
not include the country returns in the proxy portfolios, it is possible that higher

correlation with the state variables could be obtained. This can be interpreted in terms
of the familiar mean-variance diagram, as in figure 4. If a set of factor portfolios
determine the expected returns in a multi-beta model, a combination of them lies on
the minimum variance boundary of all asset returns [Chamberlain (1983), Grinblatt and

Titman (1987)]. Introducing additional assets will in general expand the minimum
variance boundary. If the efficient combination of our proxy portfolios lies inside the
minimum variance boundary of the test assets, then a combination of the portfolios will

not price the test assets. Figure 4 shows that the unconditional minimum variance
boundary formed from the industry indices contains the boundary formed from the
country returns.'7

The results of the SURM using the maximum correlation portfolios are

qualitatively similar to those of Table 3. We do not reject the efficiency of a maximum
correlation portfolio for the world index using the standard goodness-of-fit test, but the

20

average pricing errors for some countries are large. The mean absolute and weighted
mean pricing errors are somewhat smaller than in table 3, and they are reduced
dramatically when we examine the multiple beta model. Introducing the maximum
correlation portfolios for the other factors does not diminish the significance of the

world market portfolio risk premium in the SURM. As in Table 3, the point estimate
of its premium is higher in the multiple beta modeL18

One interesting difference between the results using the global economic risk
variables and using the maximum correlation portfolios involves the industrial output

variable dG7IP. Its proxy portfolio produces the largest of the average risk premiums

in the SURM, which has a t-ratio of 1.7. This suggests that the output variable may

contain measurement errors that are important and are cleaned up to some extent by a
maximum correlation portfolio. Shah (1989), Fama (1990), Schwert (1990) and Kothari

and Shanken (1992) find that stock returns in the US are sensitive to changes in

expected future output. Harris and Opler (1990) and Beckers (1991) extend such
results to international data. We therefore conduct experiments in which we replace
dG7IP by a one-year leading growth rate. Univariate and multivariate factor model
regressions using this variable are jointly significant and the betas on this variable are
significantly different across the countries.

We investigate the unconditional pricing results using the 12-month leading

output growth rate as an additional risk factor. In the multivariate SURM the betas on
the leading production variable do not seem to be marginally important. The premium

estimate is 1.25% per month but the standard error is 1.16%. The world market
premium estimate is not changed much by the introduction of the leading production

21

variable. Using the maximum correlation portfolios, including one for the leading
industrial production variable, we find generally similar results. In this case, however,

the premium on the leading output factor is significant, at 2.97% per month (standard
error= 1.20%).

5. Concluding Remarks

We empirically examine multiple beta models for the returns and expected returns on
eighteen national equity markets using a set of factors chosen to measure global
economic risks. Although previous studies do not reject the unconditional meanvariance efficiency of a world equity market portfolio, we find that the world market

betas provide a poor explanation of the average returns across countries. Our tests do
not reject the hypothesis that the returns are consistent with a four-factor model. The
average pricing errors of the multiple-beta model are only 0.2% per month for Japan

and 0.1% for Hong Kong, which are much smaller than the errors of a model based on
only the world market portfolio. This suggests that when the measures of risk are
expanded to include such variables as exchange rates, oil prices and long-term
inflationary expectations, then much of the seemingly abnormal average performance of

the Japanese and Hong Kong markets may be explained as compensation for global
economic risk.

22

Append
A. Equity returns
We use the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) equity indices. MSCI tracks 21 national indices
of which we use 18 (Finland, Mexico and New Zealand are excluded because their data histories are
shorter). Stocks from non-domiciled companies and investment funds are excluded from individual count!y
indices. Companies with restricted float due to dominant shareholders or cross-ownership are avoided.
However, there are 51 stocks from Finland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland that are restricted. The
overall weight of these restricted stocks is small, and Schmidt (1990) finds that there is little difference in
the national indices when these restricted stocks are excluded. All indices have a common base of 100 in
December 1969. The indices are constructed using the Laspeyres method which approximates value

weighting. U.S. dollar returns are calculated by using the exchange rate available at 4:00 p.m. Central
European Time. We use the MSCI world industry portfolios to construct maximum correlation portfolios
for the economic variables. MSCI tracks 38 industiy groups. These are: Aerospace and Military
Technology, Appliances and Household Durables, Automobiles, Banking, Beverages and Tobacco,
Broadcasting and Publishing, Building Materials and Components, Business and Public Services, Chemicals,
Construction and Housing, Data Processing and Reproduction, Electrical and Electronics, Electronic

Components and Instruments, Energy Equipment and Services, Energy Sources, Financial Services, Food
and Household Products, Forest Products and Paper, Gold Mines, Health and Personal Care, Industrial
Components, Insurance, Leisure and Tourism, Machinery and Engineering, Merchandising, Metals
(Non-Ferrous), Metals (Steel), Miscellaneous Materials and Commodities, Multi-Industry, Recreation,

Other Consumer Goods, Real Estate, Telecommunication, Textiles and Apparel, Transportation-Airlines,
Transportation-Road and Rail, Transportation-Shipping, Utilities-Electrical and Gas, and Wholesale and

International Trade. All of the world industry indices have a base value of 100 in December 1969. The
indices are calculated in U.S. dollars but do not include dividends. Both the industry and national indices
are calculated in excess of the 30-day U.S. Treasury bill which is available from Ibbotson Associates. The
correlations of ihe maximum correlation portfolios and the MSCI world index (wrdret) are shown below:

wrdret
mwrdret
mdted
mdGlOfx
mG7ui
mdG7elt
mdoil
mdG7ip
mG7rtb

CORRELATIONS OF il-IE MAXIMUM CORRELATION PORTFOLIOS
0.251
1.000 0.997 0.318 0.557
0.000
0.478 0.165 -0.103

1.000 0319 0.559

0.000

1.000 0.095

-0.143
-0.044

1.000

1.000

0.479 0.166 -0.103
0.272 -0.120 -0.118

0.252

0.146
0.189

0.118 -0.080
0.065 -0.018 0.210 -0.560
LOGO -0.282 0.004 -0.155
1.000 -0.053 0.304
1.000 -0.173
0.147

1.000

23
B. The World Risk Factors
WDRET = The world return is the arithmetic return on the Morgan Stanley Capital International world
equity index (including dividends) less the Ibbotson Associates one month bill rate.
dTED = The change in the Eurodollar-Treasury yield spread is the difference between the 90-day
Eurodollar yield (Citibase FYUR3M) and the 90 day Treasury bill yield (Citibase FYGM3 secondary
market, converted from discount to true yield to maturity).
dGlOFX = The change in the 0-10 foreign exchange rate is the difference in the trade weighted dollar
price of foreign exchange for 10 industrialized countries (0-7 plus the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, and
Switzerland) (Citibase FXG1O).
07U1 = The unexpected inflation for the G-7 countries is derived from a time-series model applied to an

aggregate 0-7 inflation rate. The 0-7 inflation rate is constructed by weighing the individual countries'
inflation rates (Citibase: PC6CA, PC6FR, PC6IT, PC6JA. PC6UK, PC6WG and ZUNEW) by their shares
in the previous quarter's real U.S. dollar 0.7 gross domestic product. These weights change through time.
The time series model is ARIMA(0,1,2)(0,1,2) and the parameter estimates are:

Parameter Std. Error
Intercept
MA1,1

MA1,2
MA2,1
MA2,2

0.00000
0.432613
0.271394
-0.305806
-0.180382

0.000057
0.061754
0.061544
0.065162
0.065377

T-ratio
0.10
7.01
4.41
-4.69
-2.76

The parameters are estimated with 250 monthly observations. The chi-square test for significance of the
first six residual autocorrelations has a p-value of .111 and the corresponding statistic for the first 12
autocorrelations has a p-value of .275.

dG7ELT = Change in long term expected 0-7 inflation is a result of projecting the four year moving
average of 0-7 inflation on a set of predetermined instrumental variables, The predetermined instruments
are (I) the level of one-month short-term U.S. Treasury bill yield, (2) the dividend yield of the MSCI
value-weighted world stock market index, (3) a spread between the yields to maturity of ten-year U.S.

Treasury bonds and 90-day U.S. Treasury bills, (4) the lagged value of the Eurodollar (TED) - U.S.
Treasury spread, (5) the lagged return on the MSCI world market index, and (6) a dummy variable for the
month of January. The regression models the expected long term inflation and dG7ELT is the first
difference of the fitted values of the regression.

dOlL =

The change in the natural log of the average U.S. dollar price of per barrel at the wcllhead from
1974-1989 and the posted West Texas Intermediate price from 1969-1973. Since the West Texas price is

consistently higher than the average wellhead price, the 1969-1973 data is grossed down by 65%. This
represents the average premium of West Texas over the average during 1974-1976.

dG7IP = The change in 0-7 industrial production is calculated by weighing local industrial production

24
indices by the following (fixed) factors: Canada .04314, France .09833, Germany .05794, Italy .13093, Japan
.07485, U.K. .11137, U.S. .48343 which are the weights in 0-7 gross domestic product in the third quarter
of 1969. Thc logarithmic difference in this aggregate index is the growth in 0-7 industrial production.

G7RTB The 0-7 real interest rate is calculated by aggregating individual countries' short term interest
rates. The following interest rates are used (Citibase FYCA3M-Canada 90 day Treasury bill,
FYFR3M-France 90 day bill, FYGE3M-Germany 90 day bill, FYIT6M-Italy 180 day bill, FYCMJP-Japan
commercial paper 1969-1976 and FYJP3M-Japan Gensaki rate 1977-1989, FYUK3M-United Kingdom 90
day bill, FYUS3M-United States 90 day bill.) The aggregate 0-7 interest rate is calculated by using the

countries's previous quarter's shares in 0-7 gross domestic product. The real 0-7 interest rate is calculated
by subtracting the 0-7 inflation rate.

C. Short term interest rates
These are used to calculate excess returns in local currency units. The data are as follows: Australia-13
week bill (IFS 61C), Austria-Money market rate (IFS 6GB), Belgium-3 month bill (Citibase FYBE3M),
Canada-3 month bill (IFS 60C), Denmark-Discount rate 1969-1971 (IFS 60A), Call money rate 1972-1989
(IFS 6GB), France-3 month interbank (Citibase FYFR3M), Germany-Frankfurt 90-day rate (Citibase
FYWG3M), Hong Kong-No data, U.S. 3-month bill used, Italy-6 month bill (Citibase FYIT6M),
Japan-Call money rate 1969-1976 (Citibase FYCMJP), Gensaki rate, 1977-1989 (Citibase FYJP3M),
Netherlands-Call money rate 1969-1978:11 (IFS 608), 3 month bill 1979:12-1989, Norway-Prime rate
1969-1971:1, Call money rate 1971:12-1989 (IFS6OB), Singapore/Malaysia-no data, U.S. bill, Spain-Prime
rate 1969-1973:12, Call money rate 1974-1976 (IFS 6GB), 3 month bill 1977-1989 (IFS 60C), Sweden-3

month bill (IFS 60C), Switzerland-3 month deposit rate (Citibasc FYSW3M), United Kingsdom-3 month
bill (Citibase FYUK3M), United States-3 month bill (Citibase FYUS3M)

25

References
Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio selection and corporation finance: A
synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925-984.
Beckers, Stanley, 1991, Stocks, bonds and inflation in world markets: implications for pension fund
management, Journal of Fixed Income 1, 18-30.

Bodurtha, James N., D. Chinhyung Cho and Lemma W. Senbet, 1989, Economic forces and the stock
market: an International perspective, Global Finance Journal 1, 21-46.
Breeden, D., 1979, An intertcmporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and investment
opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.
Braun, Phillip, Dan Nelson and Alan Sunier, 1991, Good news, bad news, volatility and betas, unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.

Breedcn, Douglas T., Michael R. Gibbons and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1989, Empirical tests of the
consumption-oriented CAPM, Journal of Finance 44, 231-62.
Brown, Stephen J. and Toshiyuki Otsuki, 1990a, Macroeconomic Factors and the Japanese Equity Markets:
the CAPMD Project, chapter 8 in Edwin J. Elton and Martin J. Gruber (eds) Japanese Capital Markets,
Harper and Row, New York, 175-192.
Brown, Stephen 1. and Toshiyuki Otsuki, 1990b, A global asset pricing model, unpublished manuscript,
New York University.

Campbell, John Y. and Y. Hamao, 1992, Predictable stock returns in the United States and Japan: A study
of long-term capital market integration, Journal of Finance 47, 43-70.
Chamberlain, Gary, 1983, Funds, factors and diversification in arbitrage pricing models, Econometrica 51,
1305-1324.

Chamberlain, Gary, and Michael Rothschild, 1983, Arbitrage, factor structure and mean variance analysis
on large asset markets, Econometrica 51, 1281-1304.

26
Chen, Nai-fu., Roll, Richard R. and Ross, Stephen A., 1986, Economic forces and the stock market,
Journal of Business 59, 383-403.
Cho, David, C. Eun and Lemma Senbet, 1986, International arbitrage pricing theory: An empirical

investigation, Journal of Finance, 313-329.

Cox, John C., Jonathan B. Ingersoll, and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, A theory of the term structure of interest
rates, Econometrica 53, 385408.
Cumby, Robert B. and Jack D. Glen, 1990, Evaluating the performance of international mutual funds,

Journal of Finance 45, 497-522.
Dumas, Bernard and Bruno Solnik, 1992, The world price of exchange rate risk, unpublished manuscript,
Duke University and HEC.
Fama, Eugene F., 1990, Asset returns, expected returns and real activity, Journal of Finance 45, 1089-1108.

Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical tests, Journal of
Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Ferson, Wayne B. and Stephen R. Foerster, 1993, Finite sample properties of the generalized method of
moments in tests of conditional asset pricing models, unpublished manuscript, University of Washington
and University of Western Ontario.

French, Kenneth R. and James Poterba, 1991, Were Japanese stock prices too high? Journal of Financial
Economics 29, 337-364.

Grinblatt, Mark and Sheridan Titman, 1987, The relation between mean-variance efficiency and arbitrage
pricing, Journal of Business 60, 97-1 12.

Hamao, Yasushi, 1988, An empirical examination of arbitrage pricing theory: Using Japanese data, Japan
and the World Economy 1,45-61.
Hansen, L.ars P., 1982, Large sample properties of the generalized method of moments estimators,
Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.

27
Harris, Thomas C. and Tim Opler, 1990, Stock market returns and real activity: international evidence,
unpublished manuscript, University of California at Los Angeles, November.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1991a, The world price of covariance risk, Journal of Finance 46, 111-157.
Harvey, Campbell, R. 1991b, The term structure and world economic growth, Journal of Fixed Income I,
4-17.

Heston, Steven, Geert Rouwcnhorst and Roberto E. Wessels, 1991, The structure of international stock
returns, unpublished manuscript, Yale School of Organization and Management, October.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1981, Intertemporal asset pricing with time-varying risk premia, Journal of
International Economics 11, 573-587.

Huberman, Gur, Shmuet A. Kandel and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1987, Mimicking portfolios and exact
arbitrage pricing, Journal of Finance 42, 1-10.

Jorion, Phillipe, 1991, The pricing of exchange risk in the stock market, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 26, 363-376.

Korajczyk, Robert A. and Claude J. Viallct, 1992, Equity risk premia and the pricing of foreign exchange
risk, Journal of International Economics 33, 199-2 19.

Korajczyk, Robert A. and aaude J. Viallet, 1989, An empirical investigation of international asset pricing,
Review of Financial Studies 2, 553-586.

Lchmann, Bruce N. and Modest, David M., 1988, The Empirical foundations of the arbitrage pricing
theory. Journal of Financial Economics 21, 213-54.
Lintncr, John, 1965, The valuation of assets and the selection of risk-y investments in stock portfolios and
capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 44, 13-37.

McCurdy, Thomas H. and leuan Morgan, 1992, Evidence of risk premiums in foreign currency markets.
Review of Financial Studies 5, 65-84.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41, 867-87.

28
Ross, Stephen A., The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of Economic Theory 13, 341-60.
Ross, Stephen A. and Michael Walsh, 1983, A simple approach to the pricing of risky assets with uncertain
exchange

rates, in R. Hawkins, R. Levich and C. Wihlborg, eds: The internationalization of Financial

Markets and National Economic Policy (JA! Press, Greenwich , CT.)
Schmidt, D. 1990, Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) indices, published by Morgan Stanley

Capital International (spring).
Schwert, G. William, 1990, Stock returns and real activity: A century of evidence, Journal of Finance 45,

1237-1258.

Shah,

Hemanl, 1989, Stock returns and anticipated real activity, Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Graduate

School of Business, University of Chicago.
Shanken, Jay, 1992, On the estimation of beta pricing models, Review of Financial Studies 5, 1-34.

Shanken, Jay, and Mark I. Weinstein, 1990, Macroeconomic variables and asset pricing: Estimation and
test.s, unpublished manuscript, University of Rochester.

Sharpe, William. F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk,
Journal of Finance 19, 42542.
Solnik, Bruno, 1983, International arbitrage pricing theory, Journal of Finance 38, 449-458.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1983, Testing the capital asset pricing model with broader market indices: A

problem of mean-deficiency, Journal of Banking and Finance 7,5-16.
Siulz, Rene' M., 1981a, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economies 9, 383-406.

Stulz, Rene' M., 1981b, On the effects of barriers to international investment, Journal of Finance 36, 923934.

Siulz, Rene' M., 1984, Pricing capital assets in an international setting: An introduction, Journal of
International Business Studies 15, 55-74.

29
Wasserfallen, Walter, 1989, Macroeconomic News and the Stock Market, Journal of Banking and Finance

13, 613-626.

Wheatley, Simon, 1989, Testing Asset pricing models with infrequently measured factors, unpublished
manuscript, University of Washington.

White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for
heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.

30
Footnotes:

Part of this research was conducted at the University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business and was
circulated by the authors under another title. We thank Warren Bailey, Eugene Fama, Stephen Foerster,
Kenneth French, Richard Green, Allan Kleidon, Johnny Liew, John D. Martin, L.T. Nielsen, Bruno Solnik,
an anonymous referee, and participants in workshops at the Universities of California at Berkeley, Chicago,

Florida, Iowa, Manitoba, Stanford, Texas at Austin, Texas at Dallas, Queens, Washington at Seattle, at the
August, 1991 National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute's International Studies /
Macroeconomics week, the 1992 Utah Winter Finance Conference, the 1992 Western Finance Association,
the 1992 French Finance Association and the September, 1992 Berkeley Program in Finance for helpful
discussions. Fcrson acknowledges financial support from the Pigott-Paccar professorship at the University
of Washington.

1. See Fersori and Harvey (1993) for an examination of conditional asset
pricing models using similar variables.

2. Mimicking portfolios are defined as portfolios that may be substituted for

the factors in a factor model regression and whose expected excess returns
are the risk premiums [e.g. Lehmann and Modest (1988), Huberman, Kandel
and Stambaugh (1987)].

3. We use iterated GMM following Ferson and Foerster (1993), who found
that such an approach has superior finite sample properties when compared
with a two step procedure.

4. The dividend yield is 1/12 of the previous year's dividend divided by the
level of the index at the end of a month. See the appendix for details.

31

5. MSCI

attempts to avoid the double counting of firms whose equity is

traded on the stock markets of more than one country. There are, however,

other problems with the index. French and Poterba (1991) show that the
MSCI world index gives too much weight to Japan because the amount of

cross corporate ownership of shares in Japan has been unusually high.
Alternative indices, such as the FT-Actuaries world index, suffer from the

same problem. Harvey (1991a) reports that in March of 1989 Japan
accounted for 43% of the MSCI world index and 41% of the FT-Actuaries

index. We choose the MSCI data over the FT-Actuaries data, because the
latter are only available from 1981.

6. Although the correlation between G7RTB and G7UI is relatively high (at 0.56), it is not perfect because the 07 nominal interest rates are not part of

the conditioning information used to form G7UI and because G7RTB is not
prewhitened.

7. We use a spliced series of the posted west Texas intermediate crude and
the average U.S. wellhead price, as described in the appendix. These are not

the best indicators of market prices, but they are the best available to us for
this period. Futures markets for crude oil did not develop until 1983 (heating

oil futures began trading in 1978). Chen, Roll and Ross (1986) used the
energy component of the producer price index. Given the prevalence of long

32

term oil price contracts over much of the sample, this measure is not likely to
better reflect current oil market conditions.

8. This is consistent with the evidence of Wasserfallen (1989) who finds little

sensitivity of international stock returns to macroeconomic news. However,

Wasserfallen uses the residuals from a vector autoregression as his factors,
while in table 2 we define innovations relative to the unconditional means.

9. We replicated the tests in table 2 using only G7UI or only dG7ELT as the
inflation variable. The test results for the two inflation variables, as well as the
other six risk factors, were not sensitive to which of the inflation variables was

included, or if both were included. Thus, dG7ELT does not appear to proxy
for unexpected inflation in these data. We also found that the coefficients on
the world market index for most of the countries, as presented in table 2, are
similar to their simple regression betas on only the world market index.

10. The 0MM parameter estimates are found by minimizing a quadratic
form, g'Wg, where W is the fixed weighting matrix, the inverse of a consistent

estimate of the covariance matrix of the orthogonality conditions, g, at the

true parameter values. Our pricing error is the sample mean of one of the
orthogonality conditions, evaluated at the point estimates.

Let gd be the

sample mean of the gradient of the orthogonality conditions with respect to

the parameter vector. The formula for the covariance matrix of the sample

33

mean of the orthogonality conditions is: [W' - gd(gd'W gd)1 gd']rr'. The
covariance matrix is evaluated at the consistent sample estimates.

11. The cross-sectional regression procedure of Fama and MacBeth (1973)

assumes that the security returns are correlated cross-sectionally and are
heteroskedastic, which implies that the usual regression standard errors can

be misleading.

The time-series average of the monthly cross-sectional

regression slopes is used as the estimate of the expected premium. The
standard errors are calculated as the standard error of the mean using the

time series of the monthly estimates. This assumes that the series of the
monthly coefficient estimates (which are themselves portfolio returns) are
uncorrelated over time. Shanken (1992) reviews the statistical assumptions

required for the Fama MacBeth approach and shows how it is related to
Maximum likelihood and other approaches.

12. A single cross-sectional regression of the average excess returns on the

world market betas, using the table 3 estimates, produces an adjusted Rsquare of only 3.2%.

13. This is consistent with previous studies [e.g., Jorion (1991)] who measure
exchange rates as dollars per currency unit and find positive (but insignificant)
average premiums.

34

14. In a single cross-sectional regression (with an intercept) of the average

returns on the four betas from table 3, the adjusted R-square is 71.2% and
three of the four premiums appear significant. The world market premium
has the smallest t-statistic, equal to 1.74.

15. Korajczyk and Viallet (1989) report similar results in their study of four
countries using a world CAPM and APT factors.

16. The main exception is that when returns are measured in local currency

units the average premium on dG1OFX is marginally significant in the
univariate and bivariate Fama-MacBeth models, while in the SURM and in
the four-factor models the premium is not significant.

17.

If the industry returns were shifted up by an amount, approximately

reflecting the missing dividend yield, it is clear from figure 5 that the country

index boundary would still be contained within the adjusted boundary. Of
course, the figure does not account for any estimation error in the boundary,
which may be large.

18. The joint tests for zero betas and for betas that are equal across the
national markets, like in table 2, are conducted using the proxy portfolios in

place of the economic variables. Only the portfolios for the variables dOlL
and dG7RTB fail to produce significant regression betas. We therefore use

35

six

factor portfolios in most of these experiments. We have also replicated

the SURM's using four maximum correlation portfolios for the variables that

were examined in table 3. We find similar results for the average pricing
errors and the test statistics. The estimates of the world market premium and

the other premiums are also similar to those of the six maximum correlation

portfolio model. The main difference is that the premium for dG1OFX is
1.38% per month in the six factor model and only 0.244% in the four factor
model. Neither of these is more than two standard errors from zero.

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

0

Return
(% per month)

A verage

0.5

Beta on WRDEtET

0.75

1

1.25

Fig. I. Unconditional beta coefficients of country index returns calculated in U.S. dollars regressed on the world market
return (WRDRET). The sample is February 1970—December 1989.

0.25

1.5

0

1

1.5

2

(% per month)

Average
Return

(0.5)

0

United States

0

Beta on d(.IOF'X

0.5

Canada

U

NOa

Spain

0

t<D

AUU1

0

aD
NaJyD

1

0

Germany
Switzerland

Nothedands(
Denmaik

SwejenD

Singapore/MalayslaD

[]France

Belgium

1971)- lkcenuiber I 989.

11g. 2. Uiicoutlitioiuil bela cullit ieiiis of ciiiuiiry index returns calculated in U.S. dollars regressedon the log change in
the trade—weighted U.S. dollar lrlce of the currenciesof ID industrialized countries (dG IOFX). The sauniple is
February

-

-

JapanD

Hong KongD

1.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

RcLu rn
(% per month)

Average

0

Beta on dGIOFX

0.5

1

Fig. 3. Unconditional beta coefficients of country index returns calculated in local currency regressed on the log change
in the trade-weighted U.S. dollar price of the currencies ol 10 in(lustrializc(l countries (dG IOFX). The
sample is February
l970—Dcceriiher 1989.

(0.5)

1.5

-

-

-

I

I
I

0.001

I

/

/

0.003

Rturna\/

0.002

/

/

38 1nternation Industry

//
Returns

0.005
Variance

0.004

18 Country Index

'V

I

0.006

u

I

0.007

1089.

T

Fig. 4. Two ulucomlitional I
nun varlauice rroiitie. The solid curve is calculated
the returns on 18 country
portrolios The ulsak curve repre.eiuts the iiuicoiuditionuil miudnium variance trontkr using
calculated using 38 internatioutal
iuiulustry returns. The industry rettirii. do not include dividends. The
sample is February I 97O—1)eeemher

0.000

0.002
0.000

0.004

0.022
0.020
0.018
0.016
0.014
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006

0.024

0.026

(per month)

H.ctu ru

A verage

0.008 0.009

Tiibc 1
Summary statistics for the 8iobal risk factor.: 1970:2—1989:12 (239 observation.;)

Variable

Symbol

Mean

Std. 4ev.

Pt

P3

P3

World excess return
Change in Eurodollar-Trsasury yield
Log change in 0-10 foroaps sxthange rate
Unexpected 0-7 inflstaon
Chang, in kttg.tenn 0.1 expected inSx.taon
Change In price of oil
Claa.ng. in 0-7 induatsial production

edict
dted

0.545
-0.046
0.104
-0.006
-0.039
0,062
0.215
0.132

4.189
3.988
2.099
0.204

0.15
-0.08

-0.03
.4.09

.0.07

0.31

0.00

0.06
0.04

-0.02

1.375

-0.34

-0.13

0.861
0.817
0.316

0.56
0.11
0.67

0.22

P4

P12

P24

0.03
.0.13
0.08
-0.09
-0.16
0.03
0.1$
0.52

0.09
0.02
0.06
0.01
-0.08
-0.02
.0.08
0.67

0.00
0.09
-0.07
0.08

World risk tartan

0-7 real interest rat.

dG1II
dC7ul

dgldt
doll

dgrip
gTmb

0.37
0.53

0.0$
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.24
0.53

0.01

-0.02
-0.17
0.55

Cen'ejatioris at the .rodd tusk (Scto'i

Variable

wdrst

wdr.t
4usd

1.000
.0.154
0.314
-0.005
-0.253
-0.098
-0.053
0.101

4G10(z

Glut

dCislt
doll
dCliip

Girth

dtcd

dGlO(x

doll

dGlip

Girth

1.000
-0.031

1.000

.

1.0CC

0.010
0.166
0.238
-0.101
0.128
-0.058

dGldt

Glut

5.000
.0.015
.0.110

-0143
-0.075

-0059

1.000

0.00$
0.207
0.128
-0.564

1.002
-0.008
0.053
-0.007

1.000
-0.055

-0.289

The world excess return is ths arithmetic r,tuxn on thu Morgan Stanley Capital Intarnailonal world .quriy lodux (including dividends) Ieu tb. Ibbotson
A'odatss one-month bill rate. The diange in the Eurodollae.Treaatuy ylsId spread as thu diHcs b.tween the 90-day Eurodollar yield ..nd the 90

day Treasuty bill yield (frow Federal Reserve Bulletin). The log diangs in the 0-50 foreign uctaaaig. rat. is iii. diifn'ence iii th, trade weighted dollar
pci foreign .xdtangs r&t, of 10 lndtutnsliaed countries (0-7 plua the Netherlands, Belgium, Sw.dan, eu4 S.ritzerlazad) front International Monctary
Fund. Th. wsezpectad inSainon fo, ib. 0-7 countries Is derived from a timo-.eries modal applicd to an aWate 0-7 InSation rats where the (varying)
weights in the ax regacton are determined by country weights In total 0-7 gross domestic product. Chessg, In long term .xp.cted 0.7 inSstioua is a
result of projecting th, four yw moving average of 0-7 InSaiio.s on the set of instjmsntal variable. sp.cii%sd below. Tb. change in the price ol oil is
the change in the average U.S. dollar price of per barrel at the welihead from 1974-1989 end ib. posted West Texas Intermediate price from 1969-1973.
This variable is divkled by 100. The ckaag. in 0-7 industrial production ii calculated by weighting local industrial production index levels by the
(iillowing weights Cand. 04314, France .098l, Germany .05794. Italy .13093, Japan .07485, U.K. .11137 U.S. .48343 which are iii. weights in 0.7
gross domestic product in the third quarter of 1969. The growth rate i the logarithmic differonce in lIt. erepte industrial production in4eo. The
0-7 real interest rate is calculated by aggrqatrng individua.l countries' short term interest rates minus Inflation rates using (varying) weighie bused
on quarterly shares in 0-7 gross do,raextic product.

erinanv

I

(0.127)
.0.052
(0.089)
0.009
(0.075)

0.718

(0.00.1)

0,003
(0.004)
0.0 19

17 '219

III))

i#i,(

-

s•nhut:
[11

I '2U.3-145

=

III

I 7.12(1
(0.49ii

1,,
(0.000]

(0.081)
0.1)7
(0.09!)
-0 (lOS
(0038)

1930.4$

(0.002)

0.00l

0.673

(0.078)
I .273
(0.153)
I .00.1
(0.041)

0.001

(0.003)
0.003
(0.005)

-0.059
(0.091)

(0.0118)

0.550

(0.105)

-0.002

(0.098)

(0.125)
-0.09$
(0.129)
-0.103

(0.00(3)

-0.1)20

0,973

(0.072)

O.893
(0.08.1)
0.936

(0.100)

0.4 20

-0.289

0.670

(0.272)

0.022

(0.095)

0.698

0.01$
(0.105)

(0.06.1)
0.04 2
(o.oe,s)

(0.097)
I .255
(0.2 15)

0.814
(0.089)
I .053
(0.068)
0.557
(0.074)
I .007
(0.092)

(o.o3)

-0.187
(0.102)
0.045
(0.081)
-0.050
(0.087)
0.003

dted

(0.133)
l.142
(0.187)

(0.008)
-0.00I
(0.005)
0.000
(0.004)
0(8)3
(0.003)
0.002
(0.000)
0.005

(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.002
(0.004)
0.003
(0.00.1)
0.000

-0.000

(0.003)

(0.146)

(0.004)
0.003
(0.003)
0.003
0.217

0.999

wdrct

0.001

intercept

of the asset

(I
same

4 '- =

State,

I Inuileul Iituguluuunu

Swilterlanul

Sweden

Spain

S nug..tuore/Malar,ws

riorwir

Netherlanuls

Ja1,ani

Italy

I bug b<ong

(

l'r..t,ce

l)eumark

Canada

Relgium

Austria

Country
Australia

Soure oF risk

Regressions

1.230

0.1 ,u

87.1117

107.171

0.093
(0.1(14)
0.115
(11.091)

(0.153)

0.4(39'

(0.204)

0.214

(0.197)

24.758
In I

(0.126)

24.965

(0M*

(2.750)
-1.203

-2.456
(1.1)72)
-2.830

(2.129)

0.756

(2.867)
4.370•
(2.017)

(0.239)
0.41(3

(3.107
(2.38.5)
-1.090

(1.46))

0.14$

(1.730)

(2.800)

-1.019

-2.1 37

(4.379)

-0.243

(2.142)

0.221
(0.21.5)
0.230

(0.111)

0.200

(0.147)

0,535

0,669

(0.554)
0.S12
(0.239)

(0.20-I)

2.058

(2.192)

0.511

(0 19$)
0.46!'

-0.372

(1.982)

0.50u2.

(1.481)

(0.130)
(0.163)

-0.339

(1.581)

1.6

(2.107)

2.3.

(2.349)

3.262

G7ui

-0.2(S)

(0.186)

0.S49

(0.232)

0.881

(0.219)

0.117

dGlO(x

0.367

)o

''i

34.4(8)

10.0, I)

34.48.5

(0.403)
.0.355
(0.323)
0.237
(0.240)
0.199
(0.329)
0.360
(0.207)
-0.320
(0.285)
-0.322
(0.13I)

-0.071

(0.377)
0.776'
(0.267)
-0.176
(0.225)

1.092

(0.353)
-0.067
(0.597)

19.402

19.316

03!))
)uu II.)

(0.367)

31.755

10.012)

34.289

-0.054

(0.191)

0.110

(0.181)

(0.291)

0.104

-0.281

0.227

(0.387)

0.690

(0.459)

0.094

(0.746)

1,103

(0.5 11)

0.657

(0.309)

13

402

10.7481

13,704

(1.956)
-0.65!
(0.603)

.1.947

(1.148)

1.052
(1.445)
0.112

(1.429)

1.803

(1.815)
-3.368
(2.192)

0.046

(1.056)

0.466

(1.217)
-0.322

0.292

(1.657)

1.437

-1.049

(2.808)

(1.508)

0.651

(1.375)

0.366

(1.242)

0.830

(0.992)

-0.733

(1061)

1.156

(1.379)

1.984

(1.641)

-1.334

G7rtb

(0.388)

(0.319)
0.096
(0.483)
-0.519
(0.492)
.0,548
(0.463)
1.741'
(0.783)
0.705
(0.518)

(0.409)
-0.239
(0.378)

0.1

-0.203
(0.505)

cIG7ip

(0.362)

(0.624)

(0.456)
-1.018
(0.653)
-0.100

1.907'

(0.357)
0.087
(0.292)
0.992
(0.500)

I .356'
(0.777)
-1.020
(0.794)
-0.350

(0.4 78)

(0.4 48)
0,130

(0.413)

(0.449)
-0.215

-0.301

(0.411)

0.325

(0.312)

0.445

0.269
(0.648)
-0.133
(0.556)
-0.5 17
(0.575)

doil

(0.352)
-0.155

0,172

(0.298)
-0.294
(0.227)
0.177
(0.193)

0.451

(0.509)

.0.281

-0.944
(0.392)

dG7elt

returns on the world risk factors: 1970:2—1989:12 (239 observations)

Table 2

0,776

0,45)

0.472

0.243

0.196

0.304

0.278

0.542

0.452

0.2 17

0.187

0.306

0.3(8)

0.220

0.552

0.422

0.155

0.351

(scion

0,777

0.453

0.4 71

0.246

0.196

0.297

0.262

0.545

0.4 57

0.199

0.170

0.311

0.395

0.230

0.559

0.427

0.159

0.344

Factors

2
4 risk

•2
S risk

-2

0.741

0.457

0.447

0.249

0.170

0.265

0.253

0.5 44

0.408

0.175

0.162

0.292

0.380

0.209

0.549

0.386

0.075

0.3 19

wdret

only

y.r

Ilic h-squares are adjusted for degrees of freedom.

• denotes more than two standard errors fromzero. When 4 risk factors are used the variables are w4ret, 40:0/:, dG7et and doiL Standard errors and
returnon the Morgan Stanley Capital Intosnational world equity index (including dividends) kss the
I,i.crtuaje statisticsare heteroskedasticity consistent. The world excess return. s4reS is the arithmetic
the 90 day Treasury bill yield (from Federal
Ibbotson Associates one month bill rate. The change in the Eurodollar-Treasury yield spread, dIe4, is the difference between the 90-day Eurodollar yield and
rate of 10 industrialized countries (G.7 pius the Netherlands,
Reserve Bulletin). The log change in the 0-10 forisgn exchangerate, 40101r, is the difference in the trade weighted dollar per foreign exchange
is derived froma time-seriesmodel applied to an aggregateG-7 infistion rate
l3clgium, Sweden, and Switzerland) from International Monetazy Fund. The unexpected inflation for the (3.7 countnes, G7iii,
the four
where the (varying) weights in the aggregationare determined by country weights in total 0.7 grossdomestic product. Change in long termexpected 0-7 inflation, 407e11, is a result of projecting
the change in the average U.S. dollar price of per barrel at the wellhead from 1974-1989 and
moving average of (3-7 inflation on a set of instrumental variables. The change in the price of oil, 4ou4 is
in this aggregate
the posted West Texas Intermediate price from l9.1973. This variable is divided by 100. dG7ip is the change in 0-7 industrial production. The growth rate is th. logarithmic difference
basedon quarterly shares in G-7 gross domestic
index. The 0-7 real interest rate, G7rrt, is calculated by aggregating individual countries' short term interest rates minus inflation rates using weights
product.

Table 2 (continued)

Table 3

Unconditional asset pricing tests using generalized method of moments:
u1

= r1 —

(f + A® t)13

where r represents the asset excess returns, f are the demeaned world risk factors, A are the risk premiums associated
with the factors and 3 are the asset sensitivites to the world risk factors. In the first test in columns 2-4, there is a
single risk factor, the world market return, and f + A 0 .. is replaced with the excess market return. In this case, the
reported risk premium is the average market excess return over the sample and the standard error of the mean is in
parentheses. In the second test in columns 5-9, (is specified to be four demeaned world risk factors. The instruments
in the GMM estimations are a constant and the risk measure(s). The x2 test is the minimized values of the GMM
criterion function for the system. The sample is 1970:2—1989:12 (239 observations)
One factor model
Source of risk

Country

wdret

fi

Average
return(%)

Australia

1.115
(0.140)

0.468

Austria

0.386
(0.072)
0.899

0.756

Belgium

France

(0.077)
1.031
(0.066)
0.651
(0.078)
1.066

Germany

(0.086)
0.782

Canada
Denmark

Hong Kong

Italy

Japan
Netherlands

(0.083)
1.310
(0.166)
0.783
(0.095)
0.918
(0.089)
0.984

0.897

Singapore/Malaysia

Spain
Sweden

Switzerland
United Kingdom

United States

-0.111
(0.250)

0.461
(0.321)

0.729
0.651
1.630

0.296

1.313
0.830

0.932

1.183

1.114

(0.169)
0.645
(0.095)

0.361

0.774

0.964
0.548
0.761
0.380

/3
0.9&)
(0.145)

/3

/3

/3

0.130
(0.210)

0.693
(0.620)

0.251
(0.088)

0.823
(0.216)

-1.273
(0.395)
0.124
(0.489)

0.831
(0.086)
1.025

0.510
(0.171)

0.511

.0.591

(0.288)

(0.457)

(0.066)

(0.113)
0.481

-0.381
(0.209)

(0.289)

0.578

0.148

(0.089)

0.915
-0.130
(0.450)
0.813
(0.303)
0.293
(0.239)
0.371

0.717
(0.093)
1.182

(0.207)
0.706
(0.097)
0.915
(0.079)
0.931
(0.070)

0.9

-0.261

0.149

(0.191)

0.434
(0.178)

0.403
(0.321)

(0.366)
.0.330
(0.364)

0.424
(0.186)

0.206
(0.404)

0.706
(0.585)
0.392
(0.235)
0.519
(0.133)
0.202

0.299

(0.111)
0.185
(0.233)
0.263
(0.234)
0.312

(0.436)

0.267
(0.3)9)
0.777

(0.429)
1.125
(0.674)
-1.201
(0.314)

(0.199)

(0.385)
-0.489
(0.222)

0.179

0.318

(0.3.41)

(0.095)

(0.188)

(0.292)

(0.294)
0.249

0.866

0.410

0.397

(0.077)

(0.147)
0.100
(0.161)
-0.395
(0.082)

(0.204)
-0.180
(0.224)
-0.378
(0.126)

0.029

0.039

(0.245)

(0.197)

1.233

.0.077

(0.523)
1.955
(0.424)

(0.367)

-0.991
(0.580)
-0.242
(0.577)
0.008
(0.341)
0.056
(0.294)
0.071
(0.175)

X?s
[p-value)
20.697

0.545
(0.271)

(0.295)

-0.027
(0.325)
-0.141

(0.306)
0.298

(0.293)
-0.405
(0.196)
-0.169
(0.317)
.0.026
(0.084)
0.149

0.154

0.444

A

0.119
(0.558)
-0.315

(0.261)
-0.014
(0.220)
0.081

0.325

wdret

0.094
(0.205)
-0.022
(0.221)
-0.122
(0.209)
0.031
(0.254)
-0.293
(0.311)
-0.119
(0.255)

(0.368)
0.227

(0.190)

1.254

-0.273

Average
pricing
error(Vs)
.()1S1
(0.263)

(0.760)
-0.299

(0.106)
0.737

(0.149)
0.994
(0.037)

0.486

(0.154)

(0.124)
1.091
(0.181)

0.58)

.0256
(0.501)

0.272

(0.456)
0.469
(0.510)
0.011
(0.374)
0.542

0.049
(0.272)
0.066
(0.369)
-0.147
(0.151)

doil

dGlOfx

(0.369)
0.224
(0.328)

dG7elt

wdret

(0.071)
1.016

(0.745)

Mean absolute
pricing error
Va1ue-weihted5
mean absolute
pricing error

Risk premiums

0.407
(0.300)

0.816

1.028
(0.113)

(0.081)
0.915
(0.070)
1.274
(0.134)
0.968
(0.039)

-0.140
(0.427)
0.546
(0.355)

0.451

(0.064)

Norway

Four factor model
Average
pricing
error(%)

wdret

dGlofx

dG7elt

doil

A

A

A

A

[p-value)

0.717
(0.049)

0.602

0.211

(0.340)

(0.252)

0.155
(0.167)

[0.892)

7.950

5Vslue weights are the proportion of the Morgan Stanley Capital International world index represented by eath of the 18 country indic.
Standard errors and chi-square statgtics are heteroakedastkity consistont. The world excess return, wdret is the aritlunetic return on the

Morgan Stanley Capital Intnational world equity index (including dividends) less the Ibbotson Associates one month biU rate. The tog
change in the C-IC foreign exchange rate, 4Gb/i, is the difference in the trade weighted dollar per foreign exthange rate of 10 industrialized
countries (G-7 plus the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, and Switzerland). Change in long term expected G.7 inflation. dG7eIt, is a result of
projecting the four yesr moving average of (1.7 inflation on a set or instrumental 'ariabes. The change in the price of oil. OIL is the change
iii the average U.S. dollar price of per barrel at tile wriflivad from 1974-1 ISO and I lie posted \Vest Tetss Ijitermediate price from 1 9
Ths variable is divided by 100.

I 93

