NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPLICATIONS OF FIRST-ORDER
RISK AVERSION FOR ASSET
MARKET RISK PREMIUMS

Geert Bekaert
Robert J. Hodrick
David A. Marshall

Working Paper No. 4624

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January, 1994

This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4624
January 1994
THE IMPLICATIONS OF FIRST-ORDER
RISK AVERSION FOR ASSET
MARKET RISK PREMIUMS

ABSTRACT
Existing general equilibrium models based on traditional expected utility preferences have

been unable to explain the excess return predictability observed in equity markets, bond markets,
and foreign exchange markets. In this paper, we abandon the expected-utility hypothesis in favor

of preferences that exhibit first-order risk aversion. We incorporate these preferences into a
general equilibrium two-country monetary model, solve the model numerically, and compare the
quantitative implications of the model to estimates obtained from U.S. and Japanese data for

equity, bond and foreign exchange markets. Although increasing the degree of first-order risk

aversion substantially increases excess return predictability, the model remains incapable of
generating excess return predictability sufficiently large to match the data. We conclude that the

observed patterns of excess return predictability are unlikely to be explained purely by timevarying risk premiums generated by highly risk averse agents in a complete markets economy.

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Stanfonl University
Stanford, CA 94305

Robert I. Hodrick
Kellogg Graduate School
of Management
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER

David A. Marshall
Kellogg Gniduaie School

of Management

Noflhestn University
Evanston, IL 60208

1. Introduction
It is generally accepted that excess returns on a variety of assets are predictable. This is

true for returns in the equity markets, bond markets, and foreign exchange markets of various
countries. One interpretation of this evidence is that equilibrium risk premiums on all assets are

highly variable.

Yet, existing rational expectations general equilibrium models based on

traditional expected utility preferences have been unable to generate risk premiums that are
sufficiently variable to be consistent with the observed predictability of returns.
Consequently, in this paper we abandon the expected-utility hypothesis in favor of

preferences that exhibit first-order risk aversion.'

With these

preferences,

agents are

substantively averse to even small gambles. Hence, a small degree of uncertainty in the
exogenous environment of economic agents can potentially induce relatively large fluctuations

in agents' intertemporal marginal rates of substitution. This, in turn, implies large fluctuations

in expected rates of return on a variety of assets. Our goal is to determine whether a general
equilibrium model incorporating preferences that exhibit first-order risk aversion is quantitatively

consistent with the predictability of returns and with other time series properties observed in the
data from the foreign exchange market, the equity markets, and the bond markets of the U.S. and
Japan.

Other papers that propose first-order risk aversion as an explanation for asset pricing
anomalies include Epstein and Zin (1990, 1991) and Bonomo and Garcia (1993). In particular,
Epstein and Zin (1991) are unable to reject the overidentifying restrictions implied by a closed
economy model, analogous to. the model of Hansen and Singleton (1982), when first-order risk

The concept of first-order risk aversion was intmduced by Segal and Spivak (1990).

aversion is assumed. Their approach requires the researcher to choose a proxy for the
unobservable rate of return on aggregate wealth, and their inference about the validity of the
model depends on this choice. In an open economy setting, the choice of a proxy for the return

on aggregate wealth is problematic. Hence, we do not follow the approach of Epstein and Zin

(1991). Instead of testing the first-order conditions of the model, we explicitly solve a twocountry monetary model for the endogenous moments of interest.

In our model, consumption of two goods equals the outputs of two countries, which are
assumed to be exogenous endowment streams. The two money supplies are also exogenous. The
growth rates of these exogenous processes follow a discrete Markov chain that is estimated from

U.S and Japanese data using the method of Tauchen and Hussey (1991). The equilibrium
processes for returns and other endogenous variables are found by numerically solving a system

of Euler equations. Having solved the model, we generate a variety of statistics that provide
evidence on the predictability of the model's returns. The performance of the model is evaluated

by comparing these statistics to the corresponding statistics in the data.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we present evidence
on the predictability of excess rates of return in the dollar-yen foreign exchange market, in the

dollar and yen discount bond markets, and in the equity markets. These stylized facts provide
the set of statistics that we would like the model to match. In section 3, we discuss intuitively
why time-varying equilibrium risk premiums could be an explanation of the statistics described

in section 2. Section 4 introduces the concept of first-order risk aversion, and section 5
incorporates these preferences into a formal dynamic model. In section 6 we derive the model's
equilibrium conditions for endogenous financial variables. Section 7 describes our procedure for

2

calibrating the model, and section 8 presents our results. Section 9 compares our results with
Epstein and Zin (1991), and section 10 provides concluding comments.

2. Some Stylized Facts on Excess Return Predictability
In this section we document the predictability of excess rates of return on discount bonds,
equities, and foreign money markets using regression analysis. Since U.S. and Japanese data are

the exogenous processes of the model, we report results only for these two countries.
Nevertheless, the evidence is consistent across the markets of most developed countries as
documented by the recent empirical studies of Harvey (1991), Bekaert and Hodrick (1992, 1993).

and Solnik (1993). among others.
We begin by developing notation for own-counuy money market and equity investments.

Let I (I') be the dollar (yen) return at time t+1 from investing one dollar (yen) at time t in the
nominally risk-free dollar (yen) bond. Let R÷1 (R÷1) be the analogous one-period dollar (yen)

return in the equity market of the U.S. (Japan). Throughout the paper, lower case letters will

represent either the natural logarithms of upper case counterparts or variables measured as
continuously compounded rates of return. Hence, the continuously compounded excess dollar

(yen) rate of return in the U.S. (Japanese) equity market is r1 -

i

- it). The conditional

expectation of an excess return is often referred to in the literature as a risk premium, and we
will use this terminology interchangeably with expected excess return.2

1

An excess raze of return is the nominal rate of return on an asset in excess of the short-term interest
rate. If inflation is stochastic, conditional expectations of excess rates of return will be non-zero even if
agents ait risk neutral, which makes use of the term "risk premium" for these conditional expectations
somewhat imprecise. Engel (1992) provides a recent discussion of this issue for the risk premium in the
foreign exchange market
3

A. The Foreign Exchange Market
If S1 is the spot exchange rate at date t of dollars per yen, the dollar return to investing
one dollar in the yen money market and bearing the foreign exchange risk is

Let F be

the forward exchange rate of dollars per yen quoted at date I for date C-i-i transactions. Then, the

dollar return to investing one dollar in the yen money market and eliminating the foreign
exchange risk with a forward contract is F1t/S1. Since this investment also provides a risk-free
return of dollars, covered interest arbitrage implies interest rate parity:

i —i? tç —St.

(1)

The right-hand side of equation (I) is the continuously compounded forward premium or discount

in the foreign exchange market. Notice that the continuously compounded excess dollar rate of

return from investing in the Japanese money market is i + s,÷ - s, - if, which from equation (1)

SH-tfI
A common way of testing the predictability of the excess rate of return on an uncovered
foreign money market investment is to regress the excess return on the forward premium:
—

+

3(f, — s)

+

The null hypothesis that the excess rate of return is unpredictable implies

(2)

= 0. If the point

estimate of f3 differs significantly from zero, there is evidence that cx ante excess rates of return
vary over time. In the empirical analysis we focus on a quarterly holding period Since that is the

4

frequency we use for the exogenous processes in simulating the model.3 The sample period for

our exchange rate data is January 1976 to December 1989. The data are described more
completely in Appendix A.

The rt row of Table 1, Panel A. displays the regression results for equation (2) using
the three-month forward premium as the predictor. As is typical in the literature, the
slope
coefficient of -4.016 is significantly negative.4 The R2 for the regression is .22, and the standard

deviation of the fitted value of the excess return, reported in Table 1. Panel B. is 12.36%.'
These statistics indicate that excess returns are quite predictable and risk premiums are quite
variable.

B. The Discount Bond Market
Similar evidence of predictable excess holding period rates of return can be found in the

discount bond market using a forward premium computed from bond prices as a predictor.

Specifically, let V denote the date t price of a nominally risk-free pure discount bond which
pays one unit of currency at date t+k. When necessary to avoid confusion, there will be a
superscript $ or V symbol on V, to denote the currency. Let i, be the continuously compounded

yield to maturity on a k-period bond expressed in percent per period. By definition.

The availability of monthly observations on the three-month holding pexiod allows us to use
additional observations that increase the power of the tests but induce autoconelation in the errors. As
in Hansen and Hodrick (1980), the standard errors in Table I allow for the autoconelation induced by the
overlapping error stiucwre and, additionally, for possible conditional heteroskedasticity as in Hansen
(1982).

For the dollar values of other major foreign currencies, the estimated coefficients are also
significantly below zero. Similar results arise in regressions using non-dollar exchange rates as
demonstrated in Bekaert (1992) and Hodrick (1992). Bossaerts and Billion (1991) use French franc
exchange rates and find slope coefficients that are all less than zero, but not all are significantly negative.
All rates of retum in this paper are expressed in percentage points per annum.
5

= exp(—ki).

(3)

Let the one-period continuously compounded holding period rate of return on a k-period bond

realized at time t+l be h,+ = ln(V1.fV), which from equation (3) can be written as
= —(k —

+

(4)

Ida.

In the empirical analysis we examine the one-period excess holding period rate of return
on a two-period bond, Ii.4.3 - i1, in a regression analogous to equation (2). For parallel structure,

we define the forward premium in the bond market, denoted tb,

as

the logarithm of the

contractual price today for a one-period bond delivered one period from now minus the logarithm

of the price today of a one-period bond:
fb1 =

ln(VJV1) —ln(V1) =

—2i13

+

2i1.

(5)

The bond market analogue to equation (2) is

hi.ia

ii =

+ i1(1) +

(6)

If excess holding period returns are unpredictable, f3 should be zero.
In rows two and three of Table I, we report estimates of equation (6) for the U.S. dollar

and Japanese yen discount bond markets. Since our timing interval is one quarter, h;+ia is the
three-month return on a six-month bond and ft is the forward premium on a three-month bond

to be purchased three months in the future. For the empirical analysis we have monthly
observations on three-month and six-month Euro-dollar and Euro-yen interest rates from October

1975 to June 1990.

For both the dollar and the yen markets, the estimate of

6

is -0.45, and both are

significantly negative.6 While the estimated l's are not as negative as the estimates from the
foreign exchange market, there is strong evidence of predictability of the excess rates of return.
The R2 for the U.S. market is .03. and the R2 for the yen market is .09. The standard deviations
of the fitted values of the excess returns in the two markets are 0.3 18% for the U.S. and 0.370%

for Japan. These statistics are much smaller than those in the foreign exchange market.

C. The Equity Markets
A similar set of results emerges from examining excess rates of return in equity markets.
We focus on results in Bekaert and Hodrick (1992), who show that excess rates of return to U.S.

and foreign equities are predicted by the forward premium in the foreign exchange market.
Consistent with our two-country framework, we construct a dollar world equity market excess

rate of return as an equally-weighted avenge of the dollar excess rates of returns on the equity
markets of the U.S. and Japan:

—

= [(rti — i1) + (r,1

—

i7) + (s— f1)](1/2).

(7)

We regress this excess return on the three-month forward premium in the dollar-yen foreign
exchange market:
—

i15

=

I3 + J3(f

—

+

(8)

The fourth row of Table 1. Panel A, reports a slope coefficient of -3.543, with a standard error
of 0.816. As equation (7) indicates, there are three components to this world equity excess rate
of return: the excess dollar rate of return in the U.S. equity market, the excess yen rate of return
in the Japanese equity market, and the excess rate of return in the foreign exchange market. The

6 These results axe similar to those reported by Faina (19Mb) and Stambaugh (1988) for monthly U.S.
data.

7

regression of the thiixi component on the forward premium is discussed above. Regressions of

the fhst two components on the forward premium are contained in rows five and six of Table
1, Panel A. Each of the components has a negative slope coefficient, and all but the Japanese
equity coefficient are significantly negative.

3. Time-Varying Risk Premiums
The patterns of predictability in excess returns documented above can, in principle, be

explained by time variation in equilibrium risk premiums.' Our paper considers this point of
view. In this section we formally relate the regression evidence of the previous section to time-

variation in risk premiums using a decomposition of the forward premium introduced by Fama

(1984a). We then discuss what is required from an equilibrium model if it is to be consistent
with the patterns observed in the data.'

Define the logarithmic risk premium in the foreign exchange market as rp E(s) Following Fama (1984a), the forward premium can be decomposed into the expected rate of

'The literature modelling asset returns as the outcome of a dynamic, stochastic equilibrium is too vast
to be reviewed here. Examples of recent papers that model excess returns in foreign exchange markets
using approaches related to that used in this paper include Backus, Gregory, and Telrner (1992). Bansal,
Gallant. Hussey and Tauchen (1991), and Bekaert (l993a.b). Kandel and Stambaugh (1991) use a similar
approach to model excess returns in equity markets,

'There are at least two other potential explanations of the data, which we take seriously but do not
pursue in this paper. First, the stylized facts may not be representative of the true population distributions.
Rather, they may be examples of problems in statistical inference caused by the adoption of a rational
expectations perspective in non-experimental data, Such problems could be caused by infrequent regime
changes, learning, peso problems, data snooping biases, and so forth. Second, these stylized facts may
be evidence of market inefficiency.
S

depreciation of the dollar relative to the yen minus this risk premium:
fp1 E

f1

—; = E1(As1,,)

—

rp1,

(9)

where A is the first difference operator.

Now, consider the regression of s - 1, on a constant and fp1, as in equation (2). By
rational expectations.

- = rp, +

where the

innovation, +. is orthogonal to the time

infonnation set. Consequently, only the risk premium covaries with the regressor in equation (2).

and the slope coefficient in that regression is

= cov(s,,1 —f1, fp1) =

cov(rp1, E1(6s1,1)) — var(rp,)

var(fp1)

var(E1(6.s141)) + var(rpj — 2cov(rp. E1(As.1))

(10)

A decomposition similar to equation (9) can be performed for the bond market. Define
the risk premium in the bond market to be rb1 E.(ht+ia - iJ. Then, the forward premium in the

bond market, fbi. can be decomposed into the expected rate of change of the logarithm of the
one-period bond price minus the risk premium:
lb1

E1(Av11) — rb1,

(11)

where v÷1 = In(V11). The slope coefficient in equation (6) would then be given by an expression

analogous to equation (10) with rp replaced by rb, and As.M replaced by Av+1.
Clearly, if var(rp,) = 0, the slope coefficient in equation (2) is zero. Similarly, if var(rb)
= 0,

the slope coefficient in equation (6) is zero. To generate the negative slope coefficients

found in the data, the risk premiums rp and rb1 must vary through time, The decomposition (10)
provides inwition regarding the amount of time-variation in risk premiums required to match the

data. Consider first the case of foreign exchange. The explained variance in regression (2) is

vr(fp1). so the finding of

C-I implies
9

var(rp1) > var(fpj.

(12)

Furthermore. if j3 c -1, equation (10) implies
var(rp1) > cov(rp1, E1(as1,1)) > var(E1(As1,1)).

(13)

Hence, regression results like those in the actual data require that the risk premium in the foreign

exchange market be more variable than the expected rate of depreciation and that the risk
premium and the expected rate of depreciation covaiy positively. Similarly, since the slope
coefficient for the equity market regression is comparable to that in the foreign exchange market

regression, the implied variability of the equity risk premium is comparable to the implied
variability of the risk premium in the foreign exchange market

In the case of the bond market regressions (6), the estimated slope coefficients are
insignificantly different from -0.5. Equation (10), applied to the dollar and yen bond markets,
then implies
va4E1(av11))

var(rb)

(14)

That is, the variabilities of the risk premiums in the two bond markets are roughly equal to the
variabilities of the expected rates of change of the logarithmic bond prices.
The general asset pricing framework of Hansen and Richard (1987) provides insight into

what is needed from an equilibrium model if it is to generate the requisite time-variation in risk

premiums. Let R,1 denote an arbitrary dollar return realized in period t+1 from investing one
dollar at time t. Hansen and Richard (1987) show that there exists a stochastic discount factor,

10

satisfying':

E[QIIR+L]

= 1.

(15)

In equilibrium models with effectively complete markets, QL equals each agent's intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution of wealth divided by the gross rate of change in the dollar price

level.

Equation (15) implies that substantial time variability in excess returns can be achieved
only if there is substantial time-variation in the conditional second moments of the joint (Rt÷1.
} process, which. in turn, requires substantial volatility in the marginal rate of substitution.'°

One way of generating highly volatile marginal rates of substitution is to assume that agents have

a high degree of risk aversion. In effect, the extreme nonlinearity associated with high risk
aversion can transform the uncertainty due to conditionally homoskedastic exogenous inputs into
endogenous risky asset returns whose moments are conditionally quite variable. Alternatively.

high volatility in marginal rates of substitution can be generated by directly assuming time-

varying conditional heteroskedasticity in the exogenous driving processes (as in Bekaert
(1993b))J'
It should be noted that increasing the variance of risk premiums is not sufficient to insure

'Hansen and Richard (1987) require that (i) the space of portfolio payoffs is a Hilbert space of square
integrable random variables, and (ii) there axe no arbitrage opportunities.

'° Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) develop restrictions on the mean and variance of the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution implied by the stochastic properties of observed asset returns. Cochrane and
Hansen (1992) use this methodology to survey equilibrium approaches to asset pricing. They demonstrate
how difficult it Is to generate sufficient variability in Q within the context of an equilibrium model.

"In principle, these two approaches could be combined. For the model of this paper, however.
incorporating time-vaiying conditional heteroskedasticity substantially increases the dimensionality of the
state space, rendering the approach computationally intractable.

Il

that conditions (12), (13), and (14) hold. The forward premiums and the expected rates of

change of asset prices are also endogenous variables in the model. Changes in the model
specification that increase the variances of risk premiums may also increase the variances of

E(As1) ahd Ejav,+1], leaving the relative variances unchanged. Furthermore, the covariances
between the risk premiums and the expected rates of change of asset prices may change. Thus,
while it is likely that exueme risk aversion will increase the variability in intertemporal marginal

rates of substitution, it is unclear whether this is sufficient to induce the patterns of predictability
in excess returns that are observed in the data. Hence, to explore the effects of increasingrisk
aversion we must solve the model explicitly.

4.

First-Order Risk Aversion
The preceding discussion makes clear the role that substantial risk aversion may play in

generating the regression results described in section 2. Models using expected-utility preferences
have not fared well in this regard. Even the models of Backus, Gregory, and Telmer (1993) and

Bekaert (1993b), which incorporate substantial time-nonseparabiities in the form of habit
persistence, fail to imply sufficient predictability in excess rates of return. The reason for this

failure is not difficult to see. Expected-utility preferences display second-order risk aversion.

That is, in response to a lottery which is close to perfect certainty, an expected utility maximizer
exhibits behavior close to risk neutrality. This is a problem for consumption-based asset pricing

models because, at any given date, the conditional variance of next period's aggregate
consumption is small.

One way of addressing this problem is to abandon preferences that display only secondorder risk aversion in favor of preferences that imply first-order risk aversion. With this type of

12

preference specification, agents are substantially averse to even small gambles. Epstein and Zin
(1991) examine a variety of such preferences. including Gui's (1991) disappointment aversion

preferences, in order to increase the variability of agents intertemporal marginal rate of
substitution. Disappointment aversion was introduced by Gui (1991) as a way of accommodating

the Allais paradox within a parsimonious extension of expected utility. Camerer's (1989) review

of the experimental economics literature suggests that expected utility cannot explain the
experimental evidence on preference orderings under uncertainty. Rather, what is required is a

preference ordering in which outcomes are evaluated relative to some reference point.
Disappointment aversion has this property.

We follow Epstein and Zin (1991) in using the following simple model of disappointment

aversion. A preference ordering over the space of probability distributions P (e.g.. over
alternative lotteries) can be represented by a certainty equivalent function ji: P—R. For P P.

p(P) is implicitly defined by

P(Pr1I
a

5 !_dp(z)+A 5 LdP(z)1Ai,a<1.
(p()..,)U
K(.,))a
)

(16)

where K = Aprob(z> p) + prob(z pi). if A = I. the preferences described by equation (16)
correspond ta expected utility with a coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to 1 - a. If A
differs from unity, equation (16) can be interpreted as follows. Those outcomes below the
certainty equivalent are disappointing, while those above the certainty equivalent are elating. If

A < 1, the elation region is down-weighted relative to the disappointment region. The next
section embeds these preferences in a two-country monetary model.

5. A Two-Country Monetary Model
13

In the model asset prices and exchange rates are determined in a competitive equilibrium
in which the demands for assets and goods are the optimal choices of a representative agent. As

in Marshall (1992) and Belcaert (1993b). money is demanded by agents because consumption
transactions are costly, and increasing real balance holdings decreases these transaction costs.
Specifically, let the two countries be denoted as x and y, respectively. The representative agent's
consumption of the good produced in country x is c', and the representative agent's consumption

of the good produced in country y is 0. Consumption of c' involves transaction costs measured

by

a t(c1', M1/P,') a x(c,')(M1:/P')'1 v > 1,

7. > o.

(17)

denominated in units of c'. where M1 is the amount of currency x (which we call the dollar)
acquired by the representative agent in period t and P is the price of c' at date tin units of M'.
Consumption of c' involves a transaction cost of

a Y(c1'. M.'1/P1') a

> i. c > o.

(18)

denominated in units of good y, where N1 is the amount of currency y (which we call thç yen)

acquired by the representative agent in period t; and P is the yen price of c' at date I
The timing in this model differs from the transaction-cost models of Feenstra (1986) and

Marshall (1992) in that money provides transaction services in period t when it is acquired.
However, money must be held until the following period, so losses in purchasing power due to
inflation accrue in period t+l. This timing is imposed for tractability. With our timing, the only
endogenous state variable affecting an individual agent's decisions is the agent's stock of wealth.

14

If money only provided transaction services if acquired one period earlier, the agent's stock of
money would represent a second endogenous state variable, The optimality conditions would
then involve the derivatives of the (unknown) value function with respect to the money-wealth
ratio. To solve such a model numerically would be extremely burdensome computationally.
In addition to monies, agents can hold n capital assets. Let

be the value (in units of

c') of the representative agent's investment in asset i, chosen at t, and which pays off at t+1. The

gross real return to asset i (measured in units of good x received in t+1 per unit of good x

invested at date t) is denoted R.
if S, denotes the exchange rate (dollars/yen), the budget constraint for the representative

agent in units of consumption good x is

c' +

+ S1?,' (cj

+

+

+

1M,.

w,

(19)

where W1 denotes the representative agent's wealth at the beginning of period t:

M' + S MJ

(20)

+
I-I

Pt

The representative agent's preferences over cutrent and uncertain future consumption

incorporate disappointment aversion as in equation (16), and are specified using the approach of

Epstein and Zin (1989). Specifically, let J denote the vector of exogenous state variables which
span the agent's information set at date t. The utility value of W1 in the state J1 isdenoted V(W,,

JJ, and is defined recursively by

15

V(W. J1) =

max

[([ct'][ciu]'i + P(P[PV(W_,,J)IJI])P]lm. 0<8<1. p< I,

(21)

subject to the budget constraint (19) and the wealth constraint (20). using the definition of p from

equation (16). The expression

denotes

the certainty equivalent of the conditional

distribution of the value function at date t+l, given information at date t. When agents make

their consumption and portfolio choices, they care about two distinct effects: how their choices
affect current-period utility, and what happens to the probability distribution of their future utility.

In an expected utility framework, the latter effect is incorporated by taking the conditional

In equation (21), effects of the probability

expectation of next-period's value function.

distribution of future utility on current utility are captured by the certainty equivalent function
p. In addition, the two effects are aggregated in equation (21) by the CES function of the form

(a' + tf)'1", while, in the expected-utility framework, the two effects are simply added.
The parameter p governs intertemporal substitution in the following, somewhat
unconventional, sense: The elasticity of substitution between current utility (c't(c'Y4 and the
is given by l/(1+p). Therefore, p determines

certainty-equivalent of future utility,

the optimal tradeoff between present and future utility. When p is near unity, there is an
extremely high degree of substitutability between these two sources of utility. Extremely
negative values of p imply almost no substitutability. It should be noted that this elasticity of
substitution does not directly correspond to the elasticity of substitution between current and
future consumption (as studied, for example, by HaIl (1988)). The more conventional notion of

16

intertemporal substitution elasticity is a function of all the preference parameters of the model.

6. Equilibrium Determination of Exchange Rates and Asset Returns
In onler to derive equilibrium asset prices and exchange rates, we must solve the
representative agent's decision problem and impose market clearing. The agent's optimal
behavior is characterized by a set of Euler equations that involve the real return on optimallyinvested aggregate wealth, which we denote R1. (An explicit characterization of P1 can be found

in Appendix B.) These equations also involve the real returns, inclusive of marginal transaction

cost savings, from holding dollars and yen. Let

RLl•I

5...LI' '

PIijl

(fl)

+14

denote the real return from holding dollars, where 'qs denotes the period t partial derivative of

'ip with respect to

1b argument.

('i'L is defined similarly.) The real return from holding yen

is

=

S11P1' '1."

1

(23)

sP:1ji 't4
Note that both R,11 and R, are measured in units of good x received in t+1 per unit of good
x invested at date t.

The first-order conditions for the representative agent's optimal consumption, money
holdings, and portfolio choices are the following:'

The derivation is a modification of the arguments in Epstein and Zin (1989). and is available upon
request.

— 1]} =

c24

o.

ElA(;.l) ::R1,1] = E,LIA(;.l)], V i = x, y, 1,... • N,

(25)

where
'p

(26)
z1,t

[{ci:if'[ctJ'ji +:'.'I

and

IA(Z)E{

1

if

Z1

if

Zcl

(27)

In developing the solution to the model, it is useful to define the endogenous processes

for consumption-velocities of the two monies. Let v and v denote the consumption-velocities
in countries x and y:

ci' P'

c1' P,
v1 E _____

V1

(28)

Other endogenous variables are the nominally risk free, continuously compounded interest

rates on dollars and yen, denoted i and i. Nominally risk-free interest rates are functions of the
marginal transaction costs with respect to real balances:

1

"j

iIJ__1
lLWI)

The exchange rate S1 is given by

18

(29)

s=

+*ih

rJ i+4,

c' (i—6

c1't 6 )

(30)

Given interest rates and the spot rate, the forward rate F, can then be computed using covered

interest parity as in equation (1).

7. Calibration and Solution or the Model
In this section we describe our procedures for choosing the parameters of the stochastic

processes for the exogenous variables and of the transaction cost functions. The outputs and

money supplies of the two countries are assumed to be exogenous. There are no data series
corresponding precisely to the endowment constructs of the model. The difficulty is that a twocountry model cannot replicate the complexity of trade patterns that we observe in the real world.

As a result, we do not take seriously the predictions of the model for quantity variables.
However, the implications of the model for asset return predictability can be investigated with
a plausible specification of the endowment driving processes.

We calibrate the endowments and money supplies of the two countries to consumption
data and money supply data from the U.S. and Japan. The growth rates of these four exogenous
processes are assumed to follow a vector autoregression, which we will approximate as a discrete

Markov chain. We find that a firsv.order VAR with conditionally homoskedastic errors fits the

data well. In Table 2. Panels A and B, we display OLS estimates of this VAR. Table 2, Panel

C reports statistics testing the appropriate lag length for the VAR. The Akaike and Schwarz
criteria, as well as the sequential likelihood ratio tests, support the first-order VAR specification.

Table 2. Panel D provides statistics testing for normality. autocorrelation, and conditional
hómoskedasticity of the VAR residuals. Only in the residual for the growth rate of Japanese
19

consumption is there marginal evidence of serial correlation. For none of the residuals is there
significant evidence against normality or conditional homoskedasticity.

The growth rates of these four exogenous processes are approximated by a discrete urnorder Markov chain in which each variable can take four possible values, implying a state space

with 256 possible values. The Markov chain is calibrated to the estimated VAR using the

Gaussian quadrature method of Tauchen and Hussey (1991). In Table 3, we display the
parameters of the first-order VAR implied by this Markov chain approximation. The parameters

characterizing the Markov process VAR are virtually indistinguishable from those of the
estimated VAR reported in Table 2. All parameters of the Markov process VAR (including the
elements of the covariance matrix decomposition) are within one-tenth of one standard error of
the corresponding parameters in the estimated VAR. We take this as evidence that the discrete
approximation is unlikely to distort the economic implications of the model.

The parameters of the transaction cost functions (17) and (18) are chosen by fitting

equations (29) to U.S. (for v1) and Japanese (for N)• data, as described in Appendix A.
Specifically, we set

(c.m)

*y'(c.m) = 0.0008 c 43"m I

= 0.0166c "°9m 2.W9.

(31)

Given this exogenous process, the three unknown endogenous processes R,, v. and v are
found by solving the three Euler equations (24) and (25) (for i = x and y) simultaneously. Since

the state space is discrete, the Euler equations can be solved exactly for the 256 values of each

endogenous variable. The only approximation is in the initial discretization of the driving
processes. A detailed description of the solution procedure can be found in Appendix B. Once

R,, v, and v have been determined, all other endogenous variables can be calculated from
20

definitions and equilibrium conditions.

8. Implications of the Model for Excess Return Predictability
In this section. we report results obtained from solving the model for a variety of
parameters governing preferences. The quarterly subjective discount parameter l is fixed at
(0.96)0. The choice of 8 (the weig]fl on c' in the cwrent-period utility) is irrelevant, since we
examine rates of depreciation , rather than levels of exchange rates. The remaining parameters
are varied over the following grid: A E (1.0,O.85,O.70,O.55, 0.40,0.25), p E (0.50. -0.33, -4.0.

-9.0). We experimented initially with values of a between 0.5 and -9 and found that the choice
of a had virtually no effect on the moments of interest Consequently, we only report results for

a = -1. This corresponds to a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 2 in an economy with
expected-utility preferences over timeless gambles.

We first discuss the ability of the model to replicate the predictability of excess returns
documented in section 2. We focus on three measures of predictability: the slope coefficient in

the excess return regressions analogous to equations (2), (6), and (8); the R2, measured as the
ratio of the variance of the expected excess return to the variance of the realized excess return;

and the standard deviation of the expected excess return. All three statistics can be computed
exactly given the discrete Markov chain driving process.

Consider the model's implications for the slope coefficients in the excess return
regressions analogous to equations (2), (6). and (8). The results are displayed in Tables 4. 5, and

6 for the foreign exchange market and the dollar and yen discount bond markets, respectively.
Table 7 displays the slope coefficient when the excess return to the aggregate wealth portfolio
(which we interpret as an analogue to an unlevered equity portfolio) is regressed on the foreign

21

exchange forward premium.

It is clear from these tables that the model cannot match the slope coefficients estimated
from observed data. For no combination of parameters do the regression coefficients implied by

the model come close to the magnitudes reported in Table 1. For example, for the foreign
exchange market regression, the estimated slope coefficient in Table 1 Panel A is -4.016, with
an estimated standard error of 0.766. The most negative slope coefficient implied by the model
is -0.191. which is approximately five standard errors away from the estimated value. Similarly,

the slope coefficients implied by the model for the term stnicture regressions analogous to
equation (6) (reported in Tables 5 and 6) and the equity return regressions (reported in Table 1)
are

extremely small, and they are all more than 3.4 standard errors away from the corresponding

estimates reported in Table 1.
The second measure of predictability is the model's R2 as defined above. This theoretical

cannot be observed in the data, but a lower bound is provided by the estimated R2s reported
in Table 1, Panel A. Whereas the R2s in the data are substantive, ranging between 1% and 22%.

the corresponding R2s in the model are negligible, all being less than .2%.
The third measure of the predictability of excess returns is the variability of the explained

component of excess returns. As with the R2 discussed above, a lower bound for this measure

in the data is provided by the standard deviation of the fitted value of the excess return
regressions reported in Table 1, Panel B. As with the previous two measures, the model is
unable to reproduce the variability observed in the data. For example, the standard deviation of

the fitted value of s,, - f, in Table 1 is 12.4%, The largest value of the standard deviation of
f) from the model, reported in Table 4, is 0.356%, which is over thirty times too small.

22

Analogously, the standard deviation of the fitted valueof the excess world equity return in Table

I is 10.9%. The largest standard deviation of E1(r - iJ from the model, reported in Table 7,
is 0.175%, which is over sixty times too small. The standard deviations of the fitted values of
the excess returns in the discount bond markets arc 0.318% and 0.370% for the dollar and the
yen markets, respectively. The maximum value of the standard deviations of the expected excess

returns, reported in Tables 5 and 6. ale 0.13% and 0.06% respectively.
These results are somewhat disappointing to those who favor risk-based explanations for

the predictability of excess returns. To further explore the role of risk aversion in generating
predictability in excess returns, we next examine how the predictions of the model change as we

increase the importance of the first-order risk aversion by lowering A. In all cases, setting A =
1

results in extremely small values for the slope coefficients. However, it is not generally true

that increasing the amount of risk aversion (decreasing A) implies more negative slope
coefficients. Furthermore, a large degree of risk aversion is not systematically associated with
a particular sign of the regression coefficieni For example, the coefficients corresponding to A
= .40 and A =25 in Tables 4 through 7 are as likely to be positive as to be negative. Thus, even
if it were assumed that agents in the economy display extreme risk aversion, it is not at all clear
whether this would improve the performance of the model along this dimension.

To see why the model fails to replicate the observed slope coefficients, it is useful to
return to the discussion of section 3. In that section, we argued that substantial time-variation
in risk premiums is necessary if a model is to match the patterns found in the data. Examination
of Tables 4 through 7 reveals that the variances of the cx ante risk premiums are unambiguously
increasing as the degree of first-order risk aversion increases. For foreign exchange, the standard

23

deviation of the risk premium increases by a factor of 100 when A moves from

1

to .25. For

discount bonds and the aggregate wealth portfolio, the standard deviation of the risk premium
increases at least twenty-fold when A moves from 1 to .25. Similarly, the R2's in all markets
increase dramatically as first-order risk aversion is increased.

The reason why these dramatic increases in risk-premium volatility do not imply
comparable increases in the magnitude of the slope coefficients in the prediction regressions is
that these coefficients are functions of moments in addition to the variances of the risk premiums.

As shown in equation (10), the slope coefficients also depend on the variances of the expected
asset price changes and on the covariances between the expected changes in asset prices and the

risk premiums. These moments are also affected by changes in the parameter governing firstorder risk aversion. In particular, Tables 5 and 6 show that the variances of the expected changes
in the prices of one-period discount bonds actually decrease unambiguously as A decreases. The

variance of the expected change in the spot foreign exchange rate is not monotonic in A. As

shown in Table 4, decreasing A from unity initially reduces this variance, while further
reductions in A increase it. The value of A at which this variance is at a minimum depends on

p. The effects of increased fit-order risk aversion on the covariances between the cx ante risk
premiums and the expected changes in asset prices are also in Tables 4 through 6. In the foreign

exchange market, decreasing A unambiguously increases this covariance. In the discount bond
markets, the response of this covaijance to increased risk aversion is not monotonic, and depends

on the value of p.

Our model also has implications for the unconditional mean equity premium and the
unconditional standard deviations of financial variables, which provide additional dimensions to

24

assess the rnodels performance. in Table 7, increasing the amount of first-order risk aversion
dramatically increases the unconditional mean excess equity return. As A is reduced from 1 to

.25, the mean equity risk premium increases by a factor of approximately 20. This increase is

not sufficient to match the data as the largest mean equity premium generated by our model
simulations is 3.5%; While this is substantially below the value of 8.4% estimated from our data

set, the equity return data correspond to a levered portfolio, while the equity return computed in

our model is unlevered. The result are comparable to those of Bonomo and Garcia (1993) for

homoskedastic driving processes. These authors are able to increase the mean equity risk
premium significantly by employing a richer driving process that incorporates regime switching.

Table 8 displays standard deviations implied by the model. In comparing Table 8 with
Table 1, Panel B, notice that the magnitudes of the standard deviations in the model are almost
always smaller than the corresponding statistics in the data. In particular, the standard deviation
of cunency depreciation is approximately 2.5 times higher in the data than in the model, and the
standard deviation of the equity risk premium is approximately three times higher in the data than

in the modeL When p = -9, the standard deviation of the forward premium in the model is only
50% lower than that in the data; for the other values of p. the variability of the forward premium

is almost an order of magnitude too low.

Although the model underpredicts the variability of both expected and realized excess
returns, the parameterizations of the model that generate the largest variances of expected rates
of return tend to overpredict the variances of the forward premiums in the discount bond markets.

For example, with p = -9 and A = .25. the standard deviations of the forward premiums in the
dollar and yen discount bond market are 3.81% and 2.56%. compared to 0.71% and 0.83% in

25

Table 1, Panel B.

The source of this problem is as follows. In order to generate high volatility in excess

returns, the model must generate high volatility in the conditional second moments of
intertemporal marginal rates of substitution. Unfortunately, parameterizations of the model which

do this also imply highly volatile spot interest rates. A similar problem has been noted in a
closed-economy model by Heaton (1991). Consequently, one challenge for this class of models

is to accommodate highly variable expected and realized excess returns on risky assets while
keeping short-term interest rates relatively non-volatile.

9. On the Success of Epstein and Zin (1991)
Epstein and Zin (1991) are unable to reject the overidentifying restrictions implied by
their single-country model with preferences incorporating flist-order risk aversion, which suggests

considerable support for this approach to asset pricing. Our approach is less successful. How
can we explain the differences in findings?
According to the Euler equation (25), the implications of these models for asset returns

are summarized in the behavior of the asset pricing operator
I,(Z11)

a

—l

*1

This operator is a function of RHI, the return to the aggregate wealth portfolio. Euler equation

estimation requires an observable analogue to this asset pricing operator, and Epstein and Zin use

the return on a value-weighted portfolio of equities as their empirical measure of R. This
procedure is clearly subject to Roll's (1977) critique, a point acknowledged by Epstein and Zin.
Furthermore, with this approach, the empirical asset pricing operator is a function of the returns

26

on the equity assets being priced. The operator partially inherits the statistical properties of
observed equity returns, so it has less difficulty replicating the behavior of observed excess equity
returns. In contrast, we derive R2 by explicitly solving the model's equilibrium as a function

of the growth rates of output and money in the two countries. Nowhere do we use data on asset

returns in deriving the asset pricing operator. To ask the pricing operator, derived in this way,
to replicate the stochastic properties of equity returns is a much tougher test of the model than
the Epstein-Zin procedure. It is not surprising that we find more evidence against the model.

10. Conclusions
In this paper, we ask whether high levels of risk aversion can explain the observed
predictability of excess returns within the context of a frictionless, representative agent model.
In order to give this explanation the best chance for success, we assume that agents' preferences
display first-order risk aversion. This preference specification implies that agents respond more

strongly to consumption risk than would be the case under conventional Von NeumannMorgensteni preferences. Yet, even this more extreme form of risk aversion can explain only
a small fraction of the predictability of excess returns found in the data. Furthermore, we find
that the slope coefficients in equations predicting excess returns do not increase monotonically

with increased risk aversion. The level of risk aversion affects not only the variability of risk
premiums, but also the second moments of other endogenous variables which affect predictability.
The resulting implications for the signs and magnitudes of these slope coefficients are ambiguous.

Taken together, the results of this paper suggest that the predictability of excess returns

cannot be fully explained simply by modifying preference assumptions. A more promising
approach may be to abandon the assumption that the empirical distribution in the data set is a

27

good proxy for agents' subjective distribution over future variables. Rational optimizing models

that do not impose this assumption include learning models, models with peso-problems, and
some models with regime switching. It is hoped that these alternative approaches wilt have more

success in explaining excess-return predictability than approaches based solely on modelling
agents' aversion to consumption risk.

28

APPENDIX A: DESCRIPTION OF DATA
The interest rate data are monthly series on three-month and six-month Euro-dollar and
Euro-yen rates, obtained from the Harris Bank database at the University of Chicago. Monthly

exchange rate data are from daily bid and ask rates from Citicorp Database Services and are
described in detail in Bekaert and Hodrick (1993).

The money supplies for the U.S. and Japan are quarterly series taken from International

Financial Statistics (IFS Series 34). Growth rates are deseasonalized by regressing on four
dummies. The consumption data are Nondurables and Services from the OECD Quarterly
National Accounts. The Japanese data include the Semi-durables category, as this category is
included in the U.S. Nondurables series. Per capita data on money supplies and consumption
were derived by using linear interpolations from the annual population series 99z from IFS.

The transaction cost technology parameters are considered to be part of the exogenous
environment and are calibrated from the model's implications for money demand, as summarized

by equations (29). These equations imply linear relationships between the logs of current dollar

and yen velocities of circulation and the logs of the respective interest rate divided by one plus

the interest rate. The calibration is done by linear regression using quarterly Eurocurrency
interest data and nominal velocity. The velocity series used is computed using nominal GDP,
taken 1mm OECD Quarterly National Accounts, divided by the money series described above.

GDP velocity is used because it implies more reasonable parameters for the transaction cost
function than consumption velocity. The use of GDP velocity can be justified by noting that

money in actual economies intermediates many more transactions than just consumption
transactions. See Marshall (1992) for a fuller discussion of this issue.

29

APPENDIX B: SOLUTION PROCEDURE
The key step in solving the model is to solve numerically the Euler equations (24) and
(25) for the endogenous variables v, v{. (defined in equations (28)) and R,÷1 (the return to the

aggregate wealth portfolio). We do so by using a finite-state Markov chain to approximate the
exogenous driving process (see Tauchen and Llussey (1991)). We then solve the model exactly

for this approximate driving process. In this appendix we describe the solution procedure in
greater detail.

Let e denote the total output of good x at date t. let e denote the output of good y at
date t, and let M÷1 and M denote the supplies of dollars and yen respectively, available for use
in mediating transactions at date t. (These money stocks are dated t+l because it is assumed that

the loss in value from inflation accrues to the agent in t+ I.) Let & denote the vector of growth
rates of outputs and money supplies in the two counuies:

e1' e1

NI11

M1

cJ M1' M'
It is assuMed that (e, e, M1, M,1) is an exogenous process whose law of motion is known.
First, we show how equations (24) and (25) can be written in terms of & and the three
endogenous processes (vt, v, R,1J. Using (17). (18). and the requirement that, in equilibrium.
the output of each good must either be consumed or used as transaction costs,
= c1 +

4c,.(tvei/P1)).

j=

x, y,

we can write consumption growths, marginal transaction costs, and inflation rates as functions

of (g,, v, v, R,÷1}:

30

=

;'

+X(v'f'
1 +?4v1f'
1

!.

;'

1 +(v')

=

(32)

(33)

e,' 1 +(v/1)t'

c1'

(34)

=

=

c(v')'

(35)

'4 = A(1—v)k')'

(36)

'4= CU-)(v'f'

(37)

(38)
Pt

v,

c141 Nt1

(39)
P1'

Vt, cJ1 P.i1,

The next step is to formally characterize R.M, the return to the aggregate wealth portfolio.

Since we define the return to money inclusive of marginal transaction costs, 'y and v[. we must

incorporate these marginal transaction costs into the definition of the portfolio weights for the

aggregate wealth portfolio. Formally, let

31

*1 WI

+ sf4,

+)]

+

+

(40)

* denotes wealth available for asset purchases at date t, adjusted for marginal uansaction costs.
The portfolio weights on the aggregate wealth portfolio are defined in terms of W1. Let w1

and

w,1 denote the portfolio weight on M1 and M1, respectively:

E

+ VJ)}*

2

+ VL)}*I.

(41)

(42)

Let w denote the portfolio weight on asset 1:

w,125L±,

(43)

WI

Note that the weights sum to unity:

t

+

+

= 1.

(44)

The return to the aggregate wealth portfolio is defined as follows:

2 E w1.1R,1
where

+

+

(45)

and R,. are defined in equations (22) and (23). Aggregate wealth evolves according

to

32

W11 = *1R1,1.

(46)

In a single-good nonmonetary model, the market return can be expressed as a function

of the wealth/consumption ratio and the growth rate of consumption. It is convenient to

express

R, in a similar way. To do so, define E W, - *, and let the "wealthjconsumption ratio"
WJE be denoted wc1. Equation (46) then implies

R=

wc,1 141R1)
wc,

—1

(47)

The transaction cost functions ? and y' are homogeneous of degree one, so one can use Euler's

theorem, along with equation (30), to show that

Is.1

ccj

=

; 'Ii N'i.i

Tji+

(48)

By using equations (32) - (39) and equation (48) in equations (22), (23), (26), and (47). one can

write the endogenous processes R,._1, R,,,÷1, Z,, and R, as functions of {g_1, v.

v, vL1.

wc0 wc,1). It follows that the three-equation system consisting of equation (24) and equation

(25) with i = x and i = y, can be expressed in terms of (g1÷1, v, v71, vL v÷1, wc,, wc1,1), Let
this three-equation system be denoted
I

E f g1,1. V1,1. V1 ,V1,1, V1 .WC,.11W) J = 0

(49)

where f is a known function,

Our task then is to find a stochastic process {v, vT. w;} which satisfies equations (49)
for the given & process. Following Tauchen and Hussey (1991), we approximate& by a finite-

33

state Markov chain. The discretization uses Gaussian quadrature. In the results presented in
section 7, we allow each of the four elements of & to take on 4 values, implying 256 possible

states of the economy. The endogenous processes, v, vT, wc are then represented by vectors
with 256 elements each, to be determined by solving system (49). The conditional expectation
can be evaluated exactly (given the discrete approximation) since the state transition probabilities

are known. We reduce the computational burden of this solution algorithm by assuming that the
growth rates of c and c are observed, rather than the growth rates of output in the two countries.

This enables us to solve system (49) recursively: the elements of {wc v11 do not depend on the

third equation in (49). Therefore, the 512 elements of (w;. v1} are found by simultaneously
solving the 512 equations represented by the first two equations of (49). each evaluated at each
of the 256 states. Given these values for (w;, v}, the 256 elements of v, are found

by solving

the 256 equations represented by the last equation of (49) evaluated at each of the 256 states.

Having solved for {w;, v1, v,), the remaining endogenous variables can be computed using
equation (47) and equations (32) - (39).

34

References
Backus, D., A. Gregory and C. Telmer, 1993. "Accounting for Forward Rates in Markets for
Foreign Currency". Journal of Finance 48, 1887-1908.
Bansal, R., A, R. Gallant, R.Hussey and G. Tauchen, 1991, "Nonparametric Structural Estimation
of Models for High-Frequency Currency Market Data," manuscript, Duke University.
Bekaert, (3., 1992, "The Time-Variation of Expected Returns and Volatility in Foreign Exchange
Markets," Working Paper No. 1226. Stanford University, Graduate School of Business.

Bekaert, G., 1993a, "Exchange Rate Volatility and Deviations from Unbiasedness in a Cash-inAdvance Model," Journal of International Economics forthcoming.

Bekaert, 0., 1993b, "The Time Variation of Risk and Return in Foreign Exchange Markets: A
General Equilibrium Approach," Working Paper No. 1276, Stanford Univeisity, Graduate School
of Business.
Bekaert, 0. and R. Hodrick, 1992, "Characterizing Predictable Components in Excess Returns
on Equity and Foreign Exchange Markets," Journal of Finance 47. 467-509.

Bekaert, 0. and R. Hodrick, 1993. "On Biases in the Measurement of Foreign Exchange Risk
Premiums," Journal of International Money and Finance 12, 115-138.
Ben, A. K. and C. M. Jarque, 1982, "Model Specification Tests: A Simultaneous Approach,"
Journal of Econometrics 20, 59-82.

Bonomo, M. and It Garcia, 1993, "Disappointment Aversion as a Solution to the Equity
Premium and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzles," Cahier 2793, Université de Montréal.
Bossaerts, P. and P. Hilhion, 1991, "Market Microstructure Effects of Government Intervention
in the Foreign Exchange Market," Review of Financial Studies 4, 513-Mi.
Camerer, C-F., 1989. "Recent Tests of Generalizations of Expected Utility meow." manuscript.

Cochrane, J, and L. Hansen, 1992. "Asset Pricing Explorations for Macroeconomics," NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 19927, 115-165.
Cumby, R. E. and J. Huizinga. 1992. "Testing the Autocorrelation Structure of Disturbances in
Ordinary Least Squares and Instrumental Variables Regressions, Econometrica 60, 185-196.

Engel. C., 1992, "On the Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in a General Equilibrium Model,"
Journal of International Economics 32. 305-319.

35

Epstein, L. and S. Zin, 1989. "Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns, Econometrica 57, 937-969.

Epstein. L. and S. Zin, 1990. "First-Order' Risk Aversion and the Equity Premium Puzzle,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 387-407.
Epstein, L. and S. Zin, 1991. "The Independence Axiom and Asset Returns," NBER Technical
Working Paper No. 109.
Farna,

E., 1984a, "Forward and Spot Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 319-

338.

Fama, E., 1984b, "The Information in the Term Structure," Journal of Financial Economics 13.
509-528.
Feenstra, R., 1986, "Functional Equivalence Between Liquidity Costs and the Utility of Money,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 17, 271-291.
Gui, F., 1991. "A Theory oiDisappointment Aversion," Econometrica 59, 667-710.

Hall, R. E.. 1988, "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption," Journal of Political Economy 96,
3 39-357.

Hansen, L. p., 1982. "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators,"
Econometrica 50, 1029- 1054.

Hansen, L. and R. Hodrick, 1980, "Forward Rates as Predictors of Future Spot Rates." Journal
of Political Economy 88, 829-853.
Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan, 1991, "Implications of Security Market Data for Models of
Dynamic Economies," Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-262.

Hansen, L. P. and S. Richard, 1987, "The Role of Conditioning Information in Deducing
Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models," Econometrica 55, 587-613.

Hansen, L. P. and K. Singleton, 1982, "Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation of
Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models," Econometrica 50. 1269-1286.
Harvey, C. It, 1991, "The World Price of Covariance Risk," Journal of Finance 46, March 1991,
111-155.

Heaton, J., 1991, "An Empirical Investigation of Asset Pricing with Temporally Dependent
Preference Specifications," Manuscript, M.I.T.

36

Hodrick, R., 1992, "An Interpretation of Foreign Exchange Market Efficiency Tests," manuscript,
Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern University.

Kandel and Stambaugh, 1991, "Asset Returns and Intertemporal Preferences," Journa] of
Monetary Economics 27, 39-7 1.

Marshall, D., 1992. "Inflation and Asset Returns in a Monetary Economy," Journal of Finance
47, 1315-1342.

Newey. W. and K. West. 1987, "A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica 55, 703-708.

Roll, It, 1977, "A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theoiy's Tests. Part I" Journal of Financial
Economics 4, 129-176.

Sega!. U. and A. Spivak, 1990, "First-Order versus Second-Order Risk Aversion," Journal of
Economic Theory 51, 111-125.
Sims, C., 1980, "Macroeconomics and Reality," Economeirica 48. 1-49.

Solnik, B.. 1993, "The Performance of International Asset Allocation Strategies Using
Conditioning Information," Journal of Empirical Finance 1 • 33-55.

Stambaugh, R. 1988, "The Information in. Forward Rates: Implications for Models of the Teim
Structure," Journal of Financial Economics 21, 41-70.
Tauchen, 0. and Hussey, 1991. "Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate Solutions
to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models," Econometrica 59, 37 1-3%.

37

Table 1

Panel A: Regression Results

Dependent
Variable

Coef. on
constant

Coef.

Cod. on

on fp1

fb
-

16.271

Coef. on

(b

-4.016

.220

(3.674) (0.766)
-

-0.450
(0.129)

0.038

(0.050)

h413- i
r71 -

i

-

-

0.075

i

-0.448
(0.028)

(0.0 19)

21.540 -3.543
(4.864) (0.816)
11.413

.028
.086
.139

-2.024

.041

(4.971) (0.900)
15.397

-1.045

.013

(4.807) (0.954)

38

Table 1 (continued)
Panel B: Means and Standard Deviations

Variable

Mean

Standard
Deviation

As,1

5.119

25.019

fp3

3.698

3.077

fitted s1 - ç

1.421

12.355

tbt

0.124

0.707

0.094

1.892

0.094

0.318

fb

0.116

0.826

h+ia i

0.128

1.259

fitted h+ia -

0.128

0.370

rt1 - it

8.440

29.204

8.440

10.899

-i
fitted ht.13 •1
I

.v

'

fitted r'.1 -

i

Notes: The data are monthly observations on quarterly rates. The sample period is from Januaiy
1976 to December 1989 for exchange rates and equities and from October 1975 to June 1990 for
interest rates. All rates are measured as percentage points per annum. Time subscripts denote
quarters. The logarithms of the dollar/yen spot and forward exchange rates are denoted Iand
ç The quarterly rate of depreciation is A1; the three-month forward premium on the yen in
terms of the dollar is denoted f; the quarterly dollar excess return on the world equity market
(an equally-weighted average of the dollar excess returns to U.S. and Japanese equities. defined
in equation (7)) is r'1 - it; the three-month dollar excess return to U.S. equities is
- it; the
three month yen excess return to Japanese equities is i h12 - it (h,2 - is the quarterly
excess dollar (yen) return from t to t+1 obtained by holding dollar (yen) discount bonds that
mature at t+2 fbt (tb) is the one-quarter-ahead forward premium, defined in equation (5), in the
dollar (yen) discount bond market In Panel B, the variable "fitted - f1" is the fitted value of
- i") is the fitted value of regression
regression (2); the variable "fitted ht.ja - ir' ("fitted
(6) using data from the dollar (yen) bond market; the variable "fitted r7÷1 - is the fitted value
of regression (8). The numbers in parentheses are standard errors, which are heteroskedasticityconsistent and are corrected for the serial correlation induced by the overlap in the data using the
method of Newey and West (1987).

i;

i)

it

39

Table 2
VAR Estimates and Diagnostics for the Exogenous Processes
Panel

A: Parameter Estimates for the VAR

gy

R2

-.182
(.074)

.368
(.184)

.074

.281
(.118)

-.016
(.024)

.076
(.062)

.057

1.310
(.763)

-.493
(.129)

-.259
(.370)

.198

.137

-.060
(.246)

-.015
(.050)

-.171
(.142)

.009

(.085)

constan
t

gm.1

gx.,

gm,

.610
(.446)

.195
(.151)

.022
(.437)

gx1

.629
(.141)

.033
(.038)

g;

.439
(.835)

.023
(.228)

gy,

1.118
(.287)

Panel B: Cholesky Decomposition or the Covariance Matrix or the VAR Residuals
.01261
(.00152)

.00114
(.00034)

.00054
(.00287)

-.00056
(.00073)

.00382
(.00043)

.00332
(.00272)

-.00038
(.00087)

.02326

.00371

(.00 177)

(.00097)
.007 62

(.00059)

40

Table 2 (Continued)

Panel C: Selection Criteria for the VAR Order

VAR order

Akaike Criterion

Schwarz criterion

1

-36.61

-36.05

2

-36.45

-35.33

3

-36.43

-34.74

Likelihood ratio tests

1 vs. 2

19.06 (.266)

2 vs. 3

23.94 (.091)

Panel I): Residual Diagnostics

Eq. 1
Eq. 2
Eq. 3

Eq. 4

1(4)

Q2(4)

Ku

2.481
(.894)

5.916
(.206)

.172

.005

0.075

(.784)

(.987)

(.963)

6.110

1.137

(.191)

7.039
(.134)

(.070)

-.046
(.883)

(.191)

7.198
(.126)

4.036
(.401)

(.383)

.200
(.523)

1.169
(.558)

14.27

2.123

.232

1.182

(.007)

(.7 13)

(.459)

(.554)

..547
-.500
(.426)

Sic

BJ

3.308

Notes: The sample period is 1974:4 to 1990:1. gm1 denotes the growth rate of the dollar money
supply; g; denotes the growth rate of U.S. consumption; gn denotes the growth rate of the yen
money supply; gy1 denotes the growth rate of Japanese consumption. Estimates of the VAR

coefficients and the decomposition of the en-or covariance matrix are obtained by OLS and
reported in Panels A and B with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses. The
appropriate lag length for the VAR minimizes the Akaike or Schwarz criterion in Panel C. The
likelihood ratio test is a sequential test of a VAR(n) versus a VAR(n+1). The test statistic has
a x2 distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the number of coefficients being restricted by
the lower VAR order. The statistic incorporates the Sims (1980) correction. Marginal levels of
significance axe in parentheses. Panel D reports statistics and associated p-values for various

residual diagnostic tests. Column 1 reports the Cumby-Huizinga (1992) I-test for serial
con-elation of the residuals. Column 2 reports the Ljung-Box test statistic, applied to squared
residuals, as a test for ARCH. Columns 3, 4, and 5 test for normality of the residuals. Ku is
the normalized kurtosis coefficient and Sic the normalized skewness coefficient Their asymptotic

disthbution is N(0,24/T), N(0,6[F) respectively, with T the sample size, under the null of
normality. BJ is the Bera-Jarque (1982) test for normality and is %2(2).
41

Table 3
VAR Parameters Induced by the Discretized Markov Chain Approximation

(i) Implied VAR Coefficients
constan

grT\.

gx1

t
grn

.610

.194

.022

-.181

.368

gx,

.629

.033

.280

-.016

.075

.443

.023

1.299

-.489

-.255

1.118

.137

-.062

-.014

-.170

gy,

(ii) Cholesky Decomposition of the Implied Residual Covariance Matrix
.01261

.00114

.00054

-.00056

.00382

.00331

-.00038

.02312

.00369
.00762

Notes: The discrete state space approximation to the VAR in Table 2 is computed using the
Gaussian quadrature procedure of Tauchen and Hussey (1991). Each variable is allowed to take
four possible values, implying a discrete state space with 256 elements. Variable definitions are

given in the notes to Table 2.

42

Table 4
Implications of the Model for the Foreign Exchange Market Regression

p

.5

r

A=L0 A=.85 A=.70 A=.55 A=

A=.25

-.007

-.191

1(2

I.0x104 2.1x105 8.8x10' .00016

00030

.00133

afrpj

.003

.042

.085

.116

.159

.332

at E,(As.1)]

.228

.229

.226

.230

.274

.370

-.0004

.0011

.0038

.0087

.0269

.1017

-.007

-.023

.035

-.044

COV[IP, EXAs1+1)]

1(2:

p = -.33

a[rpj

-.097

.038

-J07
1.0x107 1.8x105 7.7x105 .00015

.00029 .00116

.003

-.057

.080

.113

.155

.309

.236

.231

.229

.228

.269

.363

-.0004

.0003

.0034

.0076

.0256

.0941

p1

-.001

-.003

-.006

-.021

-.009

.057

R2

1.OxIff' 2.1x105 8.6x1(T' .00017

cov[rp,, E1(As1)]

a[rpj
a[E1(as+1)]

cov[rp E,(as,j]
f3

R

p = -9

-.068

.039

a[E(&..1)]

p = -3

-.012

.00032 .00133

.003

.042

.085

.118

.164

.334

.485

.472

.461

.443

.438

.509

.0001

.0011

.0061

.0099

.0255

.1190

.001

.003

.005

.007

.008

.009

1.7x107 2.Ixlff5 8.2x10' .00015

.00032 .00138

a[rpJ

.004

.044

.088

.120

.173

.356

a[E1(8s1J]

2.284

2.200

2.100

1.973

1.807

1.575

.0157

.0311

.0422

.0570

.1472

cov[rp E(&.,.1)]

.0046

Notes: The logarithms of the dollar/yen spot and forward cxchange rates arc denoted s and f1,
and
denotes the slope coefficient in the regression
E1(1-f).
+ (ç — a) + ç,. E1(x1) denotes the expectation of conditional on date

rp =

-=

infonnation, o[xJ denotes the unconditional standard deviation of;, and covE;, yJ denotes the
unconditional covariance. 1(2 = var(E,
-Q)Ivar(s,+1 4,). All moments reported an the exact
population moments implied by the model at the indicated parameter specifications, given the
Markov transition matrix for the exogenous process g. This transition matrix was computed
using Gaussian quadrature from the estimated VAR, as described in Appendix B.
43

Table 5

Implications of the Model for the Dollar Discount Bond Market Regression

A=1.0 A=.85 A=.70 A=35 A=.40 A=.25

p=

.5

(3

-.00(01

-.00022

-.01)026

.00013

-.00196

R2

1.0x101

7.7x10'

2.6x104

5.4x104

.00014

.00053

.00121

.00112

.00272

.00512

.215

.211

.206

.199

-7.6x1(Y'

-7.2x10'

.00048

-.00205

a(rb)
E1(Av,1]

.00005

.00042

-.00031

.0(046

R2:

5.0x104

1.4x10'

5.1x10'

.00012

.00024

.00087

a(rp

.00(05

.00078

.00146

.00219

.00297

.00528

.230

.226

.221

.214

.206

.192

3xla'

-2.2x10' .00013

2.6x10'

2.9xl04

-4.8x1ff5

-.00006

-.00031

-.00113

-.00128

-.00122

-.00491

R2

4.0x10

4.7x10'

2.2x1C73

4.9x103

.00010

.00034

a(th)
EjAvtJ

.0(02

.0021

.0044

.0062

.0083

.0135

1.109

1.074

1.030

.977

.910

.805

-.00007

-.00036

-.00118

-.00119

-.00095

0.00303

-.0001

-.0006

-.0012

-.0018

-.0025

-.0047

1.9x105

7.4x10'

.0(1)19

.00045

.00112

cov[rb, E(Av1)J

cov[rb),E(Av+1)I
R2

p = -9

.218

-I.0xlO 8.6x10'

EjAv,1I

p = .3

.220

-5.0x10' -i.0x103

cov(rb. E1(Av41)J

p = -.33

.03 .00067

.00084

1.Ix1CY'

a(rb)

.006

.024

.045

.067

.093

.123

E{óv]

5.995

5.725

5.406

5.016

4.516

3.798

-.0047

-.0176

-.0318

-.0421

-.0342

-.0528

cov(th), E(Av,1)J

Notes: h12 denotes the continuously compounded one-period holding period return on twoperiod doUar discount bonds; i denotes the continuously compounded dollar spot interest rate;
Av÷1 denotes the rate of change in the logarithm of the price of one-period dollar bonds; and rb
= E(h÷1-i). denotes the slope coefficient in the regression i, — i =
+
+

= var(Eiht_ih)/var(h,!aa_i). See also the note to Table 4.

44

Table 6

Implications of the Model for the Yen Discount Bond Market Regression

A=1.0 A=.85 A=.70 A=.55 A=.40 A=.25

p=

-.00013

1k2

2.0x107 5.Oxl(Y3

a(rb)

.5

a[E1(av1)]

.00007

.249

cov[rb, g(Av1)] -8x104
-.00021
R2:

p = -.33

a(rb)
ofE1(Av1)]

-.00052

.00214

.00169

.00012

.00024

.00054

.00195

.00091

.00176

.00247

.00352

.00658

.247

.243

.238

.230

.223

2x104

-2.3x10'

;2.3x10 .000126 .000127

-.00024

-.00095

-.00118

.00059

-.00036

.00027

.00059

.00193

.00113

.00226

.00313

.00442

.00757

.340

.333

.322

.306

.288

-3x104

-.00010

-.00011

.00007

.00003

.00012

.347

,

-.00027

-.00081

-.00176

-.00256

-.00276

-.00532

Ri

3.2x1(Y7

1.2x105

4.8x10'

.00010

.00020

.00067

a(rb)

.0004

.0023

.0045

.0062

.0080

.0131

.950

.919

.883

.836

.774

.690

-.00024

-.00068

-.00136

-.00176

-.00160

-.00239

-.0009

-.0017

-.0028

-.0039

-.0065

1.4x105

5.3x1ff5

.00013

.00029

.00073

a[E(Av÷1)]

cov[rb, E,(Av7÷1)]

p = -9

-.00044

3.5xlCY' 3.1x105 .00013

cov[rb) E1(àvL1)} -2x106

p = -3

.00002

13

I3

-.0003

R

7.2x1CE'

a(rb)

.036

.013

.024

.034

.046

0628

a[E1(Av÷1)]

4.062

3.872

3.648

3.374

3.025

2.541

0.00422

-.01396

-.02262

-.03069

-.03398

-.03876

cov[rb,

E1(AvL1)]

Notes: h.ia denotes the continuously compounded one-period holding period return on twoperiod yen discount bonds; i denotes the continuously compounded yen spot interest rate; Av1
denotes the rate of change in the logarithm of the price of one-period yen bonds; and rb =
denotes the slope coefficient in the regression hZ — i1' =
1½ + 1(fb) +
R2

=

var(Ei(hia—it))/va4h,i3—i). See also the note to Table 4.
45

Table 7
Implications of the Model for the Excess Dollar Return on Aggregate Wealth
Panel A: Predictability or Excess Dollar Return on Aggregate Wealth

A=L0 A=.85 A=.70 A=.55 A=.40 A=.25
3,

p = .5
a[E1(ç÷1-iJ]

p = -.33

-3

R

a[E1(r1-iJ]

p = -9

-.015

.003

R2

a[E(ç÷1-iJ]

-.039

-.034

-.085

1.0x104 4.2xIff' 2.1,c10'

4.6x1t5 .00012

.00042

.001

.013

.028

.042

.128

-.001

-.001

-.004

-.049

1.OxlO' 3.6x1CT' 2.Ox10'
a[E1(r1+rij]

p=

-.001

.001

.012

.028

.000

.002

.002

.068
-.040

4.6x1ff5 .00011
.042

.067

-.008

-.020

1.0x10' 3.1x104 1.4x10' 3.4x10' .00010

.006
.00039

.123
.025

.00033

.001

.012

.025

.039

.068

.122

.001

.003

.006

.010

.009

.009

3.7x101 8.1x104 2.8x10' 7.Sxlff'
.006

.028

.082

.051

.00016

.00040

.115

.175

Panel B: Mean of (r151 - iJ

A=1.0

A=.85

A=.70

A=.55

A=.40

A=.25

p = .5

0.060

0.227

0.430

0.688

0.999

1.510

p = -.33

0.062

0.238

0.447

0.718

1.047

1.563

p = -3

0.077

0.315

0.597

0.940

1.356

1.991

p = -9

0.168

0.655

1.205

1.843

2.591

3.566

Notes: r1 denotes the continuously compounded dotlar return to the aggregate wealthportfolio;
i denotes the continuously compounded dollar spot interest rate.
denotes the slope coefficient
in the regression r1, — i =
+ I (1 — s) + c. R2 = var(E(ç,1—i1))/var(r1.1 —i,). See also the
note to Table 4.

46

Table S

Implications of the Model for Unconditional Standard Deviations

Panel A: (s,1 - s,)
A= 1.0

A=.85

A=.70

A=35

A=.40

A=.25

9.118

9.121

9.122

9.125

9.110

9.093

p = -.33

9.166

9.121

9.120

9.125

9.111

9.081

p = -3

9.184

9.186

9.188

9.193

9.175

9.167

p = -9

10.066

10.026

p=

.5

9.978

9.921

9.833

9.702

Panel B: (f - s..)

A= 1.0

A=.85

A=.70

A=.55

A=.40

A=.25

p = .5

.230

.227

.225

.221

.215

.209

p=

.237

.233

.228

.223

.212

.198

p = -3

.486

.472

.456

.436

.410

.364

p=

2.282

2.193

2.087

1.955

1.784

1.521

-.33

-9

Panel

-

C: (r1 - iJ

A= 1.0

A=.85

A=.70

A=.55

A=.40

A=.25

p = .5

6.152

6.157

6.165

6.170

6.178

6.188

p = -.33

6.230

6.235

6.240

6.249

6.255

6.254

p = -3

6.802

6.791

6.782

6.765

6.741

6.714

p = -9

10.W2

9.850

9.672

9.458

9.163

8.746

47

Table 8 (Continued)
Panel D: (h,1,2 -

A= 1.0

A=.85

A=.70

A=.55

A=.40

A=.25

p = .5

0.244

0.242

0.239

0.235

0.230

0.222

p = -.33

0.214

0.210

0.205

0.200

0.193

0.179

p = -3

0.998

0.966

0.928

0.882

0.822

0.728

p = -9

5.759

5.503

5.199

4.827

4.352

3.699

Panel E: (hL. it)
A= 1.0

A=.85

A=.70

A=.55

A=.40

A=.25

= .5

0.166

0.164

0.162

0.159

0154

0.149

p = -.33

0.206

0.202

0.197

0.191

0.182

0.172

p = -3

0.697

0.674

0.647

0.612

0.567

0.505

p = -9

3.685

3.5 10

3.304

3.054

2.735

2.292

Notes: See Tables 4-7.

48

