NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NEW YORK STOCK MARKET IN
THE 1920s AND 1930s: DID STOCK
PRICES MOVE TOGETHER TOO MUCH?

Peter Rappoport
Eugene N. White

Working Paper No. 4627

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1994

This paper is part of NBER's research program in the Development of the American
Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4627
January 1994

ThE NEW YORK STOCK MARKET IN
ThE 1920s AND 1930s: DID STOCK
PRICES MOVE TOGEThER TOO MUCH?

ABSTRACT

In this paper, we re-examine the stock market of the 1920s and 1930s for evidence of a

bubble, a "fad" or "herding" behavior by studying individual stock returns. One story often
advanced for the boom of 1928 and 1929 is that it was driven by the entry into the market of
largely uninformed investors, who followed the fortunes of and invested in "favorite" stocks. The

recent theoretical literature on how "noise traders" perturb financial markets is consistent with
this description. The result of this behavior would be a tendency for the favorite stocks' prices

to move together more than would be predicted by their shared fundamentals. Our results

suggest that there was excess comovement in returns even before the boom began, but
comovement increased significantly during the boom and was a signal characteristic of the
tumultuous market of the early 1930s. These results are thus consistent with the possibility that

a fad or crowd psychology played a role in the rise of the market, its crash and subsequent
volatility.

Eugene N. White
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08903-5055
and NBER

Peter Rappoport

do Eugene N. \ Lte
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New BrUnSWiCIç NJ 08903-5055

Financial economists have invested an enormous amount of time

and effort in tasting whether the efficient markets hypothesis
holds for the stock market. When tests for efficiency have failed,
the results have been explained either as deficiencies in the tests

or as evidence for the bubbles, manias and fads of historical
accounts, depending on the convictions of the researchers. Yet,

despite this extensive tasting of the markets, there has been
relatively little effort to examine in detail the specific episodes

that historians have identified as departures from fundamentals.
In this paper, we re—examine the stock market of the 1920s and

l930s for evidence of a bubble by studying individual stock
returns.

Most studies examining bubbles, "fads," or "herding"

behavior have focused on stock market indices, but there is no

reason why such departures from an efficient market should be
spread evenly across th. market. One story often advanced for the

boom of 1928 and 1929 is that it was driven in part by the entry
into the market of largely uninformed investors, who followed

fortunes

of and invested in a ralativsly narrow

group

the

of certain

"favorit&' stocks. Th. result of this behavior would be a tendency
for th. favorite stocks' prices to move together more than would

predicted by

their fundamentals. In view of this, a symptom of the

type of mispricing believed to have occurred

of

be

in

the boom and

crash

1928 to 1929, would be evidence on the tendency of individual

stock prices or returns to move in sympathy for reasons that cannot

be accounted for by shared fundamentals. Our results, which are
based on Pindyck and Rotamberg's (1990, 1992) approach, suggest
that there was excess comovement in returns even before the bcon

began, but comoveinent increased significantly during the boom and

was a signal characteristic of the tumultuous market of the early
193 Os

1. The New Crowd in the Market

Most historians and some economists treat the bull market of

the 1920s as an episode when crowd psychology overwhelmed the
fundamentals that should have driven stock prices.

The chief

characteristic of these accounts is that it became fashionable to

invest in the stock market——a fad——and a new generation of
unsophisticated investors entered the market eager to make their
fortunes.

Allen (1931) and Galbraith (1954) recount how this

enthusiasm, perhaps led by some big speculators, started with two
stocks in early 1928.

Beginning with General Motors and RCA, the market started to
rise with enthusiasm spreading to a larger number of stocks.

The

increase in prices was not uniform, and the larger firms seemed to

be more favored.

Both the Dow Jones index, an index of selected

large firms, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve's

index, a value weighted index show the market rising, with an
occasional brief retreat, to a peak in September 1929.

However,

Fisher's (1966) equally weighted index, which reveals the fate of

smaller companies, grew much more slowly and reached its peak in
February 1929. Furthermore, not all large firm's stock prospered,

although certain groups, like banks and utilities, boomed. What
2

cannot be discerned from this record is whether the enormous rise
in the price of banks' and utilities' stocks, for example, may be

attributable to some significant improvement in the fundamentals

for these industries or an infectious enthusiasm that spread
through certain parts of the market.

Allen's contemporary history of the period suggests that the
market was driven by an optimism based more on rumor than dividends

and earnings:

The rich man's chauffeur drove with his ears laid back

to catch the news of an impending move in Bethlehem
Steel; he held fifty shares himself on a twenty-point
The window—cleaner at the broker's office
margin.
paused to watch the ticker, for he was thinking of
converting his laboriously accumulated savings into a
few shares of Simmons. (p. 315)

While Allen may have highlighted some working class investors for
effect, the stock market does appear to have been invaded by a new

class of small investors who had graduated from government
securities during World War I to bonds and then stocks (White,
1984).

Among the most easily identifiable new entrants to the

market were women investors (Galbraith, p. 76). These developments

were reflected and, in turn, stimulated by popular articles, such

as "Everybody Ought to Be Rich" in the August 1929 Ladies Home
Journal. Surveying the psychological literature, Shiller (1984)
suggested that such a surge in new investors is largely driven by
group pressure. Individuals are strongly influenced by the actions

of their friends and acquaintances, and thus a "fad" diffuses
through a society like an epidemic.
Catering to the public's new found interest in securities were

3

investment trusts or mutual funds, which enabled the smaller
investor to indirectly buy a portfolio selected by the fund. In

1926, there were 160 such funds.

The following year 140 were

formed, in 1928 186 were created and in 1929 265 were established

(Gaibraith, pp. 53—54). Investigating the behavior of the closed

end mutual funds, De Long and Shleifer (1991) discovered an
anomaly. When the price of a mutual fund is compared to the market

prices of its constituent securities in the post World War II
period, it is most common to observe a discount. However, in the
period of the 1920s bull market there was a very large premium—-

about 45 percent in July 1929.

Given that it was feasible to

replicate the composition of any fund, De Long and Shleifer
concluded that the premium was one sign of excessive investor
optimism.

The general picture drawn by these historians and economists

is of a market where the influence of the smart, well-informed
investor had been substantially reduced while the activities of the

more naive newcomers had grown.

Recently, De Long, Shleifer,

Summers, and Waidman (1990) have presented a theoretical model
where "noise traders," investors who base their decisions not on

market fundamentals of earnings and dividends but irrelevant
information, can move stock prices away from their fundamental
values even in the presence of arbitrage by "smart money."

The

intuition behind their model is that the unpredictable behavior of

noise traders makes arbitrage risky. If arbitragers had infinite
horizons, arbitrage would be riskless because they could wait out
4

the noise traders; but as their time horizons are finite, they
cannot riskiessly drive the market back to its fundamental values.

The arrival of a new generation of excessively optimistic traders
thus can push the market above its fundamentals and allow them to

earn a higher yield as they willingly accept a disproportionate
share of the risk. In line with the psychological studies, De Long

et. al. have noise traders entering the market in emulation of
This model thus appears to shed

previous generations of traders.

some light on a number of financial anomalies, including the mean
reversion in stock returns, the equity premium puzzle, the pricing

of mutual funds and the excess volatility of assets.

2. Testinc for Crowd Behavior

This historical and theoretical literature suggests that stock

prices may depart from their fundamental values. The tests devised
by Shiller (1981) and Le Roy and Porter (1981) are some of the most

common measures of whether arbitragers have guaranteed market
efficiency and kept prices in line with fundamentals.
In the simple efficient markets model, the real price of share
at time t,

should be equal to the value of all expected future

dividends discounted at a constant rate.

pricing rule, the price

If people follow this

may be considered the fundamentals,

perfect foresight or ex post rational price of the stock.

observed real price of the stock in the market is P.

The

If the

market is efficient, then Pt should be an optimal forecast of P.,
5

that is: Pt

Et(Pt1), where E is the expectation at time t. The

If this

forecast error will be u = P —

is indeed an optimal

forecast, then Pt and u must be uncorrelated. The variance of the
sum

of

two uncorrelated variables is the sum of the variances so

that var(P*) = var(P) +

var(u).

Therefore, var(P*) >

var(P) where

the errors are non—zero or the variance of the observed price
should be less than the variance of the fundamentals price.

Examining annual indices of American stock prices and
dividends over the past century, Shiller discovered was that stock

price volatility was five to thirteen times too high to be
attributed to new information about future dividends. This result
was in gross violation of the efficient markets hypothesis, and he

attributed it to crowd psychology. Shiller's remarkable finding
was subjected to intense criticism and scrutiny by Flavin (1983),

Kleidon (1986), Marsh and Merton (1986) and others for problems
with the stationarity assumptions and small sample properties of

the estimators. The central problem that emerged in subsequent
empirical work was that Shiller-styi.e tests were really joint tests

of a null hypothesis of either market efficiency and a constant

real rate of return with a variable equity premium or market
efficiency and a constant equity premium and a variable rate of
return. The most recent work on the subject by Mankiw, Romuer and

Shapiro (1991) has found very mixed evidence and less striking
violations of these joint hypotheses.

Curious to determine whether Shiller's findings could be

replicated elsewhere, researchers have looked at other stock
6

markets.

Investigating the British market, Bulkey and Tonks

(1989), did not find any serious violations, although they
concluded that there were still arbitrage opportunities available.

Looking at a longer annual series the British market, De Long and
Grossman (1992) attributed the variance bounds violations to shifts

in the equity premia, suggesting a strong aversion of investors
towards stocks before the First World War. The German stock market

lacks continuous series on stock prices and dividends.

But

examining separate periods, De Long and Becht (1992) found that

while the post-World War II market appeared to excessively
volatile, the pre-World War I market was not.

They conjectured

that the dominant role of the big German banks may have made the
market less volatile.

The evidence thus compiled does not offer any strong
suggestion that bubbles, manias or fads may play any role.
However, the testing is largely divorced from the historical
literature on these phenomena which claims that they were very
short-lived. The data which all these studies employ are indices
of annual stock prices and dividends, sometimes spliced together
from various sources. The use of this type of annual data implies
that if stock prices are not excessively volatile, then the market

efficiency hypothesis cannot be rejected for very long periods of
time.

But, annual data fails significantly to capture what

historians have described as departures from market efficiency,
such as the relatively brief bull markets of 1929 and 1987, which
had durations under two years. Higher frequency price and dividend
7

data examined by Rappoport and White (1993) suggest that market

prices in 1929 could not be validated by the expected flow of
future dividends or other factors.

Historical accounts suggest that there should be more
information in individual stocks about the effects
psychology."

of "crowd

Yet, while the use of stock indices may be

imperfect, they are proxies for individual stocks. Shiller (1989)
showed that an observation that indices are excessively volatile is

equivalent to an observation that individual stock prices covary

too much on average to accord with the efficient markets
hypothesis.

Shiller did not himself look at individual stock

prices. Instead he examined the comovements in real stock price
indices between the U.K. and the U.S. and he found that they appear
to be too large to be accounted for in terms of the comoveinents of

real dividends between countries.

The only studies to examine the behavior of high frequency

individual asset prices are two papers by Pindyck and Roteberg
(1990, 1992) who look at commodities prices and stock prices.

Considering Pt to be a vector of stock returns, they seek to
determine whether once fundamentals are accounted for there is any

significant comovement between observed individual stock returns,

that is, they examine the off-diagonal elements of the var(u)
matrix.
Pindyck and Rotexnberg (1992) show that there are two possible

sources of comovement of the returns of correctly priced stocks:

changes in the discount rate for the immediate holding period
8

(which is the same for all firms), and correlated revisions of the

expected present discounted value of the future earnings streams.

Changes in the discount rate should be reflected by macroeconomic
variables that affect the overall level of returns in the economy.

Revisions in expectations may be correlated between firms in
related activities.

Thus, there is evidence of excessive

comovement of returns if, after controlling for these macroeconomic

and industry effects, returns are still correlated across firms.

In their study covering 1969 to 1987, Pindyck and Rotemberg

formed groups of companies in unrelated lines of business. As a
check on this independence, they showed that earnings of the firms

in each group were uncorrelated over time. This fact supports the

presumption that any within-group correlation of returns must be
due to common responses to underlying macroeconomic factors. They

then regressed the time series of returns for each firm on
macroeconomic variables designed to capture temporal variation in

discount rates that result from economy—wide developments. These

variables included current and lagged values of the growth of
industrial production and prices, the 3-month T-bill rate, the
lagged dividend price ratio for the market as a whole, and the
contemporaneous rate of return on the market. The residuals from

these regressions should be uncorrelated for firms within each

group, if stocks are correctly priced, because sources of
coinovement have been removed. Pindyck and Roteznberg show that the

likelihood ratio test statistic for the null of a diagonal
covariance matrix (no excess comovement of the stock returns in a
9

group) is RI(T/2) where R is the estimated correlation matrix of
returns, and T is the number of time series observations. Minus
twice the log of this statistic has a chi—square distribution with
m(rn-l)/2 degrees of freedom, where in

is

the number of firms in the

group. In a further test they include latent variables to capture
unobserved market expectations. For all models the null hypothesis
of no excess cornovement was clearly rejected.
The appearance of additional cornovement between stock returns

suggests the possibility that there is some contagion or infection
between stocks. If investors were only following fundamentals then
the movement of one stock should not be related to another once all

fundamentals have been accounted for.

If they do move together

then investors may be behaving as noise traders using the
"irrelevant" information from other stock prices to price a stock.
A rise in the value of a few stocks may lead these investors to re-

evaluate other stocks simply because they believe this is an
indication that the rest of the market should rise.

However,

Pindyck and Rotemberg do not believe that this is the case and

offer some additional evidence the observed comovement is the
product of company size and degree of institutional ownership,
suggesting market segmentation.

3. Testing for Crowd Behavior in the l920s and l930s

To examine the behavior of individual stocks, we have
assembled a new body of data, consisting of the individual end-of10

month prices of 29 of the 30 stocks that composed the Dow Jones
Index in 1929 and their dividends from 1920 to 1934. Before 1926,
the Wall Street Journal and the Commercial and Financial Chronicle

supplied stock prices. For the period 1926-1934, the CRSP tapes
provided the price data. Dividends for the whole period were found

in Moody's Manual of Investments. Individual stock prices and
dividends were adjusted to correct for stock splits and stock
dividends as recorded in Moody's.
This sample of stocks includes some stocks that were prominent

in contemporary accounts but also some that were quiescent. The
stocks in the Dow Jones Index for 1929 were selected because most
had been on the New York Stock Exchange for long enough to provide

a decent time series.1

However, not all of them had been in

existence or been listed on the New York Stock Exchange as far back

as 1920.2

Figure 1 shows the mean, standard deviation, skewness, and
kurtosis for this cross—section of stock returns over the whole
period. Perhaps, the most striking feature of these four plots is
1The index at this date had thirty stocks; up until September

29, 1928, there had been only twenty. The stocks in the index
changed little from September 1928 to July 18, 1930, when there was

In 1929, there were only two

a turnover of seven companies.

changes, National Cash Register was substituted for Victor Talking
Machine in January and Curtiss—Wright for Wright Aeronautical in
September. (Stil].man, 1986, p. 56). Only 29 stocks were used in
this sample. Recent creations--National Cash Register and CurtissWright-—were not employed and data for Victor Talking Machine was
not found.

is worthwhile to note that in the early 1920s, trading
During the
among even prominent stocks could be quite limited.
months of July and August quotations were difficult to find before
1929.
11

that one must look quite carefully to locate the boom beginning in

March 1928 and the crash of October 1929.

For ready

identification, these dates are marked by vertical dashed lines.

Note that the most dramatic movements occurred during the
turbulence of the early 1930s.

It is difficult to establish a

reasonable benchmark against which the experience of 1928-1929 can

be compared. One candidate is the "Coolidge market" (Galbraith,
pp. 14—15) during which prices rose almost steadily from mid—1924

to the end of 1925, which is similarly marked by vertical dashed
lines. In contrast to the boom of 1928—1929, the upward movement

during the Coolidge market is quite homogeneous across stock
returns.3 The standard deviations in 1928—1929 are higher, an
stock returns are more skewed and show more bunching in the tails.

If these two episodes were both based on a general improvement in

business conditions, then there should be no marked difference
between them.

While a growing economy certainly underlay the

general rise in stocks in 1928 and 1929, their performance was
extraordinarily uneven. The second, third and fourth moments of

the stock returns suggest considerable divergence among the
experiences of individual stocks.

Barrie Wigmore (1985, P. 86)

noted this phenomenon in his detailed analysis of the performance

of a broad range of stocks.

Me concluded that "exaggerated

valuations" were "for individual companies rather than whole
industries." Thus, excess comovement of the market is not easily

3me number of stocks during the Coolidge market was slightly
smaller.
12

ascertained from the behavior of stock returns alone.

We adopt the framework developed by Pindyck and Rotemberg to
test for comovement, subject to the limitations of our data. These
limitations affect the way we control for shared industry effects.

The small size of the sample of firms we have prevents the
selection of a sufficiently large number of nonoverlapping groups
of firms. Furthermore, we do not have earnings data on the firms,
to provide a check on independence. Consequently, we calculate the

comovement test statistics for a large number of groups of six
firms selected from our 29, using a random sampling procedure. For

brevity and clarity, we shall refer to these randomly selected
groups of six firms as subsets. Each subset of firms contains no
more than one firm from the each of the eight industrial categories

detailed in Table 1, with the probability of a particular
industrial category appearing in a subset is equal to that
category's preponderance in the population of 29 firms. Thus, for
example, there is a chance of 2/29 that any subset will include a
firm in the retailing category, while there is a 5/29 chance that
it will contain an automobile industry firm. Then, given a subset
that contains a retailing firm, there will be an equal chance that

the firm is Sears or Woolworths, and so forth.

This sampling procedure ensures that none of the industrial

categories will be over— or under—represented relative to its
presence in the group of 29 firms, while the use of results from a

large number of randomly sampled subsets guards against
arbitrariness in developing the subsets. It raises the further
13

problem of the appropriate critical value for the test.

The 1

percent critical value for the null of no coinovement among a single

subset of six firms (15 degrees of freedom) is 30.6; however, our

random sampling procedure generates a large number of such test

statistics from subsets of firms whose membership differs but
nevertheless overlaps with high probability. We are thus faced
with assessing the significance of a list of chi—square statistics

among which there is a complicated pattern of statistical
dependence. Accordingly, we develop critical values by Monte Carlo
simulation. Each run of the simulation is based on 29 T—vectors of

independent standard normal variates, each representing an firm.
These 29 vectors are partitioned into industry groups with numbers

of members corresponding to those in Table 1. One hundred subsets
of six firms are then selected, according to the protocol described

above, and the comovement statistics calculated for each subset.
Each run mimics the dependence due to overlapping firms among the

subsets, while ensuring that the data on which the correlation
statistics are based are genuinely independent. For each run, we
tabulated the number of the one hundred comoveinent statistics that

exceed the 1 percent (upper) critical values for a single chisquare statistic with 15 degrees of freedom (m6). We then carried

out 1000 such runs, producing a distribution, under the null
hypothesis, of the number of rejections (individual comovemerit

statistics in excess of 30.6) among 100 subsets of the same
underlying returns data.

The upper 5 percent and 1 percent

critical values of this distribution are shown in Table 2.
14

Our tests for comovement among the returns of firms are based
on residuals obtained from time series regressions for each firm's

returns on variants of the list of regressors used by Pindyck and

Rotemberg. We experimented with current and/or one lag of the
growth rates of aggregate industrial production (DIP), wholesale

and consumer prices (DWP and DCP), the contemporaneous rate of

interest on 90—day bankers' acceptances (BA), the seasonallyadjusted, lagged (equal—weighted) dividend-price ratio for the
stocks in the sample (DVP(-l)), and the contemporaneous (equal
weighted) return on the stocks in the sample, which we call the

"market return" (MR). The results of these regressions are not
shown; curiously, very few of the macroeconomic variables display

any significance, a result similar to Pindyck and Rotemberg's
finding for their sample. In contrast to their results, we find
that the lagged dividend-price ratio for the market is of little
use in predicting individual returns. The only variable that has
marked explanatory power is MR.

Table 2 exhibits the results for comovement tests on firms'
residuals derived from four sets of regressors. Sets (a) and (b)
are similar to those used by Pindyck and Rotemberg; set (C) drops
the lagged macro variables in (a), and (d) employs only the market

return. Each comovement test is run on residuals from monthly
regressions over three different samples: 1920.02—26.12, 1927.01-

30.12, and 1931.01—1934.12. Within each sample, the results are

uniform across models (a)—(d). After attempting to control for
potential economy-wide and industry-specific sources of comovement
15

among stock returns we still find very strong evidence for
cotnovement. The null of no comovement is rejected at the 1 percent

level in every case.

However, there is least evidence of

comovernent when only the market return is used in the preliminary
regressions4.

In general, these results are similar to those

found by Pindyck and Rotemberg.5

By looking at the comovement of stock prices across three
periods we found a surprising pattern, which allows us to draw a

different interpretation from the one suggested by Pindyck and
Rotemberg. Their finding of substantial excess comoveinent is open
to a common criticism of all studies that do not accept the market
efficiency hypothesis that they have not adequately accounted f or
fundamentals.

Hamilton (1986) and Hamilton and Whiteman (1985)

have shown that if there is some fundamental unobserved by the
econometrician but known to the market participants, then asset
prices will not appear to be driven by fundamentals. The problem

is that what researchers are conducting is a joint test
specification test for fundamentals and market efficiency.
Consequently, Pindyck and Rotemberg look for an explanation
elsewhere and find that some of the excess comovement can be partly

explained by company size and degree of institution ownership,
Notice that there is no presumption that the evidence for

comovement will necessarily be lessened by including more
(potentially spurious) variables in the preliminary regressions.

While this lowers the variance of the return residuals for an
individual firm, it may lower the covariance of return residuals
across firms by a greater or lesser amount.
5We did not include latent variables in any of the regressions
in this version of the paper.
16

suggesting market segmentation.

Pindyck and Rotemberg's explanation is a plausible one for

their broad selection of stocks.

However, it is difficult to

imagine that for stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial average that
any shift in market segmentation could have occurred over the three

periods we examine. The noise trading approach seems to offer a

more plausible explanation for our results.

Because of the

uniformity of results across models of individual firm returns, it

is useful in comparing the results across time periods, to focus
only on row (d).

First, there is a distinct rise in comovernent

between stock returns from the pre-boom period to the boom. There
is excess comovement for 1920 to 1926 but it rises to 1927 to 1930.

This fact accords with the historical suggestions of the entrance
of a new generation of unschooled investors responding to hot tips,

rumors and a general euphoria.

What is surprising is that

comovement seems even stronger in the third period, 1931-1934. On

the face of it, the bubble may have burst and the naive or seminaive investors had dropped out of the market. However, we do know
that by any measure this was the period of the greatest volatility

in over two hundred years of the American stock market (Wilson,
Sylla, and Jones, 1991).

This volatility was drive by constant

domestic and foreign economic policy surprises.6 Investors were
clearly shaken by the events of the l93Os, and they may very well
have been so nervous that they reacted even more to the change in
6Eznploying an options-pricing approach to the brokers' loan
market, Rappoport and White (1994) found that actual or realized
volatility was much higher than expected or implied volatility.
17

the prices of other stocks than to the specific stock fundamentals

or economy-wide fundamentals.

The "crowd" was now nervous and

apprehensive.

4. Conclusion

-

Whether the efficient markets hypothesis accurately describes
the behavior of the stock market in the 1920s will continue to be

a subject of heated debate for the future given the imperfect

methodology for testing and the strongly held beliefs of
researchers.

However, the exercise conducted in this paper

suggests that stock returns paralleled one another too closely to
be explained by any common industry or economy-wide factors that we

could measure.

Our results are thus consistent with the

possibility that a fad or crowd psychology played a role in the
rise of the market, its crash and subsequent volatility. Yet, the
possibility remains that, in spite of our use of a broad range of

macroeconomic variables, we have not succeeded in extracting all

the common factors that drove stock prices. Our statistical
analysis of comovement is subject to problems of errors-invariables, arising from the fact that we have used realized values

of returns and other variables to test theories that in fact deal
with anticipations.

18

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Allen, Frederick Lewis, nlv Yesterday, An Informal History of the
Nineteen—Twenties (New
York, 1931)

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Banking and
Monetary Statistics (Washington, D.C., 1943).

Bulkey, George and Ian Tonks, "Are tJK Stock Prices Excessively
Volatile?: Trading Rules and Variance Bounds Tests," Economic
Journal (December 1989), pp. 1083-98.
Commercial and Financial Chronicle (New York, 1928 and 1929).
De Long, J. Bradford and Marco Becht, "'Excess Volatility' and the
German Stock Market, 1876—1990," (mimeo, March 1992).

De Long, J. Bradford and Richard S. Grossman, "'Excess Volatility
and the London Stock Market, 1870-1990," (mimeo, November 1992).
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, Robert
J. Waidman, "Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets," ourna1 of
Political Economy, 98 (Aug. 1990), pp. 703-38.

De Long, J. Bradford, and Andrei Shleifer, "The Bubble of 1929:
Evidence from Closed—End Funds", Journal of Economic History, 51
(Sept. 1991), pp. 675—700.

Fisher, Lawrence, "Some New Stock-Market Indexes," Journal of
Business (1966).

Flavin, Marjorie A., "Excess volatility in the financial markets:
A reassessment of the empirical evidence," Journal of Political
EconomY (1983), 929—56.
Gaibraith, John Kenneth, The Great Crash 1929 (Boston, 1954).

Hamilton, James D., "On Testing for Self-fulfilling Speculative
Price Bubbles", International Economic Review 27, (October 1986),
pp. 545—52.

Hamilton, James D., and Charles H. Whiteman,

"The Observable
Implications of Self—Fulfilling Expectations," Journal of Monetary
Economics 16 (Nov. 1985), pp.353—73.
Kleidon, Allan W., "Variance bounds tests and stock price valuation
models," Journal of Political Economy (October 1986), 953-1001.

Ladies Home Journal, "verybody Ought to Be Rich," (August 1929).
19

Le Roy, Stephen F. and Richard D. Porter, "The prevent-value
relation: Tests based on implied variance bounds," Econometrica
(1981), pp. 555—74.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer and Matthew D. Shapiro, "Stock
Market Forecastability and Volatility," A Statistical Appraisal,"
(1991) ,

pp. 455—77.

Marsh, Terry A. and Robert C. Merton, "Dividend variability and
variance bounds tests for the rationality of stock market prices,"
American Economic Review (June 1986), 483—98.

Moody's Manual of Investments, Industrial Securities (New York,
various years)
Pierce, Phyllis, ed., The Dow Jones Averages, 1885—1985 (Homewood,
IL,

1986)

Pindyck,

Robert S. and Julio J. Rotemberg, "The Excess Co-Movement
of Commodity Prices," Economic Journal (December 1990).

Pindyck, Robert S., and Julio J. Roteinberg,

"The Comovement of

Stock Prices" (mimeo, 1992).

Rappoport, Peter, and Eugene N. White, "Was There a Bubble in the
1929 Stock Market?" Journal of Economic History (September 1993),
549—74.

Rappoport, Peter, and Eugene N. White, "Was the Crasti of 1929
Expected?" American Economic Review (forthcoming 1994).
Shiller, Robert J., "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified
by Subsequent Changes in Dividends," American Economic Review (June
1981)

Shiller, Robert J., "Coinovements in Stock Prices and Coinovetnents in

Dividends," Journal of Finance (July 1989), pp. 719—29.

Standard & Poor's Trade and Securities Statistics (Standard &
Poor's Corporation, 1964).

Stiliman, Richard, Dow Jones Industrial Average: History and Role
in an Investment Strategy
(Hoinewood, IL, 1986).
White, Eugene N., "Banking Innovation in the 1920s: The Growth of
National Banks' Financial Services," Business and Economic History
(1984)
Wiginore,

Barrie A., The

Crash and its Aftermath (Westport:

Greenwood Press, 1985)
Wilson, Jack W., Richard E. Sylla, and Charles P. Jones, "Financial
20

Market Panics and Volatility in the Long Run, 1830-1988," in Eugene
N. White, Crashes and Panics: The Lessons of History (Hoiewood, IL,
1990)

21

Table 1

Industrial Groups

Chemicals: Allied Chemical, Texas Gulf and Sulphur, Union Carbide

Automotive: Chrysler, General Motors, Goodrich, Mack Truck, Nash
Primary Metals: American Smelting and Refining, Bethlehem Steel,
International Nickel, U.S. Steel, American Can
Food: American Sugar, American Tobacco, General Foods

Oil: Atlantic Refining, Texas Corporation, Standard Oil of New
Jersey, North American Company
Retailing: Sears Roebuck, Woolworth

Machinery and Equipment: Westinghouse, International Harvester,
General Railway Signal
New Industries: Paramount, RCA, and Wright Aeronautical

TAflLE 2

Tosta foComo'rement of..In5ividuaj Firms' Stock Prices
Nuiber or subsets of six firms yielding
comoveinent statistics in excess of 30.6'
(Maximum possible — 100)
Roqx-essors in Model or
Individual Firm Returns2

1920—26
(a DIP,DIP(—1) ,DWP,DWP(-1),
DCP,DCP(—1),DVP(—1),BA

l927—Q

193l—34

91

100

100

(D)

As (a), plus MR

13

21

52

(C)

DIP,DWP,DCP,DVP(—1),BA

91

100

100

10

18

45

6

6
8

8

(d) MR
Critical Values3
5%
1%

3

6

1 The tests for comovenient examine whether returns of groups
of six firms in different industries are mutually correlated, after

correcting for shared macroeconomic influences on returns. The
flumber 30.6 is the 1% significance level for the likelihood ratio
test of the null that the covariance zatrix of (residual) returns
is a diagonal matrix. For each model of individual firm returns,

different permutations ("subsets") of six individual
firms in different industries were randomly selected from the 29
The entries in the table
firma on which data were available.
report the number of these 100 subsets that produce rejection of
the diagonal covariance matrix null. An entry in excess of 6(8) is
cignificant at the 5%(3%) level. See text, pp.8—i0, for complete
details.
one ht.thdred

2

All data are monthly.

DVP

is

the seasonally

adjustedaggregate dividend-price ratio, BA is the rate on 90-day
bankers' acceptances, and MR the average return on the 29 Dow Jones
cecurities. DIP, DWP, and DCP are, respectively, the monthly rates
of change in industrial production, wholesale prices and consumer
prices.

Based on 1000 simulations using 50 and 100 time series
observations representing individual firm returns. See text, p.10

for

full, details.

Standard Dev.

Mean

S

Skuiess

Kur tosis

I

I

S

a
S

0
I

I

I:
I

n

a,—

I,-

I
4

