                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EVALUATING LABOUR ADJUSTMENT COSTS
                     FROM TRADE SHOCKS: ILLUSTRATIONS
                       FOR THE U.S. ECONOMY USING AN
                    APPLIED GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL
                         WITH TRANSACTIONS COSTS




                                    Ramon L. Clarete
                                       Irene Trela
                                      John Whafley




                                Working Paper No. 4628




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  January 1994


We are grateful to the Donner Canadian Foundation for financial support of a North
American trade project on which this work draws, and to Tom Rutherford both for comments
and for use of his MPS/GE equilibrium solution algorithm. An earlier paper containing the
analytical framework was presented to an NBER Applied General Equilibrium Conference
held at Stanford University in May 1990. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Trade and Investment Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                 NBER Working Paper #4628
                                                                              January 1994

                     EVALUATING LABOUR ADJUSTMENT COSTS
                       FROM TRADE SHOCKS: ILLUSTRATIONS
                         FOR THE U.S. ECONOMY USING AN
                      APPLIED GENERAL EQUILIBRiUM MODEL
                           WITH TRANSACTIONS COSTS

                                        ABSTRACT

       This paper presents a general equilibrium approach to calculating labour adjustment costs
induced by trade policy changes or external sector shocks, which we illustrate by analyzing the
adjustment consequences of eliminating quotas and tariffs on U.S. imports. In our approach,
factor adjustments in the presence of transactions costs are endogenously determined within the

equilibrium structure. The conventional way of calculating such labour adjustment costs is to
use full equilibrium models which exclude adjustment costs, and apply exogenous estimates of
duration of unemployment to implied intersectoral labour reallocations. By using an equilibrium
model in which adjustment costs are absent, the conventional approach tends to overstate the
amount of labour that moves to other sectors and hence introduces an upward bias to estimates
of adjustment costs. As well, such an approach tends to ignore the impact on intersectoral wage
rates. Our results suggest that concerns over adjustment problems should focus as much on the
consequences of adjustment costs in impeding factor mobility, as on the magnitude of the
adjustment costs themselves. Compared to the redistributive effects they induce by inhibiting
labour movement in response to policy or other changes, these costs may be small.


Rarnon L. Clarete                                                 Irene Trela
School of Economics                                               Departrcient of Economics
University of the Philippines                                     University of Western Ontario
Diliman, Quezon City                                              London, Ontario N6A 5C2
PHILIPPINES                                                       CANADA

John Whalley
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London. Ontario N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
                                               2

I.     Introduction

       This paper argues that the evaluation of adjustment costs associated with changes in

trade policies or other external sector shocks, such as import surges, requires a full

equilibrium framework in which both long-term intersectoral reallocations and short-term

adjustment costs from policy changes are endogenously determined. In particular, it suggests

that exercises such as Clime et al. (1978), Baldwin, Mutti and Richardson (1980), or de Melo

and Tan (1988) tend to overstate the adjustment costs actually involved because they use

estimates of intersectoral factor reallocations generated from models in which adjustment

costs do not formally appear, but to which they are then added in a separate calculation.

       This is because they first calculate the amount of labour which moves between

industries in long-run equilibrium assuming no adjustment costs, and then graft on a further

calculation of what adjustment costs might be implied by this change in equilibrium

behaviour, using estimates of the avenge duration of unemployment; we term this the full

equilibrium plus duration approach. If instead an equilibrium model in which adjustment

costs explicitly appear is used, a smaller number of workers will typically be shown as

moving between industries in response to trade shocks, and adjustment costs will be

correspondingly smaller. Indeed, the larger the costs of relocating between industries, the

more that trade shocks are reflected in changes in relative wages between industries rather

than in intersectoral reallocations of labour. This suggests that current adjustment cost

analyses may be over-focused on efficiency rather than distributional issues.
                                               3

       To make our argument, we develop an economy-wide equilibrium modelling approach

in which adjustment costs are endogenously determined.' In the model, adjustment costs

arise from any movement of factors between industries, and are reflected in a per-unit

requirement of transactions services for any factor so moved. These services can be

interpreted as search and/or retraining costs, as well as wages forgone during the

unemployment period for labour. Under this treatment, the adjusting factor is quasi-fixed

and a market clearing price for transaction services is endogenously determined. This

transaction services requirement for any relocating factor drives a wedge between the user

cost of factors in expanding sectors, and the rewards received by factor owners in contracting

sectors. We can then compare adjustment costs calculated using this modelling approach and

those estimated using full equilibrium plus duration methods.

       We explore the implications of the differences between these two approaches by

calculating labour adjustment costs in a model of U.S.-Mex.ican-Rest of the World trade,

used recently by Trela and Whalley (forthcoming) to analyze trade implications of

liberalization under NAFTA and adapted here to incorporate adjustment costs. The need for

adjustments arises in the model from the elimination of quotas and tariffs on U.S. imports.

The differences between the approaches in the adjustment cost estimates we report emphasize

the points we make above.




     'This equilibrium structure is related to that used by Foley (1970) to examine equilibrium
with costly marketing, but differs both in considering adjustment costs in factor markets and
in simultaneously modelling goods and factor markets. The formulation is also related to
that developed by Nguyen and Whalley (1986), who use a fixed price equilibrium approach
for a pure exchange economy in which transactions costs are endogenously determined.
                                              4

       The organization of the paper is as follows. We first outline how labour adjustment

costs can be incorporated into a general equilibrium model, also indicating how our

formulation can be generalized to capture choices among adjustment options for workers,

such as retraining programs of varying duration. We then describe the model, the data and

functional forms used in implementing our approach for the analysis of labour adjustment

costs for the trade policy change we consider. A final section reports and interprets

adjustment cost estimates from elimination of quotas and tariffs on U.S. imports.
                                               5

U.      A General Equilibrium Model With Intersectorally Partially Mobile Labour and

        Adjustment Costs

       In this section, we describe a general equilibrium model in which labour is

imperfectly mobile between sectors. The model specifies N goods-producing sectors and a

single sector producing transactions services. Each sector uses two factor inputs: capital and

labour, Capital is assumed to be perfectly mobile between sectors, but for labour to move

from one sector to another, transactions services must be used. In a real world application,

this might reflect a period of unemployment faced by any relocating factor.

       The cost of using these services drives a wedge between the buying price of labour in

expanding industries and the selling price of labour in contracting industries. Workers trade

off their longer term gains from higher wage rates over their remaining working life if they

move, against the short-run cost of relocating. The time period for the model thus

corresponds to the time horizon for workers in making relocation decisions; i.e., the period

covered by the model is a number of years rather than a single year. The transactions

services requirement to move labour reflects search time, relocation costs, and other factors.

The initiai allocations of labour by industry are parameters of the model.

       More formally, production functions for the N goods-producing and the transactions

services sectors   are given by:

           = Q(K1,L1)          I = 1,2   N
                                                                                            (1)
           =
               T(KpL)
where Q1 is the output of good i, 75 represents transactions services produced, K1 and
                                                                                       L1 are
capital and labour used by sector i, and K7- and    are similar factor usage in the
                                                  6

transactions services sector (denoted by 7). We assume these production functions to be

continuous and linearly homogeneous in capital and labour.

       Denoting the            sector as transactions services, homogeneity implies that:

       pQ1
             = w1L + rK               I = 1,2         N+1                                        (2)

where p1 is the price of good i, w is the sector-specific wage rate in sector i, and r is the

rental price of intersectorally mobile capital.

       Since in the presence of adjustment costs labour is only partially mobile between

sectors, wages fail to equalize across sectors. As a result, and in contrast to conventional

general equilibrium models without adjustment costs, a single-market clearing wage no

longer characterizes equilibrium. (N+l) sector-specific wage rates need to be specified, bul.

at the same time, there are bounds on these wage rates given by the size of the adjustment

costs. These, in turn, reflect the price of transactions services and the transactions service

requirements in moving labour between any two sectors.

       We denote the initial (pre-shock or pre-policy change) allocation of labour to sector i

as         The total economy-wide labour endowment is thus 1? =                  The result of

polky changes or external shocks affecting the economy may be that sector i uses more than,

less than, or the same amount of labour, L, that is initially allocated to the sector.

For any shock or policy change, three types of sectors will result; namely,

         II = {sector ilL, —
         E = {sectar (IL1 >
         C = {sector ilL, c     Z};       Yi;
                                                      7

 where U. E and C refer to unchanged, expanding, and contracting sectors respectively. U, E

and C represents a mutually exhaustive classification of sectors, and their union comprises

the N+1 sectors in the economy.

              the labour actually used in each sector after the shock or policy change, is

expressed as a proportion of the initial allocation of labour in sector i, L     We denote X as

sector-specific labour utilization scalars, and hence

               — x,tf    I   = 1,2   Nd                                                        (4)


where X1O,vj. Each X is endogenously determined as part of the general equilibrium

solution to the model, and indicates whether sector (is expanding, contracting or unchanged

relative to its initial use of labour. The amount of labour in the sector prior to the

adjustment generating shock or policy change thus affects the equilibrium outcome in the

economy.

          For any given values of L1, sector-specific wage rates can be calculated using equation

(2) as,

                             rK)     j=   1,2,...N.                                            (5)

Given L1 and r, K1 is determined by the requirement that capital will be hired up to the point

where its value marginal product equals the rental price of capital. This allows       to be

calculated using equation (5).

          The costs of transactions services required to move labour between sectors establishes

bounds on wage rates across sectors. Firms in expanding sectors demand labour until the

value marginal product of labour equals the cost to the firm of hiring labour, which we
                                                 8


denote as w. If the value marginal product of labour in a sector is higher than w, there are

incentives to continue hiring labour. In turn, labour initially allocated to contracting sectors

wiU move out of the sector and into expanding sectors until the value marginal product of

labour remaining in the sector equals nfl, the reservation wage received by sellers of labour

after any transactions costs. A value marginal product less than w1T provides incentives for

labour to leave contracting sectors. In unchanged sectors, the wage rate lies between w and

WI?, since labour is best off by remaining in the sector to which it is initially allocated.

thus equals the miximum of 0 and w - PT where PT15 the price of transactions services.

       Wage rates by sector, reflecting these bounds, are as follows:

                        VicE;
             —     min(w,max(wwR)) Vie U;                                                      (6)
                   w"    YjcC

       Adopting, for now, the simplifying units convention that one unit of transactions

services is required to move one unit of labour between sectors, the total demand for

transactions services is given by:

         T" =E (L15 — L,)
                 'cc

       Assuming that consumers have identical hornothetic preferences allows us to represent

the demand side of the model as a single representative consumer endowed with all the

labour and capital in the economy, L5and K. This simplification is not essential to our

analytical framework, but is used here for simplicity in presentation. In numerical

application, we can also consider multiple consumers, including cases where consumers are
                                                       9

each    separately endowed with the labour initially thocated to the various production sectors

in the model.

          The representative consumer is assumed to maximize a utility function defined over

the N goods, subject to the budget constraint

                     -             - rK'5 =0.                                                    (8)

The resulting utility maximum problem can be solved to determine C1, the final demands for

good i.

          Given the above, equilibrium in this model is characterized by goods and transactions

service prices p1    (i=1        N+1), a rental price of capital r, a wage rate in expanding sectors

w, and labour demand scalars, Xj q = 1                N+1), all denoted by the vector
  = (pl,r,w.pT,Xf),i      =I       N;j = 1      N+1, such that a series of equilibrium conditions
hold.

         The first is that bounds on sector wage rates must hold; i.e.
            n(e) w        'VjeE;
            w(e) —   min[w,max(,w)]             vj U; and                                        (9)
            w1fr)awM         'c'jeC.

The second is that demand supply equalities hold for:

          (1)     Consumer goods

                C(e) =   Q1(e)       I = 1,2,...,N;                                             (10)

         (ii)     Capital                                  -

                     =
           , K(c)                                                                               (11)
                                              10

        (iii)   Labour

                     =                                                                       (12)


and
        (iv)    Transactions services

                         V (e).                                                              (13)

        Equations (9) to (13) characterize an equilibrium in which there are (2N+4)

endogenous variables and (2N+4) equilibrium conditions. To determine an equilibrium,

values must be determined for the N goods prices, the rental price of capital, the wage rate

paid when hiring additional labour, the price of transactions services, and the (N+1) labour

demand scalars. Market cleating conditions must also apply for goods markets, the capital

market, the labour market, and for transactions services. In addition, the sector-specific

wage rates should be bounded from above by w and from below by J?•

        The properties of the mapping whose fixed point characterizes an equilibrium in this

model can be seen as follows. Rewriting the conditions (9) to (13) as functions f1(e)

(1 = 1,.. .2N+4), an equilibrium for the model can be alternatively characterized as a vector

e such that:

        ffr*) = 0.                                                                            (14)

The equation system f(e) operates much like a system of excess demands, which satisfy a

condition akin to the traditional Wairas Law. If g(e) is defined to equal wf(e), where

for i = J,2...,N+3; and E,5, for i = N+4,...2N+4; then g(e) has the property that

      4q,(e) =   0, i.e. a modified version of the Wairas Law holds. This property can be

shown to follow directly from the model structure.
                                                     11


        Adding over the zero-profit conditions (2), and substituting (4) and (6) into the budget

constraint (8), yields:



         EpiC,-Q?+rCK,-f) -R'-E
         i—I
                              seE
                                  wL'
         - S min(w,                                                                                  (15)
               icU
                              max(w,wR))         5fec       +
                                                                5 wX,i     = 0.




       Adding and subtracting w sr X,tr; PTEC X,L; and w 5kUL5 to and from
both sides; and substituting (7) yields:


                pC4   - Q) +             - K')   +           - L')    +       - T5)
         '5    leE
                     (w,-w)X,L,3+5 (w,-w)X,L+5 (w_wR)X,L,
                                       SET)                     icC
                                                                                                     (16)

                          +
                              5 (w - min(w,max(w,,WA)))L              0.
                               i€U



By definition, X,L • L,s       if sector let!. Thus, we get the result that       "   e,g1fr) = 0;

i.e. egft) = 0. The equation system (9) to (13) can be solved for t using general

equilibrium solution code such as the MPS/GE software developed by Rutherford (1988),or

using a conventional fixed-point algorithm such as Broadie's (1983), Merrill's (1972), or van

der Lan and Talman's (1979).

       The model described above can also be used to analyze labour adjustment costs for an

open prce-t2jcing economy. If there are T traded goods, H home goods, a transactions

services sector, an aggregate consumer, and a government, the total number of sectors in the

model is N = 2" + H + 1. Production functions for goods and transactions services sectors
                                                     [2
are as described above. The aggregate consumer has a utility function defined over the

(T+FJ) goods.

        If world prices of trade goods are fixed and denoted by the vector , we can define a
composite traded good for this model as:

         C=     ER and;
                  1.1                                                                    (17)

                  iQi
where   cc and 1/ are respectively the demand and supply of the composite traded good. We
denote the price of this composite good relative to the numeraire good used in the model by

p. Accordingly, the domestic prices of traded goods, pfand are equal to pf PPr

        In this case, a general equilibrium is given by values

 [r,wp1(i       — l,2,,..,H),          p ,Xj(j   1,2,...,M, and   such that:



        (i) factor markets clear


                  -?             0;
                                                                                         (18)
                        —
                  - L5           0;

        (ii) goods markets clear



             C-Q1 =0                   Yhomegoods;
                                                                                         (19)
             Ct    —
                        QC        0;    and
                   —
                        P    =    0.
                                                 13

       (iii) bounds on wage rates hold


                        -o YjeE;
                 -   min(w,                       vj   U; and                              (20)
                   maxN,w))                 C)


              nwR=0 YjeC;
An equilibrium in this case can also be computed using fixed-point or other solution

techniques.

       In presenting the models above, we have used the simplifying assumption that

adjustment costs are such that one unit of transactions services is required for each unit of

labour that moves between sectors. This treatment of adjustment costs can be both

generalized and refined, although at some cost in complexity of notation. If the major

component of adjustment costs is labour time (unemployment), then the technology for

transactions services can be specified as heavily labour-intensive, or even exclusively labour

using. If adjustment costs are thought to be different between pairs of industries, different

transactions services requirements for moving labour between any pair of industries can be

specified. In this case, optimizing behaviour by agents would involve trading off moving to

high wage industries against larger adjustment costs which, in turn, could reflectany

retraining required. Differential adjustment costs across different regions can also be

modelled, with industries subscripted by region and with differential adjustment costs

between them. Hence a range of elaborations are possible on the basic approach, which, in

combination, allows for a wide range of applications of the model.
                                                14

m. Analyzing Labour Adjustment Costs in a Model of U.S. Trade
       We have used the approach presented above to analyze the adjustment consequences

of eliminating quotas and tariffs on U.S. imports in models with and without endogenously

determined transactions costs. We employ an existing multisectoral trade model of the U.S.,

Mexico, and the Rest-of-the-World recently used by Trela and Whalley (forthcoming) for

model-based evaluations of the impact of NAFTA. We have further elaborated this model

here to incorporate labour adjustment costs, following the description of our approach given

above. This allows us to compare across comparable models, one with and one without

explicit modelling of adjustment costs.

       For both variants, the modelling strategy is the same; calibration to an initial

benchmark data set and counterfactual equilibrium analysis using the model specification

generated through calibration, as in conventional applied general equilibrium analysis (see

Shoven and Whalley (1992)). The models are static and incorporate the three regions: the

U.S.. Mexico, and the Rest-of-the-World (ROW). Only the U.S. and Mexico are modelled

in detail1 drawing on data contained in social accounting matrices (SAMs) for each of the

regions for 1988. The ROW is modelled schematically with each industry's output set at

three times that of the U.S. in the base data, and with no intermediate production or separate

capital and labour components in value added.

       Nine sectors (commodities) are specified: agriculture, steel, local autos2, transplant

autos2, textiles and clothing, other manufactures, crude petroleum and natural gas, services



    2This distinction enters the model because of its focus on NAFTA, and its earlier use in
evaluating the impact of new NAFTA trade rules which discriminate between auto production
based on the degree of local content.
                                                 15

and other goods. Each sector produces output according to a constant returns to scale

technology. Domestic and imported commodities are assumed to be imperfect substitutes,

and are modelled using the Arrnington assumption (see Armington (1969)). Domestic and

exported commodities are assumed to be homogeneous.

       Production in the U.S. and Mexico foUows a Leontief specification both between

intermediate outputs,   and   between intermediates and value-added. Value-added, in turn, is

produced by two primary factors - capital and labour - using a constant elasticity of

substitution (CES) specification. For each intermediate, CES sub-aggregators are used; first

across similar foreign produced intermediates, yielding a composite foreign intermediate

product, and then aggregating the composite foreign intermediate and the similar domestic

intermediate product. Production in the ROW is modelled as a constant elasticity of

transformation (CET) function that converts aggregate GDP into the various commodities

specified in the model.

       On the demand side of the model, there is a single representative consumer in each

region with a CES utility function defined over eight commodity aggregates: agriculture,

steel, autos, textiles and clothing, other manufactures, crude petroleum and natural gas,

services, and other goods. Within the auto aggregate, the utility function has a CES sub-

aggregator covering local autos and transplant autos. Within each of the nine sub-aggregates,

the utility function has additional CES sub-aggregators much as on the production side, first

aggregating similar foreign-produced commodities, and then the composite foreign

commodity and the similar domestic commodity. Trade policy interventions are incorporated

into the model using tariffs, plus an explicit quota-based treatment of non-tariff barriers.
                                                16

       To calibrate the with and without adjustment cost versions of the model, we use the

same 1988 data base as in Trela and V/balky (forthcoming), but make a further modification

because the time period for the analysis is no longer one year, as in Trela-Whalley. An

assumed time horizon of 40 years for labour relocating to different industries is used, on the

grounds that young workers with the majority of their working life ahead of them are most

likely to be those who move in response to a trade or other shock. Thus, in maldng

decisions to move between sectors workers compare the income differential from relocation

over a 40-year working life to the once-and-for-all adjustment cost. The period assumed for

the equilibrium analysis is, therefore, the remaining length of the working life for relocating

labour (assumed to be 40 years). We also make the strong assumption that the economy has

fully adjusted to past disturbances, and thus a]] intersectoral factor movements due to

previous distuibances have been completed. This implies that relative to the benchmark

equilibrium, no adjustment occurs if there are no policy changes or external shocks.

       We also need to specify what it costs one U.S. worker to move from one sector to

another. We assume that all workers laid off due to trade shocks are, on average, out of

work for the same period. We use two alternative estimates of duration of unemployment:

31 weeks (see Bale (1976)), and 52 weeks.      Other components of adjustment costs, such as

retraining and relocation costs, are not included in these transaction requirements estimates.

       We discount incomes and expenditures in our 1988 data set over the assumed 40

years' time horizon using a 10 percent discount rate. This is used for wages, capital income,




    'Jacobsen (1978)   and   de Melo and Tan (1988) use a duration of unemployment estimate
of six months.
                                                   17

 sales,   intermediate costs, imports, exports, and final demand expenditures, making the strong

assumption that there is no growth over the period. Once the benchmark equilibrium da set

has been constructed, calibration proceeds in the same form as in Shoven and
                                                                             .Wballey
(1992). The model is then solved in counterfactual mode, using the MPS/GEsolution

software code developed by Thomas Rutherford of the University of Colorado.

          The models described above can be used to calculate welfare, trade, and other effects

occurring from elimination of quotas and tariffs on U.S. imports. In the model variant with

adjustment costs endogenously determined, welfare effects (measured using a Hicksian

Equivalent Variation) are already net of adjustment costs, which are given by the value of

transactions services used. In the other model variant, adjustment costs are calculated by

applying assumed unemployment duration to the labour reallocations implied by the model.

Welfare impacts of the policy change yielded by the model do not reflect the adjustment costs

estimated extraneously in this way.

          Table I reports estimates of adjustment costs under the two approaches for the
removal of U.S. quotas and tariffs (on all products imported from all regions). Estimates

using the general equilibrium model without the explicit treatment of adjustment costs arc

shown under model      1   in columns I and II, while those using the model incorporating

adjustment costs are shown under model 2 under columns In and IV. Columns I and m

assume that the earnings losses of displaced workers continue for 31 weeks, while columns H

and IV assume they continue for 52 weeb. In all four model variants, the time horizon of

migrating workers is assumed to be 40 years.
                                             18

                                           Table 1

               Adjustment Effects of Removing U.S. Quotas and Tariffs
                          on all Products from all Regions in
                Alternative Variants of the Trela.Whalley (1993) Model


                                    Model Variant 1             Model Variant 2

                                    Full Equilibrium        Esthnates Using Model
                              Plus Duration Estimates
                                                            With_Adjustment Costs
                                    i                n         m             iv
                              (31 weeks        (52 weeks    (31 weeks     (52 weeks
                              duration)'       duration)1   duration)'    duration)'
             U.S.
            Costs
                                    7.7           13.0          6.8          10.4


See text for further explanation.
                                                19

       Results in Table 1 show how adjustment costs using conventional full equilibrium

duration methods are overestimated compared to an equilibrium approach using endogenous

adjustment costs. The full equilibrium duration estimate of adjustment costs is $7.7 billion in

column I, and $13.0 billion in column II. In contrast, $6.8 billion and $10.4 billion are lost

to adjustment costs in results in columns UI and IV.

       In Table 2, we show the effects on sectoral wage rates of removing U.S. quotas and

tariffs in the model variant with endogenous transactions costs. In the results reported in

column I (31-week duration assumed), the expanding sectors are agriculture, local autos,

transplant autos, manufacturing, crude oil and petroleum, and others, while steel and textiles

are the contracting sector. Unchanged sectors include services. These sectoral

characteristics arc reflected in the dispersion of wages rate changes across sectors. Similar

results are exhibited in column II (52-week duration), except there is less intersectoral

movement of labour.
                                 20
                              Table 2

    Effects on Sectoral Wages' of Removing U.S. Quotas and
             Tariffs on all Products from aU Regions
                            (In percent)

                                Estimates Using Model Variant
                                    With Adjustment Costs
                                         I             n:
                                 (31 weeks         (52 weeks
                                  duration)         duration)
Agriculture                       0.4                0.7
Steel                             -s.i              -8.5
U.S. Autos                        0.4                0.7
Transplant Autos                  0.4                0.7
Textiles                          -5.1              -8.5
Manufactures                      0.4               0.7
Crude Oil                         0.4               0.7
Services                          0.3               0.3
Others                            0.4               0.7


Relative to the consumer price index.
                                              21

V.     Conclusion

       This paper discusses the calculation of adjustment costs in models where adjustment

costs are not explicitly incorporated. We emphasize differences between models which do

not explicitly incorporate adjustment costs, but instead add on a separate calculation of

adjustment costs based on a counterfáctual calculation of a new long-mn equilibrium

following removal of trade barriers, and models which explicitly model such adjustments.

We argue that the former tend to over-estimate adjustment costs, while the latter explicitly

calculate induced dispersion in wage rates. We present a computational procedure for the

explicit analysis of such adjustment costs, and present calculations based on a model of the

U.S. economy which we use to analyze the potential effects of eliminating U.S. tariff and

quota restrictions. Model results show both that existing calculations tend to overestimate

adjustment costs (since with endogenous adjustment costs more workers move), and that in

models with adjustment costs dispersion in sectoral wage rates accompanies adjustment.
                                             22

                                       Bibliography

Arm.i.ngton, P.S. (1969). "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of

       Production." international Money Fund Staff Papers 16, pp.159-76.
Baldwin, R., J. Mutti, and D. Richardson (1980). "Welfare Effects on United States of a

       Significant Multilateral Tariff Reduction." Journal of international Economics 10,

      pp.405-23.

Bale, M.D. (1976). "Estimates of Trade-Displacement Costs for US Workers." Journal of

       international Economics 6 (August), pp.245-SO.

Broadie, M. (1983). "OCTASOLV User's Guide, Systems Optimization Laboratory

       Technical Report." Department of Operations Research, Stanford University, pp.83-
       9.

Cline, W. et a!. (1978). Trade Negotiations in the Tokyo Round: A Quantitative

      Assessment. Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

de Melo, I. and D. Tan (1988). "Wdfire Costs of U.S. Quotas in Textiles, Steel and

       Autos," Paper presented at a General Equilibrium Trade Policy Modelling

       Conference held on March 24, 1988, University of Western Ontario, London,

       Canada.

Foley, D. (1970). "Economic Equilibrium with Costly Marketing." Journal of Economic

       Theory 2, pp.2-91.

Jacobsen, L. (1978). "Earnings Losses of Workers Displaced from Manufacturing

       Industries" in W. Dewald (ed.), The impact of International Trade and investment on

       Employment. U.S. Department of Labour.
                                            23

MerriU, 0.11. (1972). "Applications and Extensions of an Algorithm that Computes Fixed

       Points of Certain Upper Semi-Continuous Point to Set Mappings." Ph.D.

      dissertation, Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Michigan.

Nguyen T. and 3. Whailey (1986). "Equilibrium Under Price Controls with Endogenous

      Transactions Costs." Journal of Economic Theoiy 39, pp.290-300.

Shoven, J. and 3. Whalley (1992). Applying Genera! Equilibrium. Cambridge University

      Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Trela, I. and I. Whalley (forthcoming). "Differences Between Explicit and Ad Valorem

      Barrier Representations in Analysis of the Effects of North American Economic

      Integration." The World Economy.

van der Laan, (3. and 3.3. Talman (1979). "A Restart Algorithm for Computing Fixed

      Points Without an Extra Dimension." Mathematical Programming 17, pp.74-84.
