                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PUBLIC PENSION GOVERNANCE
                               AND PERFORMANCE




                                     Olivia S. Mitchell
                                      Ping Lung Hsin




                                 Working Paper No. 4632




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  January 1994


A draft of this paper was presented at the January 1994 American Economic Association
meetings (Boston, Massachusetts). This version will be presented at the January 1994
Conference on "Mandatory Pensions: Funding, Privatization, and Macroeconomic Policy"
(Santiago, Chile). The authors acknowledge research support from the Public Sector
Management and Private Sector Development Division, Country Economics Department of
the World Bank; The Wharton School; and the ILR School at Cornell University.
Conclusions and interpretations are those of the authors and do not reflect official Bank or
University policy, nor that of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Useful comments
were offered by Gary Fields, Estelle James, Robert Palacios, and Don Snyder, as well as from
colleagues at the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute meetings and the
Department of Economics at the University of Pennsylvania. Do not quote without
permission of the authors. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Aging, Asset
Pricing, and Labor Studies.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4632
                                                                               January 1994


                             PUBLIC PENSION GOVERNANCE
                                 AND PERFORMANCE

                                         ABSTRACT

       This paper investigates the determinants of public sector pension plan investment and
funding behavior. Its goal is to draw lessons which may be used to improve the design and
governance of public pensions. Plan performance is related to characteristics of the pension
systems' governance structure and authority, using a new survey of U.S. state and local public
pension plan governance practicesand performance outcomes.
       The study suggests that most large public pension systems funded their plans satisfactorily
in 1990, but some did not. Better public pension funding was associated with a pension system
having in-house actuaries and when pension Board members were required to carry liability
insurance. In contrast, public pension funding was lower when states experienced fiscal stress,
and when employees were represented on the pension system Board. Pension funding did not
appear sensitive to statutes guaranteeing benefits or funding levels, nor by the ability of states
to carry budget deficits from one year to the next. The results also suggest that public pension
Boards having more retiree-Trustees experienced lower investment returns, as did public sector
pension plans required to devote a portion of their assets to in-state investments. Returns did not
differ depending on whether a pension Board had in-house, or external money managers.
       No single set of pension plan management practices can optimize plan performance for
all systems across all time periods. Nevertheless, these results suggest that care must be taken
when designing the regulatory and investment environment in which these plans operate.

Olivia S. Mitchell                                                 Ping Lung Hsin
Department of Insurance and Risk Management                        ILR School
The Wharton School                                                 Cornell University
University of Pennsylvania                                         Ives Hall
307 Colonial Penn Center                                           Ithaca, NY 14853
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
          Public Pension Governance and Performance

       The cost of supporting retirees has risen quickly in both developed and developing nations,
and promises to become ever greater in decades to come. Policymakers seek to prepare for these

costs by designing better functioning pension plan structure.s. An item at the top of the policy

agenda is to improve public pension plan investment and funding performance. This paper
examines public sector pension plais in the United States, asking why some plans appear to have
been well-managed and what structural design features are associated with good pension

management outcomes.
       The two pension plan performance outcome measures of central interest in this paper are

the yields on public pension system assets, and the public pension plans' funding status.
Investment performance is important since higher yields reduce the need for additional taxes to
support current and future retirees. Pension funding is important since better funded plans stand a
better chance of having assets on hand to pay promised benefits. This study relates these two

pension plan outcomes to a variety of features characterizing each pension system's governance
structure and authority, reporting requirements, and other factors affecting the environment in
which the pension funds operate. A new data set on more than 200 state and local public sector

plans in the U.S. is used to examine the relationship between public sector plan performance and

management practices, seeking to draw lessons which might improve the design and governance of
public pensions here and in other countries.

        Section 1 of the paper develops several hypotheses regarding public pension plans
investment performance and pension governance, while Section II examines determinants of

funding patterns. Empirical analysis in Section ifi suggests that public plan investment
performance and funding outcomes are linked to characteristics of the pension Board itself, and

also to public sector mandates regarding investment and asset allocation. Section IV tests the

sensitivity of the results to alternative empirical specifications. Finally, Section V draws lessons




Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
  from this rescarch for policymakers in other countries, in the expectation that they may benefit

  from the experience of public pension plans in the United States.


 I. The Determinants of Public Pension Investment Performance

           Often referred to as "public employee retirement systems" (PERS), retirementsystems
 established for individuals employed by state and local governments have become large and
 powerful institutions in the last three decades. Typically these are defined benefitpension plans,
 which provide workers an annual benefit accrual (usually a function of pay and years of service).
 This accrual converts into a retirement annuity payment when the employee attains a specified age
 and service under the plan. Recent surveys show that there are approximately 2,400 public

 pension systems in the U.S., covering about 10 million full-time public sectoremployees and
 about 3 million pension beneficiaries -- mainly employees of state and local governreents, and

 often teachers and other school employees, police and firefighters, judges, correctional officers,

 and other public servants (see Table l).1 These plans pay relatively generous benefit levels

 amounting to 40% of pre-retirement pay at relatively young retirement ages; usually PERS
 retirement benefits are at least partially indexed to inflation.

         Benefit promises which accrue under PERS plans are liabilities that thesponsor is expected
 to pay retirees at some future date. Practice varies as to whether public employers back up these

promises by making payments to a segregated pension trust fund, which are then invested to

generate eventual benefit payments. Many PERS plans have succeeded in amassing substantial
funds: in the U.S., public pensions held about $730 billion at the end of the 1980's, accounting
for 5% of the country's total financial assets, 13% of all domestic bonds, and
                                                                                           almost 8% of all
domestic equities (Hoffman and Mondejar 1992).

         A major responsibility of those charged with managing public sector pensions is to direct
the investment of these assets. Research suggests that PERS funds have been managed somewhat


1Excluded from the PERS designation are national
                                                   military and federal government employee plans, as well as
federal Social Security old-age pensions. These plans are, for the most part, unfunded systems.


Mnchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance -
                                                               115/94
differently from those in private sector pensions. Thus until 1960, corporate equities constituted
only a negligible fraction of state and local plan assets, while government securities and corporate

bonds were much more heavily favored than private plans (see Table 2). This pattern of asset

holdings was in part motivated by state and local government rules prohibiting pension managers
from investing in what were perceived to be "risky' assets including equity, venture capital, and

foreign holdings.
        Though these strictures have diminished in the last decade, yields on public pension fund

assets have frequently been low, with public plans earning rates of return substantially below those

of other pooled funds and often below leading market indices.2 Tables 3 and 4 demonstrate this
for the period 1968-86 as well as more recently, when state and local pension plans reported

annual returns averaging 11.1% while bonds rose by 15.5% and securities by 13.9%.
        One explanation for why public plan investment yields are often low is that they are
operated according to principles different from those adopted in the private sector. Specifically,
many public pensions are managed by staff which must respond to political as well as economic
incentives and pressures. A typical public system is governed by a Board of Directors comprised
of eight members, on average, with three elected members, three appointed members (often by the
Governor), and two serving ex officio (eig. the State Treasurer, the superintendent of schools,
etc). Those elected to public pension Boards are frequently active employees, which is quite
uncommon in the private sector; in addition, in many cases retired workers are also included as

Board members (Zorn 1991).

        Because public pension Boards are often managed by political appointees and covered
pension members, it is possible that the Boards select investments different from those chosen by

nonpension money managers competing in the capital market. There is little direct evidence on this

point in the public sector, but pension participants in the private sector appear to invest more

conservatively than do professional pension managers (EBRI 1993). Hence it is hypothesized that

2For a discussion of studies on this topic see Beebower and Bergstrom (1977); Berkowitz et al (1986); Brinson et a!.
(1986); Grinbtan and Titman (1989); Ippotito (1989); and McCarthy and Turner (1992).


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance -    1/5194
                                                                                                                    4



 better performance from public pensions could be observed when public systems manage their

 funds professionally, instead of relying on former or current employees.

         Another way that pension governance structures might alter PERS investment yields is that
 Board authority varies a great deal across public pension plans, depending on laws which
                                                                                                         vary
 from state to state, and also depending on custom and tradition. For example, some PERS Boards

have a great deal of responsibility for investment decisions, they control actuarial inflation and

 interest rate assumptions, and direct the system's reporting practices. In othercases, external
professional money managers and actuaries manage investments and reporting, leaving day-to-day
benefit payments and record-keeping functions to the Board. The latter tasks are substantial: public

sector pension plans reported an average of 42,000 active members per plan and $2.8 billion in
assets, with annual administrative costs totalling about 1-4% of assets.3 Large plans can service
many of these needs in-house, employing on the average one staff member per 1,000 plan
participants. Smaller plans are more likely to use external actuarial, legal, and accounting firms,
and frequently employ professional money managers and/or investment consultants (Zorn 1991).
         When private sector pension systems manage their benefits administration and investment
in-house, researchers have found substantial evidence of economies of scale in larger plans
(Mitchell and Andrews 1981). It is therefore possible that larger public pension plans might also

experience higher yields than would smaller plans, though these scale economies could be captured
in smaller plans by hiring external professional money managers and consultants. In addition to

size, investment style could lead to performance differences: for example, Top 10 performance

group money managers apparently earn higher yields, though Lakonishok et al. (1991, 1992)
suggest that net returns are equalized after commissions. Below the analysis controls on plan size
and whether plans use investment managers in the Top 10 performance group.
         In addition to management style, the literature suggests that additional factors can affect

pension asset performance. For example recent studies indicate that net investment returns in the

3See Mitchell, Sunden, Hsin and Reid (1993) for a discussion of administrative costs in US public pension plans.
and Sunden and Mitchell (1993) for costs in the US Social Security system. Valdes Prieto (1993)
                                                                                                 compares private
and public plan& adminstratjve costs in four nations.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                     5




private sector are sometimes reduced when investment managers are subjected to frequent

performance reviews. This is because of a principal/agent problem: money managers sometimes
structure their portfolios to meet short-run objectives at the cost of long-run goals.4 In the public

sector context, PERS Boards using external money managers subject to frequent valuations might
face lower net rates of return than systems using only in-house managers, particularly if they are

evaluated relatively infrequently (ceteris paribus). Thus the empirical analysis of pension asset
yields must control not only on who is managing the portfolio, but also on how often they report

how they are doing.
        Pension plan asset performance clearly depends on other factors in addition to the ones just
described, with perhaps the most important one being the fund's portfolio mix. As noted earlier,
public plans tend to hold fewer stocks than do private pensions, in part because the federal
government requires private pension fiduciaries to invest in a well-diversified portfolio of assets
chosen for traditional financial reasons. Furthermore, ERISA regulations governing private plans

specifically require pension fiduciaries to behave according to generally accepted financial
principles, a philosophy summarized as the "prudent man rule". In the public pension arena, no
federal legislation controls PERS investment pattems. As a result there are no legal constraints on
those who wish to deploy public pension assets for nontraditional investment purposes, and

several groups have become increasingly vocal.5 For example, the Governor of New York argues

that public pension assets be loaned advantageously to firms "conducting business" within his
state. Other states have asked their pension fund managers to only invest in so-called

"economically targeted" or "socially responsible" companies (defined variously as firms which do
not pollute, companies headquartered in-state, etc). While these unconventional investment



4This has been called "window-dressing" at year end so as not to be seen holding "losers (Benartzi and Thaler 1992.
and Laknonishok et al. 1991 and 1992).
51n the United States, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ER.ISA) requires private sector
pension plan assets to be managed according to prudent and conservative investment practice. and furthermore holds
plan trustees personally responsible for the plan's investment practices. However ERISA does not cover PERS
plans. and efforts to extend national regulation to state and local pensions have been challenged by those who believe
that this would undermine states' taxing authority; see Munnell (1983).


Mitchell and Hsin . Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                        6



 practices have their appeal, retirees and active workers have expressed concern that their
                                                                                           pension
 assets may earn low returns, and perhaps be insufficiently diversified.6
          These differences in PERS investment practices imply that publicpension plan returns may

 vary because of strictures placed on the plans by the political process, strictures whichmay not be
 in evidence in privately-run pension plans. As a result,empirical analysis of PERS performance
 must take into account the risk characteristics of the pension portfolio, whether investorsoperate
 under constraints such as ceilings on bond or stock holding, rules requiring fiduciaries to diversify
 their portfolios in a manner which might be deemed "prudent" by impartial financial experts. or

 requirements that money must be directed to "socially acceptable" ventures. If these stricturesare
 effective, they may lower returns and/or increase risk.


 IL The Determinants of Public Sector Pension Funding Practices
          Federal law in the United States requires private-sector pension plan sponsors to explicitly

 recognize their accumulating pension liabilities, arid then to set aside contributions inan orderly
 fashion so as to build up assets sufficient to meet benefit promises when workers retire. The

rationale for full pension funding in the private sector is that sponsoring companies may go

bankrupt, and unless the pension plan has received assets sufficientto cover benefit promises,
retirees could face curtailed or terminated benefit payments.7

         In the public sector, pension funding practice has been much more variable, both in the
U.S. and elsewhere. This is partly because many deem the risk of government bankruptcy to be

low, and thus less persuasive as a rationale for prefunding. As a result, partially-funded or

compietely unfunded (pay-as-you-go or PAYGO) plans have been the norm for most developed

and many developing nations around the world (James 1993). At the state level in the U.S.,


6See tot instance Goldman, Sachs (1993), New
                                                   York State Industrial Cooperation Council (1989, 1990), New York
Retired Public Employees Association (1989), and Snell and Wolfe (1990).
7Cessation of benefits has become less likely since ERISA
                                                             regulations established a government insurance agency
for private sector defined benefit private pensions. On the oUier hand the pension insurance agency is not completely
stable financially, and the risk of private pension underfunding is now borne primarily by groups other than those
retirees in the underfunded plan; see Gustman and Mitchell (1992).


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance. 1/5/94
                                                                                                       7




funding practices also vary: m some cases state laws require prefunding for accumulating pension
liabilities, but in other cases they do not. (For constitutional reasons, the Federal government has

not regulated state-level public pensions; see Munnell 1983).
       Despite the PAYGO tradition, there are several arguments in support of substantial pension
prefunding in the public sector. Funds invested earn the pension plan investment income which
"can substantially reduce the employer's ultimate payment for such benefits" (Bleakney 1972: 16);
this may take on special urgency gi'i/en the aging of the public sector workforce over the next

decades (Mitchell 1991). Also, underfunded pensions impose an implicit future liability on
taxpayers, reducing states' and localities' ability to raise funds in other ways (Epple and Schipper

1981). Public sector retiree income security might also be threatened by underfunding; indeed

some public employees have sought to offset the risk of underfunded pension promises by

demanding higher pay (Inman 1982, 1986; Mitchell and Smith 1994 forthcoming; Smith 1981).

Finally, some analysts argue that PAYGO systems decrease savings and impose politically
unpalatable redistributive burdens across cohorts (James 1993).

        Despite these arguments favoring prefunding of benefit promises, public sector pension
plans have typically accumulated fewer assets relative to benefits than do their private sector

counterparts (see Table 5). During the 1980's many public employers contributed less to their
public employees' pension accounts than they were required to (according to actuarial
computations), in part because public tax collections fell in American states and cities during the

recession. As a result, some public pensions became (or grew more) underfunded, meaning that
plan assets were insufficient to cover benefits promised to retirees. A study of 1989 data showed
that state and local employer pension contributions were about 10-15% below target, and the
pattern of shortfall was most persistent for systems where unemployment was higher than it had
been for some time. This effect persisted even when controlling for habit persistence, holding

constant past cumulative funding levels (Mitchell and Smith 1992, forthcoming 1994). Therefore
a full analysis of funding must take into account the possibility that fiscal stress undermines PERS

plans financial stability.

Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                         S




           The structure of PERS Boards can also affect pension funding. One possibility is that
 Board comprised of pension-covered members may meet funding requirements more promptly
 than one heavily weighted with political appointees.8 Working counter to this hypothesis is the

 lact that pension funding is an extremely complex and difficult area, which active and retired
 workers may he unable to fully scrutinize. Lack of adequate technical training combines with

 conservatism regarding investment risk, on top of which is the fact that pension participants

 typically have very poor understanding of their plan's rules and features (Mitchell 1988) For this
 reason, having professional representatives on the PERS Board could improve funding, especially

 as compared to relatively nontechnical pension participants. Which effect dominates is anempirical
 matter.

           In addition to Board composition, other PERS management practices can also influence

 funding outcomes directly. Specifically, some systems use in-house staff actuaries, increasing
 funding if these staffers are relatively free from political suasion, but decreasing it otherwise.
 When the PERS Board is required to authorize benefit increases, rather than simply passing on
 increases negotiated by state and local employees independently, this could translate into higher
 funding rates -- after all, authorization to provide future benefits would be required from those

managing the funding process. It is also worth investigating whether funding is improved when
Board members have liability insurance, which if true suggests that the private insurance market

may enforce funding stringencies on PERS Boards when political tensions pull in other directions.
         Another set of factors influencing funding may be the reporting requirements to which

pension managers respond. While public pension accounting practice embraces some common

assumptions and standards across states and localities, the remaining differences make it difficult to

compare public plan investment performance and funding outcomes in some cases. Thisproblem

 8Elements of this were present in the court case recently filed by California state retirees, who protested the
Governor's effort to reduce state budget deficits by raising the public pension plan's assumed interest rate from 8.5%
to 9.5%. Retirees contended that "manipulating the rate of return
                                                                      on plan investments, though within legally
'reasonable limits', can substantially reduce employer contributions to the point where a pension plan can be
substantially underfunded and put at high risk." (Hemmerick 1991b: 39). When the existing PERS Board refused to
implement the Governor's proposal, he then moved to dissolve the old Board and construct a new Board more
receptive to his proposals.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                     9




has been recognized by many pension analysts over the years, and is slowly being remedied by the

Governmental Accountmg Standards Board which is devising a framework for public pension

financial reporting (GASB 1992). The majority of large state and local plans now conform to
GASB Statement No. 5 (GASB 1986) which specifies that public pension plans must report assets

at market value, and liabilities measured according to a concept known as the Pension Benefit

Obligation (PBO).9 As a result of this increasing standardization, it is now much more likely that
stock funding ratios are accurate, by which is meant that pension assets are correctly computed as a
fraction of liabilities. This contrasts with practice a decade ago when most PERS plans reported
assets at cost, and used a variety of different methods to compute liability measures (Schmitt et ai.
1991 . Despite this progress, a cross-plan analysis of funding still requires paying attention to

different approaches used in reporting assets and funding.

         Along the same lines, it might be expected that more frequent reporting would tend to
induce standardization, so that better funding would be expected of a PERS required to report to its

sponsoring employer and participating members more often. Audits and actuarial valuations are
also carried Out at different intervals, and the reporting standards themselves vary. These different

reporting methods may simply affect data quality without altering investment and funding

performance, but many fear they have more potent effects altering plan outcomes materially. These
cross-plan differences should be controlled in empirical analysis, and examined to see if they
influence PERS funding outcomes materially.

         Other variations in pension reporting are also important, particularly in the case where flow
funding measures are considered, where flow funding is defined as the ratio of annual actual

employer contributions, to annual required contributions. Variations in flow funding measures are



9The PBO includes five types of prospective pension liabilities as noted in Mitchell and Smith (1992): benefits
pledged to currently retired employees, benefits pledged to vested terminated employees (based on past service and
salary levels), benefits payable to vested active employees (based on current service and sa'ary), benefits payable to
non-vested active employees who may vest in the future, and benefits that will be earned by current workers resulting
from future salary increases. The plan's PRO changes over time reflecting new expected benefit accruals; these yearly
accruals are termed the plan's "normal cost." To be actuarially sound, the employers annual contributions to the
plan must be meet normal cost         to amortize any past unfunded pension liabilities.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                       10




 due in part to laws governing pension funding practices which differ across states.'0 A related
 problem arising in the reporting context arises when a system uses the PBO measure to report

 GASB-sanctioned funding measures, but uses some other actuarial method to compute annual
 required employer contributions. It is possible that a plan would then appear well funded by the
 officially recommended PBO measure, but would be less than fully funded by the systems own
 accounting measure.11 As a consequence, it is important to investigate whether differences in
 funding patterns are related to different methods of computing liabilities for reporting, versus for
 funding, purposes.

          Funding differences may also result from other factors. In computing pension obligations,
 for instance, actuaries employ a variety of assumptions to compute promised future benefits.
 Unbiased estimates of the factors of central interest require that theseassumptions be controlled in

the empirical analysis, by including plan-specific estimates ofexpected future price and wage
increases, assumed discount rates and retirementages, integration of benefits with Social Security,

whether benefit levels were guaranteed by law, and portability of pension accruals. Pension

systems also have some leeway with regard to their past service liability amortization period, which
refers to the time period over which unfunded pension promises from the past are covered from

current contributions. Since it is possible that poorly funded plansstrategically select an
amortization period to improve the funding report, this too should be controlled on in a multivariate

funding analysis.

         To this list of pension funding determinants must be joined several indicators of the
regulatory and fiscal environment in which PERS Board members make funding decisions. Most

 t0As an example, fire and police pension plans in Portland, Oregon are govererned by a law which sets the public
employers annual contribution rates as a fraction of payroll, and this contribution rate is generally met.
Consequently the pension financial statement indicates that the employer's actual contributions are exactly equal to
required contributions, resulting in a flow funding rate of 100%. In fact, however, the system is operated on a
PAYGO basis; the flow funding figure reported by this plan does not represent the actuarial figures that the
accounting standards profession would prefer under its proposed reporting rules.
  1This has apparently octurred in several instances over the last two years, where employers were able to
dramatically cut their contributions after converting to new actuarial methods consistent with the PBO measure. For
a discussion of recent efforts by numerous public employers to change public pension funding patterns see Durgin
(1991). Employee Benefit Plan Review (1991), Hemmerik (1991 a and b), Price (1991), Shine (1991), and
Verhovek (1990).


Mitchell and }lsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                       11




obviously linked the pension funding outcome is the existence of state-level legally mandated
funding requirements. One would anticipate that if such law is binding, it would enhance funding
in those states. A variant of this point is that states experiencing severe fiscal stress tend to reduce

funding, suggesting that this too should be taken into account in multivariate analysis. Based on
previous work, we include a variable indicating fiscal stress, which is the deviation of the State's
unemployment rate from its long term trend (Mitchell and Smith 1994 forthcoming). It is
anticipated that greater fiscal stress would reduce funding, perhaps offset if contributions are
derived from a special or dedicated tax. In addition other "political economy variables" are

explored including an indicator of whether a state has a balanced budget requirement, to assess
whether pension underfunding serves as a "safety valve" in cases where the balanced budget rule is
taken seriously. Finally, there may be differences in plan participants' ability to exact full funding
rates, so it is important to control for the presence of unionized employees and teachers.


III. Empirical Analysis of Public Pension Yields and Funding
        The data used for empirical analysis are obtained from a cross sectional survey of 201
pension systems conducted in 1991, covering a total of 269 separate retirement plans. The
PENDAT file created from this survey was provided by the Government Finance Officers'
Association (Zorn 1991). As of this writing, there is no larger, more up-to-date, and more
representative survey of state and local pension plans in the country; the federal government

collects no centralized information of this type (though many have suggested it should).
        Respondent systems included in the PENDAT file represented 73% of state and local active

pension plan participants, and 71% of state and local plan assets in 1990 (Zorn 1991). These
systems represent the vast majority of the PERS-covered population, but are not necessarily

representative of all plans since they are among the largest in the nation, and probably better
managed and funded than many smaller plans; as a consequence, interpretation of results must bear
this caveat in mind. PERS plans responding to the survey accounted for about a tenth of the

estimated universe of State and local pension plans nationally.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 115194
                                                                                                                    12




         The PENDAT datafile is quite extensive, including variables reflecting all aspects of the
 systems management, investment, and funding practices as well as plan participant and benefit
     es2 The indicator of investment performance is used as a dependent variable for the
 multivariate analysis (actual investment yield rates) and two measures of pension funding -- stock
and flow funding patterns.

           Taking the investment outcomes first, two different approaches were chosen to measure
 public system's asset performance. Virtually all PERS report one datum for 1990 --that year's
 total portfolio return (referred to below as YIROR). Most also reported their annualizedaverage

 return over the period 1986-1990 (referred to below as Y5ROR). Both performance variables are

reported in nominal dollars (the analysis therefore assumes that all plans experienced identical
inflation rates). The fact that the investment yield is averaged over the 5-year span makes it

impossible to compute traditional measures of pension performance variability over time; estimates
of this concept must await development of panel data.

         Two dependent variables were developed for the funding analysis. The concept which best

captures a plan's stock funding rate in the PENDAT survey expresses pension plan assets as a
fraction of the Pension Benefit Obligation, and for ease of reference this stockfunding measure is
termed AST PBO. An alternative measure focuses on the plan's current funding practices, a

concept captured here as FLOWFUND, or the ratio of actual to required employer contributions
for the year.

          Explanatory variables in the analysis are grouped into five main categories: pension Board

composition, Board management practices, investment practices, reporting requirements and
assumptions, and other factors which reflect regulations at the state level governing budget and


 '2When there were missing data, this was handled in several ways. Serious reporting errors in pension statistics
were rechecked with the PERS plan representatives directly. A complete list of data checks thus generated is
available from the author on request. For example the stock funding ratio for Wisconsin was listed in the dataset as
 1300%. which the plan representative indicated was incorrect. In the case of missing observations for some of the
explanatory variables used in regression models, the variable in question was assigned a value of 0, and concurrently
the missing value dummy variable was set to 1. Missing data on the dependent variable (e.g. investment
performance or funding) suggested the use of sample selection models to determine whether systems which did report
their funding and investment yields had better (or worse) than average outcomes; see Section IV.


Mitchell and Hsin- Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                   13




funding practices. Controls are also included for plan size, type of plan and covered employees,
and in some cases portfolio composition is incorporated on the grounds that plans with less risky
holdings will have lower returns.

         Most of these variables were directly derived from the PENDAT file, but outside sources
were used in a few instances. The variable called TOP 10MG indicates whether the pension system

used a money manager in the Top 10 performance group as identified by Lakonishok ci al (1992).

The term UNEMPD represents the degree of fiscal stress experienced by the state proxied by the
deviation of the unemployment rate in 1990 from the mean of the previous nine years: previous

analysts suggest that this type of fiscal stress reduces funding possibilities (Mitchell and Smith
1994 forthcoming). The variable DEFPOS is also derived from outside sources, and indicates
whether a state is permitted to carry over a budget deficit from one year to the next Public pension

funding may be seen as an off-budget safety-valve, relieving the pressure of having to meet state
balanced budget requirements. Hence pensions may be better funded when state budget deficits
can be carried through time, while underfunding may prevail more often when state budgets must
be balanced, by law, at year's end.13
         Summarizing this discussion in a multivariate framework, the following model is
postulated:

         (1)     Y1=at+alX1+a2X2+a3X3+a4X÷a5Z÷el
         (2)     Y2=bO+bl X1+b2X2+b3X3+b4X4+b5Z+e2
where Y1 represents a vector of variables reflecting public pension investment performance; Y2
represents a vector of funding variables; X1 - X4 represent vectors of variables reflecting pension

Board composition, Board management practices, investment practices, reporting requirements and

 '31f there is a link between state balanced budget laws and pension finding. it probably arises when state pension
contribuuons are allowed to fluctuate depending on state budget needs, affording politicians on off-budget method of
achieving compliance with balanced budget requirements. This can happen since most state budgets typically do not
include public pension systems in their regular budget reports. It is has not yet been determined whether the safety-
valve argument is empirically important. Certainly balanced budget mandates are widespread: a majority of states
(44) have balanced budget laws on the books, and most of these (37) require the governor to sign a balanced budget
(NASBO 1992). Only 13 states permit the governor to carry over a. I't'dget deficit from one year to the next,
providing flexibility which might obviate the need to use the public pension. This latter stance is deemed "most
sthngent" by NASBO, is represented in the DEFPOS variable developed for this study.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 115194
                                                                                                                      14




assumptions: and Z represents a vector of other factors including state regulations governing

budget and funding practices, controls for plan size, type and in some cases portfolio composition.
In this section the disturbance terms are assumed to be distributed normally with zero mean: in

Section IV this assumption and others, are discussed in more detail.


Evidence on the Investment Performance of State and Local Pension Systems

         In 1990, the annual investment yield reported by the 168 PERS systems was 7.7% (see the

appendix Table). This compares favorably with market data showing a +6.8% return for securities
that year, and with the 1990 inflation rate of 6.1%. However, not all plans performed this well--
one plan reported a -5.5% return that year, while at the other extreme a plan reported a yield of
+24.5%. This range is almost certainly dueto different portfolio composition patterns across the

plans: in the market as a whole, the +6.8% return for securities that year was offset by an average
3.2% yield on bonds, which suggests the importance of holding constant the portfolio composition
of pension plans when comparing their investment yields (see Figure 1). A narrower frequency
distribution of pension yields characterizes Y5ROR, returns averaged over the period 1986-1990
(see Figure 2). Across the 128 plans reporting the figure averaged 11.6%, with the lowest return
reported of -2.5% and the highest being 31%. The overall mean was lower than the annualized

return on bonds for the same period of 13.5%, but exceeded the average stock return of 10.1% as
well as the annualized inflation rate of 33%•l4

         Table 6 provides multivariate regression estimates of equation (1) above, indicating the
determinants of pension plan investment yields. The findings show that the composition of the
public pension Board appears to matter: specifically, yields in 1990 were about 2% lower if
retiree representation on the public pension Boards increased by 10%. This may be the result of
inexpert Board members becoming increasingly activist of late, an explanation buttressed by the
fact that the retiree effect was negative but not statistically significant in the five-year yield

t4 1-year yield reported here differs from Zorn's (1991) 6.9% figure, and the 5-year annualized yield reported here
is lower than Zorns 13.9% figure; Zorn uses the PENDAT file but excludes many plans from the analysis (39 and
53 plans, respectively).


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                   15




equation. This finding is not solely attributable to more conservative investment choices made by
retiree Board members, since the model controls for the overall fractions of the portfolio held in
stocks and bonds.15 Nevertheless, before concluding that retiree participation on pension Boards

is necessarily deleterious, it should be noted that appointed members might also depress asset

yields if they were improperly selected.
        Of the several pension management practice variables used in the investment performance

equations, few had a powerful effect on pension yields. One influential practice was a system's
practice of permitting administrative costs to be charged to investment income (ADINVST), rather

than being covered from state or local budgets directly. This reduced the 5-year average return

figure at statistically significant levels, though the 1990 return was not powerfully affected. Some

state and local systems used outside money managers and financial counsellors, either in concert

with internal management, or exclusively. In any event, plans investing in-house or using external
money managers apparently fared about the same, even if the external managers were drawn from
the "Top 10" group (as identified by Lakonishok et al. 1992))6
        Only a few of the rules regarding investment practices proved to statistically significantly
affect measured outcomes. In no case was the prudent man requirement statistically linked to
returns or investment variability; one explanation is that all pension Boards may defacto follow a
variant of this policy. The data aLso indicated no significant effect of state-mandated limits on

stockholdings on any of the investment performance variables. More serious is the negative return
observed for PERS pensions required to direct a portion of their investments in-state. This policy

is often recommended by those who propose to use pension funds to build a stronger job and Lax
base.'7 Unfortunately, plans following this policy experienced lower investment returns in 1990:
the results imply that 10% more in-state investments are associated with a 1% return. This effect

t5More complex risk adjustments could be undertaken in a ume series analysis, but cannot be undertaken in this
cross-sectional dataset.
 6The PENDAT survey does not indicate whether the systems reported net or gross investment returns, but the
negative significant effcct of ADINVST suggests that the figures given were net of expenses. Other analysts have
suggested that higher gross yields produced by active money managers tend to be equalized after commissions
(Ippolito 1989).
t7See for example Goldman, Sachs (1993).


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                  16




was   not detected using the 1985-90 average return data, but should not be ignored since it may
reflect recent trends which may not have beenobserved in earlier years.

         Two factors used to quantify pension system reporting practices are included in Table 6. It
will be recalled that having independent investment performance analysts and more frequent

performance valuations could be predicted to either improve or depress investment yields,

depending on whether more reporting is seen as beneficial, or harmful (Lakonishok et al. 1991,
1992; Benartzi and Thaler 1992). The data do not support either position, however, since neither

variable iss strongly statistically significant.

         Summarizing findings, some pension governance and management factors did affect yields
in the major public sector plans considered here. Three findings stand Out:
         •Public pension Boards having more retiree-Trustees experienced lower investment returns.
         •Returns did not differdepending on whether a pension Board had in-house, or external
         money managers, even if the external managers were drawn from the "Top 10" group.
         •Public plans required to devote a portion of their assets to state-specific projects earned
         lower returns.

Funding Patterns Among State and Local Pension Plans:

         As noted earlier, many state and local pension plans follow GASB advisory rules when
reporting their pension assets and liabilities. This makes it possible to place some credence in

funding figures, particularly with regard to the ratio of the pension plan's assets to its promised
benefit liabilities (AST_PBO). The stock funding ratio averaged 91% in 1990 (for the 220 plans
reporting; see Figure 3). There is ample evidence of wide dispersion in funding practice: the
minimum stock funding ratio was approximately 0 (for PAYGO plans), and 18 plans were

seriously underfunded, having less than half the assets needed to meet pension obligations.'8 On
the other hand, the maximum funding ratio was 3.2, and a third of the plans had sufficient assets to

meet projected benefits. For this reason the average stock funding rates of more than 90% should
not be taken as evidence that public plans were uniformly well-funded on an accumulated basis.




18Zorn (1991) reports a slightly lower stock funding ratio (89%) but uses a much smaller sample size (30 plans)
from the PENDAT survey.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                   17




        In contrast to stock funding measures, annual funding statistics capture whether the
employer is conthbuting enough each year enough to cover new benefit accruals and amortization

needs from past unfunded obligations. As mentioned earlier, however, there is reason to believe
these annual flow funding figures are biased upward: an employer reporting full compliance with
required contribution levels may sometimes receive monies inadequate to meet eventual benefit

promises. This probably explains why the average FLOWFUND ratio in 1990 was 93% (across
187 plans; see Figure 4). The range'about the mean is large: at one extreme a plan reported

receiving 3.4 times the amount required, while at the other extreme a plan indicated receiving -4.3

times what was required.'9 On the whole, the vast majority (137 of 187 plans) reported receiving
contributions less than 100% of required, suggesting that most public sector employers
contributions did not meet required levels iii 1990.

        Multivariate evidence linking public pension governance and funding patterns according to
equation (2) is summarized in Table 7, where both stock and funding patterns are examined. A
first hypothesis was that public pension Board composition variables are related to stock funding
ratios, and there is support for this position. Specifically, the results show that having more
elected members on the Board lowered PERS funding rates, with retiree-Trustees having a larger
depressing effect.20 No composition effect was found in the flow funding equation, however.

         Pension management practice also proved informative in explaining funding patterns: three
of the four variables used were positively related to stock funding patterns. For instance, the plans
appeared better funded when a PERS had in-house actuaries, and the effect was statistically
significant. Likewise, if the Board was required to authorize actuarial assumptions, stock and flow
funding were higher. There was a positive significant relationship between funding levels and
Board members having liability insurance: perhaps this is due to the increased oversight imposed


19The large negative funding figure was reported by a teachers plan which changed the actuarial method employed in
1990: a court case concluded in 1993 denied the legality of this change.
2011 should be noted that fund tiustees appointed by politicians may not necessarily ensure that the plan is operated
for the sole benefit of the plan participant. For example, the California public employee retirement system sued the
Governor of that state for proposing to replace the 13-member pension board with a newly appointed 9-member
board, as welt as appointing the plan's actuary who agreed to the Governor's actuarial assumptions (Melbinger 1992).


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                            18




by private insurers. (On the other hand, flow funding was negatively related to liability coverage --
which may indicate reverse causality, if plans which underfunded on a flow basis were required to

purchase insurance in order to induce Board members to serve.)

          Pension reporting and assumptions also affected funding outcomes as expected. Pension
systems differed according to the frequency and format of funding reports, and stock funding
ratios were lower where longer amortization periods were selected -- indeed, it is possible that

amortization periods were strategically chosen to improve the funding report. Supporting this view
is the finding that plans which did not report their amortization period were even more seriously

underfunded than average. Clearly it is necessary to standardize on reporting in order to obtain a

clear picture of stock funding practices. Assumptions to compute promised future benefits also
played a role in the empirical analysis: the model included variables indicating expected future

price and wage increases, assumed discount rates and retirement ages, integration of benefits with

Social Security, and portability of pension accruals. Of this set, only the portability factorproved
statistically significant at conventional levels, and was negative. This is probably due to the fact
that asset accruals did not always follow employees who were permitted to take benefit accruals

with them when they changed jobs (usually this is limited to in-state moves). As such, it would be
incorrect to conclude that labor mobility per se reduces stock funding ratios: rather, fundingwas
low when systems permitted mobile workers to claim benefits with no concomitantasset

accumulation hacking up the promise.
         Of the other factors controlled in the empirical funding anaiysis, very few had statistically

significant effects. Somewhat surprising was the null effect of state requirements that pension
plans had to be funded, requirements that benefit levels had to be guaranteed by law, and
requirements that states must balance their budgets from one year to the next. Nor were funding
levels different when dedicated or special taxes were earmarked for pension revenue.21 Employee


21Thus these data do not support Munnell and Ernsbergers (1989) suggestion that commingling
                                                                                            pension funding
with other government budgets may exacerbate funding problems. Those authors also suggested that more
centralization might improve funding, but this hypothesis is difficult to test in practice since centralization can refer
to many different aspects of plan management. Thus. for example, the actuanal assessment may be conducted


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                  19




type (i.e. teachers) and unionization status also had no effect. In fact, only one other variable was
found to systematically and powerfully reduce stock funding: namely, fiscal stress, measured here
by the deviation of recent unemployment from the levels experienced over the last decade. The
effect was substantial, suggesting that a one-point increase in a state's unemployment rate over the

long-run average would depress stock funding by 6 percentage points. This effect is consistent
with previous studies on public plans (Mitchell and Smith 1994, forthcoming), and suggests that
cconomic recessions have long as well as short-term effects on public budgets through pension

plan funding.
        Because the stock funding data are better than the flow funding data, we emphasize those

models and findings. The following conclusions may be drawn:

        •Better public pension funding was associated with a pension system having in-house
        actuaries and when Board members were required to carry liability insurance.
        •Public pension funding was lower when states had experienced fiscal stress, and when
        employees were represented on the pension system Board.
        •Funding did not appear sensitive to statutes guaranteeing benefits, or by legal funding
        requirements, or by the ability of states to cany budget deficits from one year to the next.

IV. Sensitivity of Results
        Several sensitivity tests were conducted to judge the robustness of the results. One concern
has to do with potential endogeneity of prticular variables in the regression equations. For
example, the performance equations included among the vector of control variables the PERS

portfolio mix, because the plan's stock and bond holdings were expected to have affected the
plan's investment performance. Nevertheless it could be argued that a system's 1990 return and
 1990 portfolio mix are probably simultaneously determined, if one had in mind a more general
stnictural system involving expectations over variables not available in the data set. To test this

possibility, these potentially endogenous portfolio composition variables were purged from the
equation and the model re-estimated. This produced estimates virtually identical to those already

reported. In a similar vein, it might be asserted that the pension assumptions in equation (2) are

centrally even though contributions are collected locally, the benefits administration may be managed centrally even
though negotiation over benefits is conducted locally, and so forth.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                20



endogenously determined by politicians setting funding targets. Hence a reduced-form equation
was estimated which excluded pension assumptions from the model. Here too, coefficient
cstimates for the remaining variables were virtually identical to those reported here (results

available on request). Hence it appears that this form of simultaneity does not exert a potent effect
on the outcomes of most interest here, namely the pension governance and authority terms.

        An additional question examined in some detail, but summarized here for the sake of

brevity, pertained to the issue of biased reporting due to selective missing data. This was handled
in two ways. First, if a pension plan had valid data on all but one (or a few) right hand side
variables, the missing datum was assigned a value of 0 and a missing-value indicator was given a

value of 1. This permitted maintenance of sample size due to incomplete reporting for pension
assumptions, in particular. A second approach was taken if the plan lacked a report for a
dependent variable, since this raised a question about whether the data were missing randomly.
Specifically, it might be that that those plans who were performing less well than the market, or
those who were more poorly funded than average, might not be reporting. For this reason, several
models were also estimated accounting for the probability of some plans not reporting investment
yields and funding ratios. In each case, a sample selection term derived from a Probit non-

reporting equation (inverse Mills ratio) was incorporated in the regression equations (1 and 2).
The selection controls proved to be not statistically significant in general, and other coefficient

estimates were quite similar to those reported here (result.; available on request).

        The conclusion from the sensitivity analysis is that the results reported in Tables 6 and 7 are

quite robust to a reasonable range of alternative formulations. They also confirm the important role
of several pension governance features in public pension plan outcomes.22 It must be emphasized
that these behavioral patterns are derived from the data at hand, however, and are not necessarily

representative of those plans excluded from the PENDAT sample. Specifically, the findings are


22Several other models were also examined, including one which entered the state budget deficit variable into the
returns equations. The coefficient was not statistically significant and all other results were unchanged. Also
examined were models where the TOPIMGR term was replaced with a term indicating whether any external money
manager was used, and results were unchanged.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                     21




most applicable to relatively large state-n.m plans. rather thr the smaller local and municipal public
plans covering a few officers or other uniformed public sector workers. As a result, the data are
not yet good enough to know whether these smaller plans have the same problems, and same

strengths. as their larger counterparts.


V. Conclusions and Discussion
        After a decade of strong growth, public pension plans in the United States are at a
crossroads. A few state and local retirement systems are experiencing problems, and some retirees

have experienced cuts in anticipated benefits as a result of these developments. In 1991, for

instance, cost-of-living clauses in California's public pension pian were disallowed, with funds
thus generated earmarked to "r(jU( employer contributions in fiscal year 1992-93 and subsequent
fiscal years until those amounts are depleted" (cited in Melbinger 1992: 23). In the future, if public
fund assets prove too meagre to meet benefit promises. retirees may face other benefit cuts.

        In contrast to problems experienced in pension plans where public employers were subject
to fiscal distress, many public plans have done quite well. The strong capital markets of the

1980's boosted many pension systems' investment portfolios substantially. Increased assets
combined with careful money management and adequate employer contributions covered all or

most of the benefits promised to current and future retirees. This research suggests that better

performance from public pensions can be attained when plans manage their funds and actuarial

computations professionally instead of relying on employee-Trustees, and when they do not limit

their portfolios to local investments.
        These conclusions should be tempered by several considerations. First, additional work is
required to control on portfolio risk characteristics, which have only been partly captured in the
models examined here. Second, future studies should focus more attention on public pension
Board activism and its potential effects on pension plan yields as well as risk. A question which is
only beginning to be asked is whether the social costs of underfunding and below-market return

investments can offset their social benefits. In other words, from a public finance viewpoint,


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                22



'cconomicallv targeted" investments might be justified when the social gains to such investment

outweigh the social costs, taking care to note that the costs ;r.-iude potential retiree insecurity if
public pension underfunding leads to reductions in anticipated benefits. It would be useful to
design and implement such a cost/benefit framework when evaluating public pension asset
allocation and performance practices. In order to do this, time-series data must be collected which
can be examined using a common reporting and accounting framework. Policymakers and
researchers in the United States have begun to recognize this need, and have recommended

standardization of pension data gathering, possibly under the auspices of a federal agency

(Melbinger 1992; Mitchell 1991; Munnell 1983).

         Because pension systems are extremely complex institutions, a single optimal package of
plan practices cannot be identified which is relevant to all systems and across all time periods.
Indeed, this research highlights some of the enormously complicated issues that must be
confronted when seeking to establish funding norms. If near-full funding of public pension plans
is deemed a worthwhile objective, it will be easier to monitor with standardization of pension
reporting practices. This is particularly true of the many assumptions needed to assess a defmed
benefit plans promised obligations. Obtaining this information is often a difficult task, inasmuch
as rules determining pension benefit eligibility and amounts frequently differ from one group of
employees to another and across cohorts. Sometimes benefit and contribution regulations have

internally inconsistent objectives. For all these reasons, it is a fairly laborious task to improve
reporting and disclosure patterns for public plans. The Government Accounting Standards Board
in the U.S. has devoted several years to the development of a standardized framework to be used

for reporting public pension plan liabilities and assets, and their work could be beneficially

reviewed by those seeking improved public pension plan performance.23
         Outside the U.S., it is even more difficult to evaluate pension funding patterns. Data are

often insufficient with which to derive assumptions needed for projecting expected labor force


23Fiscal analysts in other countries may profit from the experiences of public pension managers in the United
States. A checklist of issues which should be considered is contained in Mitchell (1994 forthcoming).


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
patterns, and forecasts of economic trends are also inherently uncertain. Frequently public pension

systems are not computerized, making it quite difficult to track investments and participant data. In
other cases, there may be significant evasion of public pension payroll taxes, which can make
projections of contribution and benefit flows politically disputatious.24
        This discussion raises a more general question: how should public pension policies around
the world he evaluated? Mandated retirement savings programs in most nations are generally
subject to a plethora of government reslrictions -- regarding where the funds can be invested

domestically and whether pension funds can be invested abroad, about the fund's exposure to
inflation and financial market risk, and related questions. Those contemplating mandating

retirement savings programs must recognize that these restrictions are a means of reallocating the
risks of retirement income security between the public and private sectors, which should be

explicitly acknowledged in designing pension funding and investment policy. Whether the social
costs of such programs offset their social benefits should be a question explicitly addressed.
        A way to reframe this question is to ask why many U.S. state and local public pensions
tend to be relatively well-funded, at least as compared to federal plans in many other developed
nations which have employed PAYGO financing for some time. One explanation may be that
underfunding in the U.S. is limited becatise of states' and localities' mobile populations, who

respond to the additional tax burdens that underfunded plans must eventually impose. This theory

has little empirical support., however, since underfunded pension promises appear to be imperfectly

capitalized in property values (Epple and Shipper 1981). There is some suggestion that public
sector workers require a wage premium to compensate them for their underfunded pension

promises, and underfunded pensions may also affect government bond ratings (Smith 1981;
Mitchell and Smith 1994 forthcoming). These and other constraints will probably become

increasingly binding with more flexible international labor and capital mobility, and may further
restrict governments' ability to underfund public pension plans in the future.


24MitcheIl (1994 forthcoming) cites examples of data and ta colle.ticn problems in developing countries.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                     24




        Some analysts suggest that the myriad reporting and funding issues surrounding publicly

managed pension plans can be reduced by substituting defined contribution plans in favor of
defined benefit plans. In this case, an employer promises only to deposit some contribution rate
into an account which then is invested, sometimes with the proviso that funds cannot be withdrawn

until retirement. In the United States, deferred compensation plans of this sort have become

increasingly popular since enabling tax law regarding these plans was clarified during the 1980's.
All states currently offer such plans to their public sector employees, generally in the form of

voluntary supplemental tax-deferred savings plans offered in addition to the conventional defined

benefit pension plan. A recent study indicated participation rates of about 24% of eligible workers
in the public sector. These plans are even more popular among private employees, where 57%of
eligible employees participate in 401(k) defined contribution offerings. The difference in
participation rates between public and private sectors is attributed to the fact that public employees

must make the entire contribution themselves arid the limit is currently $7,500 per year (or one-
third of compensation), while in the private sector the contribution limit is higher and companies

generally offer workers matching funds (EBRI 1993).
        One appeal of these savings plans is that they are self-directed, so participants can

frequently tailor their investment portfolios individually. In recent years, however, analysts have
become concerned that employees participating in deferred pay plans tend to overconcent.rate their

investment portfolios in low-risk, low-return assets. As a consequence of their conservative
stance, future retirees may find that their retirement income is inadequate to meet needs (EBRI

1993). This objection is linked to a broader criticism of these plans, which is that they do not
necessarily generate subsistence income for retirees, inasmuch as eventual benefit amounts are
linked to contributions, not need (James 1993).

        The appeal of mandatory defined contribution plans has been spurred by the recent
experiences of Chile's new retirement system. More than a decade ago, a replacement plan for the

country's foundering PAYGO social security system was created by formulating a mandatory
defined contribution plan, managed by several competing private investment houses. The Chilean

Mitchell and Hsin . Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                             25



system's popularity is in substantial part due to high investment returns during the 1980's, which
exceeded those of other public retirement systems in Latin America (James 1993; Mesa Lago 1989,

1991). However little is yet known about how well the Chilean plan performed relative to an
internationally diversified portfolio, which is in principle the benchmark which participants would

wish to employ. During the first several years of the Chilean pension plan's operation, for
instance, the pension system's investment portfolio was limited almost exclusively to government
bonds, and only gradually has private domestic equity been permitted. Even more recently, the
Chilean defined contribution system has begun to introduce international asset holdings, though
these are still limited to a fraction of the pension ponfolio.
        In sum, policyrnakers all over the world confront an aging population. and look to pension

plans to help meet the growing retirement n&ds. A key element in meeting these needs will be the

improvement of pension plan investment and funding performance. While the U.S. experience
cannot be generalized to all countries, it suggests that public pension performance responds to the
financial and administrative environment in which these plans operate. Retirement income security

for tomorrow requires designing better pension systems today.




25For discussions of the Chileai experience see Baeza (1986), Baeza and Manubens (1988), Cheyre (1991), Diamond
(1992 and 93), Marcel and Asenas (1992), Myers (1985), Valdes Prieto (1993), and Wallich (1993).


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                            Figure         1.


DISTRIB. OF ANNUALIZED MARKET RETURN ON INVESTMENT
                                1   YEAR


PERCENTAGE
        40




        30




        20




                        6      10     12                 20   22   24   26   26   30

                              RATE OF RETURN()

              IF RATE OF RETURN LE -4 THEN HIOPOINT--4
              IF RATE OF RETURN GT 30 THEN MIOPOINT—30
                                               Figure 2.

DISTRIB. OF ANNUALIZED MARKET RETURN ON INVESTMENT
                                                 5    YEARS


PERCENTAGE
        40




        30




        20




        10




        0
             -4   -2   0   2     4    6    8     10     12    14   16   18   20   22   24   26   28   30
                                                 RATE OF RETURN (%)

                               IF RATE OF RETURN LE —4 THEN NIDPOINT——4
                               rF flATE OF RETURN GT 30 THEN MIDPOINT—30
                                                   Figure 3.

                       DISTRIB. OF STOCK FUNDING RATIO
PERCENTAGE
        60




       50




       40




       30




       20




             -20   0   20   40   60     80   100   120   140   160   180   200    220   240   260   280   300 320 340
                                                   STOCK FUNDING PATIO      (%)


                                      IF RATIO   LE -20 THEN MIDPOINT——20
                                                   Figure 4.

                       DISTRIB. OF FLOW FUNDING RATIO
PERCENTAGE
       60




       50




       40




       30




       20




             -20   0   20   40   60     00   100    120   140   160   180   200   220 240   260 280 300   320   340

                                                    FLOW FUNDING RATIO      (%)


                                      TF RATIO     LE —20 THEN MIDPOINT—-20
                                                                                                         26



                                                        Table 1
                            Public Pension System Characteristics:
                             U.S. State and Local Pension Plans

 I. U.S. Public Pension Plan Characteristics Over Time
                                                                    Year
                                           1980                     1985                      1989

Number of Plans                              NA                    2,589                      2,387
Total Participants (000)                     NA                   15,234                     16,684
Active Participants (000)                    NA                   10,364                     11.357
Total Assets ($B current)                   $162                      374                       629
Annual Contributions ($B current) $21                                  37                         44
Annual Benefits ($B current)                 $1 1                      22                         33

NA: Not available
Source: Piacentini and Foley (1992).


II. Survey of U.S. Public Pension Plan Participants in 1989
                                                                              Pension Characteristic

Mean Retirement Benefit1                                                             $9,318
Median Retirement Benefit1                                                           $7,200
Median Public Pension as % of Pre-retirement Earnings (total)2                            42%
           Median Public Pension as % of Pre-retirement
           Earnings for those not receiving Social Security3                              50%
Fraction Receiving Any Post Retirement Benefit Increases4                                 34%
Fraction of Participants Covered by Defined Benefit Plan5                                 70%

Sources:
1Phillips (1992), Table 14,9: 367.
2Phillips (1992), Table 14.13: 371.
3Phillips (1992), Table 14.7: 375.
4Phillips (1992), Table 14.20: 379.
5Phillips (1992), Table 14.25: 384, Fraction excludes 10% of respondents unable to identify plan type.




Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                   Table 2.
                               U.S. Pension Plan Portfolios:
                               Size and Allocation 1950-1989


                                             Fraction of Assets in:
             Total Assets          Corporate Corporate                US Govt
             ($B Current)          Equities  Bonds                    Securities Other

I. State and local government pension plans
1950            $4.9             0.0%            12.2%             51.0%              36.7%
1955            10.8             1.9             25.0              43.5               29.6
1960            19.7             3.0             36.0              29.9               31.0
1965            34.1             7.3             50.4              22.3               19.9
1970            60.3            16.7             58.2              10.9               14.1
1975          104.8             23.2             59.0               7.4               10.4
1980          198.1             22.4             47.7              20.2               9.7
1985          404.7             29.7             31.9              30.5                7.9
1989          727.4             39.9             27.3              27.2                5.5

II.Private pension plans
Noninsured:
1950            $7.1            15.5%            39.4%             32.4%              12.7%
1955            18.3            33.3             43.2              16.4                7.1
1960            38.1            43.3             41.2               7.1                8.4
1965            74.4            54.8             30.5                4.0              10.6
1970           112.0            59.9             26.2                2.7              11.2
1975           225.0            48,0              18.6               8.0              25.4
1980           469.6            47.6              16.5              10.8              25.1
1985           848.4            46.4              14.3              12.3              27.0
1989         1,163.5            57.3              12.4              12.3              18.0

Insured:
1950              4.8            4.2             41.7              22.9               31.2
1955             10.1            4.0             43.6                9.9              42.6
1960             16.8            4.8             43.5                6.0              45.8
1965            25.5             6.3             41.6                3.5              48.6
1970            37.5            13.6             37.6                2.4              46.4
1975            64.6            18.6              37.5               2.2              41.8
1980           152.2            16.0              39.9               3.7              40.3
1985           337.9            13.0 .            35.7              12.9              38.4
1989           525.8            12.3              39.8              11.6              36.3

Note: Insured plans are pension plans whose assets are held by insurance companies.
Source: Hoffman and Mondejar (1992), T. 16.9 and 10: 438-441.




Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                                   28


                                                     Table 3
                               Pension Plan Investment Yields:
                                 Historical Patterns 1968-1986

         US State & Local      US Large Private Pension Plan    CanJian Large                                  US
         Pension Plan               Investment Return        Private Pension Plan Market thdeces             Inflation
         Investment Return1     SEI data2       5500 data3   Investment Return4 Stocks5 Bonds5                Rate5


 1968           7.75%              8.4%              —                  9.4%             11.1%      2.6%           4.7%
1969            -7.94             -5.2               —                 -3.2              -8.5       -8.1           6.1
1970            5.63               1.3              —                   1.3               4.0       18.4       5.5
1971           14.76              17.5              —                  12.5              14.3       HO         3.4
1972           12.58              15.3              —                  18.4             19.0        7.3        3.4
1973           -9.32             -15.1              —                  -2.1            -14.7         1.1       8.8
1974          -13.03             -20.3              —                 -12.7            -26.5        -3.1      12.2
1975           19.14              23.1              —                  13.2             37.2       14.6        7.0
1976           18.03              17.2              —                  12.4             23.8       18.6        4.8
1977            0.31              -2.2              1.6                  8.7            -7.2        1.7        6.8
1978            3.16               5.8             6.0                13.5               6.6       -0.1        9.0
1979            6.36              13,7             10.1               15.0              18.4       -4.2       13.3
1980           11.58              20.2            21.9                18.3              32.4       -2.6       12.4
1981            3.00               2.7             5.4                 1.5              -4.9       -1.0        8.9
1982           27.22              23.0             18.2               21.1              21.4       43.8        3.9
1983           12.89              15.9             9.4                20.0              22.5        4.7        3.8
1984            —                   —              99                  8.8               6.3       16.4        4.0
1985            —                   —             20.0                23.5              32.2       30.9        3.8
1986            —                   —             14.1                12.8              18.5       19.8        1.1
Notes:
  Public pension plan data from SEI Financial Services reported by Berkowitz & Logue (1986). T. All1-3.
2 Large U.S. private plan data from SEI Financial Services reported by McCarthy & Turner (1992) T. 12.1: 253.
        U.S. private plan data from 5500 Reports reported by McCarthy and Turner (1992)T. 12.1: 253.
4Large Canadian private pension plan data, SET Financial Services iepnrted by Pesando and Hyatt (1992) T. 1: 21.
  McCarthy and Turner (1992). Table 12.1: 253.




Mitchell and Hstn . Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                Table 4
                        U.S. Public Sector Pension Plan Yields:
                             Annual Averages 1984-1990


                   State & Local Pension Plan                   Market Indeces      Inflation
                   Investment Return                      Bonds7      Securities7    Rate7

Average 1984-1990:                 11.13%                 15.51%          13.91%      4.11%
1990                                 6.851                 -3.17           6.78       6.11
1988                                 3•952                 16.81          10.70       4.42

Average 1988-90                      9•553                 15.04          11.24       5.06
Average 1986-90                     Il.98                  13.77          10.66       4.14

Average 1986-88                     l3.88                  13.50          10.09       3.32
Average 1984-88                     12.076                 15.79          15.51       3.54
Notes:
1Zorn (1991), T. Vfl-7: 34; 129 plans.
2Zorn (1990), T. 34: 834; 108 plans.
3Zorn (1991), T. V11.8: 35; 85 plans.
4Zorn (1991), T. VI1-9: 36; 85 plans.
5Zorn (1990). 1. 35: B35; 113 plans.
6Zorn (1990), T. 36: B36; 85 plans.
7lbbotson Associates (1992), 1'. 13: 34.




Mitchell and Hsjn- Public Pension Governance and Performance   - 1/5194
                                                                                             30


                                                     Table 5
               U.S.   Public and Private Pension Plan Funding Ratios

Ratio of Pension Plan Assets
to Pension Plan Liabilities                                              Fraction of Plans

I.   State and Local Plans'
     <50%                                                                        8%
     50-74                                                                      21
     75-99                                                                      39
     100%                                                                       33
ft Private Sector Plans2
     <50%                                                                        1%
     50-74                                                                       4
     75-99                                                                      10
     100-124                                                                    25
     125-149                                                                    22
     150%                                                                       38
Sources:
1Authors' adaptation of unpublished data from GAO.
2Piacentini and Foley (1992), Table 4.20: 153.




Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5194
                                                    Table 6
                           Determinants of Investment Returns
                          in U.S. State and Local Pension Plans
                                         (standard errors in parentheses)

                                                                       Dependent Variable
Explanatory Variable                                      1990 Return            Five-year Av. Return

A. Pension Board Composition
    BDELAC                                                      -0.01                       -0.02
                                                                (0.02)                      (0.01)
    BDELRT                                                      0.17*t                      -0.002
                                                                (0.07)                      (0.05)
B. Pension Management Practices
   ADINVST                                                      -0.34                       l.24**
                                                                (0.89)                      (0.58)
    INVINHS                                                     0.80                        0.60
                                                                (1.36)                      (0.92)
    TOP1OMG                                                     -0.49                       -0.32
                                                                (132)                       (0.86)
    TOPIO*EXT                                                   -0.08                        1.03
                                                                (1.78)                      (1.17)
C. Pension Investment Practices
   INSTATE                                                      -0.08                       -0.02
                                                                (0.04)                      (0.02)
    PRUDMAN                                                     0.83                        0.33
                                                                (1.20)                      (0.84)
    STKMAX                                                      -0.03                       0.57
                                                                (1.18)                      (0.86)
D. Pension Reporting Practices
   IND1NVPF                                                     -1.16                       -0.57
                                                                (1.00)                      (0.68)
    FREQVAL                                                     0.70                        0.13
                                                                (0.54)                      (0.56)

    R2                                                          11.3                        12.4
    N                                                          158                          132

Notes to Table 6: 1.96, *       1.65 (< 1.96). Both models also include a constant term as well as controls for
plan type (TCHRPLAN), plan size (ASSETS and SSETSW), and the fraction of the plan assets held in bonds and
stock (BOND. STOCK). See the Appendix Table for variable descriptions and descriptive statistics.




Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance -   115/94
                                                    Table 7
        Funding Determinants of U.S. State and Local Pension Plans
                                         (standard errors in parentheses

                                                           Dependent Variable
Explanatory Variable                   Stock Funding Ratio                 Flow Funding Ratio
A. Pension Board Composition
    BDELAC                                       .0.20**                           0.08
                                                  (0.08)                           (0.17)
    BDELRT                                       -0.6l                             0.34
                                                  (0.35)                           (0.70)
B. Pension Management Practices.
   BDBENOK                                       -1.34                             -1.86
                                                  (5.77)                          (11.02)
    BDACTOK                                      13.O2                            30.8
                                                  (7.04)                          (14.49)
    LIAB IN S                                     3.47                            19.19**
                                                  (4.89)                           (9.33)
    ACCINHS                                      1 l.14**                          -1.89
                                                 (5.01)                            (9.16)
C. Pension Reporting Practices
   REPSOLO                                        4.86                             -1.74
                                                  (4.58)                           (8.67)
    GIVERPT                                       8.62                             -0.35
                                                  (8.03)                          (14.38)
    AMORTPER                                     1.25**                            -0.18
                                                  (0.20)                           (0.37)
D. Pension Assumptions
    WDOT                                         -4.30                              1.91
                                                  (3.80)                           (7.04)
    PORTABLE                                    - 13.35**                          2.20
                                                  (5.25)                           (9.82)
    NEXPROR                                      -0.51                             2.16
                                                  (3.59)                           (6.49)
    INFL                                         -3.24                             5.13
                                                  (3.42)                           (6.10)
E. Other Factors
    UNEMPD                                       6.07**                            0.65
                                                  (2.08)                           (3.82)
    FUNDLAW                                       0.12                             -7.49
                                                  (4.94)                           (9.22)
    BENNOCUT                                      3.41                            -10.53
                                                  (4.75)                           (9.03)
    DEFPOS                                        7.78                             -0.34
                                                  (5.08)                           (9.34)
    SPECTAX                                       3.68                             -0.98
                                                  (6.40)                          (12.36)

                                                 28.9                              18.6
    N                                            217                               184




Mitchell and Hsjn - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
Notes to Table 7: "t 1.96. t 1.65 (< 1.96). Both models also include a constant term as well as controls for
plan type and union (TCHRI'LAI4, UNION), benefit differences across workers (BENTIERSI, whether the plan was
integrated with social security or indexed (SSINT, COLA), whether the unit credit method was employed
(ACTUARUC). the plans average retirement age (AVRETAGE). and whether the plan reported its retirement age,
amortization period, wage growth, inflation, and expected rate of return assumptions (AVRETAGMS, AMORTMS.
WDOTMS, INFLMS, EXPRORMS). See the Appendix Table for variable descriptions and descriptive statistics.




Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance -   lI/94
                                                                                             34



References
Baeza, Sergio, cd. Analisis de Ia Prevision en Chile. Chile: Centro de Estudios Publicos, 1986.
Baeza, Sergio and Rodrigo Manubens, eds. Sistema Privado De Pensiones En Chile. Santiago,
       Chile: Centro de Estudios Publicos, 1988.
Beebower, Gilbert L. and Gary L. Bergstrom. 'A Performance Analysis of Pension and Profit-
      Sharmg Portfolios: 1966-1975." Financial Analysts Journal, May-June 1977: 3 1-42.
Benartzi, Shiomo and Richard Thaler. "Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity Premium Puzzle".
       Unpublished paper, Johnson Graduate School of Management, Cornell University,
       October 1992.

Berkowitz, Logue & Associates, Inc. Study of the Investment Performance of ERISA Plans.
      Prepared for the Office of Pension and Welfare Benefits, Department of Labor, 1986.

Bleakney, Thomas P. Retirement Systems for Public Emj:l. 'ees. Philadelphia: University of
      Pennsylvania Press, 1972.
Brinson, Gary P., L. Randolph Hood, and Gilbert L. Beebower. 'Determinants of Portfolio
       Performance." Financial Analysts Journal, July-August 1986: 39-44.
Cheyre, Hernán V., La Prevision en Chile Ayer y I-Joy. Santiago, Chile: Centro de Estudios
       Publicos, 1991.
Diamond, Peter, "Pension Reform in a Transition Economy: Notes on Poland and Chile". Paper
      presented at NBER conference on Industrial Restructuring in Eastern Europe, February

Diamond, Peter. 'Social Security Reforms". Paper prepared for the "Chilean Economy: Policy
     Lessons and Challenges" Conference at the Brookings Institution, April 22-3, 1993.

Durgin, H. "Politicians Grabbing Pension Assets." Pensions and Investments. July 8, 1991.
Employee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI). Notes. January 1993, 14 (1).
Enzplovee Benefit Plan Review. "Lag Found in Teachers Pension Contributions." February, 1991.

Epple, Dennis and K. Schipper. 'Municipal Pension Funding: A Theory and Some Evidence."
    Public Choice 1981: 141-178.

Gnnblatt, Mark and Sheridan Titmaji. "Mutual Fund Performance: An Analysis of Quarterly
      Portfolio Holdings." Journal of Business 62(3), 1989: 393-416.
Goldman, Sachs. The Nature and Scale of Economically Targeted investments by the 104 Largest
      U.S. Public Pension Plans. Report prepared August 1993.
Governmental Accounting Standards Board. "Disclosure of Pension Information by Public
      Employee Retirement Systems and State and Local Governmental Employers" Statement
      No. S of the GovernmentalAccounting Standards Board. GASB November 1986.
Governmental Accounting Standards Board. Action Report.. December 1992.


Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                              15




Gusiman, Alan and Olivia S. Mitchell. 'Pensions and the US Labor Market.' In Pensions and The
        US Economy. Eds. Z. Bodie and A. Munnell. Pension Research Council. Philadelphia:
        Irwin, 1992: 39-87.
Hemmerick. Steve. "California May Cut Funding." Pensions and investments. Aug. 19, 1991 [a].
Flemmerick, Steve. "Groups Take On California." Pensions and Investments. Dec. 9. 1991 [b].
Hoffman, Arnold and John Mondejar. "Pension Assets and Financial Markets, 1950-89". In
      Trends in Pensions 1992, John A. Turner and Daniel J. Belier, Eds. USGPO. 1992.

Ibbotson Associates. SBBI 1992 Yearbook Chicago, 1992.
Inman, Robert P. "Appraising The Funding Status of Teacher Pensions: An Econometric
       Approach". National Tax Journal, March 1986: 2 1-24.

Inman, Robert P. "Public Employee Pensions and the Local Labor Budget". Journal of Public
       Economics 19(1982): 49-71.
Ippolito, Richard A. "Efficiency with Costly Information: A Study of Mutual Fund Performance,
        1965-1984." The Quarterly Journal of Economics CIV(1), February 1989: 1-23.
James, Estelle. "Income Security for Old Age: Conceptual Background and Major Issues." The
       World Bank Public Sector Management and Private Sector Development Working Paper
       WPS 977, September 1993.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shielfer, Richard Thaler, and Robert Vishny. "Window Dressing By
      Pension Fund Managers." American Economic Review 8 1(2), May 1991: 227-231.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. "The Structure and Performance of the
      Money Management Industry". Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics
       1992: 339-39 1.

Marcel, Mario and Alberto Arenas, Social Security Reform in Chile. Inter-American Development
       Bank Occasional Paper No. 5, 1992.
McCarthy, David D. and John A. Turner. "Pension Rates of Return in Large and Small Plans."
      In Trends in Pensions 1992, John A. Turner and Daniel J. Belier, Eds. USGPO, 1992.
Melbinger, Michael S. "The Possibility of Federal Regulation of State and Local Government
      Retirement Plans." Employee Benefits Journal 17(4), December 1992: 23-27.
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo, Ascent to Bankruptcy: Financing Social Security in Latin America.
      Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press 1989.
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo, "Portfolio Performance of Selected Social Security Institutes in Latin
      America." World Bank Discussion Paper No. 139, 1991.
Mitchell, Olivia S. "Retirement Systems in the Developed and Developing World: Institutional
       Structure, Economic Effects, and Lessons for Economies in Transition." In Labor Market
       Policies for Managing the Social Cost of Economic Adjustment. Eds. A. Van Adams, E.
       King, and S. Tzannatos. The World Bank (1994 forthcoming).


Mitchell and Hsjn - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                  36


Mitchell, Olivia S. Testimony on Public Sector Pensions. Joint Hearing before the House Select
      Committee on Aging and the Subcommittee on Investment, Jobs and Prices of the Joint
       Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress. November 1991, Washington, D.C.
Mitchell, Olivia S. "Worker Knowledge of Pension Provisions." Journal of Labor Economics 6
      (January, 1988): 2 1-39.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Emily S. Andrews. "Scale Economies in Private Multi-Employer Pension
      Systems". Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 34 (July 1981): 522-530.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Robert S. Smith. "Pension Funding in the Public Sector". Review of
      Economics and Statistics (1994 forthcoming).
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Robert S. Smith "Public Sector Pensions: Benefits, Funding and
      Unionization", in Industrial Relations Research Association Papers and Proceedings of the
      44th Annual Meetings. Madison, WI 1992: 126-133.
Mitchell, Olivia S., Annika Sunden, Ping-Lung Hsin, and Gary Reid. An InternationalAppraisal
      of Social Security Administration Cost:s. Mimeo, The World Bank, 1993.
Munnell, Alicia H. Testimony on Public Pensions. Joint hearing of the Subcommittee on Oversight
      of the Ways and Means Committee and the Subcor3mittee on Labor-Management Relations
      of the Committee on Education and Labor, November 15, 1983.
Munnell, Alicia H. and C. Nicole Ernsberger. "Public Pension Surpluses and National Saving:
      Foreign Experience." New England Economic Review, March/April 1989: 16-38.
Myers, Robert J., "Privatizat.ion of Chile's Social Security Program." Benefits Quarterly 1(3):
      Third Quarter 1985: 26-35.
National Association of State Budget Officers (NASBO). "State Balanced Budget Requirements:
       Provisions and Practice." Mimeo, Washington D.C., June 1992.
New York Retired Public Employees Association, Inc. "Our Money's Safety: A Response to the
     Governor's Task Force Report On Pension Fund Investment." Report issued September
     1989.
New York State Industrial Cooperation Council. "Economically Targeted Investments by Pension
     Funds: A Study of the Feasibility of Implementation of Recommendations Made by the
     Governor's Task Force on Pension Fund Investment." Report issued February 1990.
New York State Industrial Cooperation Council. "Our Money's Worth: The Report of the
     Governor's Task Force on Pension Fund Investment." Report issued June 1989.
Pesando, James E. and Douglas Hyatt. "The Distribution of Investment Risk in Defined Benefit
      Pension Plans: A Re-Examination.' Paper prepared for the Conference on Current
      Pensions Policy Issues, March 1992.
Phillips, Kristen. "State and Local Government Pension Benefits". In Trends in Pensions 1992,
        John A. Turner and Daniel J. Beller, Eds. USGPO, 1992.
Piacentinj, J. and Foley, 3. EBRI Databook on Employee Benefits, EBRI, Washington. D.C.
        1992.



Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5194
                                                                                                 37


Price, M. "NY Bill Loosens Fund Restrictions." Pensions and Investmenr.s. May 13, 1991.
Schmitt, Ray, Carolyn L. Merck and Jennifer A. Neisner. "Public Pension Plans: A Status
      Report." Congressional Research Service Report for Congress #91-813 EPW, December
       1991.

Shine. P. "D.C's Huge, Unfunded Pension Liability." Washington Post, Mar. 25, 1991.
Smith, R.S. "Compensating Differentials for Pensions and Underfunding in the Public Sector."
       Review of Economics and Statistics. 1981: p. 463-468.
Snell, Ronald K. and Susan Wolfe. "Public Pension Funds' Investment Practices: Results of a
       Survey Conducted by the National Conference of State Legislatures and the National
       Association of Legislative FIscal Officers." National Conference of State Legislatures,
       Fiscal Affairs Program, Legislative Finance Paper #72, February 1990.
Sunden, Annika and Olivia S. MitchelL "An Examination of Social Security Administration Costs
      in the United States". Mimeo, The World Bank, Washington DC, August 1993.
Valdes Prieto, Salvador. "Administrative Charges in Pensions: Chile, the U.S., Malaysia. and
       Zambia". Mimeo, August 1993.
Verhovek, S. H. "States are Finding Pension Funds Can Be a Bonanza Hard to Resist." New
      York Times, Apr. 22, 1990.
Wallich, Christine. "Savings Mobilization through Social Security: The Experience of Chile
       During 1916-77," World Bank Staff Working Paper Number 553. Washington, DC: The
       World Bank, 1983.
Wilshire Associates. 1990 Report on Funding Levels for State Retirement Systems. Santa
       Monica, CA: Wilshire Associates Incorporated, 1990.
Zorn, Paul. Survey of State and Local Government Employee Retirement Sszems. Government
       Finance Officers Association. Report issued November 1991.
Zorn, Paul. Survey of State Retirement Systems Covering General Employees and Teachers.
    Government Finance Officers Association. Report issued 1990.




Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                       38


                     Appendix: Descriptive Statistics and Variable Definitions
I. Dependent       Variables                    Mean                        St. Dev.
YRIROR                                                    7.67               5.0
YR5ROR                                                   11.68               3.0
AST_PBO                                                 90.75               33.1
FLOWFUND                                                93.79               51 .2
II. Explanatory Variables
BDELAC                                                  31.01               25.3
BDELRT                                                    3.27               6.2
LIABINS                                                  0.42                0.5
BDACTOK                                                  0.83                0.4
BDBBIOK                                                  0.72                0.5
ADINVST                                                  0.51                0.5
INVINHS                                                  0.42                0.5
ACCINHS                                                  0.60                0.5
TOPIOMG                                                  0.41                0.5
TOPIOEXT                                                 0.18                0.4
PRTJDMAN                                                 0.85                0.4
INSTATE                                                   1.45              10.0
STKMAX                                                   0.83                0.4
INDINVPF                                                 0.75                0.4
FREQVAL                                                   1.23               0.8
REPSOLO                                                  0.59                0.5
GEVERPT                                                  0.90                0.3
AMORTPER                                                22.64               14.0
AMORTMS                                                  0.10                0.3
ACTtJARUC                                                0.12                0.3
COLA                                                     0.79                0.4
WDOT                                                     4.80                2.5
WDOTMS                                                   0.20                0.4
PORTABLE                                                 0.35                0.5
EXPROR                                                   7.75                0.9
EXPRORMS                                                 0.01                0.1
'NFL                                                     3.88                2.4
INFLMS                                                   0.26                0.4
AVRETAGE                                                47.85               23.7
AVRETAGEMS                                               0.19                0.4
SSINT                                                    0.09                0.3
FUNDLAW                                                  0.58                0.5
DEFPOS                                                   0.35                0.5
TCHRPLAN                                                 0.12                0.3
ASSETS                                                3252.28             6637.4
ASSETSQ(10-6)                                           54.35              212.2
BOND                                                    33.16               28.1
STOCK                                                   36.09               17.3
BENNOCIJT                                                0.52                0.5
BEWTIERS                                                 0.28                0.5
ISUNION                                                  0.69                0.5
SPECTAX                                                  0.14                0.3
UNEMPD9O                                                 -1.72               1.2




Mitchell arid Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance. 1/5/94
                                                                                                                     39



Variable Definitions
Note: Variables qualitative (0,1) unless specified. All variables derived from PENDAT file (see Zero 1991) unless
otherwise indicated.

Dependent Variables
YRIROR                    Annual (1990) rate of return reported in survey (%).
YR5ROR:                   Average annualized rate of return 1986-90 reported in survey().
AST_PBO:                  Reported pension system assets / PBO measure of cumulative plan liabilities (%).
FLOWFIJND:                Annual actual/required employer plan contributions (%).

Explanatory Variables
A. Pension Board Composition
BDELAC:                   Fraction of pension Board elected by active employees (%).
BDELRT:                   Fraction of penion Board elected by retired employees (%).
LIABINS:                  Board covered by liability insurance.
BDACTOK:                  Board required to authorize actuarial assumptions.
BDBENOK:                  Board required to authorize benefit amounts.
B. Pension Management Practices
ADINVST:             Administrative cost charged to pension investment income.
INVINHS:             Investment staff of pension portfolio partly (or fully) managed in-house.
ACCINHS:             Accounting staff needs of pension system partly (or fully) met in-house.
TOPIOMG:             Investments handled by top-lO performance bracket managers (Laknonishok eta!. 1992).
TOPIO*EXT:           Plan investments exclusively handled by top-b money managers.
C. Pension Investment Practices
PRUDMAN:             Pension Board required to act according to "prudent man' rule.
INSTATE:             Fraction of pension investments which-mucte directed in-state (%).
STKMAX:              Maximum limitation on the assets in the pension portfolio.
D. Pension Reporting Practices
INDINVPF:                  Pension system obtains independent investment performance evaluations.
FREQVAL:                   Frequency of independent performance evaluations.
R.EPSOLO:                  System issues own financial report (not integrated with other budgets).
GIVERPT:                   Plan participants receive annual financial report.
AMORTPER:                  Amortization period for past service liabilities.
AMORTMS:                   Amortization period not stated.
ACTUARUC:                  Pension system uses unit credit method of computing pension liabilities.
E. Pension Assumptions
COLA:               Benefits partially (or fully) indexed after retirement.
WDOT:               Future salary growth assumption required to compute PBO.
WDOThf S:                  Salary growth assumption not stated.
PORTABLE:                  Employees moving within state may carry benefit accruals to new plans.
EXPROR:                    Interest rate assumption used in computing PBO (%).
EXPRORMS:                  Interest rate assumption not stated.
NFL:                       Cost of living assumption required to compute PBO.
INFLMS:                    Cost of living assumption not stated.
AVRETAGE:                  Average retirement age used in computing PBO (yrs).
AVRETAGEMS:                Average retirement age not stated.
SSENT:                     Plan integrated with Social Security.
F. Other Factors
FIJNDLAW:                  State has legal funding standard for pension system.
DEFPOS:                    State law does not prohibit carryover of state budget deficit from one year to the next
                           (National Association of State Budget Officers 1992)
TCHRPLAN:                  System covers at least some teachers and other school employees.




 Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
                                                                                                           40




Appendix Table (continued)
ASSETS:                 Actuarial value of pension system assets, typically at market value (million S).
ASSETSQ:                Squared value of ASSETS.
BOND:                   Pension system portfolio held in corporate and government bonds (%).
STOCK:                  Pension system portfolio held in stock (%).
BNOCUT:                 State has law guaranteeing benefit amounts.
RENTERS:                Benefits differ according to worker hire date.
ISUNION:                At least some employees covered by pension system unionized.
SPECTAX:                Special or dedicated tax is the source of employer contributions.
UNEMPD:                 Recent (1990) level of unemployment minus long run (1981-89) average level of
                        unemployment level in the state (US Bureau of the Census 1991).




Mitchell and Hsin - Public Pension Governance and Performance - 1/5/94
