                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MONETARY POLICY WITH FLEXIBLE
                         EXCHANGE RATES AND FORWARD
                         INTEREST RATES AS INDICATORS




                                   Lars E. 0. Svensson




                                 Working Paper No. 4633




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  January 1994

Presented at the 13th Bank of France-University Conference, "Capital Movements and
Exchange Rate Politics," November 24-26, 1993, and to be published in CahiersEconomiques
et Monétaires. I thank the discussant Jean-Pierre Laffargue and conference participants for
comments. I also thank Rod Beetsma, Magnus Dahiquist, Jon Faust, Mark Fisher, Lan
Horngren, Assar Lindbeck, Hans Lindberg, Maurice Obstfeld, Vincent Reinhart, Anders
Vredin, David Zervos, and participants in a seminar at the Stockholm School of Economics
for discussions and comments on a previous version; Marten Blix and Joaidm Persson for
research assistance; and Molly Akerlund and Patricia Reinhold for secretarial and editorial
assistance. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Finance and
Macroeconomics and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed axe those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4633
                                                                               January 1994


                          MONETARY POLICY WITH FLEXIBLE
                           EXCHANGE RATES AND FORWARD
                           INTEREST RATES AS Th4DICATORS

                                          ABSTRACT

       In the new situation with flexible exchange rates, monetary policy in Europe will have
to rely more on indicators than previously under fixed rates. One of the potential indicators, the
forward interest rate curve, can be used to indicate market expectations of the time-paths of
future short interest rates, monetary policy, inflation rates and currency depreciation rates. The
forward rate curve separates market expectations for the short, medium and long term more easily
than the standard yield curve. Monetary policy in France, Germany, Great Britain, Sweden and
the United States is interpreted with the help of forward rates.



Lars E. 0. Svensson
Institute for international Economic Studies
Stockholm University
10691 Stockholm
SWEDEN
CEPR and NBER
1. Introduction
Previous monetary policy with fixed exchange rates in Europe the last few years can
be described, with some simplification, as Germany's pursuing an independent monetary
policy directed as domestic price stability, and the rest of the countries' pegging their
exchange rate to the German mark, the European anchor currency. This was the case for
the countries within the ERM as well as the countries outside the ERM that unilaterally
pegged their exchange rate to the mark, as Austria, or the ecu, as Finland, Norway and
Sweden. Monetary policy outside Germany was then in principle very simple, it consisted
solely in defending a fixed exchange rate towards the mark or the ecu. This in turn, again
with some simplification, implied that central banks had to set interest rates so as to
roughly balance capital flows.
    The last year's turmoil in Europe has dramatically changed this. The Finnish markka,
the Italian lira and the British pound were forced to float in September 1992. In November
the same year the Swedish krona was floated, in December the Norwegian krone. In
August 1993 the exchange rate bands for the currencies that remained in the ERM were
increased to     percent, with the exception of the German mark and the Dutch guilder
which remained in the narrow band.
   The loss of the fixed exchange rates means the loss of the nominal anchor for the
countries that used to peg their exchange rates to the mark or the ecu. Except for
Austria and the Netherlands, fixed exchange rates do not now seem, a realistic alternative
for the European countries in the short or medium term. Even if fixed exchange rates
towards a stable currency were feasible, if the ultimate target for monetary policy is price
stability, one can seriously doubt the efficiency of fixed exchange rates as an intermediate
target to achieve price stability (see Svensson (1994)). Hence, for several reasons there
is a need to discuss how monetary policy should he designed in the new situation with
flexible exchange rates in Europe.
    This paper briefly discusses the design of monetary policy with flexible exchange rates,
in terms of the convenient and generally accepted conceptual framework of goals, inter-
mediate targets, indicators and instruments of monetary policy. It argues that likely
difficulties in finding appropriate intermediate targets will increase the role of indicators
for assessing the state of the economy, the stance of monetary policy, and how the in-
struments should be adjusted to achieve the goal of monetary policy. Several indicators
wifl have to be used simultaneously. The paper extends on the use of one of the possi-
ble indicators, the forward interest rate, and discusses how forward interest rates can be

                                             I
 used to extract market expectations of future interest rate, inflation rates and currency
 depreciation rates. Some discussion and interpretation of forward interest rates in France,
 Germany, Great Britain, Sweden and the United States is provided)
     The paper is outlined as follows. Section 2 discusses the design of monetary policy
 with flexible exchange rates in terms of the conceptual framework of goals, intermediate
 targets, indicators and instruments. Section 3 provides definitions of yields to maturity,
 zero-coupon interest rates (spot rates) and forward interest rates. Sections 4, 5 and 6
 discusses how forward interest rates can be used to extract expected future interest rates,
 expected future inflation, and expected future currency depreciation, respectively. Three
 different risk premia (term, inflation, and foreign exchange risk premia) are defined and
 discussed. Section 7 provides a comparison and discussion of forward interest rates in
 France, Germany, Great Britain, Sweden and the United States. Section 8 concludes.
 Appendix A reports on the estimation of forward rates from bond yields, and Appendix
 B defines three related concepts of term prernia.


 2. Monetary Policy with Flexible Exchange Rates
 A generally accepted conceptual framework for the design of monetary policy distinguishes
 between goals, intermediate targets, indicators and instruments (see Friedman (1990) or
 McCallum (1990), for example).2 As the term implies, the goals of monetary policy—price
 stability and full employment, for example—are the ultimate objectives ofmonetary policy.
Monetary policy is complicated by the fact that the central bank has only very indirect
control over the variables that usually constitute the goals. These variablesreact with long
and variable lags to monetary policy. The variables themselves are observed with some-
times rather substantial delays, at rather long intervals, and with substantial statistical
uncertainty. Some central banks select intermediate targets such as various money-supply
aggregates or the exchange rate. These intermediate targets do not necessarily haveany
intrinsic value, apart from their correlation with the goals. They are more controllable
and more readily observed than the goals (they are observed more often, with less time
lag, and react more quickly to monetary policy). Properly chosen intermediate targets
can therefore contribute to fulfilling the goals. Indicators are variables that provide the

    'Forward interest rates are already used as one of the monetary policy indicators by Bank of England,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Sveriges Rikshank. Their role as indicators is
discussed in Bank of England (1993b), Svensson (1993a) and Sveriges Riksbank (1993). See also Bank
for International Settlements (1993, p. 144).
    2This section builds to some extent upon Svensson (1992).

                                                   2
central bank with information on the state of the economy (inflation pressure and inflation
expectations, for example) or on the monetary policy stance (that is, how expansive the
monetary policy is). Indicators thus offer the central bank guidance on how monetary
policy should be conducted in order to achieve the goals. Depending on the design of the
monetary policy, a variable may be an indicator or intermediate target. To illustrate, the
exchange rate is an intermediate target when fixed, but an indicator when flexible. As a
rule, the indicator function of a variable ceases if the variable becomes an intermediate
target. Short and long interest rates, credit volume, employment and wage settlements
are other examples of indicators. Finally, instruments- such as the interest rate at which
the central bank lends reserves to private banks, or the monetary base or some compo-
nent thereof - are variables that are subject to direct daily control of the central bank
and which the bank can employ to implement monetary policy. The instruments chosen
and the rules by which the instruments are adjusted define the day-to-day implementa-
tion of monetary policy. Most central banks employ a short-term interest rate as their
instrument. Some empirical evidence and practical experience indicate that the choice of
instruments is not so important.3
   The design of monetary policy involves selecting goals, intermediate targets, indicators
and instruments. Let me start by discussing the goal of monetary policy. Price stability
and full employment are often mentioned as possible goals of monetary policy. Research
in recent years and practical experience during the postwar period have shown that an
explicit monetary policy goal of full employment leads to a high rate of inflation, while
an explicit price-stability goal alone does not result in lower rates of employment or
growth.4 In the medium and long term there is evidence that monetary policy can only
systematically affect nominal variables and not real ones. Therefore monetary policy
can only have nominal variables as useful goals. Price stability will provide the best
environment for efficient resource allocation and optimal growth. More and more countries
have also assigned priority to the goal of price stability. Price stability can also be seen
as the goal of the previous fixed exchange rate regimes in Europe, since one purpose of
the fixed exchange rate was to ultimately force domestic inflation to conform with the
low and stable German inflation. The discussion that follows is based on the assumption
that price stability is the goal of monetary policy.
   For several reasons it seems important to make the price-stability goal specific and

  3See Bernanke and Mishkin (1992).
  4See for instance Alesina and Summers (1993).


                                                  3
 precise. A precisely defined goal may reduce the uncertainty about monetary policy that
 a forced switch to a flexible exchange rate in all likelihood has caused. A precisely defined
 goal means a stronger commitment to monetary policy and can increase its credibility. A
 precisely defined goal makes it possible to monitor how well the goal is being met and to
 criticize the central bank directly, even holding it responsible, in the event the goal is not
 met. A precisely defined goal can also help to stabilize inflation expectations.
     Against this background, it seems suitable to define price stability as an interval for the
 future price level or its rate of change, where the price level in turn is defined by the most
 commonly known price index, the consumer price index. Several countries have recently
specified explicit inflation targets, for instance Britain, Finland and Sweden, following
earlier examples of Canada and New Zealand. (See Freedman (1993) for a discussion of
the Canadian experience of inflation targets, and for references to the relevant literature.)
    Both theory and practical experiences indicate that institutional reform can enhance
the credibility of the price-stability goals by: establishing price stability as the goal of
monetary policy; by giving the central bank the independence that will enable it to achieve
the goal and resist short-term pressures and special interest groups; and by holding the
Board of Governors and management of the central bank accountable if the goal is not
met.
    Although there is evidence that monetary policy in the medium and long term can sys-
tematically affect only nominal variables, there is certainly evidence that monetary policy
has effects on real variables, output and employment, in the short run. Therefore, mone-
tary policy may stabilize or destabilize short-run fluctuations inoutput and employment,
although it cannot systematically affect average output and employment in the medium
and long run. This fact is not an argument against price stability as a goal for monetary
policy. On the contrary, a credible price-stability goal is likely to make monetary policy
more effective in stabilizing short-run output fluctuations, for two reason.
    First, a price-stability policy implies an automatic stabilization of aggregate demand
shocks. An increase in aggregate demand that leads to increased inflation will be met
with a monetary contraction; vice versa for a decrease in aggregate demand. Second, it is
likely that long-run credibility for a price-stability policy gives central bank more discre-
tion to stabilize output in the short run, as discussed in Bernanke and Mishkin (l992).
Without such long-run credibility a short-run monetary expansion may be interpreted by
the private sector as the beginning of an extended period of monetary expansion. There-

  5See also Hörngren and Lindberg (1993).


                                             4
fore it may result in increased inflation expectations and increased wages, prices and
long-term interest rates. This may both dampen the initial stimulating effect on output
and lock the economy into a situation with high inflation. With long-run credibility, a
short-run monetary expansion rate will not lead to increased inflation expectations and
their accompanying negative effects.
   As examples of this, Germany and the United States seem to have established good
long-mn credibility for a price-stability policy, with low long interest rates and low long-
run inflation expectations. This should imply considerable discretion in the short-run.
Consistent with this, the United States has been able to meet the latest recession with a
very expansionary monetary policy with very low short-term real interest, rates, without
any rise in long-run inflation expectations and long-term interest rates. Britain and Swe-
den, in contrast, seem to have lower long-run credibility for their price-stability policy,
which shows up in higher long-term interest rates and higher long-run inflation expec-
tations. Monetary expansion after the pound and the krona were floated indeed seem
to have resulted in increased inflation expectations, as will be further discussed below in
section 7. The scope for short-run monetary policy to stabilize output without endanger-
ing price stability seems smaller in Britain and Sweden than in German and the United
States.
    After this discussion of the goal of monetary policy, let me go on to discuss interme-
diate targets. Since the central bank has only indirect control over the price level, and
since the latter reacts with "long and variable lags" to monetary policy measures, it may
be desirable to select an intermediate target. An ideal intermediate target has a high
correlation with the goal but is much easier to control and monitor. Thus, monetary
policy is made easier if it is focused on the intermediate target. It is easy to monitor how
well the central bank meets the intermediate target and the bank can more readily be
held accountable if the intermediate target is not met. But the problem, not surprisingly,
is that it is difficult to find an ideal intermediate target.
    A fixed exchange rate towards a currency with a low and stable inflation can be seen
as an intermediate target to achieve price stability. However, fixed exchange rates do not
seem a realistic possibility in Europe in the short or medium term, except for Austria
and the Netherlands. Even if fixed exchange rates against a stable currency were feasible,
they may be a rather inefficient means to price stability, as argued in Svensson (1994).
    Various money supply aggregates (from the monetary base to M3) are common as
intermediate targets. In the academic literature, such broader aggregates as nominal


                                             5
 expenditure and nominal GDP have also been proposed as intermediate targets.6 Here,
  however, there is a conflict; although more narrow money-supply aggregates are easier
  to control, they may be very weakly correlated with the goal, while broader aggregates
 correlate more closely with the goal but are more difficult to control. A special problem is
 the fact that money supply aggregates have in many cases exhibited great instability-in
 connection with financial innovations or changes in credit market regulations, for example.
     Many observers have considered Germany's use of M3 as an intermediate target a
 model for other countries.7 A target for the annual change in M3 is calculated based
 on forecasts of the annual change in velocity and potential GNP, and on an explicit
 inflation goal. However, this procedure requires stable empirical estimates of demand for
 money and experience in forecasting the velocity. In the short term it may be difficult to
judge whether velocities are sufficiently forecastable for monetary aggregates to serve as
 intermediate targets.8 One particular problem is that the change from a fixed exchange
 rate to a flexible rate may itself affect the demand for money, in which case estimates with
 data from the period with a fixed exchange rate will no longer be applicable. At least in
 the short term after the abandonment of the fixed exchange rates, it seems most likely
 that monetary aggregates will be important indicators but not intermediate targets.
     This implies a very important role for indicators. Without an intermediate target, only
indicators remain between the instrument and the goal. The central bank will then have
to use available indicators to assess the state of the economy and the stance of monetary
policy in order to decide whether the instrument need to be adjusted or not for achieving
price stability.
     The central bank will need indicators of inflation pressure, especially indicators that
forecast inflation one to two years ahead, since this is probably about the lag between
the price level and monetary policy measures. A number of indicators will obviously be
necessary for this, including money and credit aggregates, output gaps, vacancies and
unemployment, asset prices and a number of other indicators used in forecasting business
cycles.
    Indicators of inflation expectations will be of great interest rates, for at least tworear

   'See Friedman (1990), McCallum (1990) and Rogoff (1985).
   TSee Bernazike and Mishkin (1992).
   'It is worth noting that Germany's financial mazket is less developed than many other countries
and that Gennany lacks alternatives to bank deposits for interest-basedsavings by households and small
companies. This contributes to the relatively stability o(the demand for money, which can be expected to
exceed that in many other countries where private bonds, National Debt Office accounts, money-market
funds and other instruments have already been introduced.


                                                  6
sons. Market expectations of inflation can be seen as the market's forecast of inflation,
which should have information for the central bank's forecast of inflation. Market ex-
pectations of inflation in relation to announced inflation goals also indicate the degree
of credibility of the goal. Indicators of monetary policy expectations, for instance mar-
ket expectations of future overnight interest rates when the overnight rate is the policy
instrument, should also be of obvious interest to the central bank.
    Short and long term interest rates, in general the yield curve and its slope, are tra-
ditional indicators for monetary policy. in the rest of this paper I shall argue that the
information in the yield curve is more conveniently presented by the corresponding for-
ward rate curve, and I shall discuss how the forward rate curve can be used as an indicator
of market expectations of future interest rates, inflation rates and currency depreciation
rates.


3. Yields to Maturity, Spot Rates and Forward Rates
The standard yield curve displays bill and bond yields to maturity as a function of the
time to maturity. As is well known, the bond yield depends on the coupon size, the
"coupon effect." Yields for different coupons are therefore not comparable. To make
yield curves comparable they need to be standardized. This can be done in several ways.
The theoretically preferable way is to express the yield curve in terms of yields to maturity
on zero-coupon bond yields, spot (interest) rates. For maturities below 12 months spot
rates are directly available in the form of rates on Treasury bills which are zero-coupon
bonds. For longer maturities zero-coupon bonds are usually not available for sufficiently
many maturities and in sufficiently large issues to be sufficiently liquid. Therefore spot
rates will have to be estimated from yields on coupon bonds. Also, even if there were quite
a few longer-maturity zero-coupon bonds, one might still want to use the information in
the coupon bond yields. See Appendix 1 for details on how spot rates can be estimated
from data on coupon bonds.
   A few markets for forward loans and investment exist for settlements within 1 year,
whereas very few or no such markets exist for longer maturities. Therefore, in practice
only implied forward interest rates are available. Implied forward interest rates are derived
from spot rates, since a forward investment with specific settlement and maturity dates
can be reproduced by a sale and a purchase of zero-coupon bonds: a sale of a bond
maturing on the forward contract's settlement date and a purchase of bonds of the same
market value that matures on the forward contract's maturity date. The implied forward

                                              7
  rate is the return on such a readjustment of a bond portfolio.
     The algebra of spot and forward rates is easiest if all rates are continuously compounded.9
 Let i(t, 2') be the continuously compounded spot rate for a zero coupon bond traded at
 time t, the trade date, that matures at time T> 1, the maturity date. Let f(t, t', T) be
 the (implied) forward rate on a forward contract concluded at time t, the trade date, for
 an investment that starts at time 9 > t, the settlement date, and ends at time T > 9,
 the maturity date. Then the forward rate is related to the spot rates according to

                                       (T —   t)i(t, T) — (C — t)i(i, 9)
                          1(1,9,2')
                                                    T-t'                                   (3.1)

 That is, the forward rate for a one-year investment with settlement in 4 years (9 — t = 4
 years) and maturity in 5 years (T — = 5 years) ("the 1-year forward rate 4 years from
 now") is equal to 5 times the 5-year spot rate minus 4 times the 4-year spot rate.
    The instantaneous (-maturity) spot rate (in practice the over-night rate) is defined as

                                       i(t)     limi(i,T)                                 (3.2)

and the instantaneous(-maturity) forward rate is defined as

                                   f(t,i') )Jmf(t,i',T).                                  (3.3)

The finite-maturity forward rate f(t, 9, T), T > 9, will be the average integral of the
instantaneous forward rates with settlement between t' and T,


                                 f(t, 9, T) =   f..f(t,r)dr
                                                                                          (3.4)

   Instantaneous forward rates and finite-maturity spot rates are related as marginal
and average cost of production, when the time to maturity is identified with quantity
produced. The spot rate i(t, T) at time t with maturity at time 2' is identical to the
average of the instantaneous forward rates with settlements between the trade date t and
the maturity date 2',
                                  1(2,2')
                                              fT=f(t,:)dr
                                                                                         (3.5)

   9The continuously compounded spot rate i(tT) and the annually compounded spot rate (t,T) are
related by i(t.T) = exp[IQ,T)}_1 and iQ,T) = ln[1
                                                  +i(t,T)].


                                                8
Equivalently, the forward and spot rates fulfill the relation,

                             f(t, T)   i(t, T) + (T — 1)th(tT)                            (3.6)

which is the standard relation between marginal and average cost, with time to maturity
T—   t corresponding to quantity produced. Hence, when looking at spot and forward rates
we shall recognize sometimes the familiar shapes known from textbooks of microeconomic
theory.
    Figure Ia shows actual market bond yields and estimated spot and forward rates
for France, for the trade date September 22, 1993. The squares show quotes of the
overnight rate, Treasury bill yields and government bond yields, annually compounded
and expressed in percent per year, and plotted against the maturity date.1° The dashed
curve shows estimated spot rates plotted against the maturity date. The solid curve shows
estimated instantaneous forward rates plotted against settlement (and maturity, since the
two coincide for instantaneous forward rates). The forward rates approach a constant
value for long maturities, marked by a horizontal line with long dashes. Error bars on the
spot and forward rate curves denote 95 percent confidence intervals. See Appendix 1 for
details on the estimation.
    We see that the French spot curve on September 22, 1993, had a U-shape somewhat
similar to the standard shape of average cost curves in microeconomics. Consequently
the forward rate curve has a shape somewhat similar to the standard shape of marginal
cost curves. The spot and forward rate curves start for zero time to maturity in the
same point, the forward rate curve lies below the spot rate curve while the spot rate is
decreasing in the time to maturity, the forward rate curve cuts the spot rate curve at the
latter's minimum, and the forward rate curve lies above the spot curve when the latter is
increasing. When for long times to maturity the forward rate becomes constant, the spot
rate asymptotically approaches the same constant.
    Since spot rates and forward rates can be derived from each other, they contain the
same information. Using forward rates instead of spot rates is hence just presenting
the same information in a different way. Using forward rates is an advantage when the
emphasis is on expected future time paths of relevant variables rather than expected future
time averages àf these variables.
   Next I shall discuss how forward rates can help to infer market expectations about

  '°The rates in the graphs are annually compounded, since that is the standard Way to express interest
rates, even though the equations and computations are easiest with continuously compounded rates.

                                               9
 future interest rates, inflation rates and future currency depredation rates.


 4. Expected Future Interest Rates
 Under subjective certainty (perfect foresight, or point expectations) the forward rate
 f(t, t', T) for a given settlement date C and maturity date T will equal the expected
 future spot rate i(t', T) with trade date equal to the forward contract's settlement date
 and maturity date the same as the forward contract. Thus, the instantaneous forward
 rate will equal the expected future instantaneous spot rate (the future overnight rate).
     Why is this? The reason is that a forward contract that involves lending at a future
 date, the settlement date, can be financed at the settlement date by borrowingon the spot
 market at the settlement date. Then the difference between the predetermined forward
 rate and the spot rate determined on the settlement date, f(i, C, T) —i(t', T), is the excess
 (nominal) return on the forward contract. Under subjective certainty that excess return
 must be zero.
    Under subjective uncertainty, the excess return on the forward contract is uncertain at
the trade date,   since the future   spot rate is uncertain. Whether the forward rate equals
the expected future spot rate then simply boils down to whether the expected excess
return on the forward contract is zero or not. The expected excess return on the forward
contract is the forward term premium, (t, C, T). Hence, the expected future spot rate is
the forward rate less the forward term premium,                       -




                             Ei(1', T)   1(4 t', T) — p(t, t', T).                      (4.1)

Hence, whether the forward rate indicates the expected futurespot rate is simply a matter
of the size and the sign of the forward term premium.
    Older theories of the term premium include the liquidity preference theory, which
implies a positive holding period term premium (see below), and the preferred habitat
theory, according to which the term premium for different settlements depend on relative
supply and demand from investors with different horizons. More recent asset pricing
theory (see Shiller (1990) and Svensson (1993b)) explains each premium as depending
upon the covariance of the relevant real excess return with the real return on the market
portfolio (CAPM), real consumption (consumption-based CAPM), or the marginal rate
of real consumption (general asset pricing model). From the more recent theories there
seems to be no prior as to the sign and magnitude of the term premium.

                                              10
    The discussion of term premia in the literature is complicated by the fact that there are
actually three different (but related) term premia that need to be distinguished (Shiller
(1990)). Aside from the forward term premium there is the holding period term premium
(the expected excess return of holding a long bond a short period over the short interest
rate) and the rollover termpremia (the expected excess return of holding along bond to its
maturity over the return from rolling over a short bond to the long bond's maturity) (see
Appendix 2 for precise definitions). The literature has mostly discussed holding period
term premia for, say, 10-year bonds held for 1 year. This premium is 9 times the forward
term premium with settlement in 1 year and maturity in 10 years. This is a combination
of settlement and maturity that is hardly relevant for monetary policy; the forward term
premia that are relevant would rather have settlement in 2-4 years, say, and maturity one
year after. There are very few estimates in the literature of forward term premia with
that combination of settlement and maturity."
    McCulloch (1975, Table 6) reports average (unconditional) forward term premia for US
monthly Treasury bills and Treasury bonds data for the period 1946-1966. For settlement
in 1-5 years and maturity 1 year later he finds positive but small prernia, 0.03-0.10 percent
per year, not significantly different from zero. For settlement in 10 years and maturity 1
year later the premium is -1.09 percent per year, not significantly different from zero.
    For the period 1952-1987 I have estimated unconditional forward term premia on a
database presented in McCulloch (1990), for settlement in 1-4 years and maturity 1 year
later.'2 The result is displayed in Table I. The premia are fairly small and negative, be-
tween -0.10 and -0.62 percent per year, not significantly different from zero (the premium
for settlement in 4 years is close to being significant, though).'3
    Conventional wisdom says that yield curves often have a positive slope (that is, the
yield spread between long and short rates is positive). This is sometimes taken as implying
positive term premia. That implication is not correct, though. Term prernia can be small
or even zero even if the yield spread is positive: Suppose short rates are increasing over
the sample period (this is the case for samples ending with the 1980s). Suppose term

  ttcampbell and SMiler (1991) test and reject the expectations hypobtesis for a number of different
combinations of different maturities and settlement. They do not report estimates of term premia,
though. Frachot and Lease (1993) derive term premia in a model of the term structure with stochastic
conditional volatility and are able to explain the empirical results of Campbell and Shifler (1991).
   "This is the seine dataset that Campbell and Shifler (1991) uses.
   '3For VS data, for settlement in 2-4 years and maturity 1 year later, Fame and Bliss (1987) cannot
reject the hypothesis that forward rates forecast future interest rates and that forward term premia are
zero.



                                                  11
  premia are zero, so tong rates equal expected average short rates up to the long bond
  maturity. If short rates are expected to increase, expected future short rates and hence
  current long rates are of course higher than current short rates.
     To check this, I have estimated the average yield spread between 1-10 year maturities
  and the 3-month maturity, on McCulloch's (1990) dataset. The result is reported in
  Table 2. The average yield spread is positive, between 0.37 and 0.81 percent per year,
  and significantly different from zero. This is so even though term premia are small and
 negative.
     The premia reported here are average, unconditional, termpremia. It is, however, the
 conditional time-varying preinia that are relevant in (4.1). Even if unconditional term
 premia are small, it is possible that time-varying term premia can be sometimes large. If
 time-varying premia are forecastable and economically significant, forward rates should
 be adjusted by the premia in order to infer expected future interest rates. Then the
 time-varying premia should be estimated simultaneously with thespot and forward rates.
 If time-varying term premia are not forecastable, the forward rates should be adjusted
 with the unconditional term premia. The estimates of these reported here indicate that
 they are rather small, though. However, even if the term premia were large, if they were
 relatively stable, shifts over time in unadjusted forward rate curves would still contain
 information, even if the level of the curves would be less reliable.
    In the rest of the paper I shall assume that the term premia relevant for monetary
policy are negligible, and that forward rates indicate expected future spot rates.
    Treasury bill and government bond yields fluctuate quite a bit from day to day, per-
haps depending upon temporary excess demand or supply for different maturities. Con-
sequently estimates of spot and forward rates fluctuate quite a bit from day to day. I do
not want to assume that these short-mn fluctuations necessarily reflect short-run changes
in expected future spot rates. Instead the assumption is that forward rates indicate ex-
pected future spot rates when these short-run fluctuations are filtered out. Therefore,
throughout one should use for instance moving averages over one or a few weeks, rather
than estimates for a particular day. For
                                         convenience only, the examples in this paper will
refer to estimates for single dates.
    Figure lb shows spot rates (dashed curves) and forward rates (solid curves) on Septem-
ber 22, 1993, for France (thick curves) and Britain (thin curves). Consider expectations
of future monetary policy for France, as manifested by the overnight rate. We see that
the expected overnight rate is expected to be lowered to almost 5 percent
                                                                          per year at the


                                           12
end of 1995. From 1996 onwards the over-night rate is expected to increase to about 7
percent per year by year 2001. For Britain, the overnight rates are expected to increase
from a bit more than 5 percent per year to reach 8 percent per year in year 2000.
    How should such expected increases in the overnight rate be interpreted? Could they
be interpreted as an expected future monetary contraction because of expected future
inflation? Hardly. If the central bank is expected to react to higher inflation with a
monetary contraction this would be incorporated into price-setting behavior, in which case
the higher inflation and resulting contraction would not occur, and hence not be expected
to occur. An expected increase in overnight rates might reflect a return to normal short
real rates if these are currently abnormally low. Current French and British short real
rates do not seem to be abnormally low, though.'4 Instead it seems that the expected
increase in overnight interest rates must be interpreted as an expected accommodation
of the central bank to a situation of higher inflation, higher money growth, and higher
interest rates due to Iowa demand for real money balances. Inflation expectations will
be further discussed in the next section.
    Whereas the forward rates indicate the expected time-path of future short interest
rates, the spot rate for a particular maturity indicates the expected average short rates
up to that maturity. The British spot rate of 7 percent per year for maturity in year 2000
is hence the average short rate between 1993 and 2000.
    What about expected future interest rate differentials across countries? From (4.1)
and its foreign analog we get that the expected future interest rate differential between
the domestic and foreign country fulfills

      Ei(t', T) — Ei(t', T)         f(t, t', T) —   f(t, C, T) — [y(i, C, T) — rp(t, C, T),         (4.2)

where foreign variables are denoted by an asterisk. The expected future interest rate
differential equals the difference between the domestic and foreign forward rates less the
difference between the domestic and foreign forward term premia. If the premia are of
the same sign and magnitude they will hence cancel.
    Assuming that the premia are either negligible or that they cancel, we can use the
difference between the French and British forward rate curves in Figure lb to infer the

  Bank of England (1993a) displays a real forward rate curve (derived from the British index-linked
gifts) that does not indicate an expected rapid increase in short real interest rates. In May 1993 the real
forward rate for settlement in 2 years was 3 percent per year. It increases slowly with settlement and
reaches 4 percent per year for settlement in about 14 years.


                                                     13
expected future interest rate differential between the two countries. The differential is
obviously expected to go from almost minus 2 percentage points to plus 2 percentage
points in about 4 years.


5. Expected Future Inflation Rates
Let r(t, T) and ir(i, T) denote the real spot interest rate and the inflation rate, respectively,
between times i and T, T > i.15 Under subjective certainty the Fisher equation holds.
That is, the future inflation rate ir(t', T) between time C and T that is expected at time
i, t c C c T, is equal to the difference between the expected future nominal and real spot
rates between times I' and T, 1(2', T) — r(i', T). Under subjective certainty the nominal
forward rate equals the expected nominal future spot rate. Furthermore, if there is market
for real bonds, the real forward rate equals the expected real future spot rate. Hence, the
expected future inflation rate equals the difference between the nominal and real forward
rates.
    With subjective uncertainty, the expected future inflation rate is no longer necessarily
equal to the difference between expected future nominal and real spot rate. Instead an
inflation risk premium O(t, 2', T) enters, so we have

                        Egr(t', T)    Ei(t', T) — Etr(t', T) — 0(1, L', T).                      (5.1)

The inflation risk premium is the expected real excess return on nominal bonds over real
bonds. According to standard theory it depends on the covariance between that excess
return and the return on the market portfolio (CAPM), consumption (consumption-based
CAPM) or the marginal rate of substitution (general asset-pricing model) (see Svensson
(199Th)). Furthermore, we have seen in (4.1) that the expected nominal futurespot rate
equals the nominal forward rate less the (nominal) term premium. Hence, the expected
future inflation rate is related to the forward rate as

               En(t, i',T)      f(i, t', T) — E1r(t', T) — w(t, t', T) — 0(2, i', T).           (5.2)

   With a market for real bonds, as in Britain, the expected future real spot rate is related

 "The inflation rate rQ,T) is defined as r(1,T) = JnIP(!?(I)1, where P(i) is the price level at timeS.




                                                14
to the real forward rate, g(t, t', T), via the real (forward) term premium, '(t, jlT),

                                 Egr(t',T)     g(t,t',T) — '(i,t',T).                          (5.3)

    It follows that the expected future inflation rate can be written

         Egir(t, 9, T)   f(t, 9, T) — g(i, 9, T) — [y(t, 9, T) — '(t, 11, T)] — O(t, I', T),   (5.4)

the difference between the nominal and real forward rates, less the difference between the
nominal and real term premia, less the inflation risk premium.
    If there is a market for real bonds, expression (5.4) can be used. If the nominal and
real term premia are of the same sign and magnitude they will cancel. The inflation risk
premium should be small in an economy with real bonds, since with real bonds in the
market portfolio the correlation between inflation and the return on the market portfolio
should be less. Then expression (5.4) should be a rather reliable measure of expected
future inflation rates.'6
    Without a market for real bonds, only expression (5.2) can be used. The estimated
expected future inflation rate will be contingent upon an assumed expected future real
interest rate.
    As mentioned the inflation risk premium depends on the covariance between the excess
real return on nominal bonds over real bonds and the return on the market portfolio,
consumption or the marginal rate of substitution, depending upon which asset pricing
model is used. The excess return is simply the negative of the rate of inflation. The
inflation risk premium then depends on the covariance between inflation and the variables
mentioned. Whether the inflation premium is positive or negative depends (in CAPM)
on whether inflation is negatively or positively correlated with the return on the market
portfolio. A priori it is not obvious which sign the inflation risk premium will have.
Regardless of the sign, the correlation between inflation and the return on the market
portfolio is probably not large, in which case the inflation risk premium is unlikely to be
large.
   In the rest of the paper I shall assume that the inflation risk premium is negligible.
   Assume that the expected future real spot rate for France and Britain will be between

  '6Bank of England (1993a,b) reports inflation expectations for Britain by subracting a real implied
forward rate curve from a nominal forward rate curve. The real fbrward rate curve is estimated from
yields on the British index-linked gUts. Woodward (1990) has previously used data on the index-linked
guts to compute the term structure of inflation expectations for Britain.

                                                   15
 3 and 4 percent from 1996 onwards.'7 Then in Figure lb we conclude that the expected
 French inflation rate for 1996 is 1.5-2.5 percent per year, since the forward rate for that
 year is about 5.5 percent per year. The expected inflation rate rises somewhat to 3-4
 percent per year around year 2001. The expected future British inflation rate is 3.5-4.5
 percent per year in 1996 and increases further to 4-5 percent per year around year 2001.
 The difference between the nominal spot rate for given maturity and an assumed real spot
 rate would indicate the expected average inflation rate for that maturity. The difference
 between the nominal forward rate for a given settlement and an assumed future real rate
 indicate the expected future inflation rate at the time of the settlement. Hence, the
 forward rate curve indicate the expected time-path of the inflation rate, whereas the spot
 rate curve indicates the expected average future inflation.
     What about expected future inflation differentials across countries. From (5.2) and
its foreign analog follows

   Etff(2, t', T) — E1r(t, 2', T)         1(2, 2', T) —     f(t, 2', T) — [Etr(2', T)   —
                                                                                            E1r(t', T)]
                                          —[w(2, t',   T)   —
                                                                y(t, il, T)J — [0(2, 2', T) — 0(1, t', T)].
                                                                                                        (5.5)
The expected inflation rate differential is equal to the difference between the forward
rates, less the difference between the expected real rates, less the difference between the
term premia, less the difference between the inflation risk premia. If expected future real
rates, term premia and inflation risk premia are similar across the countries, the forward
rate difference is a good indicator of the expected future inflation differentials.
    In Figure ib, for 1996 and a few years after, the expected inflation for Britain is about
2 percentage points higher than for France.


6. Expected Future Currency Depreciation Rates
Under subjective certainty the expected future depredation rate between time 2' and time
T > 2' of the domestic currency relative to the foreign currency, 8(2', T), must equal the

  'TThis is consistent with the real forward rate curve presented in Bank of                 (1993a). Note
that tt does not make sense to assume a given expected real except at Least a England
                                                                                   couple of years into the
future. In the short run there is considerable inertia in the price level and the inflation rate. With some
aamphflcation: in the short run the inflation is sticky and the real rate adjusts to the nominalrate; the
medium and long rim the real rate is sticky and the nominal rate adjusts to the expected inflation rate.




                                                   16
expected future interest rate differential, i(i', T) — i(t', T).18 Under subjective ceitainty
the forward foreign exchange risk premium, eQ, V, T), enters into the relation,

                         Efi(i',T)     Ei(t',T) — Ei(t',T) — C(i,t',T),                            (6.1)

so the expected future currency depreciation rate equals the expected future interest rate
less the forward foreign exchange risk premium.
    The forward foreign exchange risk premium is the expected excess nominal return on
domestic currency bonds over foreign currency bonds. It depends on the covariance with
the nominal return on the market portfolio (CAPM) or the nominal mirginal rate of
substitution (general asset-pricing model) (see Svensson 1993c)).
  Uncovered interest parity is the same thing as zero foreign exchange risk premia.
Uncovered interest rate parity is usually empirically rejected, except for the franc/mark
exchange rate (see Rose and Svensson (1993), for instance). However, attempts to estimate
the size of foreign exchange risk premia have usually resulted in very small premia (see
Hodrick (1987) and Marston (1993) for surveys).
    In the rest of the paper I shall assume that the foreign exchange risk premium is
negligible.
    From (4.2) follows that the expected currency depreciation rate fulfills

      E6(i', T) = f(i, t', T) — f(t, 1', T) — (p(t, jI, T) — wit, 1', T)J — (t, i', T),            (6.2)

the difference between the forward rates, less the difference between the term premia, less
the foreign exchange risk premium.
    If the term premia are assumed to cancel, and the foreign exchange risk premium is
assumed to be negligible, the vertical distance between the French and British forward
rate curves show the expected future depreciation rate of the franc relative to the pound.
The vertical distance between the French and British spot curves shows the average rate
of depreciation up to the maturity date.
    Figure Ic shows the expected future depredation rate (dashed curve) and expected

  "Let eQ) denote the log exchange rate (log of units of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency).
Then the domestic currency depreciation rate 6(t, 7') i defined as

                                      L(t,T)5



                                                   17
 future accumulated log depredation (solid curve) of the franc relative to the pound.'9
 Hence the dashed curve is the slope of the solid curve. We see that the franc is expected
 to depredate initially but appreciate eventually by more than 10 percent in the next 10
 years.


 7. Comparison of Monetary Policies
 This section compares monetary policies in France, Germany, Britain, Sweden and the
 United States with the help of graphs of spot and forward rates as weU as of expected
 future exchange rates. Figures 2a, Ii and 3a, 6 show spot and forward rates by country
 and by trade date. The six trade dates are September 14 and 21 for 1992 (before and
 after Black Wednesday, September 16, 1992); February 5, May 7, August .2 (immediately
 after the July crisis 1993) and September 22 for 1993. The first five dates are chosen to
 coincide with those for which Bank of England's model Inflation Report report British
 forward rates (Bank of England (1993cr, 6)). The British forward rates estimated here
 correspond closely to those reported by Bank of England, although they are computed
 with different methods.2°
   Spot and forward rates have been estimated with the help of selected Treasury bill
and government bond yields for each trade date, with a method described in Appendix 1.
The estimates should really be done with all the reasonably liquid bills and bonds, and
with a fair amount of detailed institutional knowledge of each country's bill and bond
market. A few different estimation methods should also be tried. The graphs presented
here should therefore be considered as indicative only.
   Graphs of forward rates lend themselves very well to studies of particular events,
and the graphs should really be interpreted by researchers with detailed knowledge of
monetary policy events in each country. Lacking such knowledge for countries other than
Sweden, I will here only present some broad impressions, and instead invite specialists on

  'The expected accumulated log depreciation is given by
                                              = Egt(t,T)(T— t),    T> t.
Under the assumption of a negligible foreign exchange risk premium (uncovered interest parity) it fulfills

                                 Eie(T)—e(t) = (i(t, T)—i' (1, T))(T—t).

   20Bank of England computes forward rates from a par yield curve, the estimation of which is described
in Bank of England (1990) and Mastronikola (1991).


                                                   18
each country for more detailed interpretation.
    Consider Figure Sa which shows instantaneous forward rates by country. Central banks
 control interest rates at the shortest maturities (overnight or weekly rates, say). Central
 banks therefore control the left end-point of each forward rate curve (the shortest forward
 rate coincides with the shortest spot rate). The rest of the curves is determined by the
 market, and can be interpreted as the market's expectations of future short rates, hence
of future monetary policy as it is manifested in the short rates central banks set. The
excess of the forward rates over a given expected future real spot rate can be interpreted
as the expected future inflation, and differences between countries' forward rates can
be interpreted as expected future currency depreciation rates1 all under the maintained
assumption that the relevant prernia are either negligible or cancel. Even if the premia axe
not negligible or do not cancel, as long as they are stable over time, shifts in the curves
convey information even if levels cannot be interpreted.
     However, let me repeat that I do not want to assume that day-to-day fluctuations
in estimated forward rates should be interpreted in this way, instead the interpretation
concerns averages over one or a few weeks, say. The estimated spot and forward rates to
be discussed are nevertheless for simplicity from six single dates only, which is another
reason why only broad impressions rather than a detailed interpretation is presented.
    Figure 3a shows that forward rate curves in general have shifted down during the last
year. For the United States longer forward rates have fallen more than shorter, whereas
the opposite is the case for the other countries. The British experience is interesting (it
is also discussed in Bank of England's Inflation Report). The lowering of short rates after
Black Wednesday was followed by a considerable increase (several percentage points) in
long forward rates. Only recently have long forward rates come down to where they were
immediately before Black Wednesday. One interpretation is that monetary expansion
after Black Wednesday, with limited credibility due to Britain's inflation history and lack
of independence of Bank of England, led to a considerable increase in long run inflation
expectations. For France lower short rates have not been followed by increases in the
long forward rates. Only recently have the long forward rates come down somewhat. For
Sweden the lowering of short rates have, as for Britain, been followed by increases in long
forward rates, and only during the last summer have they come down to where they were
immediately before Black Wednesday.
  A comparison with Figure Ea for Britain and Sweden shows that the spot rates give
a different interpretation than the forward rates. The long spot rates had come down


                                            19
below the levels of September 14, 1992, already in February, 1993, and they have fallen
considerably below since. The long spot rates, being the average forward rates from the
trade date up to the maturity, are influenced also by expected interest rate movements
in the near term, whereas long forward rate have filtered out the effects of short-term
expectations. To the extent that the focus is on expected interest and inflation rates in
years a few years into the future, the forward rates are more relevant than the spot rates.
Indeed, since monetary policy has effects on the price level with a lag of, say, one or two
years, in monetary policy issues it should be frequent to look beyond the first year or two.
Looking at the spot rates in such a situation may actually be misleading, as this example
shows.
    Figure Sb shows forward rates by trade dates. Especially in the spring of 1993 the
countries fall into two categories. France, Germany, and the United States fall in one
category, with similar relatively low long forward rates. Britain and Sweden fall into
another category, with significantly higher long forward rates. This pattern is less clear
in the fall of 1993, with the long forward rates of France and Britain falling in between
those of Sweden and the United States.
    I interpret this as indicating that there is higher credibility for price-stability monetary
policy in France, Germany, and the United States than in Britain and Sweden.2' In
Britain and Sweden the lowering of short rates have lead to increased long forward rates,
which only recently have come back to the same levels as before Black Wednesday. The
United States's high credibility has allowed a very expansionary monetary policy in the
short run with very low short nominal and real rates, without resulting in increased long
forward rates due to increased long-run inflation expectations. Instead the long forward
rates have even come down during the last year. Germany's long forward rates have also
come down since September 1992. Whereas France in the spring of 1993 had forward
rates very similar to Germany's, after the July crisis the long forward rates have risen
somewhat above Germany's, which if sustained might be interpreted as indicating some
market doubts about France's long-run inflation outlook.
    Figure 4a shows expected future mark exchange rates for the franc, the pound, the
krona and the dollar, expressed as accumulated log depreciation from September 14, 1992.
The left end-point of each curve shows the spot exchange rateon the corresponding trade
date. The rest of each curve shows the expected accumulated future log depreciation

          reasons   for the high crethbility of price stability in the United States are discussed by Goodiriend
(1993).



                                                       20
calculated from the differences between forward rates in Figure 3b. Therefore Figure
4a simply shows the exchange rate expectations that are consistent with the forward
interest rates and the spot exchange rate on each trade date. The franc had in September
1993 depreciated a few percent relative to the mark, but there were no expectations of
further depredation. The pound had in September 1993 depreciated quite a bit, some
appreciation was expected in the short term, and in the long run further depreciation is
expected. For the krona, it appears that during the September 1992 crises, the expected
devaluation was about 10 percent (see the kink at 10 percent for the curves of September
14 and 21 in 1992). After the krona was floated in November 1992 it has depreciated
rapidly, more rapidly than expected, and in September 1993 further depreciation was
expected. The dollar has fluctuated relative to the mark quite a bit, but there are no
expectations of substantial future depreciation or appreciation.


8. Conclusion
In the new situation with flexible exchange rates, monetary policy in Europe will have
to rely more on indicators than previously under fixed rates, especially since it will most
likely be difficult, at least for some time, to find appropriate and reliable intermediate
targets for monetary policy. Several different indicators will have to be used. One of the
potential indicators, the (implied) forward interest rate curve, can be used to indicate
market expectations of the time-paths of future short interest rates, monetary policy,
inflation rates and currency depredation rates.
    The forward rate curve contains the same information as the spot rate curve, but it
presents the information in a way that makes it easier to interpret for monetary policy pur-
poses. Thus the forward rate curve separates market expectations for the short, medium
and long term more easily than the spot rate curve. Since monetary policy measures
have effects with "long and variable lags," looking beyond the short term is important
in monetary policy. Using long spot rates or long bond yields instead of long forward
rates can then give misleading impressions, since long spot rates and long bond yields
include expectations of interest rate movements in the short term. In long forward rates
expectations of interest rate movements in the short term have been filtered out:
    Monetary policy in France, Germany, Great Britain, Sweden and the United States
has been interpreted with the help of forward rates. The British and Swedish experience
is similar in that long forward rates increased considerably after the pound and the krona
were floated, and the long forward rates have come down to pre-September 1992 levels

                                            21
only recently. In contrast, monetary expansion and very low short-term interest rates
in the United States has been followed by a fall in long forward rates. There is some
indication of an increase in French long forward rates after the widening of ERM bands in
August 1993. These developments have been be interpreted in terms of movements in long
run inflation expectations. The developments and the interpretation in terms of inflation
expectations are consistent with the idea that long-run credibility for a price-stability
policy increases the scope for monetary policy to stabilize output and employment in the
short run.
    The paper has highlighted the role of term, inflation and foreign exchange risk premia
in using forward rates as indicators of future interest rates, inflation rates and currency
depredation rates. The maintained assumption in the analysis of monetary policy in the
five countries considered is that the relevant premia either cancel or are negligible. This
maintained assumption has some empirical support. Estimates of average forward premia
for settlement in a few years and maturity one year later indicate that the premia are
small. Also, the conventional wisdom that upward sloping yield curves imply positive
term prernia is not correct, since the upward sloping yield curve may be explained by
expectations of rising short rates over the sample. However, it is actually conditional time-
varying premia, rather than unconditional average premia that are relevant. More research
on and estimation of unconditional time-varying forward premia with these combinations
of settlement and maturity is called for. The literature has usually considered other term
premia, the holding period and rollover term premia, and other combinations of settlement
and maturity. The literature has also frequently focused on testing the expectations
hypothesis (the hypothesis of zero risk premia) rather than on actually estimating the
size of the premia in order to judge whether the premia are economically as well as
statistically significant.
    If unconditional time-varying premia are non-negligible, that does not mean that for-
ward rates cannot be used as indicators, only that the premia should be estimated simul-
taneously with the forward rates and then used to adjust the forward rates.


A. Estimation of Spot and Forward Interest Rates
The estimation of spot and forward rates follows McCulloch (1971, 1975) in fitting for
each trade date a discount function (the price of a zero-coupon bond as a function of the
time to maturity) to bill and bond price data, but it uses the functional form of Nelson


                                            22
and Siegel (1987) instead of McCulloch's cubic spline.22
    Nelson and Siegel (1987) assume that the instantaneous forward rate is the solution
to a second-order differential equation with two equal roots. Hence it can be written

                     f(m; /9, r) = o + p1 exp (—         ) + fi2 exp (—2!),                      (A.1)

where m 0 is the time to maturity in years, and where Pa, th,                     /92 and   r are the
parameters. The spot rate can be derived by integrating the forward rate according to
(3.5). It is given by


                 i(m;fl,r)=po+(flt+$)l ex;( ;) —$2exp(_).                                        (A.2)

    Let i(0;$,r), f(0;/I,r), i(oo;$,r) and f(co;fi,r) denote the limits of the spot and
forward rates when the time to maturity goes to zero and infinity, respectively. The spot
and forward rates have the properties

                                 i(oo;fl,r) = f(oo;fl,r) = Po and                                (A.3)

                                 i(O; /9, r)   = 1(0; /9, r) = Pc + fly.                         (A.4)
Furthermore, suppose there is a maximum or a minimum for the forward rate, that is,
there is an fit 0 such that the derivative fm(th; /9, r) = 0, with I = f(th; /9, 'r). Then,


                                  !=th+thexP(_1) and                                             (A.5)


                                                                                                 (A.6)

It follows that the parameters Pa, fit, /92 and r can be computed recursively by f(oo),
1(0), I and fit, which facilitates their interpretation and the choice of starting values in
the estimation procedure.
    The discount function is then given by

                                 d(rn; /9, r) = exp[—i(m; /9, i-)mJ.                             (A.?)

  22See Dahlquist and Svensson (1993) for a comparision of estimates of spot and forward rates with
the simple functional form of Nelson and Siegel (1987) and the complex functional form of Longstaff and
Schwartz (1992).


                                                    23
      For a given trade date, let there be it coupon bonds (ç,, rn,,p1), j = 1, ..., n, where
c1,   rn1 and p denote, respectively, the coupon, the time to maturity and the observed
price of bond j, which is assumed to have a face value of 100 units of domestic currency.
If bond prices are not directly available, they are computed from the yields to maturity.
For given parameters (fi, r). the model prices of the bonds, P,(/3, r), axe computed with
the discount function evaluating each coupon payment:
    For annual coupon payments, let rik, k = 1,2,..., K5, denote the times for the coupon
payments on bond j, where K, is the number of coupon payments. In the special case
when rn5 is an integer, we simply have tjk = k and K1 = rn;. In the general case we have

                                     =      rna—Lms]+k—1 and
                                                                                                  (AS)
                                  K5 =      [rn5]+1

where [m1J denotes the largest integer that is strictly smaller than rn. The model price
of each bond, P;($,r), is the present value of the bond when the coupon payments and
the face value are priced with the discount function,

                           K,
              Pj($,r)E100.cjd(r;k;f3,r)+l0O.d(TKI;/3,r),j=1,...,n.
                      k=1
                                                                                                  (A.9)

      For semiannual coupon payments, that is, for Britain and the United States, these
relations are accordingly modified.
      The observed price is assumed to differ from the model price by an error term, cj,

                                            = Pj($,r) + c,.                                     (A.1O)

   The model prices are then fitted to the observed prices with non-linear least squares or
with maximum-likelihood. The estimates in this paper are maximum likelihood. The 95%
confidence intervals have been computed with the delta method and are heteroskedasticity-
consistent.
    Figure Al corresponds to Figure la, for France, September 22, 1993. It shows actual
bond prices (squares), estimated bond prices with 95% confidence intervals (dots with
error bars), and coupons (pluses). For this estimation the root mean square error is 0.28

  "That model prices will not be exactly equal to observed prices would be a problem if the model was
used to price financial instruments, since that would allow arbitrage (cf. Hull (1993, p. 398)). However,
the purpose here is to provide spot and forward rates to be used as indicators for monetary policy, in
which case small deviations between model and observed prices is of no significance.

                                                  24
percent of the bonds's principal value. The maximum error is 0.68 percent of the face value
of the 19-year bond maturing in year 2012. The root mean square error of yield errors
is 0.13 percentage points. The parameters are fib = 0.0746, fl = —00060, th = —0.0571
and r = 2.210. For long maturities the spot and forward rates hence approach the level
7.46 percent per year continuously compounded, which corresponds to 7.75 percent per
year annually compounded.
    The estimates of the spot and forward rates in this paper has been done with the
restriction that the estimated spot rate and forward rate for zero maturity and settlement
should equal the quoted overnight rate (in practice, that fib and fi' should sum to the
quoted overnight rate). In some cases that has lead to a poor fit of the Treasury bill rates
with maturity 3, 6 or 12 months. Then the zero-maturity spot and forward rate has been
adjusted to give a better fit to the Treasury bill rates. In these cases the left end-points of
the spot and forward rate curves of course differ from the quoted overnight rate. Figure
la is one such case. There the zero-maturity spot and forward rate has been set to is
7.1 percent per year annually compounded, which differ from the quoted overnight rate,
about 7.5 percent per year annually compounded. This procedure has been followed since
I have trusted the Treasury bill data more than the overnight rate data.
    It is desirable that the estimated spot rates should fit the Treasury bill rates well since
the latter are actual spot rates. There is no reason the estimated spot rates should equal
the coupon bond yields, since the yields depend on the coupons. Therefore, the fact that
the spot rates in Figure la deviate from the bond yields for long maturities does not
indicate a bad fit.
    Minimizing the squared deviations from Treasury bill and bond prices gives less weight
to short-maturity yields, since prices are insensitive to yields for short maturities. Unre-
stricted estimates can then give fairly large deviations for short yields. That is the reason
why I have imposed the restriction on estimated zero-maturity spot and forward rates.
Alternatively, the price deviations can be weighted somewhat in favor of short maturities.
Minimizing deviations from yields is of course an implicit strong weighting of short ma-
turities. In general, the weighting should be motivated by the purpose of the estimation,
especially in which maturity range most precision is desired.
    Convergence was fast with reasonable starting values, especially when the parameters
   fi'   and $2 were scaled by 100.
   See Dahlquist and Svensson (1993) for further discussion of these and related issues.




                                             25
B. Three Different Term Premia
As discussed in Shiller (1990) there are three kinds of term premia that have been discussed
in the literature. The forward term premium ç(t, 1', T) is defined as

                             p(t, 2', T)     f(t, I', T) — Ei(t', T).                 (13.1)


   The holding period term premium rph(t, 1', T) is defined as

                             'P4@, t', T)   E1h(t, 2', T) — 1(2, 9),                  (8.2)

where the holding period return h(t, 1', T) is the rate of return from holding a bond
maturing at time T from time 2 to time t', which gives
                                                  —
                                     1(2, T)(T        t)—i(t', T)(T — 2')
                       h(L, 2', T)                                                    (B3)

   The rollover term premium çt',(i, T, m) is defined as

                 ço,(t,T,m) = i(1,T) —                  (2 + U — 11)m,t   +jrn),      (13.4)


where m =       and n is an integer, the number of times a bond of maturity m is rolled
over.
   The following relations hold between these term premia:

                              (ph(t, 9, T)
                                               w(t t',7')(T — 2')
                                                                                     (13.5)



                     w@,t', T)       1y(t, t + (j — 1)m,i + im).                     (3.6)




                                                26
Table 1. Forward Term Premium (1-year rates, %/yr)
             Settlement Premium Std Err
                1 yr     -0.10     0.22
               2 yrs     -0.24     0.36
               3 yrs     -0.44     0.36
               4 yrs     -0.62     0.34


 Table 2. Yield spread (over 3-month yields, %/yr)
              Maturity Spread Std Err
                 1 yr    0.37    0.05
                2 yrs    0.49    0.10
                3 yrs    0.57    0.13
                4 yrs    0.63    0.13
                5 yrs    0.68    0.13
                10 yrs   0.81    0.12




                          27
References
 [1 Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), "Central Rank Independence
    and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence," Journal of Money,
    Credit, and Banking 25, 151-162.

 12] Bank of England (1990), "A New Yield Curve Model," Bank of England Quarterly
    Bulletin, February 1990, 84-85.

 [1 Bank of England (1993a), Inflation Report, May 1993.

 [4) Bank of England (1993b), Inflation Report, August 1993.

 [5) Bank for International Settlements (1993), 63rd Annual Report, Basle.

 [6] Batten, Dallas S., Michael P. Blackwell, In-Su Kim, Simon E. Nocera and Yusuru
     Ozeki (1990), "The Conduct of Monetary Policy in the Major Industrial Countries:
     Instruments and Operating Procedures," IMF Occasional Paper No. 70.

 (7] Bernanke, Ben, and Frederic Mishkin (1992). "Central Bank Behavior and the Strat-
     egy of Monetary Policy: Observations from Six Industrialized Countries." NBER
     Macroeconomics Annual 1992.

 (8] Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller (1991), "Yield Spreads and Interest Rate
    Movements: A Bird's Eye View," Review of Economic Studies 58, 495-514.

 [9] Dahlquist, Magnus, and Lan E. 0. Svensson (1993), "Estimation of the Term Struc-
     ture of Interest Rates with Simple and Complex Functional Forms: Nelson & Siegel
    vs. Longstaff & Schwartz," Working Paper.

[10) Fama, Eugene F., and Robert R. Bliss (1987), "The Information in Long-Maturity
    Forward Rates," American Economic Review 77, 608-692.

(11) Frachot, Antoine, and Jean-Philippe Lesne (1993), "Expectations Hypotheses and
     Stochastic Volatilities," Working Paper, Banque de France.

[12] Freedman, Charles (1993), "Formal Targets for Inflation Reduction: The Canadian
     Experience," Working Paper, Bank of Canada.




                                         28
 [13] Friedman, Benjamin M. (1990), "Targets and Instruments of Monetary Policy,"
      Chapt. 22 in Friedman, Benjamin M. and Frank H. Hahn (eds), Handbook of Mont-
      tary Economics, Volume II, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

 (14] Goodfriend, Marvin (1993), "Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem:
      1979-1992," in Marvin Goodfriend and David H. Small, eds, Operating Procedures
      and the Conduct of Monetary Policy. Conference Proceedings, Federal Reserve Board,
     Washington, D.C.

 [15] Hodrick, Robert J., (1987), The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of For-ward and
      Futures Foreign Exchange Markets, Harwood Academic Publishers, London.

 [16] Hörngren, Lars, and Hans Lindberg (1993), "The Struggle to Turn the SwedishKrona
      into a Hard Currency," Working Paper No. 8, Sveriges Riksbank.

 [17] Hull, John C. (1993), Options, Futures, and Other Derivate Securities, Second edi.
     tion, Prentice-Han, London.

 [18] Marston, Richard C. (1993), "Nominal Interest Differentials," manuscript chapter.

 1191 Mastronikola, Katerina (1991), "Yield Curves for Gilt-Edged Stocks: A New Model,"
     Bank of England Discussion Paper, Technical Series, No. 49.

1201 McCallum, Bennett T. (1990), "Targets, Indicators and Instruments of Monetary
    Policy," IMF Working Paper WP/90/41.

1211 McCulloc, J. Huston (1971), "Measuring the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
     Journal of Business 44, 19-31.

1221 McCulloch, J. Huston (1975), "An Estimate of the Liquidity Premium," Journal of
    Political Economy 83, 62-63.

(23] McCuiloch, J. Huston (1990), "US Term Structure Data, 1946-1987," Appendix B
    in Shiller (1990).

(24J Nelson Charles R., and Andrew F. Siegel (1987), "Parsimonious Modeling of Yield
    Curves," Journal of Business 60, 473.489.

(25) Rogoff, Kenneth (1985), "The Optimal Degreee of Commitment to an Intermediate
    Monetary Target," Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 1169-1189.


                                          29
[261 Rose and Svensson (1993), "Expected and Predicted Realignments: The FF/DM
    Exchange Rate during the EMS, 1979-1993," Working Paper.

[27] Shiller, Robert J. (1990), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates," Chapt. 13 in
    Friedman, Ben M., and Frank H. Hahn (eds), Handbook of Monetary Economics,
     Volume I, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

[28] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1992), "Targets and Indicators with a Flexible Exchange Rate,"
     Monetary Policy with a Floating Exchange Rate, Sveriges Riksbank, December 1992,
     15-24.

129] Svensson, Lars E.O. (i993a), "The Forward Interest Rate Curve - An Indicator of
    Market Expectations of Future Interest Rates, Inflation and Exchange Rates" (in
    Swedish), Ekonomisk Debatt 21-3, 219-234.

[301 Svensson,Lars E.O. (1993b), "Term, Inflation and Foreign Exchange Risk Premia:
    A Unified Treatment," Seminar Paper No. 548, Institute for International Economic
    Studies.

[311 Svensson, Lars E.O. (1994), "Fixed Exchange Rates as a Means to Price Stability:
    What Have We Learned?" European Economic Review, forthcoming.

[32) Sveriges Riksbank (1993), Monetary Policy Indicators, June 1993.

[33] Woodward, C. Thomas (1990), "The Real Thing: A Dynamic Profile of the Term
     Structure of Real Interest Rates and Inflation Expectations in the United Kingdom,
     1982.89," Journal of Business 63, 373-398.




                                         30
LS    931030
                       Figure 1 a. Yields to kiuturity, Spot and Forward Rates
                          France, Sep 22, 1993, 95Z confidence interval
           10


           9
     0a)
     •0
     C     8
     J0
      a           0
     F
     0     7
     0
     >'
     0     6
     C                           ci
     C
     0
           5


           4                                               0           Actual yield to maturity
                                                           —   —   —   EetIrnoted spot rate
                                                                       Estimated forward rate
           3       I     I       I       I             I
                                               i   I                                              I   I
                1992   1996    20D0    2004    2008        2012           2016        2020        2024
                                        Maturity/settlement
          Figure   lb.       Spot and Forward Rates, France arid Creat Britain
                                         Sep 22, 1993
     10


     9
-c
4)
-o
C    S
J0
a
E
C    7
C)
>
0    6
C
c
                                                      9_
a
     5

                                                       ——    —, France. epot rate
     4                                                          France. forward rate
                                                       — —   —. Great Brltcfn, spot rate
                                                                Great Britain. forward rate
     3        I          I             I          I     I          I       I       I

            1994 1995 1996           1997 1998   1999 2000 2001         2002 2003 2004
                                      Maturity/settlement
             Figure     ic.
                       Expected Future Deprecia tion Rate and
            Accu mulated Depreciation, FRF/GBP. Sep 22, 1993
      2


      0


     —2



     —4
N
     —6



     —8


    —10
          — — —
                  Expected future depreciation rate, 7./yr
                  Expected future accumulated log depreciation. 2
    —12                                     I


          1994 1995 1996 1997             1998    1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
                   Figure 2a. Spot Rates by Counb-y
                 France                                   Germany
                            —Sep 14, 1992
12                            Sep 21, 1992 12
                            —'Vet, 5.1993
     ¼                      '—'•Moy 7, 1993
10 .'.                      —Auv 2. 1993 10

8                                             8

                                              5




         1994 lSfl $998 2000 2002 2004        ?992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
                 Maturity


              Great Britain                                Sweden




         1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004        12992 1994 )996 1998 2000 2002 2004



              United States
12


10




 1492 1994 1996 1996 2Q00 2002 2004
                   Figure 2b. Spot Rates by Trade Date
               Sep 14, 1992                               Sep 21. 1992
     12                                         12
V
V
C
                                                10
C
a.
£


.6
C
C
C


                              —— Swsd.n
                              — United State.
     1992 1994 1996 19982000 2002 2034           92 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
                   Ucturity


                Feb 5, 1993                                May 7, 1993
     12                                         12

     10                                         10

     a                                           a

     6                                           6


     4                                           4


     (992 1994 1996 i990 2000 2002 2004         92   1994 1590 1990 2000 2002 2004



               Aug 2. 1993                                Sep 22, 1993
    12                                          12

    10


     e                                          a

     6                                          6


     4                                          4


          1994 1996 1990 2000 2002 2004         h92 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
                 Figure 3o. Forward Rates by Country
                 France                              Germany
    12                                   12
S
V
C                                        10
3
C

                                         a
                                         6

                                         4

                                              1994 1998 1998 2000 2002 2004
                 Settlsrnsnt


              Great Britain                           Sweden
    12                                   12

    10                                   10

     8                                   8

     6                                    8


     4                                   4


    92 1994 1996 i998 2000 2002 Z(Y4     ?992 1994 199$ 1998 2000 2002 2004



              United States
    12

    10


     a


     6

     4


    "992 1994 1996 1996 2000 2002 2004
                  Figure 3b. Forward Pates by Trade Date
                 Sep 14, 1992                                     Sep 21, 1992
    12                                                 12
I
g 10                                                   10
0

                                                           8

                                                           8
                                    — Franc.
                                    —. Ganiany
                                       Gr.at Britain       4
                                       Swudsn
                                    —United Stales
     i4az 1994   1696 1998 2000 2302 2304               19e2 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
                    Sotti. ens nt



                 Feb 5, 1993                                      May 7, 1993
    12                                                 12

    10                                                 10

     8                                                  a

     6                                                  8

     4                                                  4


    (9Z 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004                   i992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004



                 Aug 2, 1993                                     Sep 22, 1993
    12                                                 12

    10                                                 10


                                                       6

    6                                                  6

    4     /I                                           4



    &92 1994 1996 1996 2000 2002 2004                  f992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
     Figure 4a. Expected Future Exchange Rates by Currency
N                  FR Ff0 EM                                  GBP/ OEM
a
      30                                          50

      20                                          40
0.
      10


C
          0 '—                                    20
C                              —'—Sep 14. 1992
o—10                              Sep 21, 1992    10
                               —. Feb 5, 1993
     —20
                               —-Uay 7, 1993       0
0                              —Aug 2. 1993
                                 Sep 22. 1993
            1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004         'Th92 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004



                  SEK/DEM                                     IJSD/DEM
     60                                           .30

     50                                           20

     40                                           10

     30                                            0

     20

     10                                          -20

     tbs2 1994 1996 1996 2000 2002 2004          tb92 1984 1986 1998 2000 2002 2004
Figure 4b. Expected Future Exchange Rates by Trade Date
N
a                Sep 14, 1992                          Sep 21, 1992
     60                                      60
                            — FRF/tiflA
                            —-GW/DEM




          1994   1996 1998 2000 2002 2004   Th19Z 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004


                  Feb 5, 1993                           May 7, 1993
     60                                     60


                                                              -
     30



      o




    %92 1994 1995 1996 2000 2002 2004             1994 19 1998 2000 2002 2004


                 Aug 2, 1993                          Sep 22, 1993
     60                                     60



    .30




          1994   1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 %92 1994 1998 1998 2000 2002 2004
LS   931030
               Figure Al. Actual and Estimated Bond Prices, Coupons. France
                           Sep 22. 1993. 95Z confidence interval
         130   -



                                                                              di
                                                      a
         120   -

                                              w



     N   110   -                                          9
                                                  +   +           +            +
                                                          +


         100   -   Wf+
                   El
                    El                                                      Q Actual bond-price
                                                                            • Estimated bond price
                                                                            + coupon + 100
                   I     I - _I__i_   I   I   I                    I   I
          go -
               1992 1996                  2000        2004     2008        2012     2016       2020   2024
                                                              Maturity
