                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                        ECONOMIC GROWTH, POPULATION
                     THEORY, AND PHYSIOLOGY: THE BEARING
                        OF LONG-TERM PROCESSES ON THE
                          MAKING OF ECONOMIC POLICY



                                      Robert W. Fogel



                                  Working Paper No. 4638



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1994



Prepared for presentation as the Prize Lecture in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred
Nobel, December 9, 1993. Since this lecture is based on research still in progress, it is
important to emphasize that the findings reported here are provisional and are subject to
change as the current databases expand and as the analyses of these data are refined.
Nevertheless, I believe that the general outlines of the emerging new theories of mortality,
morbidity, and aging are likely to survive further research. Research reported in this paper
was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (#PO1-AG1O12O-02), the
National Science Foundation, (#SES-9114981), and the Walgreen Foundation. I have
benefitted from comments and criticisms by Christopher J. Acito, Robert McC. Adams, Gary
S. Becker, Christine K. Cassel, Katherine A. Chavigny, Dora L. Costa, William J. Darby,
Partha Dasgupta, Sidney Davidson, Stanley L. Engerman, Phyllis Eveleth; Enid M. Fogel,
Milton Friedman, Victor R. Fuchs, Zvi Griliches, Robin M. Hogarth, Susan E. Jones, John M.
Kim, Peter Laslett, Lionel W. McKenzie, Reynaldo Martorell, Douglass C. North, S. Jay
Olshansky, Clayne L. Pope, Samuel H. Preston, Irwin Rosenberg, Roger A. Schofield, Nevin
S. Scrimshaw, Robert M. Solow, Richard H. Steckel, David Surdam, Richard Suzman, James
NI. Tanner, Peter Temin, James Trussell, James W. Vaupel, Hans T. Waaler, and E.A.
Wrigley. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Growth, Health Economics, and
the Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4638
                                                                             February 1994


                         ECONOMIC GROWFH, POPULATION
                      ThEORY, AND PHYSIOLOGY: THE BEARING
                         OF LONG-TERM PROCESSES ON ThE
                          MAKING OF ECONOMIC POLICY


                                         ABSTRACT



       This paper sketches a theory of the secular decline in morbidity and mortality that takes

account of changes in human physiology since 1700. The synergism between technological and

physiological improvements has produced a form of human evolution, much more rapid than

natural selection, which is still ongoing in both OECD and developing countries.
Thermodynamic and physiological aspects of economic growth are defined and their impact on

growth rates is assessed. Implications of this theory for population forecasting, measurement of

national income, demand for leisure, pension policies, and for the demand for health care are

considered.




Robert W. Fogel
Center for Population Economics
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
           Economic Growth. Population Theory. and Physiolo2v: The Bearing of
                Long-Term Processes on the Makin2 of Economic Policy

       Economic history has contributed significantly to the formulation of economic theory.

Among the economists who have found history an important source for their ideas are Smith,

Maithus, Marx, Marshall, Keynes, Hicks, Arrow, Friedman, Solow, and Becker. Failure to

take account of history, as Simon Kuznets (1941) stressed, has often led to a misunderstanding

of current economic problems by investigators who have not realized that their generalizations

rested upon transient circumstances. Nowhere is the need to recognize the role of long-run

dynamics more relevant than in such pressing current issues as medical care, pension policies,

and development policies. I will attempt to put these issues into perspective by describing the

escape from hunger and premature mortality which began in Europe and North America about

300 years ago and has not yet run its course. Even in the rich countries of the world, most

individuals are still developing chronic diseases and dying prematurely.
                                            *   **
       The attempt to explain the secular decline in mortality in a systematic way did not begin

until after World War I because before that time it was uncertain whether such a decline was

in progress. There were two reasons for the delay in recognizing the phenomenon. First, little

was known about mortality rates before the end of the Napoleonic wars. Hardly a dozen life

tables had been constructed before 1815 by various pioneers in demography and they exhibited

no clear time trend (Dublin and Lotka 1936; Gille 1949/50). Second, there waslittle evidence

in the first four official English life tables, covering the years 183 1-80, of a downward trend in

mortal ity.

        By the third decade of the twentieth century, however, it became obvious that the new

declines in British mortality rates were not just a cyclical phenomenon. Between 1871 and 1901

life expectation in Britain increased by 4 years. During the next three decades there was an

additional gain of 16 years. Similar declines in mortality were recorded in other European

nations.
                                                                                                 2
       The plunge in mortality rates during the early decades of the twentieth century delivered

a major blow to the Maithusian theory of population. Improvements in mortality were supposed

to be short lived because, under the conditions of population pressure against the food supply

that Maithus specified, the elimination of deaths due to one disease would be replaced by those

due to some other malady. Efforts to reconcile Maithusian doctrine with the observed mortality

decline, to modify it, or to replace it produced a large new literature.

                         1. Explaining the Secular Decline in Mortality

       The drive to explain the secular decline in mortality pushed research in three directions.

First, there was a concerted effort to develop time series of death rates that extended as far back

in time as possible in order to determine just when the decline in mortality began. Second, the

available data on mortality rates were analyzed in order to identify factors that might explain the

decline as well as to establish patterns or "laws" that would allow predictions of the future

course of mortality.

       Third, a widespread effort was undertaken to determine the relationship between the food

supply and mortality rates.     There were several aspects to this effort. Perhaps the most

important was the emergence of a science of nutrition that identified a series of diseases related

to specific nutritional deficiencies and discovered the synergy between nutrition and infection

(Scrimshaw, Taylor and Gordon 1968). Another aspect was the emergence of the field of

development economics after World War II as part of the campaign to close the yawning gap

in income, health, and life expectancy between the industrialized nations and the "developing

nations." Still another aspect was the combined effort of economic and demographic historians

to study the role of mortality crises and their relationship to famines during the seventeenth and

eighteenth centuries.

       Prior to the 1960s, efforts to reconstruct the secular trend in European mortality were

focused primarily on notable local communities and parishes. However, developments in
                                                                                                 3

statistical techniques and the remarkable reductions in computational costs during the 1960s and

1970s made it possible to draw and process large nationally representative samples. The results

of these efforts, combined with official statistics after 1830 in France and after 1871 in England,

are displayed in Figure 1. Analysis of the French and English series revealed that the secular

decline in mortality took place in two waves. In the English case the first wave began during

the second quarter of the eighteenth century (18-I!) and lasted through 19-I after which mortality

rates stabilized for half a century. The decline resumed during 19-IV and continues through the

present. The French case is similar except that the first wave of the decline in mortality began

about half a century earlier in France and its rate of decline during the first wave was more

rapid.
         Perhaps the most surprising aspect of Figure 1 is the implication that the elimination of

crisis mortality, whether related to famines or not, accounted for less than 10 percent of the

secular decline in mortality rates (Wrigley and Schofield 1981; Lee 1981; Dupâquier 1989, Weir

1982 and 1989; Richards 1984; Galloway 1986; Fogel 1992b). Similar results were obtained

by studies of official statistics for Sweden (Bengtsson and Ohlsson 1984, 1985; Galloway 1987;

cf. Eckstein, Schult.z, and Wolpin 1985; Perrenoud 1984 and 1991; Fridlizius 1984). By

demonstrating that famines and famine mortality are a secondary issue in the escape from the

high mortality rates of the early modern era, these studies shifted attention to the neglectedissue

of chronic malnutrition as the principal pathway through which malnutrition contributed to the

high mortality rates of the past (cf. Sen 1981).

                 2. The Synergy Between Biomedical and Economic Analyses of
                            the Secular Trend in Chronic Malnutrition

         Recently developed biomedical techniques, when integrated with economic techniques,

make it possible to probe deeply into the extent of chronic malnutrition from the beginning of

 the eighteenth century in Europe and North America, to chart and explain the escape from such

 malnutrition, and to consider the impact of improved nutrition on the secular trend in health and
                                                                                               4
life expectation, on labor productivity, and on economic growth. The combination of the

economic and biomedical modes of analysis has been synergistic since it has yielded analytical

insights that could not have been obtained merely by relying on the techniques of one of the

disciplines.

        Malnutrition can be caused either by an inadequate diet or by claims on that diet

(including work and disease) so great as to produce malnutrition despite a nutrient intake that

in other circumstances might be deemed adequate.' There can be little doubt that the high

disease rates prevalent during the early modern era would have caused malnutrition even with

diets otherwise adequate in calories, protein, and other critical nutrients. However, recent

research indicates chat, for many European nations before the middle of the nineteenth century,

the national production of food was at such low levels that the poorer classes were bound to have

been malnourished under any conceivable circumstance, and that the high disease rates of the

period were not merely a cause of malnutrition but undoubtedly, to a considerable degree, a

consequence of exceedingly poor diets.

2. 1 Energy Cost Accounting and Secular Trends in Body Size

       As a result of the work of agricultural historians we now have estimates of British

agricultural production by half-century intervals going back to 1700. These provide the basis

for national food balance sheets which indicate the secular trend in British caloric consumption

(Chartres 1985; Holderness 1989; Allen 1994). Supplemented by household surveys of food

purchases (Shammas 1984 and 1990; Oddy 1990; cf. Fogel 1987), these sources indicate that

average daily caloric consumption in Britain c. 1790 was about 2,060 kcal per capita or about

2,700 kcal per consuming unit (equivalent adult males). For France, Toutain (1971) has

constructed estimates from national food balance sheets going back to the decade preceding the

French Revolution, His estimates indicate that the daily per capita caloric consumption was

1,753 kcal during 1781-90 and 1,846 during 1803-12. Converted into calories per consuming
                                                                                               5

unit, these figures become 2,290 and 2,410.

       One implication of these estimates is that mature adults of the late eighteenth century

must have been very small by current standards. Today the typical American male in his early

thirties is about 177 cm (69.7 inches) tall and weighs about 78 kg (172 ibs) (USDHHS 1987).

Such a male requires daily about 1,794 kcal for basal metabolism (the energy required to keep

the body functioning while at rest) and a total of 2,279 kcal for baseline maintenance (the 1,794

kcal required for basal metabolism plus 485 kcal for digestion of food and vital hygkne)

(Quenouille et. al. 1951; FAO/UNU/WHO 1985). If either the British or the French had been

that large during the eighteenth century, virtually all of the energy produced by their food

supplies would have been required for maintenance and hardly any would have been available

to sustain work. To have the energy necessary to produce the national products of these two

countries c. 1700, the typical adult male must have been quite short and very light.

       This inference is supported by data on stature and weight which have been collected for

European nations. Table 1 provides estimates of final heights of adult males who reached

maturity between 1750 and 1875. It shows that during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries

Europeans were severely stunted by modern standards (cf. line 6 of Table 1). Estimates of

weights for European nations before 1860 are much more patchy. Those which are available,

mostly inferential, suggest that c. 1790 the average weight of English males in their thirties was

about 61 kg (134 Ibs), which is about 20 percent below current levels. The corresponding figure

for French males c. 1790 may have been only about 50 kg (about 110 Ibs), which is about a third

below current standards.

2.2 Size Distributions of Calories

       The synergy between the economic and biomedical lines of analysis is apparent in the

new insights obtained by switching from a reliance on the mean height, the mean weights, and

the mean daily consumption of nutrients to the size distributions of these variables. Becauseof
                                                                                                 6
the limits of time, I focus here on the distributions of calories.2

        Size distributions of caloric consumption are one of the most potent instruments in

assessing the plausibility of proffered estimates of average diets. They not only bear on the

implications of a given level of caloric consumption for morbidity and mortality rates, but they

also indicate whether the calories available for work are consistent with the level of agricultural

output and with the distribution of the labor force between agriculture and nonagriculture (Fogel

and Floud 1994; Fogel 1991; cf. Wrigley 1987). Although national food-balance sheets, such

as those constructed by Toutain (1971) for France over the period 1781-1952, provide mean

values of per capita caloric consumption, they do not produce estimates of the size distribution

of calories.3

      Three factors make it possible to estimate the size distributions of calories from the patchy

evidence available to historians. First, studies covering a wide range of countries indicate that

distributions of calories are well described by the lognormal distribution. Second, the variation
in the distribution of calories (as measured by the coefficient of variation [siX] or the Gini [C]

ratio) is far more limited than the distribution of income. Third, when the mean of the

distribution is known, the coefficient of variation (which together with the mean determines the

distribution), can be estimated from information in either tail of the distribution. Fortunately,

even in places and periods where little is known about ordinary people, there is a relative

abundance of information about the rich. At the bottom end, it is demographic information,

particularly the death rate, which rather tightly constrains the proportion of the population whose

average daily consumption of calories could have been below BMR or baseline maintenance.

      Table 2 shows the exceedingly low level of work capacity permitted by the food supply

in France and England c. 1790, even after allowing for the reduced requirements for maintenance

because of small stature and body mass (cf. Freudenberger and Cummins 1976). In France the

bottom 10 percent of the labor force lacked the energy for regular work and the next 10 percent

had enough energy for less than 3 hours of light work daily (0.52 hours of heavy work).
                                                                                                7

Although the English situation was somewhat better, the bottom 3 percent of its labor force

lacked the energy for any work, but the balance of the bottom 20 percent had enough energy for

about 6 hours of light work (1.09 hours of heavy work) each day.

      Table 2 also points up the problem with the assumption that for ancien régime

populations, a caloric intake that averaged 2,000 kcal per capita (2,600 per consuming unit) daily

was adequate (Livi-Bacci 1990). That average level of consumption falls between the levels

experienced by the French and the English c. 1790. In populations experiencing such low levels

of average consumption, the bottom 20 percent subsisted on such poor diets that they were

effectively excluded from the labor force with many of them lacking the energy even for a few

hours of strolling. That appears to be the principal factor explaining why beggars constituted

as much as a fifth of the populations of ancien regimes (Goubert 1973; Cipolla 1980; Laslett

1984). Even the majority of those in the top 40 percent of the caloric distribution were so

stunted (height below U.S. standards) and wasted (weight below U.S. standards) that they were

at substantially higher risk of incurring chronic health conditions and of premature mortality (see

the next section).

                     3. Waaler Curves and Surfaces: A New Analytical Tool

       Extensive clinical and epidemiological studies over the past two decades have shown that

height at given ages, weight at given ages, and weight-for-height (a body mass index, or BMI)

are effective predictors of the risk of morbidity and mortality. Until recently most of the studies

have focused on children under age 5, using one or more of the anthropometric indicators at

these ages to assess risks of morbidity and mortality in early childhood, and it was at these ages

that the relevance of anthropometric measures originally were established most firmly (Sommer

and Lowenstein 1975; Chen, Chowdhury, and Huffman 1980; Billewicz and MacGregor 1982;

Kielmann et al. 1983; Martorell 1985). During the last few years, however, a considerable body

of evidence has accumulated suggesting that height at maturity is also an important predictorof
                                                                                                 8
the probability of dying and of developing chronic diseases at middle and late ages (Marmot,

Shipley, and Rose 1984; Waaler 1984; John 1988; Costa 1993; Kun 1993). BMI has similar

predictive properties (Heywood 1983; Waaler 1984; Martorell 1985; Payne 1992; Osmani 1992;

cf. Srinivasan 1992).

       Height and BMI measure different aspects of malnutrition and health. Height is a net

rather than a gross measure of nutrition. Moreover, although changes in height during the

growing years are sensitive to current levels of nutrition, mean final height reflects the

accumulated past nutritional experience of individuals throughout their growing years, including

the fetal period. It follows that when final heights are used to explain differences in adult

mortality rates, they reveal the effect, not of adult levels of nutrition on adult mortality rates,

but of nutritional levels during infancy, childhood, and adolescence on adult mortality rates. A

weight-for-height index, on the other hand, reflects primarily the current nutritional status. It

is also a net measure in the sense that BMI reflects the balance between current intakes and the

claims on those intakes.


3.1 The Relationship Between Body Size and the Risk of Dea!h at Middle and Late Ages

      A number of recent studies have established the predictive power of height and BMI with

respect to morbidity and mortality at later ages. The results of two of these studies are

summarized in Figures 2 and 3. Part A of Figure 2 reproduces a diagram by Waaler (1984).

It shows that short Norwegian men aged 40-59 at risk between 1963 and 1979 were much more

likely to die than tall men. Indeed, the risk of mortality for men with heights of 165 cm (65.0

inches) was on average 71 percent greater than that of men who measure 182.5 cm (71.9

inches). Part B shows that height is also an important predictor of the relative likelihood that

men aged 23-49 would be rejected from the Union Army during 1861-65 because of chronic

diseases. Despite significant differences in ethnicities, environmental circumstances, the array

and severity of diseases, and time, the functional relationship between height and relative risk
                                                                                                9
are strikingly similar in the two cases.

      Waaler (1984) has also studied the relationship in Norway between BMI and the risk of

death in a sample of 1.7 million individuals. Curves summarizing his findings are shown in

Figure 3 for both men and women. Although the observed values of the BMI (kg/rn2) ranged

between 17 and 39, over 80 percent of the males over age 40 had BMI's within the range 21-29.

Within the range 22-28, the curve is relatively flat, with the relative risk of mortality hovering

close to 1.0. However, at BMIs of less than 22 and over 28, the risk of death rises quite

sharply as the BMI moves away from its mean value. It will be noticed that the BMI curves are

much more symmetrical than the height curves in Figure 2, which indicates that high BMIs are

as risky as low ones.

       Although Figures 2 and 3 are revealing, neither one singly, nor both together, are

sufficient to shed light on the debate over whether moderate stunting impairs health when

weight-for-height is adequate, since Figure 2 is not controlled for weight and Figure 3 is only

partially controlled for height (Fogel 1987; Fogel and Floud 1994). To get at the "small-but-

healthy" issue one needs an iso-mortality surface that relates the risk of death to both height and

weight simultaneously. Such a surface, presented in Figure 4, was fitted to Waaler's data by

a procedure described elsewhere (Fogel 1993b). Transecting the iso-mortality map are lines

which give the locus of BMI between 16 and 34, and a curve giving the weights that minimize

risk at each height.

       Figure 4 shows that even when body weight is maintained at what Figure 3 indicates is

an ideal" level (BMI = 25), short men are at substantially greater risk of death than tall men.
Thus, an adult male with a BMI of 25 who is 164 cm tall is at about 55 percent greater risk of

death than a male at 183 cm who also has a BMI of 25. Figure 4 also shows that the "ideal"

BMI (the BMI that minimizes the risk of death) varies with height. A BMI of 25 is "ideal" for

men in the neighborhood of 176 cm, but for tall men (greater than 183 cm) the ideal BMI is
                                                                                               10

between 22 and 24, while for short men (under 168 cm) the "ideal" BMI is about 26.

3.2 Using Waaler Surfaces to Explain the Secular Decline in Mortality

      Superimposed on Figure 4 are rough estimates of heights and weights in France at 4 dates.

In 1705 the per capita food supply in France was lower than in Britain so that average body

mass was probably even lower than in Britain. Circa 1705 the French probably achieved

equilibrium with their food supply at an average height of about 161 cm and BMI of about 18.

Over the next 270 years the food supply expanded with sufficient rapidity to permit both the

height and the weight of adult males to increase. Figure 4 indicates that it was factors associated

with the gain in BMI that accounted for most of the reduction in the risk of mortality before

1870. After 1870, factors associated with the gain in height explain most of the additional

mortality decline. Figure 4 also implies that while these factors jointly explain about 90 percent

of the decline in French mortality rates over the period between c.1785 and c.1870, they only

explain about 50 percent of the decline in mortality rates during the past century. Increases in

body size and the factors associated with it continued to have a major impact on the gains in life

expectation among persons of relatively good nutritional status, but during the last century

factors other than those related to height and BMI became increasingly important.

      The analysis in this section points to the misleading nature of the concept of subsistence

as Malthus originally used it and as it is still widely used today. Subsistence is not located at

the edge of a nutritional cliff, beyond which lies demographic disaster. The evidence outlined

in the paper implies that rather than one level of subsistence, there are numerous levels at which

a population and a food supply can be in equilibrium, in the sense that they can be indefinitely

sustained. However, some levels will have smaller people and higher "normal" (non-crisis)

mortality than others.4

3.3 The Relevance of Waaler Surfaces for Predicting Trends in Chronic Diseases

       Poor body builds increased vulnerability to diseases, not just contagious diseases, but
                                                                                                11

chronic diseases as well. This point is implicit in Figure 2 which shows that chronic conditions

were much more frequent among short young men in the 1860s than among tall men. Figure

5 shows that the same relationship between ill health and stature exists among the males covered

by the U.S. National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS) for 1985-88.                Stunting during

developrnernal ages had a long reach and increased the likelihood that people would suffer from

chronic diseases at middle and at late ages.

       American males born during the second quarter of the nineteenth century were not cnly

stunted by today's standards, but their BMIs at adult ages were about 15 percent lower than

current U.S. levels (Fogel, Costa, and Kim 1993). The implication of the combined stunting

and low BMI is brought out by Figure 6 which presents a Waaler surface for morbidity

estimated by Kim (1993) from NHIS data for 1985-88.

       The Waaler surface for risk from chronic conditions in Figure 6 is similar to, but not

identical with, the Norwegian surface for mortality (see Figure 4). The iso-morbidity curves

in ill health rise more steeply than the iso-mortality curves as one moves away in either direction

from the optimal weight curve. Furthermore, the optimal weight curve in Figure6 usually lies

about one iso-BMI curve to the right of the optimal weight curve computed from the Norwegian

mortality data. Thus, both the Norwegian mortality data and the U.S. health data indicate that

 for men in the neighborhood of 1.60-1.65 meters the optimal BMI is in the range of 25 to 27.

This is above current levels recommended by FAO/WHO/UNU (1985), falling into the lower

 ranges of overweight in that standard.

        Figure 6 also presents the coordinates in height and BMI of Union Army veterans who

 were 65 or over in 1910 and of veterans (mainly of World War H) who were the same ages

 during 1985-88. These coordinates predict a decline of about 35 percent in the prevalence of

 chronic disease among the two cohorts. About 61 percent of the predicted decline in ill health

 is due to factors associated with the increase in BMI and the balance is due to factors associated
                                                                                             12

with increased stature.

       The decline in the prevalence of chronic diseases predicted by Figure 6 is quite close to

what actually occurred. Table 3 compares the prevalence of chronic diseases among Union

Army men aged 65 and over in 1910 with two surveys of veterans of the same ages in the

1980s. That table indicates that heart disease was 2.9 times as prevalent, musculoskeletal and

respiratory diseases were 1.6 times as prevalent, and digestive diseases were 4.7 times as

prevalent among veterans aged 65 or over in 1910 as in 1985-88. During the 7.6 decades

separating the two groups, the prevalence of heart disease among the elderly declined at a rate

of 12.8 percent per decade, while musculoskeletal and respiratory diseases each declined at a

rate of 5.9 percent per decade.

       Young adults born between 1822 and 1845 who survived the deadly infectious diseases

of childhood and adolescence were not freer of degenerative diseases than persons of the same

ages today, as some have suggested, but more afflicted. At ages 35-39 hernia rates, for

example. were more than three times as prevalent in the 1860s as in the 1980s. Of special note

is the much higher incidence of clubfoot in the 1860s -- a birth anomaly which suggests that the

uterus was far less safe for those awaiting birth than it is today.

       Those who also survived diseases of middle ages were more afflicted by degenerative

chronic conditions at old ages in the 1910s than in the 1980s. Nearly 74 percent of the elderly

Union Army veterans suffered from three or more disabling chronic conditions, which is much

higher than the rate among elderly veterans in 1983 (Fogel, Costa, and Kim 1993). It may be

true that there were less genetically frail persons among those who survived to age 65 in 1910

than there are today. If so, that genetic advantage was apparently offset by a lifetime of

socioeconomic and biomedical stress that left health in old age badly impaired and that sharply

curtailed the life expectations of the elderly. During the 1910s the elderly died not from the

infectious diseases that killed the great majority of their cohorts at relatively young ages but
                                                                                               13

primarily from degenerative diseases which, at the two-digit level of the International
Classification of Diseases, are similar to the distribution of causes of death during the 1980s,

except that deaths from neoplasms were lower and deaths from tuberculosis were higher than

in the 1980s.
       The provisional findings thus suggest that chronic conditions were far more prevalent

throughout the life-cycle for those who reached age 65 before World War I than is suggested

by the theory of the epidemiological transition. Reliance on causes-of-death information to

characterize the epidemiology of the past has led to a significant misrepresentation of the

distribution of health conditions among the living. It has also promoted the view that the

epidemiology of chronic diseases is more separate from that of contagious diseases than now

appears to be the case.
                 4. Physiological Foundations for Waaler Surfaces and Curves

       What is the basis for the predictive capacity of Waaler surfaces and curves? Part of the

answer resides in the realm of human physiology, which concerns the functioning of the organs

and the organ systems of the body. Variations in height and weight appear tobe associated with

variations in the chemical composition of the tissues that make up these organs, in the quality

 of the electrical transmission across membranes, and in the functioningof the endocrine system

 and other vital systems.
        Research in this area is developing rapidly and some of the new findings are yet to be

 confirmed. The exact mechanisms by which malnutrition and trauma in utero or early childhood

 are transformed into organ dysfunctions are still unclear. What is agreed upon is that the basic

 structure of most organs are laid down early, and it is reasonable to infer that poorly developed

 organs may break down earlier than well developed ones. The principal evidence so far is

 statistical and, despite agreement on certain specific dysfunctions, there is no generally accepted

 theory of cellular aging (cf. Tanner 1990 and 1993).
                                                                                                14

         With these caveats in mind, recent research bearing on the connection between

malnutrition and body size and the later onset of chronic diseases can conveniently be divided.

into three categories. The first category involves forms of malnutrition (including the ingestion

of toxic substances) that cause permanent, promptly visible physiological damage, as is seen in

the impairment of the nervous systems of fetuses due to excess consumption of alcohol or of

smoking by pregnant women. Alcohol, for example, induces growth retardation in fetuses and

infants and causes atrial septal defect, microcephaly, and other birth anomalies which are

collectively labeled Fetal Alcohol Syndrome or Fetal Alcohol Symptoms (Robbins, Coi.ran,

Kurnar 1984). It appears that protein calorie malnutrition (PCM) in infancy and early childhood

can lead to a permanent impairment of central nervous system function (Scrimshaw and Gordon

1968; Martorell, Rivera, and Kaplowitz 1990; Chavez, Martinez, and Soberanes 1993; cf. Volpe

1987). Iodine deficiency in utero and moderate-to-severe iron deficiency during infancy also

appear to cause pennanent neurological damage (Lozoff, Jimenez, and Wolf 1991; Scrimshaw

1993).

         Not all damage due to retarded development in utero or infancy caused by malnutrition

shows up immediately..• In a recent series of studies D.J.P. Barker and his colleagues (Barker

et al. 1989; Barker, Osmond, and Golding 1990; Barker 1991; Barker et al. 1992; Law et al.

1993; Phillips et al. 1993; Phipps et al. 1993) have reported that such conditions as coronary

heart disease, hypertension, stroke, diabetes, and autoimmune thyroiditis begin in utero or in

infancy, but do not become apparent until midadult or later ages. In these cases, individuals

appear to be in good health, and function well in the interim. However, early onset of the

degenerative diseases of old age appears to be linked to inadequate cellular development early

in life. Some, but not all, such cases are associated with low birth weight. Some babies are

born in the normal weight range but experience below average infant weight gains. In other

instances babies are small relative to the size of their placentas, short in relation to the size of
                                                                                                 15

their head, or long but thin (Barker 1993; cf. Tanner 1993).

       Certain physiological dysfunctions incurred by persons suffering from malnutrition can.

in principle, be reversed by improvcd dietary intake, but they often persist because the cause of

the malnutrition persists. If the malnutrition persists long enough these conditions can become

irreversible or fatal. This category of dysfunctions includes the degradation of tissue structure,

especially in such vital organs as the lungs, the heart, and the gastrointestinal tract. In the case

of the respiratory system, for example, there is not only decreased muscle mass and strength but

also impaired ventilatory drive, biochemical. changes in connective tissue, and electrolyte

abuonnalities. Malnutrition also has been related to the atrophy of the mucosal cells of the gut,

the inhibition of wound healing, increased likelihood of traumatic shock and of sepsis, impaired

functioning of the endocrine system, increased tendency to edema, electrical instability that can

provoke acute arrhythmias, and degenerative joint diseases (Saba, Dillon, and Lanser 1983;

ldiaqucz 1988: McMahon and Bistrian 1990; Hill 1990; Fisler 1992; cf. Manton 1993).

       Also relevant is the discovery of the relationship between birth weight and the probability

of neonatal death. The curves in Figure 7 are "U" shaped, indicating that in each population

babies significantly heavier than the optimal weight also incur high mortality risks. Moreover

the optimal birth weight in the two populations with small mothers was significantly lower than

that of the U.S. population where mothers were relatively large. It appears that prior to high-

technology interventions, the size of the mother's pelvis constrained the rate at which birth size

(and perhaps the robustness of the vital organs of the baby) could have increased with the

improvement iii intrauterine nutrition. Babies at weights which optimized survival in a relatively

tall population Were at elevated risks of dying in populations with relatively short mothers, due

to delivery distress. There was, in other words, an intergenerational constraint on the rate at

which babies could escape from the effects of malnutrition as fetal nutrition improved (cf.

Chandra 1975).
                                                                                                16

         The recent physiological findings also cast new light on the first phase of the secular

decline in mortality. Some investigators have called attention to changes in age-specific

mortality rates that may indicate a shift in the balance between pathogens and their human hosts

(Fridlizius 1984; Perrenoud 1984). Although the shift has been attributed to a decline in the

virulence of pathogens, not enough evidence is in hand as yet to assess this possibility.

However, the recent physiological research summarized in this section suggests a new pathway

through which the balance between pathogens and human hosts may have turned in favor of the

hosts. In addition to the improved operation of the immune system, there is the increased

capacity of a vital organ to survive the attack of pathogens as a result of increased tissue

resilience, including the improved operation of the nervous system. The process could have

been synergistic since the improvement in the operation of the immune system might have

interacted with the increased resilience of other vital organs.5 The last possibility is consistent

with the a2e-specific patterns of decline in mortality rates that have so far been uncovered for

the eighteenth century.

                            5. Some Implications for Current Policy

         Maithus believed that malnutrition manifested itself in the exceptional--in periodic

famines and in the excess mortality prevalent among the ultra-poor of his day who lived in

misery and vice. He thought that persons near the middle of the social order, the sturdy

agricultural laborer or the town artisan, were generally well fed, healthy, and lived normal life

spans.

         We now know, however, that famines accounted for less than 4 percent of the premature

mortality of Malthus's age, and that the excess mortality of the ultra-poor (the bottom fifth of

society) accounted for another sixth of premature mortality. About two-thirds of all premature

mortality in Maithus's time came from the part of society that Malthus viewed as productive and

healthy. Yet by current standards, even persons in the top half of the income distribution in
                                                                                              17

Britain during the eighteenth century were stunted and wasted, suffered far more extensively

from chronic diseases at young adult and middle ages than is true today, and died 30 years

sooner than today.6

5.1 Implications for Poor Countries
       The Malthusian legacy is embodied in such theses as "small-but-healthy" which holds that

stunted or moderately wasted individuals may not be more vulnerable to ill health and mortality

than those who conform to the U.S. standard. The paucity of life-cycle data sets in developing

countries caused investigators to focus only on the early years of the life span, searching for

interactions between natal or infant measures of size and measures of health and work capacity

later in childhood. Such studies generally picked up the effects of only exceedingly severe

stunting and wasting (more than 2 standard deviations below average), missing the impact of

more moderate size effects, many of which do not show up until later in life (Seckler 1980;

Sukhatme 1981; Lipton 1983; cf. West et al. 1990).

       However, the information reported in this paper indicates that childhood stunting and

wasting has a long reach, predicting chronic disease rates at young adult and later ages. The

higher prevalence of disabling chronic diseases among adults in the developing nations has

escaped attention becausç the relevant information on such conditions are not generally collected.

But the long reach of childhood malnutrition in rich countries, both now and when they were

much poorer than they are today, suggests that a similar interconnection also exists in developing

 countries.

        Chronic diseases are not the only way that chronic malnutrition reduces the productivity

 of the labor force. When the mean amounts of calories are as low as they are in the poor

 nations of the world, labor force participation rates and measures of labor productivityare bound

 to be low, especially when the hours of labor are adjusted for the intensity of labor (see Fogel

 1991; cf. Dasgupta 1993). Elsewhere I have estimated that when the labor input is adjusted for
                                                                                              18

intensity (measured by calories), improved gross nutrition accounts for roughly 30 percent of

the growth of per capita income in Britain between 1790 and 1980.

5.2 Implications for Rich Countries

       Between 1850 and 1950 U. S. life expectation at birth increased from about 40 to 68

years. Then for the next two decades further progress in longevity came to a virtual halt.

During and following this interregnum investigators who reviewed the progress in mortality over

the preceding century tended toward a consensus on three propositions: (1) The century-long

decline in mortality rates was unique and could not be repeated because virtually all of the gains

made through the elimination of death from contagious diseases below age 60 had been made.

(2) Deaths, now concentrated at older ages, were due to degenerative diseases that were

unrelated to the contagious diseases that they superseded. The degenerative diseases were caused

by accelerated organ losses that were part of the natural process of aging. (3) There was an

upper limit to life expectation that was genetically determined. One influential paper put that

limit at 85   7 years (Fries 1980, cf. Fries 1989).

       More recent studies, responding to the renewed decline in mortality, which this time is

concentrated at ages 6 and over, have uncovered evidence that militates against the notion of

a genetically fixed life span or, if it is fixed, suggests that the upper limit is well above 85.

Vaupel's study of Danish twins indicates that genetic factors account for only about 30 percent

of the variance in age of death (Vaupel 1991a). His study of Swedish males who lived to age

90 indicates that the death rate at that age has declined at a rate of about 1 percent per annum

since 1950, a finding that is contradictory to the rectangularization of the survivorship curve

(Vaupel 1991b; cf. Thatcher 1992; Vaupel and Lundstrom 1994; Kannisto et al. 1994). Two

recent studies of insect populations (Carey et al. 1992; Curtsinger et al. 1992) indicated that

variation in environmental conditions had a much larger effect on the life span than genetic

factors and revealed no pattern suggestive of a fixed upper limit. Collectively, these studies do
                                                                                               19

not rule out genetic factors but suggest something much less rigid than the genetic programming

of absolute life spans: An emerging theory combines genetic susceptibility of various organs

with cumulative insults as a result of exposure to risk.

       Recent studies also indicate that age-specific rates of chronic conditions above age 65 are

generally falling. According to Manton, Corder, and Stallard (1993) the rate of disability among

the elderly in the U. S. declined by 4.7 percent between 1982 and 1989. Put on a decade basis,

this rate of decline is quite similar to the long-term rates of decline between 1910 and 1985-88

in chronic conditions among elderly veterans (Fogel, Costa, and Kim 1993). The finding is

consistent with the growing body of evidence (reported in section 3 and 4 above) indicating that

chronic diseases at later ages are, to a considerable degree, the result of exposure to infectious

diseases, malnutrition, and other types of biomedical and socioeconomic stress early in life. It

is also consistent with the predicted decline of about 6 percent per decade in chronic diseases

based on the Waaler surface in ill health displayed in Figure 6 (cf. Blair et al. 1989; Manton,

Stallard, and Singer 1992; Manton and Soldo 1992).

       Much current research is now focused on explaining the decline in chronic conditions.

Part of the emerging explanation is a change in life styles, particularly reduced smoking,

improved nutrition, and increased exercise, which appear to be involved in reducing the

prevalence of coronary heart disease and respiratory diseases. Another part of the explanation

 is the increasing effectiveness of medical intervention. This point is strikingly demonstrated by

 comparing the second and last columns of the line on hernias in Table 3, above. Prior to World

 War II hernias, once they occurred, were generally permanent and often exceedingly painful

 conditions. However, by the 1980s about three-quarters of all veterans who ever had hernias

 were cured of them. Similar progress over the seven decades is indicated by the line on genito-

 urinary conditions. Other areas where medical intervention has been highly effective include

 control of hypertension and reduction in the incidence of stroke, surgical removal of
                                                                                               20
osteoarthritis, replacement of knee and hip joints, curing of cataracts, and chemotherapies that

reduce the incidence of osteoporosis and heart disease (Manton, Corder, and Stallard 1993).

       The success in medical interventions combined with rising incomes has naturally led to

a huge increase in the demand for medical services. Econometric estimates suggest a long-run

income elasticity in the demand for medical services across OECD nations in the neighborhood

of 1.5 and indicate that 90 percent of the variance in medical expenditures across OECD

countries is explained by variations in income (Moore, Newman, and Fheili 1992). The rapidly

growing level of demand, combined with the egalitarian policy of providing medical care at

highly subsidized prices, has created the crisis in health care costs that is now such a focus of

public policy debates across OECD nations, with various combinations of price and
governmental rationing under consideration (Economist 1990; Newhouse 1992; Schwartz and

Aaron 1991, Schieber, Poullier, and Greenwald 1993).

       Whatever the eventual outcome of these policy debates, it is clear that we are in a much

different world than that of Malthus. Instead of debating whether to provide food to paupers

who might otherwise die, we are now debating how to distribute services that have proved

successful in raising the quality of life of the aged and in extending life expectation. And we

are now struggling with entirely new ethical issues such as whether it is rigbt to restrict medical

services that extend life of a low quality (Shuttleworth 1990; Wolfe 1986; Pellegrino 1993).

       Growing opportunity to improve health at young ages, to reduce the incidence of chronic

diseases at late ages, and to cure or alleviate the disabilities associated with chronic diseases

raises two other post-Malthusian population issues. One is the impact of improved health on

population size. A recent paper by Ahlburg and Vaupel (1990) pointed out that if mortality rates

at older ages continue to decline at 2 percent per annum, the U.S. elderly population of 2050

would be 36 million larger than forecast by the Census Bureau (cf. Preston 1993). That

possibility poses policy ssues with respect to health care costs (because total medical costs may
                                                                                                 21

rise sharply even if cure rates continue to improve) and to pension costs (because the number

of persons eligible for benefits under present proposed rules and of projected levels of
compensation will become so large that outpayments will exceed planned reserves).

       Some policymakers have sought to meet the pension problem by delaying retirement.

Such schemes are based on the proposition that improved health will make it possible for more

people to work past age 65. However, the recent fmdings on the secular improvement in health

at older ages make it clear that worsening health is not the explanation for the steep decline since

1890 in labor force participation rates of males over 65. As Costa (1993) has reported, the U.S.

decline in participation rates of the elderly over the past century is largely explained by the

secular rise in income and a decline in the income elasticity of the demand for retirement. It

is also related to the vast increase in the supply and the quality of leisure-time activities for the

laboring classes.

       In Maithus's time, and down to the opening of this century, leisure was in very short

supply in the OECD countries and, as Veblen pointed out (1934), it was conspicuously

consumed by a small upper class. The typical person labored over 60 hours per week for wages

and many had chores at home which consumed an additional 10 or 12 hours (Kuznets 1952;

Fogel 1993a; Olson 1992; cf. Atack and Bateman 1992). Aside from sleep, eating, and hygiene,

such workers usually had barely 2 hours a day for leisure. Although opera, theater, and ballet

were available, they were too expensive to be consumed ordinarily by the laboring classes.

       Over the twentieth century, hours of work have fallen by nearly half for typical workers.

Ironically, those in the top decile of the income distribution have not shared much in this gain

of leisure since the highly paid professionals and businessmen who populate the top decile work

closer to the nineteenth-century standard of 3,200 hours per year than the current working-class

standard of about 1,800 hours. There has also been a vast increase in the supply of leisure-time

activities--movies, radio, television, amusement parks, participant and spectator sports, travel--
                                                                                                 22

and   a decline in the relative price of such activities. Many firms cater especially to the tastes

of the elderly, offering reduced prices and special opportunities. As a result, the typical worker

spends two-thirds as much time in leisure activities as in work and looks forward to retirement

(Fogel    1992a and 1993a).


          Given the growing and income-inelastic demand for leisure that characterizes the post-

Malthusian    milieu of the OECD nations, it remains to be seen to    what extent the   demand   for

leisure   and retirement can be throttled. Policymakers may encounter as much resistance to

efforts to reduce the implicit subsidies for leisure as they have had recently in raising the taxes

on work.
                               6. Some Implications for the Theory
                              and Measurement of Economic Growth

          Recent   findings in the biomedical area call attention to what may be called the

thermodynamic and physiological factors in economic growth. Although largely neglected by

theorists of both the 'old" and the "new" growth economics, these factors can easily be

incorporated into standard growth models. Viewed in the human capital context, both factors

may be thought of as labor enhancing technological changes that were brought about by

developments in the agricultural, public health, medical services, and household sectors. They

may also be thought of as adjustments for the mismeasurement of the labor input, when labor

is measured only in person-hours.

          I referred to the thermodynamic factor indirectly in section 5.1, when I indicated that

about 30 percent of the British growth rate over the past 200 years was attributable to

improvements in gross nutrition.          That computation was based on the first law of
thermodynamics, which holds that energy output cannot exceed energy input. Since that law

applies as much to human engines as to mechanical ones, it is possible to use energy cost

accounting techniques to estimate the increase in the energy available for work over the past two

centuries.     In the British case that increase had two effects. It raised the labor force

participation rate by bringing into the labor force the bottom 20 percent of consuming units in
                                                                                                23

1790 who had, on average, only enough energy for a few hours of strolling. Moreover, for

those in the labor force, the intensity of work per hour has increased because the number of

calories available for work increased. This change in the intensity of effort, by itself, appears

to have accounted for about 20 percent of the long-term growth rate.

         The contention that the British intensity of effort increased over time may seem dubious

since the work day, week, and year (measured in hours) declined significantly over the past two

centuries. However, the British (and other Europeans) could not have worked at the same

average intensity per hour in 1790 as they do today, since that would have required a

considerably larger supply of dietary energy per capita than was actually available. Increases

in the intensity of labor per hour was also a factor in the American case, where food supplies

were far more abundant than in Europe. Even if it is assumed that the daily number of calories

available for work was the same in the U.S. in 1860 as today, the intensity of work per hour

would have been well below today's levels, since the average number of hours worked in 1860

was about 1.75 times as great as today. During the mid nineteenth century only slaves on

southern gang-system plantations appear to have worked at levels of intensity per hour

approaching current standards (cf. Fogel 1991 and 1993a; Olson 1992; Fogel and Engerman

1992).

         The physiological factor pertains to the efficiency with which the human engine converts

energy input into work output. Nutritionists, physiologists, and development economists have

contributed to the extensive literature on this topic. Since some important issues are still

unresolved, a firm assessment of the physiological-contribution to economic growth is not yet

possible. However, some aspects of the contribution can be indicated.

         Changes in health, in the composition of diet, and in clothing and shelter can significantly

affect the efficiency with which ingested energy is converted into work output.' Reductions in

the incidence of infectious diseases increase the proportion of ingested energy that is available
                                                                                               24
for work both because of savings in the energy required to mobilize the immune system and

because the capacity of the gut to absorb nutrients is improved, especially as a consequence of

a reduction in diarrheal diseases. Thermodynamic efficiency has also increased because of

changes in the composition of the diet, including the shift from grains and other foods with high

fiber content to sugar and meats. These dietary changes raised the proportion of ingested energy

that can be metabolized (increased the average value of the "Atwater Factors," to use the

language of nutritionists).     Improvements in clothing and shelter have also increased

thermodynamic efficiency by reducing the amount of energy lost through radiation.

       Individuals who are stunted but otherwise healthy at maturity will be at an increased risk

of incurring chronic diseases and of dying prematurely. To evaluate the significance of changes

in the rate of deterioration in the capacity to work over the life cycle one needs to calculate the

effect of changes in stature and weight on the discounted present value of the difference between

earnings and maintenance over the life-cycle (cf. Dasgupta 1993). A rare data set containing

the desired information has been analyzed by R.A. Margo and RH. Steckel (1982). The

equation that they fitted to these data can be used to estimate the increase in the discounted net

revenue stream at age 30 as a result of increasing the mean height and BMI from the levels that

prevailed among the British in c. 1790 to those of c. 1980.' The exercise reveals that the

discounted revenues would have increased by about 43 percent. This last figure, combined with

a guess on the effect of the shifting of Atwater factors, suggests that the average efficiency of

the human engine in Britain increased by about 60 percent between 1790 and 1980. The
combined effect of the increase in dietary energy available for work, and of the increased human

efficiency in transforming dietary energy into work output, appears to account for about 50

percent of the British economic growth since 1790.

       Focusing on the thermodynamic and physiological aspects of economic growth calls

attention to the long lags that frequently occur between the time that certain investments are
                                                                                             25
made and the time that their benefits occur. Much of the gain in thermodynamic efficiency that

occurred in Britain and other OECD countries between 1910 and 1980 was due to a series of

investments made as much as a century earlier. Failure to take account of these extremely long

lags between investments and payoffs leads to puzzling paradoxes. During the Depression

Decade of the 1930s, for example, the U.S. unemployment rate was never less than 16 percent;

for half the period unemployment ranged between 20 and 25 percent. Yet life expectation

between 1929 and 1939 increased by 4 years and the heights of men reaching maturity during

this period increased by 1.6 cm (U.S. Bureau of Statistics 1975; Karpinos 1958).

       The resolution of the paradox turns, I believe, on the huge social investments made

between 1870 and 1930 and whose payoffs were not counted as part of national income during

the 1920s and 1930s even though they produced a large stream of benefits during these decades.

I refer, of course, to the social investment in biomedical research (which included the
establishment and expansion of modern teaching and research hospitals) whose largest payoffs

came well after the investment was made. Also included in this category are such public health

investments as the construction of facilities to improve the supply of water, the cleaning up of

the milk supply, the draining of swamps, the development of effective systems of quarantines,

and the cleaning up of the slums.
                                           *   **
       Keynes said: "In the long run we are all dead. That was an appropriate point to make

during the interwar period, which included the severe inflations of the 1920s and the worst

depression in history during the 1930s. Urgent, forceful action was needed to regain control of

the money supply, to take care of the millions of unemployed, and to prevent the collapse of the

democracies.

       We live in another era. The major issues of economic policy in OECD nations today

cannot be understood from a purely short-run perspective. The crisis in medical care, the
                                                                                               26

pension crisis, and the challenges of globalization are governed by long-run processes that

policyrnakers need to understand. As I have tried to point out in this lecture, we have not yet

completed the escape from hunger and premature death that began nearly three centuries ago.

Chronic diseases and death are still occurring prematurely even in the rich countries. If the

reforms of health care and pension programs now being considered by policymakers are to be

successful, they must be consistent with the long-term physiological changes governing the
decline in chronic diseases and the increase in longevity. Long-term forecasts that do not take

account of the dynamics of these changes over the past century, and of the socioeconomic,

biomedical, and other environmental improvements that made them possible, are liable to be far

off the mark.

       At the outset of this lecture I stressed the need for economists to take account of long-run

dynamic processes through a study of history. Uncovering what actually happened in the past

requires an enormous investment in time and effort. Fortunately for theorists, that burden is

borne primarily by economic historians. Theorists only need to spend the time necessary to

comprehend what the historians have discovered. A superficial knowledge of the work of

economic historians is at least as dangerous as a superficial knowledge of theory.
                                                                                            27
                                         NOTES



     Before proceeding with the discussion of chronic malnutrition it is necessary to clarify

     a terminological confusion that has misled some investigators: That is the distinction

     between the term "diet" or food intake (which represents gross nutrition) and the term

     "malnutrition" (which represents net nutrition--the nutrients available to sustain cellular

     growth). I will not dwell on this distinction here but will only emphasize that when I

     mean gross nutrition I will use the term "diet"         and   that such other terms as
     "malnutrition," "undernutrition," "nez nutrition," and "nutritional status" are meant to

     designate the balance between the nutrient intake (diet) and the claims on that intake.

     See Fogel and Floud (1994) for a further elaboration of this distinction.

2.   See the appendix to Floud and Fogel 1994 for the estimated distributions of height,

     weight and the body mass index (BMI) in France c. 1790.

3.   In principle it is possible to construct size distributions of calories from household

     consumption surveys. Inasmuch as most of these surveys during the nineteenth century

     were focused on the lower classes, in order to make use of them it is necessary to know

     from what centiles of either the national caloric or the national income distribution the

     surveyed households were drawn.

4.   Moreover, with a given population and technology, changes in the allocation of labor

     between agriculture and other sectors may lead to changes in body size and mortality.

     In an ancien régime economy the lower the share of the labor force that is in agriculture,

     cet. P1L the lower the share of caloric production that can be devoted to baseline

     maintenance. The reasoning behind this statement is as follows: Assume that one

     worker in agriculture feeds himself plus three persons outside of agriculture. Hence, a

     movement of one percent of agricultural workers to nonagriculture would reduce the per
                                                                                            28
     capita availability of food to the increased nonagricultural sector by about 1.33 percent.

     If baseline maintenance accounts for 75 percent of caloric consumption and if calories

     reserved for work remain ConStant in the nonagricultural sector, calories available for

     baseline maintenance in that sector would decline by about 1,8 percent (assuming that

     within the agricultural sector per capita production and consumption is unchanged).

5.   Such possible synergies call into question the proposition that, because an individual

     appears to be currently well fed, malnutrition does not affect the outcome of diseases

     such as influenza, smallpox or typhoid (cf. Duncan, Scott, and Duncan 1993).
     Individuals may be more likely to succumb to such infections, even if they are currently

     well fed, because past malnutrition, either in utero or subsequently, has degraded vital

     organs (cf. Scrimshaw, Taylor, and Gordon 1968).

6.   Premature mortality is defined as death rates that are higher than the 1980 death rates

     when standardized for the 1700 age structure (cf. Fogel 1986 and 1992b). Estimates of

     the overall death rate c. 1790 are from Wrigley and Schofield (1981). Estimates of the

     relative death rates by deciles of the caloric consumption distribution were based on the

     estimated average heights and BMI in these deciles and on the relative mortality risks that

     they imply, as indicated in Figure 4. For further details on the computations see the

     appendix in Fogel and Floud 1994 and Table A2 in Fogel 1993b.

7.   The discussion in this paragraph draws on Dasgupta 1993 and the sources cited there.

8.   The data pertain to slaves seized as booty of war by the Union Army in 1863. The

     equation is:

                    In V = 2.73 + 0.032S + 0.17A - 0.005A2 + 0.000046A3 + 0.05311
                          (1.47) (0.92) (2.22) (-2.23)      (2.10)       (2.16)

                         + 0.01911 - 0.00027HW;        N=    523; R2 = 0.20;
                          (1.79) (-1.73)
     where V is the value of a slave, S is a dummy for skin color, A is age, H is height (in
                                                                                               29
      inches), and W is weight (in ibs). T- statistics are in parens. For 1790 I used l.679m

      and 60.61 kg. For 1980 I used 1.76m and 75.89 kg.
9.    The following procedure was used to arrive at this estimate: Bringing the bottom 20

     percent of the caloric distribution of c. 1790 into the labor force increased the labor force

     participation rate by 25 percent. Among those in the labor force the average number of

     calories available for work increased by 56 percent between c.1790 and 1980. Hence,

     the total increase in output per capita as a result of the increased availability of calories

     for work was 95 percent (1.25 x 1.56 = 1.95). Dasgupta's (1993) discussion suggests

     that reductions in diarrheal and other diseases combined with a shift in the compositon

     of the diet increased the Atwater factors by about 12 percent. Since the exercise based

     on the equation in note 8 implies that the reduction in chronic diseases and premature

     mortality increased thermodynamic efficiency by 43 percent, the combined increase in

     thermodynamic efficiency is about 60 percent (1.12 x 1.43 = 1.60). In combination,

     then, increased calories available for work and the increased thermodynamic efficiency

     increased per capita income between c.1790 and 1980 by 212 percent (1.95 x 1.60 =

     3.12) or by 0.60 percent per annum (3.12°" - 1     = 0.0060), which is slightly more than

     half of the annual British growth rate (0.60 ÷ 1.15 = 0.52). For further details,

     including discussion of possible upward and downward biases in this computation, see

     Fogel 1987 and Fogel and Floud 1994.
                                                                                           30

                                       REFERENCES


Ahlburg, D. A., and J. W. Vaupel. 1990. Alternative projections of the U.S. population.
      Demography 27: 639-52.

Allen, R. C. 1994. Agriculture during the Industrial Revolution, 1700-1850. In The
       economic history of Britain since 1700, 2d ed., edited by R. Floud, and D.
       McCloskey, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

Atack, J., and F. Bateman. 1992. How long was the workday in 1880? Journal of
       Economic History 52: 129-60.

Barker, D. J. P. 1991. The intrauterine environment and adult cardiovascular disease.
      In The childhood environment and adult disease, Ciba Foundation Symposium
       156, 3-16. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.

____________ 1993. Fetal origins of coronary heart disease. British Heart Journal 69:
      195-96.

Barker, D. J. P., C. Osrnond, and J. Golding. 1990. Height and mortality in the counties
       of England and Wales. Annals of Human Biology 17: 1-6.

Barker, D. J. P., et al. 1989. Growth in utero, blood pressure in childhood and adult
      life, and mortality from cardiovascular disease. British Medical Journal 298:
      564-67.                                   -

Barker, D. J. P., et al. 1992. Relation of fetal and infant growth to plasma fibrinogen
       and factor VII concentrations in adult life. British Medical Journal 304: 148-52.

Bengtsson, 1., and R. biiisson. 1984. Population and economic fluctuations in Sweden
       1749-1914. In Pre-industrial population change, edited by T. Bengtsson, G.
      Fridlizius, and R. Ohlsson, 277-97. Stockholm: Almquist and Wiksell.

___________     1985. Age-specific mortality and short-term changes in the standard of
       living: Sweden, 1751-1859. European Journal of Population 1: 309-26.

Billewicz, W. Z., and I. A. MacGregor. 1982. A birth to maturity longitudinal study of
       heights and weights in two West African (Gambian) villages, 1951-1975. Annals
       of Human Biology 9: 309-20.

Blair, S. N., et al. 1989. Physical fitness and all-cause mortality: A prospective study
        of healthy men and women. JAMA 262: 2395-2401.
                                                                                           31
Carey, J. R., et al. 1992. Slowing of mortality rates at older ages in large medfly
        cohorts. Science 258: 457-61.

Chandra, R. K. 1975. Antibody formation in first and second generation offspring of
      nutritionally deprived rats. Science 190: 289-90.

Chartres, J. A. 1985. The marketing of agricultural produce. In The agrarian histoyf
       England and Wales, vol. 5: 1640-1750, Pt. 2: Agrarian change, edited by J.
      Thirsk, 406-502. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Chavez, A., C. Martinez, and B. Soberanes. 1993. Effect of malnutrition on infant
      development. In Longitudinal community based studies of the impact of early
      malnutrition on child health and development, edited by N. S. Scrimshaw.
       Boston: !NFDC, in press.

Chen, L., A. K. M. Chowdhury, and S. L. Huffman. 1980. Anthropometric assessment
      of energy-protein malnutrition and subsequent risk of mortality among pre-school
      aged children. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 33: 1836-45.

Cipolla, C. M. 1980. Before the Industrial Revolution: European society and economy.
       1000-1700. New York: W. W. Norton.

Costa, D. L. 1993. Health, income, and retirement: Evidence from nineteenth century
       America. Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago.

Curtsinger, J. W., et al. 1992. Demography of genotypes: Failure of the limited
       life-span paradigm in Drosphila melanogaster. Science 258: 461-63.

Dasgupta, P. 1993. An inquiry into well-being and destitution. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Dublin, L. I., and A. 3. Lotka. 1936. Length of life: A study of the life table. New
       York: Ronald Press Co.

Duncan, S. R., S. Scott, and C. J. Duncan. 1993. The dynamics of smallpox epidemics
     in Britain, 1550-1800. Demography 30: 405-23.

Dupâquier, J. 1989. Demographic crises and subsistence crises in France, 1650-1725.
     In Famine, disease and the social order in early modern society, edited by J.
     Walter, and R. Schofield, 189-99. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Eckstein, Z., T. P. Schultz, and K. I. Wolpin. 1985. Short-run fluctuations in fertility
       and mortality in pre-industrial Sweden. European Economic Review 26: 297-3 17.

Economist. 1990. Squeezing in the next five billion. 20 January, 19-20, 22.
                                                                                           32

FAO/WHO/UNU. 1985. Energy and protein requirements. Report of a joint
       FAO/WHO/UNU expert consultation. Technical Report Series no. 724. Geneva:
       World Health Organization.

Fisler, J. S. 1992. Cardiac effects of starvation and semistarvation diets: Safety and
        mechanisms of action. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 56: 230S-34S.

Fogel, R. W. 1986. Nutrition and the decline in mortality since 1700: Some preliminary
       findings. In Long-term factors in American economic growth, edited by S. L.
       Engerman, and R. E. Gallman, 439-555. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
       (for NBER).

____________ 1987. Biomedical approaches to the estimation and interpretation of
      secular trends in equity, morbidity, mortality, and labor productivity in Europe,
      1750-1980. Typescript, University of Chicago.

___________     1991. New findings on secular trends in nutrition and mortality: Some
       implications for population theory. Typescript, University of Chicago.

____________ l992a. Egalitarianism: The economic revolution of the twentieth century.
      The 1992 Simon Kuznets Memorial Lectures presented at Yale University (April
      22-24). Typescript, University of Chicago.

____________ 1992b. Second thoughts on the European escape from hunger: Famines,
      chronic malnutrition, and mortality. In Nutrition and poverty, edited by S. R.
      Osmani, 243-86. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

____________     l993a. A comparison of biomedical and economic meausres of
       egalitariansim: Some implications of secular trends for current policy. Paper
       presented at the Workshop on Economic Theories of Inequality, Stanford
       University (Marph 11-13). Typescript, University of Chicago.

____________ 1993b. New sources and new techniques for the study of secular trends
       in nutritional status, health, mortality, and the process of aging. Historical
       Methods 26: 5-43.

Fogel, R. W., D, L. Costa, and J. M. Kim. 1993. Secular trends in the distribution of
       chronic conditions and disabilities at young adult and late ages, 1860-1988: Some
       preliminary findings. Paper presented at the NBER Summer Institute, Economics
       of Aging Program (July 26-28). Typescript, University of Chicago.

Fogel, R. W., and S. L. Engerman. 1992. The slave diet on large plantations in 1860.
       In Without consent or contract, vol. 2: Evidence and methods, edited by R. W.
       Fogel, R. A. Galantine, and R. L Manning, 291-304. New York: W. W. Norton.
                                                                                            33
Fogel, R. W., and R. Floud. 1994. Nutrition and mortality in France, Britain, and the
       United States. Typescript, University of Chicago.

Freudenberger, H., and G. Cummins. 1976. Health, work, and leisure before the
       Industrial Revolution. Explorations in Economic History 13: 1-12.

Fridlizius, G. 1984. The mortality decline in the first phase of the demographic
       transition: Swedish experiences. In Pre-industrial population change, edited by T.
       Bengtsson, G. Fridlizius, and R. Ohlsson, 71-114. Stockholm: Alinquist and
       Wiksell.

Friedman, G. C. 1982. The heights of slaves in Trinidad. Social Science History 6:
       482-5 15.

Fries, J. F. 1980. Aging, natural death, and the compression of morbidity. New England
        Journal of Medicine 303: 130-36.

___________ 1989. The compression of morbidity: Near or far? Milbank Quarterly 67:
      208-32.

Galloway, P. 1986. Differentials in demographic responses to annual price variations in
       pre-revolutioriary France: A comparison of rich and poor areas in Rouen,
       1681-1787. European Journal of Population 2: 269-305.

_____________ 1987. Population, prices and weather in preindustrial Europe. Ph.D.
       diss., University of California, Berkeley.

Gille, H. 1949/50. The demographic history of northern European countries in the
       eighteenth century. Population Studies 3: 3-70.

Goubert, P. 1973. The ancien régime, translated by S. Cox. New York: Harper
      Torchbooks.

Gould, B. A. 1869. Investigations in the military and anthropological statistics of
       American soldiers. Cambridge: Harvard University.

Heywood, P. F. 1983. Growth and nutrition in Papua New Guinea. Journal of Human
     Evolution 12: 131-43.

Hill, G. L. 1990. Some implications of body composition research for modern clinical
       management. Infusionstherapie 17(suppl. 3): 79-80.
                                                                                            34

Ilolderness, B. A. 1989. Prices, productivity, and output. In The agrarian hiSti)ry of
       England and Wales, vol. 6: 1750-1850, edited by G. E. Mingay, 84-189.
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ilynen. F. F., and I. Leitch. 1971. The physiology of human preganancy, 2d ed.
       Oxford: Blackwell Scientific.

Idiaqucz, J. 1988. Nutritional status and autonomic nervous system function. Functional
       Neurology 3: 205-9.

John, A. M. 1988. The plantation slaves of Trinidad, 1783-1816: A mathematical and
       demographic inquiry. Cambridge: Cambridge Universiry Press.

Kannisto, V., et al. 1994. Reductions in mortality at advanced ages. Population and
       Development Review, forthcoming.

Karpinos, B. D. 1958. height and weight of selective service registrants processed for
      military service during WW 11. fluman Biology 30: 292-321.

Kielmann, A. A., et al. 1983. Child and maternal health services in rural India: The
       Narangwal experiment. Vol. 1: Integrated nutrition and health. Baltimore: Johns
       hopkins University Press for The World Bank.

Kim, J. NI. 1993. Economic and biomedical implications of Waaler surfaces: A new
       perspective on height, weight, morbidity, and mortality. Typescript, University
      of Chicago.

Kuznets, S. 1941. Statistics and economic history. Journal of Economic history 1: 26-
      41.

             1952. Long-term changes in the national income of the United States of
       America since 1870. In Income and wealth of the United States: Trends and
       structure, edited by S. Kuzncts, International Association for Research in Income
       and Wealth, Income and Wealth Series 2, 2-241. Baltimore: The Johns llopkins
       Press.

Lasleti, 1'. [1965] 1984. l'he world we have lost: England before the industrial age. 3rd
       ed. New York: Scrihner's.

Law, C. M., et al. 1993. Initiation of hypertension in utcro and its amplification
       throughout life. British Medical Journal 306: 24-27.
                                                                                             35
Lee, R. 1981. Short-term variation: Vital rates, prices, and weather. In E. A. Wrigley
       and R. S. Schofield, The population history of England, 1541-1871: A
       reconstruction, 356-401. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Lipton, M. 1983. Poverty, undernutrition and hunger. World Bank Staff Working Papers
       no. 597. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Livi-Bacci, M. 1990. Population and nutrition: An essay on European demographic
      history. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Lozoff, B., E. Jimenez, and A. W. Wolf. 1991. Long term developmental outcome of
      infants with iron deficiency. New England Journal of Medicine 325: 687-95.

McMahon, M. M., and B. R. Bistrian. 1990. The physiology of nutritional assessment
     and therapy in protein-calorie malnutrition. Disease-a-Month 36: 373-417.

Manton, K. G. 1993. Biomedical research and changing concepts of disease and aging:
      Implications for long-term forecasts for elderly populations. In Forecasting the
      health of elderly populations, edited by K. G. Manton, B. H. Singer, and R. M.
      Suzman, 319-65. New York: Springer-Verlag.

Manton. K. G., L. S. Corder, and E. Stallard. 1993. Estimates of change in chronic
     disability and institutional incidence and prevalence rates in the U. S. elderly
     population from the 1982, 1984, and 1989 National Long-Term Care Survey.
       Photocopy, Durham, NC, Duke University, Center for Demographic Studies.

Manton, K. G., and B. J. Soldo. 1992. Disability and mortality among the oldest old:
      Implications for current and future health and long-term care service needs. In
       The oldest old, edited by R. M. Suzman, K. G. Manton, and D. P. Willis,
       199-250. New 'York & Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Manton, K. G., E. Stallard, and B. Singer. 1992. Projecting the future size and health
      status of the U S. elderly population. International Journal of Forecasting 8:
     433-58.

Margo, R. A., and R. H. Steckel. 1982. The heights of American slaves: New evidence
      on slave nutrition and health. Social Science History 6: 5 16-38.

Marmot, M. G., M. J. Shipley, and G. Rose. 1984. Inequalities in death--specific
       explanations of a general pattern? Lancet 8384 (May 5): 1003-6.

Martorell, R. 1985. Child growth retardation: A discussion of its causes and its
       relationship to health. In Nutritional adaptation in man, edited by K. Blaxter, and
       J. C. Waterlow, 13-29. London and Paris: John Libby.
                                                                                           36

Martorell, R., J. Rivera, and H. Kaplowitz. 1990. Consequences of stunting in early
      childhood for adult body size in rural Guatemala. Annales Nestlé 48: 85-92.

Meerton, M. A. von. 1989. Croissance économique en France et accroissement des
      française: Une analyse "Villermetrique". Typescript, Leuven, Center voor
       Econornische Studiën.

Moore, W. 3., R. J. Newman, and M. Fheili. 1992. Measuring the relationship between
      income and NHEs. Health Care Financing Review 14: 133-39.

Newhouse, 3. P. 1992. Medical care costs: How much welfare loss? Journal of
       Economic PerspectiveS 6(3): 3-21.

Oddy, D. J. 1990. Food, drink and nutrition. In The Cambridge social history of Britain
      17 50-1950, vol. 2: pple and their environment, edited by F. M. L. Thompson,
      25 1-78. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Olson, 3. F. 1992. Clock time versus real time: A comparison of the lengths of the
       northern and southern agricultural years. In Without consent or contract, vol. 3:
       Markets and production: Technical papers volume 1, edited by R. W. Fogel and
       S. L. Engerman, 216-40. New York: W. W. Norton.

Osmani, S. R. 1992. On some controversies in the measurement of undernutrition. In
       Nutrition and poverty, edited by S. R. Osmani, 121-64. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Payne, P. 1992. Undernutrition: Measurement and implications. InNutrition and povery,
       edited by S. R. Osmani, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Pellegrino, E. D. 1993. The metamorphosis of medical ethics: A 30-year retrospective.
       JAMA 269: 1158-62.

Perrenoud, A. 1984. The mortality decline in a long-term perspective. In Pre-industrial
       population change, edited by T. Bengtsson, G. Fridlizius, and R. Ohisson, 41-69.
       Stockholm: Almquist and Wiksell.

___________      1991. The attenuation of mortality crises and the decline of mortality.
        In The decline of mortality in Europe, edited by R. Schofield, D. Reher, and A.
        Bideau, 18-37. Oxford: Ciarendon Press.

Phillips, D. I. W., et al. 1993. Fetal growth and autoimmune thyroid disease. quarterly
       Journal of Medicine 86: 247-53.

Phipps, K., et al. 1993. Fetal growth and impaired glucose tolerance in men and women.
       Diabetologia 36: 225-28.
                                                                                           37
Preston, S. H. 1993. Demographic changes in the United States, 1970-2050. In
       Demography and retirement: The twenty-first centu, edited by A. M. Rappaport
       and S. J. Schieber, 19-48. Westport, CT: Praeger.

Quenouille, M. Ii., et a!. 1951 Statistical studies of recorded energy expenditure in
       Man. Technical Communication no. 17. Aberdeenshire, Scotland: Commonwealth
       Bureau of Animal Nutrition.

Richards, '1'. 1984. Weather, nutrition and the economy: The analysis of short run
       fluctuations in births, deaths and marriages, France 1740-1909. In Pie-industrial
       pQ.pulation change, edited by T. Bengtsson, G. Fridlizius, and R. Ohisson,
       357-89. Stockholm: Almquist and Wiksell International.

Robbins, S. L., R. S. Cotran, and V. Kuinar. 1984. Pathologic basis of disease. 3d ed.
      Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.

Saha, T. M., B. C. Dillon, and M. E. Lanser. 1983. Fibronectin and phagocytic host
       defense: Relationship to nutritional support. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral
       Nutrition 7: 62-68.

Schieber, G. J., J.-P. Poullier, and L. M. Greenwald. 1993. health care systems in
       twenty-four countries. Health Affairs 10(3): 22-38.

Schwartz. W. 13., and H. J. Aaron. 1991. Must we ration health care? Best's Review.
     January, 37-41.

Scrimshaw, N. S. 1993. Malnutrition, brain development, learning and behavior. The
      Twentieth Kamla Pun Sabharwal Memorial Lecture presented at Lady Irwin
      College. New Delhi (November 23). Typescript.

Scrimshaw, N. S., and J. E. Gordon, eds. 1968. Malnutrition, learning and behavior.
      Cambridge: MiT Press.

Scrimshaw, N. S., C. E. Taylor, and J. E. Gordon. 1968. Interactions of nutrition and
      infection. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Seckler, D. 1980. Malnutrition: An intellectual odyssey. Western Journal of Agricultural
       Economics 5: 219-27.

Sen, A. 1981. Poverty and famines: An essay on entitlement and deprivation. Oxford:
       Clarendon Press.

Shanimas, C. 1984. The eighteenth-century English diet and economic change.
       Explorations in Economic History 21: 254-69.
                                                                                               38

                1990. jJL re-industrial consumer in Enejand and America. Oxford:
      Clarendon Press.

Shuttleworth, J. S. 1990. Ethical issues in long-term care. Journal of the Medical
       Association of Georgj 79: 843-45.

Sominer, A., and M. S. Lowenstein. 1975. Nutritional status and mortality: A
      prospective validation of the QUAC stick. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
      28: 287-92.

Srinivasan, T. N. 1992. Undernutrition: Concepts, measurement, and policy
      implications. In Nutrition and poverty, edited by S. R. Osmani, 97-120. Oxford:
      Clarendori Press.

Sukhatme, P. 1981. Relationship between malnutrition and poverty. Indian Association
      of Social Science Institutions, First National Conference on Social Sciences.
      Delhi, January 12-15, 1981.

Tanner. J. M. 1990. Foctus into man: Physical growth from conception to maturity, rev.
      ed. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

____________ 1993. Review of D. J. P. Barker's Fetal and infant origins of adult
      disease. Annals of Human Biology 20: 508-509.

Thatcher, A. R. 1992. Trends in numbers and mortality at high ages in England and
      Wales. Population Studies 46: 411-26.

Toutain, J. 1971. La consommation alimentaire en France de 1789 a 1964. Economies
      ctSociétés, Cahiers de 1'ISEA 5(11): 1909-2049.

U. S. Bureau of Statistics. 1975. Historical statistics of the United States, colonial times
       to 1970. Washirgton, D.C.: GPO.

U. S. Department of Health and human Services. 1987. AnthropometriC reference data
       and prevalence of overweight. Vital and Health Statistics, Series 11 no. 238.
       Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Vaupel, J. W. 1991a. The impact of population aging on health and health care costs:
      Uncertainties and new evidence about life expectancy. Unpublished manuscript,
      Center for Health and Social Policy, Odense University, Denmark.

______         l991b. Prospects for a longer life expectancy. Paper presented to the
       annual meeting of the Population Association of America, Washington, D.C.
       (March 21-23).
                                                                                           39
Vaupel, J. W., and H. Lundström. 1994. Prospects for longer life expectancy. In
       Economics of aging, edited by David Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
       (for NBER), forthcoming.

Veblen, T. [1899] 1934. The theory of the leisure class: An economic study of
       institutions. New York: Modern Library.

Volpe, J. J. 1987. Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy - Clinical aspects. In Neurology pf
       the newborn, 2d ed., 236-79. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.

Waaler, H. T. 1984. Height, weight and mortality: The Norwegian experience. Acts
      Medica Scandinavica suppl. 679: 1-51.

Weir, D. R. 1982. Fertility transition in rural France, 1740-1829. Ph.D. diss., Stanford
       University.

____________ 1989. Markets and mortality in France, 1600-1789. In Famine, disease
       and the social order in early modern society, edited by J. Walter, and R.
       Schofield, 201-34. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

____________ 1993. Parental consumption decisions and child health during the early
      French fertility decline, 1790-1914. Journal of Economic History 53: 259-74.

\Vest, P., cc al. 1990. Social class and health in youth: Findings from The West of
       Scotland Twenty-07 Study. Social Science and Medicine 30: 665-73.

Wolfe, B. L. 1986. Health status and medical expenditures: Is there a link? Social
       Science and Medicine 22: 993-99.

Wrigley, E. A. 1987. Urban growth and agricultural change: England and the continent
      in the early modern period. In Peoples. cities and wealth: The transformation of
      traditional society, 157-93. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Wrigley, E. A., and R. S. Schofield. 1981. The population history of England,
       1541-1871: A reconstruction. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Young, V. R., and N. S. Scrimshaw. 1971. The physiology of starvation. Scientific
       American 225(October): 14-21.
                                                              Table I
                                   Estimated Average FInal Heights or Men Wbo Reached Maturity
                                        eIween 1750 md 1175 In x European Populations,
                                                       by Quarter Centuries
                                                                       (an)


                            (I)                          (3)                (4)       (5)                  (6)                  (7)

              Date of matunty
              by century and          Grut           Norway            Sweden        Frsrse              Denznar           Hungary
                  quarter            Brttain


                                                                                     —                    —                 61.7
      I.           18-111            165.9              163.9           161.1
                                     167.9              —               166,7        163.0               165.7             165.8
      2.           13-TV

      3.           19-I              168.0              —               166.7        164.3               165.4             l639
      4.           19-Il             171.6                              168.0        165.2               166.1             l64.2
                   19-Ill            169.3              163.6                        165.6               165.3              —
      5.                                                                169.5


      6.           20-111            175.0              178.3           177.6        172.0               176.0             170.9



Sourcev Fogel 1987. Table 7 (or all colurnnstscept 5. j: Rows 3-5 were computed from Meerton 1989 at asnended by Weir (1992).
with 0.9cm added to allow (or additional Srowth between age 20 and maturity (Gould 1869, 104-lOS; c(. Friedman 1982, 510. a. 14). The
entry to row 2 in derived from . linear eatrapolalion of Meerton's data (or 1815-1836 back so 1788, with 0.9cm added (or additional growth
between age 20 and maturity. The entry in row 6 in from Foei 1987. Tablc 7.


                                                                  Table 2
                                    A Comparison or the Probable French and English Distributions
                                        of lb. Daily Coriawoption or Kcaln per Cociswn(ng Unit
                                               Toward the End of the Eighteenth Century

                                                    A                                                            B

                                               France c. 1785                                            England C. 1790

                                                  )-2,290                                                 X-2,700
                                                 (a/X) — 0.3                                               (n/ — 0.3



                                     Daily heal                 Cuniuladve                  Daily heal               Cumulsave
              Docile                consumption                         S                consumption                        S
                   (I)                   (2)                       .    (3)                     (4)                         (5)




I.         Highest                   3.6fl                             100                  4,329                      100
2.         Ninth                     2.981                             84                   3.514                          84
3.         Eighth                    2.676                             7!                   3.155                          71
4.         Seventh                   2,157                             59                   2,897                          59
5.         Sizth                     2,276                             4!                   2,684                          48
6.         Fifth                     2,114                             38                   2,492                          38
7.         Fourth                    1.95$                             29                   2.309                          29
8.     Third                         1,79!                             21                   2.120                          21
9.         Second                    l.614                             13                    1,903                         13
10.        First                     1.310                              6                    1.54$                         6



Sources and pmctdures: See Fogel    1987, enp. tables I and 5 and note 6.
                                                  Table 3
Comparison of the Prevalence of Chronic Conditions Among Union Army Veterans
in 1910, Veterans in 1983 (Reporting whether they ever had specific chronic conditions),
and Veterans in NHIS 1985-88 (Reporting whether they had specific chronic conditions
            during the preceding 12 months), Aged 65 and Above, Percentages
                                                1910                        Age-
                                              Union                       adjusted       NHIS
                                               Army           1983          1983        1985—88
                 Disorder                    veteransa     veterans veterans veterans
          Musculoskeletal                       67.7             47.9          47.2       42.5

          Digestive                             84.0             49.0          48.9       18.0
               Hernia                           34.5             27.3          26.7        6.6
               Diarrhea                         31.9              3.7           4.2         1.4

          Genito-urinary                        27.3             36.3          32.3        8.9

          Central nervous,endocrine,
            Metabolic, or blood                 24.2             29.9          29.1       12.6

          CircuIatory'                          90.1             42.9          39.9       40.0
              Heart                             76.0             38.5          39.9       26.6
               Varicose veins                   38.5              8.7           8.3        5.3
               Hemorroidsc                      44.4                                       7.2

          Respiratory                           42.2             29.8          28.1       26.5

             a).ev1Jling rates of Union Army veterans are based on examinations by physicians. Those
         for the 1980s are based on self reporting. Comparison of the NHIS rates with those obtained
         from physicians' examinations in NHANES 11 indicates that use of self reported health
         conditions does not introduce a significant bias into the comparison. See the source for a
         more detailed discussion of possible biases and their magnitudes,
             6Among veterans in 1983. the prevalence of all types of circulatory diseases will be
         underestimated because of under-reporting of hemorroids.
             The variable indictaling if the 1983 veteran ever had hemorroids is unreliable.
         Source: Fogel. Costa, and Kim 1993
                         FIGURE 1
            The Secular Trends in Mortality Rates
                   in England and France

                           PART A
 CDR                  England: 1553-1975
     -
50
40 -
     -
30
     -
20
10 -

 0                                                  I




  1500         1600      1700   1800       1900         2000
                            Time
                           PART B
  COR                 France: 1752-1974

50

40

30

20

10

 0
     1500      1600      1700   1800       1900         2000
                            Time
Note: Each diagram shows the scatter of annual death
rates around a 25-year moving average. See Fogel
and Floud 1991 for sources and procedures.
                        FIGURE 2
     Comparison of the Relationship between Body Height
                     and Relative Risk in Two Populations
                          PART A
       Relative Mortality Risk among Norwegian Men
            Aged 40-59, between 1963 and 1979
           -• 2.5-
           a:

           t0 2.0-         -

              a)
              >
              ci)
         a: 0.5-
               140 150 160 170 180 190 200
                                     Body Height (cm)
                           PART B
       Relative Rejection Rates for Chronic Conditions
           in a Sample of 4,245 Men Aged 23-49,
                Examined for the Union Army
                    3.0        0

en
        a)

                                         Inguinal Hernias   4---•
        0                                       Diseases
        C-)
        ci)

       o
        ci)
                               \\CircuIatory
        a)
                    1.0-
        cci
        ci)
       a: 0.5-                                  b
                                                     0
                    0.0
                           59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77
                                   Height (inches)
                                                  FIGURE 3
                 Relationship between BMI and Prospective Risk among Norwegian Adults
                                     Aged 50-64 at Risk (1963-1979)
      2.4
            —                      I
      2.2   .
(I)                             Males                                   Females
a: 2.0
>     1.8
(1          '
t     1.6
0           •                                                                             I
      1.4                                    /                                                //•
a)                                          frd'
>     1.2                                                                             ,
4-.
a)
      1.0
            ._\                        </               Ae\__ :/_                 ,
a:    0.8
                                                  .----60-64
      0.6                                     I     I     I  I .1. I
                17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31   33353739       171921232527293133353739
            i
Source: Waaler 1984                       Weight / Height2 (kg / m2)
                                             FIGURE 4
                                Iso-Mortality Curves of Relative Risk
                    for Height and Weight Among Norwegian Males Aged 50-64,
                With a Plot of the Estimated French Height and Weight at Four Dates
                   _________ )so-r1aory-Rrsk Curves          so-SM) Curves        Arvmum-Rrsk Curve
                             (0.7—2 2)                       (Th—i4)
      1.95




      1 .90




      1 .85




      1 .80

'I,


1     1.75
or
I
Q)



      1.70




      1 .65




      1 .60




      1.55
              40              50               60     70          80         90    100            110
                                                       Weight (kg)
                                 FIGURE 5
The Relationship between Height and Relative Risk of Ill Health
                in NHIS Veterans Aged 40-59
                2.5
          Cl)
                2.0
          ci)
          >
          Co    1.5—
         Ia)


                1.o-
                      — liii II LIIi I   I   II 1111 II II liii 111111 I
                          160       170 180                  190 200
                                     Height (cm)
Source. Fogel, Costa, and Kim 1993
                                                                                                                                         FIGURE 6
                      Health Improvement Predicted by NHIS 195-I9X Health Surface
                                                — Optimum Weight Curve                                                                        Iso-Risk Curves (0.5-2.2)        lso-BMI curves (t3.39(
   1.95

                                                                                                                   I
   i.go —                                                                                             ,'                   ,,



                                                                                                 I,                I
                                                                     I                                                          I
   1 .85 —                                                                                  ',         ,'                  II
           -                                                                           I               I
                                      I                     I                                                          I
           —
                                  I                                                I               I
           —

                             ,I                                               ,I                  I
                                                I                                                              I
   1.80
           —
                                           II
                                                                     ,                                 ,l
                                                                                                           ,
                Ill                                             II                          II




   1 75 —
           —             I




   1 70                                                                  ,'
           -                 I
           —/                                                   II                     II



   1 .65




                II                    II            1,
   1.60 — /                       ' /

                     I                                      I
                I
                    I
                                                    I
                                                        I
                                                                         II
                                  -
   1.55
           40                                                             50                                                        60     70            80               90              100           110
                                                                                                                                             Weight (kg)
All risks are measured relative to the average risk of morbidity (calculated over all heights and
weights) among NHIS l985-l9 white males aged 45-64.
Source: Kim 1993
                        FIGURE 7
     Perinatal Death Rate by Birth Weight
          in Ghana, India, and U.S.A.

 1000
     500—
                                                            /
                                                                0


Q 100                                       0 00
           -                                                    /
ci 50—
a)                                                          /

a)                                  \
                                        \               /
a)    10                                           /1
0
                   Ghana
                    India
                   U.S.A. G—----
       1
               IiIlItII1IIIIIII1IIIIIIIII1IlIuIIlII1IiuuIuIJI1uIIlI

               0     1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
                            Weight (grams)


Source: Hyuen and Leitch 1971
