NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LOGIC OF CURRENCY CRISES

Maurice Obstfeld

Working Paper No. 4640

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1994

Prepared for the 13th Colloque Banque de France-Universit6, "Mouvements de Capitaux et
Marché des Changes," Paris, November 24-26, 1993, and forthcoming in the Cahiers
Economiques et Monétaires of the Banque de France. I thank Matthew Jones and Dennis
Bacsafra for excellent research assistance. Camilla Sommarmo, Lars Homgren, and Lars E.
0. Svensson generously helped me obtain data. Comments from Lars Horngren, Kerstin
Mitlid, Andr6 Orlan, Henri Pages, and Lars E. 0. Svensson led to improvements in the
paper, as did the discussions at the Banque de France conference and at presentations
sponsored by New York University's C.V. Starr Center and the S6minaire d'Economie
Mon&aire Internationale chaired by Daniel Cohen, Jacques M6litz, and Charles Wyplosz.
Any errors and all interpretations are my own. Financial support was provided by the Center
for German and European Studies at the University of California, Berkeley; by the Ford
Foundation (through a grant to CIDER at Berkeley); and by the National Science Foundation
of the United States. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Finance
and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4640
February 1994

ThE LOGIC OF CURRENCY CRISES

ABSTRACT
Once one recognizes that governments borrow international reserves and exercise other
policy options to defend fixed exchange rates during currency crises, the question arises: What

factors determine a government's decision to abandon a currency peg or hang on? In a setting
of purposeful action by the authorities, the possibility of self-fulfilling crises becomes important.

Speculative anticipations depend on conjectured government responses, which depend, in turn,

on how price changes that are themselves fueled by expectations affect the government's
economic and political positions. The circular dynamic implies a potential for crises that need
not have occurred, but that do because market participants expect them to. In contrast to this

picture, most previous literature on balance-of-payments crises ignores the response of
government behavior to markets. That literature, I argue, throws little light on events such as
the European Exchange Rate Mechanism collapse of 1992-93. This paper then presents two
different models in which crisis and realignment result from the interaction of rational private
economic actors and a government that pursues well-defined policy goals. In both, arbitrary
expectational shifts can turn a fairly credible exchange-rate peg into a fragile one.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER

1. Introduction
The dramatic currency crisis that culminated in the August 1993 wIdening
of exchange-rate bands within the European Monetary System (EMS)
challenges economists to rethink their models of how markets may force

governments to alter supposedly fixed exchange rates. Some European
governments, notably Italy's, clearly lacked the full confidence of the
markets as a result of fiscal trends incompatible with a fixed exchange

rate in the long run. But the scale and scope of the turmoil that began
in the summer of 1992 were so great that ultimately even apparently
sustainable currency pegs were shaken. The disparate circumstances of
the many currencies successfully attacked by speculators has led
observers such as Eichengreen and Wyplosz (1993) and Portes (1993) to

argue that, at least in the European context, recent speculative crises
have been driven in part by self-fulfilling forces.
Economists have rightly tended to be wary of such accounts: finance

ministers past and present have preferred to blame crises on Gnomes of

Zurich or agtoteurs rather than face the reality of fundamental factors,
including policy errors. A seminal paper by Krugman (1979) provided a

convincing theoretical rationale for the economists' view. Krugman set

out a simple model in which a currency peg must be abandoned once the
pegging nation's foreign exchange reserves run out. He went on to

analyze how the peg collapses in situations where the eventual
exhaustion of reserves is inevitable. His remarkable finding was that

1

speculators with foresight tnevttably attack the currency before

reserves are fully depleted and purchase all remaining reserves at that
moment--a moment that can be defined precisely. This prediction follows

from the simplest principles of currency arbitrage.1

In this paper I argue that one cannot adequately understand recent
European currency experience in terms of Krugman's model. For industrial

European countries with access to world capital markets, reserve

adequacy per se is far less of a concern than it was in the early 1970s;
this factor no longer deserves the primacy assigned it in Krugman's

analysis.2 Clearly a number of other factors, notably the effects of high
interest rates and growing unemployment, came into play in determining
how different governments responded to the 1992-93 crisis.
Once one acknowledges that governments may borrow reserves and

exercise other policy options in the face of a crisis, the question
arises: What factors determine a government's decision to abandon a
1Agénor, Rhandari, and Flood (1992) and Blackburn and Sola (1993) survey

the large literature growing out of Krugman's paper.

2Under perfect capital mobility, a central bank whose orzly reason for
departing from a currency peg is reserve inadequacy could simply
sell domestic assets from its portfolio and attract an equal reserve
Inflow. This action, which amounts to borrowing reserves with domestic
currency, leaves unchanged both the public sector's net debt to the
private sector and the national net foreign wealth position. If the peg
is in question for reasons other than reserve adequacy, however, the
transaction can have strategic implications; see section 3.1 below.
Buiter (1987) analyzes a model in which domestic debt issue is more
costly than foreign-currency borrowing, so that an open-market sale of
domestic debt worsens the public finances.

2

currency peg or hang on? In a setting of purposeful action by the
authorities, however, the possibility of self-fulfilling crises cannot
be easily dismissed. Speculative anticipations depend on conjectured
government responses, which depend, in turn, on how price changes that

are themselves fueled by expectations affect the government's economic
and political positions. This circular dynamic Implies a potential for

crises that need not have occurred, but that do occur because market
participants expect them to.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 begins by analyzing
speculative attacks in exhaustible resource models, where attacks are

inevitable as a result of resource depletion. These models are compared
with Krugman's model, in which a process of reserve depletion is imposed
with no modeling of the basis for government policy decisions. A brief

review of Sweden's 1992 currency crisis serves to illustrate some

restrictive features of the standard model and to suggest factors that
should play a role in more general models of currency crisis.
Section 3 presents two different models in which crisis and

realignment result from the interaction of rational private economic
3
actors and a government that pursues well-defined policy goals. In the

31n two earlier papers (1986, 1988) I presented models in which
speculative attacks trigger government responses that effectively
validate those attacks. Dellas and Stockman (1993) build on my 1986
analysis to show how the possibility that a government will Introduce
capital controls in a crisis can generate self—fulfilling attacks. These
papers do not, however, derive official responses from models of optimal
government behavior, as I do here. Probably the earliest attempt

3

first of these models, high nominal interest rates associated with
devaluation expectations can force a government to devalue a currency
whose peg would have been viable under another set of private

expectations. This model is based on the effects of high Interest rates
on the government's fiscal position, but one could devise similar models

in which high interest rates induce the government to realign though
their impact on the banking system, firms' balance sheets, mortgage

interest rates, and so on.
A second model shows how realignments may reflect the authorities'
desire to offset shocks to competitiveness and employment. This model,

too, is subject to multiple equilibria. In it, arbitrary expectational
shifts can turn a fairly credible exchange—rate peg into a fragile one.4

formally to analyze the realignment decision in a strategic context is
in a neglected chapter of a book by Gale (Gale 1982, chapter 3). Gale
concluded, as I do below in more fully specified models, that
devaluations could be self-fulfilling phenomena.

4Ozkan and Sutherland (1993) and Bensaid and Jeanne (1993) explore

models in which higher nominal interest rates depress output, so that
governments abandon pegged exchange rates if nominal interest rates
reach too high a level. Both models produce realistic interest-rate
dynamics prior to a collapse: those in the first come from the
stochastic evolution of foreign interest rates, those in the second from
market learning about the fixed cost policymakers incur when they
realign. A similar fixed cost figures in the models of section 3, below;
the Bensaid— Jeanne model shares with those models the prediction that
self—fulfilling attacks may occur. In earlier work, Gros (1992) studies
a dynamic model in which realignment is driven by Interest rates and
self-fulfilling attacks are possible. While Gros did not explicitly cast
his model in a setting of policy optimization, it would not be hard to
rationalize his assumptions in terms of policy objectives like those
assumed by Ozkan and Sutherland and by Bensald and Jeanne.

4

2. How Unsustainable Policies Lead to Crises
In the most basic model of currency crisis, authorities pursue
unsustainable macroeconomic policies that must eventually force a fixed
exchange rate to be abandoned. Krugman (1979) showed that in a world of

perfect foresight, the moment of transition between the fixed—rate
regime and Its successor generally involves a speculative attack In

which private participants in the foreign exchange market acquire in an
instant all the foreign—currency reserves central banks commit to the

existing parity's defense.
2.2. SpecuLative Attacks En Gold and Other Exhaustible Resource Markets

Krugman's model was inspired by the literature on government
price-fixing schemes in exhaustible resource markets (Salant and
Henderson 1978, Salant 1983). Both the logic and limitations of his

account are placed in perspective by first reviewing the standard
partial-equilibrium model of attacks on government resource stockpiles.

In that model the government wishes to peg the price of a

resource—-call it "gold"--at a price p measured in in terms of a broad
commodity basket.5 The private sector's flow demand curve for gold is

5Monetary models of gold standards, which combine the natural resource
aspect of gold with its monetary function, are analyzed by Flood and
Garber (1984a), Bordo and Ellson (1985), and Barsky and Summers (1988).
Here I do not mean my identification of the resource with gold to be
taken too literally.

5

< 0,

and there is a "choke price" p such that D(pC) = 0. At time t = 0 the
total stock of gold in the (world) economy is S0; for simplicity, the

marginal cost of extracting gold from the ground for private use is
assumed to be zero.

The laissez—f atre perfect-foresight solution for the price path p
is well known from the classic work of Hotelling (1931). The key Insight

used in deriving this path is that because gold in the ground yields no

service flow and costs nothing to extract, its price

must rise at the

real rate of interest, r.6 A rate of price increase greater than r would
lead to an excess flow demand for gold by industry and personal users as

gold owners hoard it to earn excess returns; a rate of price increase
below r would lead to an excess supply as owners dump their gold on the

market in order to shift into bonds.
The laissez—faire gold price can be determined from the above

arbitrage argument, which implies a price path from t = 0 of the form

Pt

=

rt
p0e

more general models, price must rise at a rate of r less marginal
extraction cost. That more general condition allows gold in the ground
to coexist with, say, gold jewelry that yields a utility flow. With zero
extraction cost, allowing a utility value from holding gold above ground
would lead to the immediate extraction of all gold and a rate of price
Increase somewhat below r.

6

and the requirement that supply equal demand at each moment. Let T be
following (2), reaches the zero-demand choke price pC,

the date

pc =

rT

p0e

or,

(1) T =

log(pC/p0)/r.

Then supply will equal demand on every date if the initial market price

p0 is set to equate intertemporal demand to the total available stock:
log(pC/p0)/r
S =

J

D(p0ert)dt.

On date T = log(pC/p0)/r, the economy's stock of gold is used up and
(in
demand is nil. To take a simple concrete example, if D(p) =

p'

which case p =

(2)

p0

(S) = (raS0i1'°.

Now consider how the equilibrium would look if the government pegs

the price of gold at some level

between (S0) and pC• Initially gold

owners will sell their entire stock S0 to the government because they

7

can earn a rate of return r >

0

by placing their wealth in bonds instead

of gold. For a time, industrial and personal demands therefore will be
supplied entirely by the government, which must sell an amount D() of

its reserve each period. It is clear, however, that this situation is
unsustainable: eventually the stock S0 will be depleted and the

equilibrium price will have to be at its choke level. The critical
problem is to characterize the process through which the government's
price—fixing scheme collapses.

Figure 1 furnishes a simple characterization based on the
assumption that D(p) =

p°.

Its two solid graphs show two notional

prices of gold. The horizontal line is the natural logarithm of the

official price .

The

second upward-sloping curve is the natural

logarithm of p, defined by the function p(S) in (2), where St is the
stock of gold remaining at time t conditional on the price—fixing

scheme remaining in effect until that date:
=

(rS

The price

=

Is interpreted as the shadow free-market price of gold

given a price hypothetically fixed at

between dates 0 and t, but not

after; it is the competitive market price that would prevail in the
absence of future price fixing, given the economy's remaining stock of

gold, S =

S

—

D()t, when the price has been fixed at p in the past.

8

log

log

log

log

0

of price

Figure

V

V

1

ti

------7

V

V

V

t2

price

V

price

Hotelling

V

Time

V

V

When p <

is

rising at a proportional rate below the real interest

rate r because the economy is using gold more slowly than it would were

the actual price. When p >

D'

is

rising at a proportional rate

greater than r because gold is being consumer more quickly. Since
= —D() =

Pt

Pt

Pt

P

under

price fixing, equation (3) discloses that

which confirms the intuitive argument just given.7

The date T at which the two price lines intersect is the date on
which the price—fixing scheme collapses; it does so after a speculative

attack in which private market participants acquire all of the remaining

official gold stock at price . Thereafter a latssez—faire equilibrium
prevails, with market price rising at rate r until the (perhaps
infinite) choke price is reached and the economy's gold stock is
* (S)e1t, where the latter (shown by the
7Notlce In particular that
upper dashed line in the figure) is the laLssez—fatre or Hotelting price
prevailing (given an initial gold stock of S) if the government never
intervenes in the gold market. In contrast, in the equilibrium under

study now, demand is at D() for dates t prior to the date of the
crisis, not at D[(S)ertJ. Thus, S under the price—fixing—cum-collapse
scenario generally won't equal the gold stock the economy would have had
on date t had latssez—fatre prevailed since date 0, even though the gold
stock on date 0 was S in both regimes.

9

exhausted (see the lower dashed line in figure 1). The episode of price
reaches pC• In the case D(p) = p°',
fixing only postpones the date
— (l/rc'). (T* 0 implies an attack the moment price fixing is
T* =
attempted.)

Why does the crisis occur precisely on date T*? For dates t1

earlier

than

T*, there would be a sharp fall in the price of gold, from

to , once the economy's gold stocks were again in private hands.
The prospect of this loss would induce each individual speculator, and

hence all of them, to refrain from buying gold from the government at
price

on date t1. For dates t2 later than T an attack would force the

market price of gold to jump upward, from

to

. The

prospect of such

2

an Instantaneously Infinite rate of capital gain would entice each

speculator, and hence all of them, to buy as much gold as possible at

the official price an instant before

t2.

Thus, T is the exact date of

the crisis. On that date, speculators purchase all gold held by the

authorities but there is no discrete jump in gold's price.8

2.2. The Foreign Exchange Market Analogy

To analyze the collapse of a fixed exchange rate in a model
analogous to the foregoing resource model, imagine a monetary economy in
because
8Observe that for t > T*, the competitive price Pt is below
the former price rises only at rate t once the collapse has taken place.

10

which the demand for domestic (high-powered) money takes the form

(4) =e
M

—iii

where A is a constant,

is the domestic money price level, and

is

the domestic nominal interest rate. Under perfect asset substitution,
capital mobility, and perfect foresight, the domestic nominal interest

rate is linked to the (constant) foreign nominal rate i by the interest
parity condition

(5)

t

where

j*+E/E
tt
E is the price of foreign currency in terms of domestic currency

(the exchange rate) and

is the instantaneous expected (and actual)

rate of change in that price. To make matters as simple as possible, let
purchasing-power parity (PPP) link the domestic and foreign price

levels. With the latter assumed constant and normalized at unity, PPP

implies that we can identify the price level P with the exchange rate

Et (so that Pt = Et henceforth).

If the exchange rate is fixed at ,

the central bank must stand

ready to intervene in the money market so that domestic monetary

conditions remain consistent with that rate. Write the central bank's

11

balance sheet (ignoring net worth) as

(6) M
t
t +f,
t =C
the stock of foreign-exchange

is nominal domestic credit and

where

reserves, valued in foreign currency. In principle, central—bank

financial operations take the form of variations in C as well as
provided domestic and foreign-currency bonds are perfect substitutes (as

is assumed in (5), and as is necessarily the case under a credibly fixed
exchange rate), the two types of operation are equally efficient means
of maintaining the exchange parity. Attack models

La Krugman (1979)

assume, however, that the domestic-credit process Is exogenous, meaning

that the bank's reserves bear the full adjustment burden to
balance-of-payments pressures. Specifically, the model assumes that

domestic credit grows at a constant proportional rate

> 0 regardless

of events in the foreign exchange market:

(7)

t
t
The

strong assumption (7) implies that official reserves will be

declining through time while the exchange rate remains fixed; this
ever—shrinking reserve stock is analogous to the declining resource

12

stock in the Hotelling-SalafltHefldersofl model. As long as the exchange

rate Is fixed at ,
demand

expected depreciation is zero and nominal money
.
•
—
—
— _.ni*
'

. Thus M = C + Ef

is, by (4), constant at M = EAe

= 0, so if

is the share of reserves in M,

=—

(8)

(1—w)

< o.

t

While

a shrinking resource stock arises endogenously in the

resource model, it is imposed exogenously, through (7), in this
foreign-exchange case. The equilibrium of the model still involves a

speculative attack provided there is some lower limit on foreign-

exchange reserves. This lower limit is taken (arbitrarily) to be zero.
The resource model assumed that the government refrained from

intervention after the collapse of the price-fixing scheme. This outcome

is not inevitable; the government could reset the price at a new level
above

and (temporarily) regain its stockpile (enriching speculators in

the process). Such a move is analogous to a devaluation in the foreignexchange setting.9 To keep to the analogy with the resource model)

however, I assume that once foreign reserves touch their lower limit of

91f resource speculators anticipate with certainty that an attack will
set off a discrete rise in p, however) the only equilibrium is an
immediate attack. Similarly, if foreign-exchange speculators expect
an attack to cause a devaluation with certainty, they strike immediately
and reap the gains. If the price changes occur only after a transitional
period of floating, then an attack may not take place right away.

13

zero, the authorities institute an indefinite float of the currency.
In the present context the analog of the resource shadow price is
the shadow exchange rate, introduced by Flood and Garber (1984b). The
shadow exchange rate

is the floating rate that clears the foreign

exchange market, given the stock of domestic credit C, after all
foreign—exchange reserves have passed into private hands. Under perfect

foresight the natural logarithm of that rate is10

(9) log

=

1(i

+

') + log C.

Figure 2 shows how the fixed exchange rate collapses under these
assumptions. Panel (a) graphs the shadow floating exchange rate (9)
along with the pegged rate. The schedules' intersection determines the

time T of the speculative attack. (The reasoning pinpointing the
collapse of price fixing in the resource model applies here as well.)
Panel (b) shows money-supply behavior along the economy's equilibrium

path. Panel (c) shows the path of foreign reserves implied by

The key feature of the equilibrium is that reserves take a discrete

jump to zero at T, rather than declining smoothly to zero at time T.
This drop in reserves is the result of a sudden attack in which market
'°This solution is based on the normalization A = 1.
11The vertical scales in panels (b) and (c) are not intended to be the
same.

14

(a)

Log of exchange rate

log Et

logE

(b)

t

T*

0

Time

Log of money supply

logM

0

(c)

Time

Log of reserves
log f0

logf1*

S.
S.

0

T

Figure 2

T Time

participants, taking advantage of the central bank's commitment to sell

foreign exchange at the price L strip it of its remaining reserves. A
discrete jump in reserves is necessary to avoid a discrete jump in the
exchange rate: because the expected rate of currency depreciation rises

from 0 to '

at

time T* and i rises from i to i + , the money market

can remain in equilibrium at the initial price level P = £ only if the
nominal money supply falls enough exactly to accommodate the implied

fall in real money demand.

Critical to the preceding result is an assumption that ,

the

interest—sensitivity of money demand, is positive. Otherwise

expectations don't matter: if i = 0, foreign reserves hit zero only at
time T because the transition to a float occasions no sharp fall in
money demand. Obviously, the bigger is i the earlier the date of

attack, other things equal.
This type of speculative—attack model was extended to a
discrete—time environment with stochastic domestic-credit growth by
Flood and Garber (1984b).12 In their model, domestic credit growth

fluctuates randomly around a positive trend growth rate. Now T* is a
random variable rather than a perfectly foreseen date. Realistically,
the stochastic model predicts that as reserves decline, the nominal

interest rate rises as the probability increases that an unexpectedly
. .
Goldberg (1991) has added additional stochastic elements to produce a

12

richer account.

15

large domestic-credit shock pushes reserves to zero and knocks out the
exchange-rate peg. On the date the collapse occurs, the home currency
suffer a discrete-—albeit unanticipated——depreciation.

2.3. Evaluation
Models

in the spirit of Krugman (1979) provide elegant parables of

how rational financial markets respond to unsustainable macroeconomic
policies. The models ignore, however, the policy options available to

authorities and the ways in which the marginal costs of exercising these
options are balanced. Since the actions of rational speculators must be
conditioned on the conjectured response of the authorities, the class of
models reviewed gives relatively little general guidance on the factors
generating crises and determining their outcomes.

Some interesting recent models have offered explicit political
underpinnings for models such as Krugman's. Guidotti and Végh (1992)

develop a model in which a "war of attrition" over balancing the
national budget leads to continuing finance through reserve drains; if
agreement is not reached in time, a crisis can occur. Velasco (1993)
considers a scenario with divided government in which reserve drains

occur because individual ministries fail to internalize the overall
public—sector constraint. Stein and Streb (1993) propose an

asymmetric-information model in which governments may rationally run

down foreign reserves so as to push inflation into the future, thus

16

FIGURE 3

Swedish 1 —year interbank interest rate

Daily data,

1992 (percent)

17
16
15

II

14
1

I

I

I liii
illi!

3

Ii'
Ut

12

IIu

,ih uiftuIIU

I

I

I,

11
1

p

ti
III

0

9
FEB

APR

JUN

NOV

SEP

JUL

MAY

MAR

JAN

AUG

OCT

DEC

FIGURE 4

Riksbank for eign exchange reserves

(a)

Weekly data, 1992 (billion kronor)
190
180
170
160
150
1 40

130
1 20

110
100

go
JAN

JUL

MAY

MAR
APR

FEB

JUN

NOV

SEP

AUG

OCT

DEC

Riksbank net forward exchange position

(b)

Monthly data, 1992 (billion kronor)
20
0
—20
—40
—60
—80

—100
—120
—140
FEB

APR

JUN

AUG

OCT

DEC

risking a crisis later. These papers yield important insights into the
genesis of crises in countries where fiscal profligacy is the sole
underlying cause pf currency instability, but they do not cover the

entire range of factors at work, particularly in the European context.
Consider, for example, the travails of the Swedish krona during
1992.13 Sweden announced a unilateral peg to the European Currency Unit

in May 1991. The Danish rejection of the Maastricht Treaty on June 2,

1992 was the occasion for a small immediate rise in krona interest

rates; these rates rose sharply as uncertainties intensified over the
summer (figure 3). The culmination of these developments was an attack
on non-EC Nordic currencies in late August and early September, during

which Swedish interest rates rose to unprecedented levels. While the

krona peg survived this battle, it lost the war soon after, succumbing
to a new attack on November 19 and entering a float.
Figure 4, which graphs 1992 data on the Sveriges Rlksbank's

foreign exchange reserves [panel (a)] and net forward position in

foreign currencies [panel (b)], reflects a story quite different from
that behind panel (c) of figure 2.14 Sweden's foreign exchange reserves
'3Hörngren and Lindberg (1993) present an excellent review of recent
Swedish currency experience.

'4Reserve data come from the Riksbank's Assets and Liabilities: Weekly
Statement, various issues. Forward position data are reported in the
Riksbank's Quarterly Review, 1993:4, table 28; they do not appear on the
bank's balance sheet. Note that an official forward sale of foreign
currency effectively reduces the net supply of domestic—currency bonds
in private hands while increasing that of foreign-currency bonds; there

17

were trendless (or slightly increasing) through early June, dropping
only slightly by early August. There was virtually no net central-bank

forward intervention in this period. Starting July 24, the Riksbank

began to raise the marginal interest rate it charges the domestic banks.
At the height of the August-September attack the Riksbank

intervened heavily in the krona's defense, borrowing reserves for this
purpose in the second week of September. The resulting reserve shifts

are apparent in figure 4. Most intervention took the form of spot
foreign-currency sales, although the Riksbank also intervened in the

forward market. After the Initial storm had passed) however, total
central—bank assets rose, interest rates fell, and reserves rose-—until,
quite suddenly, the ECU peg collapsed in mid-November.

A model to illuminate these events must encompass many more

variables than simply the level of Sweden's foreign exchange reserves.
Sweden was in recession in the summer of 1992; its unemployment rate

jumped sharply from a 1982-91 average of 2.4 percent to 5.3 percent over

all of the following year. In addition, the government's budget deficit
had recently surged from an average surplus of 2.5 percent of GDP over
1987—91 to a deficit of 7.1 percent of GDP in 1992. Nonetheless, the

legislature seemed far from agreement on a deficit reduction package.
are no monetary—base effects. The forward sale thus is equivalent to a
sterutzed spot sale of foreign reserves. Forward positions can be
rolled over upon maturity through a swap of domestic for foreign
currency.

18

A troubled domestic banking system, unable to tolerate high interest

rates, was straining the public finances. Finally, the krona had
appreciated sharply in real terms since the end of 1990, and Sweden's

switch from a trade-weighted basket peg to an ECU peg In the spring of
1991 made it more vulnerable to the dollar's depreciation over 1992.
In these circumstances, Sweden's maintenance of the krona's ECU peg

was possible only at the cost of considerable short-term pain; and the
conservative government naturally found its popularity falling. The

perceived benefits from holding on were twofold. First, even though

inflationary pressures were, for the moment, at bay, the government
believed its long-term credibility would be damaged by a retreat from
its announced nominal-anchor rule. Second, Sweden wished to demonstrate
its readiness for EC membership by successfully pegging to the ECU—-a

strategy also followed by Norway and Finland.

This second motivation was crucial, for it implied that any event
that made devaluation more "excusable" in the eyes of EC members, or

that lessened the expected benefits of EC membership, would shake the

government's resolve to tolerate further pain. The Danish vote, which

made European unification look less likely for the near term, was the

first shock: it signaled that the costs of abandoning an ECU peg, not

only for Sweden, but for de jure

Exchange

Rate Mechanism members, might

turn out lower than previously reckoned. To counter these impressions

and restore stabilizing expectations France, on June 3, announced a

19

September 20 referendum on the Maastricht Treaty. But this tactic
soon backfired as French public opinion shifted against Maastricht.

Finland, which had devalued last at the end of 1991, was the first
country to come under pressure. Once the markka was floated on September

8, Sweden's resolve was put to the test and Its fierce, and temporarily
successful, defense of the krona began In earnest; by September 16 the

Riksbank had been forced to increase its overnight lending rate to 500

percent per annum, an act that placed strain on private-sector balance
sheets as well as on the government's. After a subsequent political
agreement to cut public expenditure, the foreign—exchange market

stabilized and the Riksbank began to lower interest rates and regain
foreign reserves. The central bank simultaneously increased its exposure

in the forward market, perhaps to signal its resolve.
Surprisingly, in light of their painful struggle with the markets
only two months earlier, the Swedish authorities floated the krona on
November 19 without an aggressive interest—rate defense like the one in

September. Instead, the response to renewed speculation was a strategy

of limited interest-rate increases and mostly sterilized intervention, a

strategy that led to massive reserve losses (see the two panels of
figure 4).

15

But these losses were a symptom, and not the cause, of the

15Hörngren and Lindberg recount that the Riksbank sold over 160 billion
kronor in six days. The kronor magnitudes in figure 4 have not been
revalued to reflect the currency's depreciation starting on November 19.

20

krona peg's political and economic unsustainability.16
What explains the Swedish government's surrender? Economic pain has

a cumulative effect: the government had taken all it could during the
August-September crisis and had little stomach for more. Furthermore,
the indefinite exit of England and Italy from the ERM on "Black
Wednesday," September 16, coupled with the Spanish devaluation, left

Sweden with little more to prove concerning its convergence to EC

policies. These events and the French pettt out on Maastricht left the
future of the EMS itself in doubt.
What lessons does the Swedish example teach? In general governments

have several options that can be exercised in defense of an exchange

parity, including borrowing foreign reserves, raising interest rates,
reducing government borrowing requirements and, as was the case for some
ERM members, tightening or imposing exchange controls. These strategies,

if followed to the limit, have some chance of success. But they are
painful, especially when unemployment is high and the public and private

16Figure 4 gives the impression that the sum of the Riksbank's foreign
reserves and net forward position was around zero when the krona
collapsed in November--an apparent confirmation of Krugman's (1979)
assumption that total reserves are driven to zero in a collapse. This
appearance is an artifact of intra-government accounting conventions.
Offsetting the Riksbank's large foreign reserve acquisition in early
September [panel (a)] was a corresponding balance-sheet liability to
Sweden's National Debt Office, which itself borrowed intervention
reserves for the Riksbank in the foreign exchange market. The resulting
"domestic" liability on the Riksbank's balance sheet thus reflected a
foreign liability of the Swedish government. Arguably, Sweden's foreign
reserves were below zero at the end of November 1992.

21

sectors are acutely vulnerable to high cx post real rates of interest.
Governments therefore will balance the costs of such defenses against

the benefit of resisting realignment pressures; and often they will
conclude that the pain is not worth the gain. Any economic event that

raises the market's estimation of the government's susceptibility to

pain, or that lowers the perceived gains from a successful parity
defense, can trigger a speculative attack. There need be no long
prologue to such an attack; market sentiment can shift almost overnight.
Table 1 illustrates how little markets anticipated the autumn 1992
crisis by showing the losses a German Investor In some devaluing
currencies would have made by rolling over one—month deposits from the

announcement or tightening of an ECU peg through the month of collapse.

Table

Annualized Percent Rates of

Return,

in Deutscheinarks,

on Compounded

One—Month Deposits of Other European Currencies
Currency

Dates

of Investment

Return

Comparable Return on Dli

LIra

Jan.

1990—Oct. 1992

6.42

9.22

rona

June 1991—Dec. 1992

—0.12

9.73

Oct. 1990—Oct. 1992

1.67

9.56

Pound
sterling

Source: OR! date

If.

governments determine the extent of

22

their

resistance through a

cost—benefit analysis, however, self—fulfilling crises become likely in

situations where economic distress already places the government under

pressure. The reason is that the cost of resisting an attack depends in
part on endogertous variables. If markets expect devaluation, for

example, domestic interest rates will rise, thus creating an Incentive
to devalue. Similarly, expectations of devaluation may be Incorporated
in wage demands, raising authorities' Incentive to accommodate. These

processes are circular: thus their timing is basically arbitrary and
they can be bought into play by seemingly minor events.

3. Market Forces and Government Incentives in Crises
This section explores economic two models of self—fulfilling crisis that
highlight the government's endogenous response to market expectations.

In the first, devaluation expectations feed into interest rates and thus
can sap the government's resolve to resist a validating realignment. In
the second, expectations feed into wages and competitiveness, creating
similar incentives by raising unemployment.

While the first model shows how strategic exchange intervention may

alter the likelihood and severity of a crisis, both models assume that
foreign reserves can be freely borrowed in the world capital market,
subject only to the government's consolidated intertemporal budget

constraint. Neither model assumes additional reserve constraints, nor

assigns to reserve levels per se a special role in generating

23

balance—of-payments crises.

3.1. The Role of Nomtnal Interest Rates
A factor often cited in explaining why a government accedes to

devaluation pressures is the increased cost of servicing the public
debt. Ultimately, accounts of crises based on limited foreign reserves
must also be based on overall fiscal weakness: were the public fiscal

position robust, it would be credible and feasible to borrow sufficient
reserves to repurchase a large portion of the high-powered money supply

and thereby fend off any attack. The model of this section extends the
insightful contribution of Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) by modeling the

intertemporal decisions of an explicitly purposeful government.'7 Two

factors that turn out to play a key role in affecting the likelihood of
crises are the maturity structure of the government's domestic
obligations (as in the Giavazzi-Pagano analysis) and the currency

composition of the overall public debt.'8

The world lasts for two periods, labeled 1 and 2. I will consider
the position of a government that issues a domestic currency unit
'7The model develops ideas sketched Obstfeld (1990a). Giavazzi and
Pagano, as I do here, built on Calvo's (1988) important analysis of dual
equilibria in markets for domestic-currency public debt. (See also
Alesina, Prati, and Tabellini 1990.)
'8Formal models of government behavior incorporating these factors were
introduced by Lucas and Stokey (1983), Persson and Sverisson (1994), and
Persson, Persson, and Svensson (1987). Milesi-Ferretti (1993) explores
political motivations for debt management in a monetary model.

24

(called the "lira") but also participates in the market for a foreign
currency (the "mark"). The government enters period 1 with obligations
to pay to claimants the nonnegative amounts 0D1 lire in period 1 and 0D2

lire in period 2. In parallel notation, the government enters period 1
entitled to receive payments of ofi marks in period 1 and 0f2 marks in
period 2. The levels of real government consumption in the two periods,

g and g2, are given exogenously. Finally, the government can levy taxes

on output at rate t to balance its budget, but only in period 2.
The pair {D,0D2) defines the maturity structure of the
government's lira debt—-its intertemporal endowment of domestic-currency
liabilities. When 0D1 = 0 any government debt is long-term, but when 0D2

=

0

any government debt is short term and must be rolled over in period

1. This, as shown below, is a potential source of difficulties for a
government that lacks credibility.

The assumptions of PPP and E =

P

are retained from the last

section. In period 1 the lira/mark exchange rate is fixed at E, but in
period 2 the rate may be changed to E2. The letter i denotes the nominal

interest rate on loans made in period 1 and repaid in period 2.
Public—sector "cash-flow" constraints19 reveal how the government's

maturity and currency exposure change its vulnerability to market
developments. Denote by D2 new lira obligations due in period 2 that

19The terminology comes from Persson and Svensson (1984).

25

are incurred by the government in period 1. The period I constraint Is

(10)12
D =(1+i) 01
D +Eg
101
1! —E(f)+

E(f
112

In (10), f signifies the new mark—denominated claims due in period 2
that the government acquires in period 1 (including new central-bank

foreign exchange reserves). In words, (10) implies that in period 2 the

government will subtract from its original lira cash flow the principal

and interest on its period I lira borrowing. The latter, in turn, equals
lira debt service, government consumption expenditure, and the

acquisition of new mark assets, less mark receipts that accrue in period
1. The government's only choice in period 1 (given the assumed setup) is
the currency composition of borrowing.

What is the government's position in period 2? It must meet all
period 2 oblIgations, whether incurred in period 1 or before, and spend
E2g2 lire besides. The revenue to finance these obligations comes from

mark assets, taxes on domestic output y, and any increase in the amount
of (high-powered) money residents wish to hold in period 2, M2, over the

amount held in period 1, M.2° The implied period 2 constraint is:2'
20The tacit assumption in (10) is that no seigniorage revenue is
available in period 1 because the exchange rate must remain fixed until
period 2.
211n (11) below, it would be more appropriate to take private-sector

26

(11)12
D +02D —E(f
—M.
2
2
212 +02f)+Eg22=Ety+M
1

Under the assumptions of capital mobility and uncovered

interest—rate parity, perfect-foresight equilibrium entails the ex post
equality of lira- and mark—asset returns, measured in lire,

(12)

1 + i = (E2/E1)(l + i*).

Given (12), (10) and (11) may be combined to yield the familiar

intertemporal government budget constraint (expressed in lira terms),

E(f)— D

Eg —ty—(M2—M)
1

(13)E(f)—D+202.°2=Eg+22
11
101 01
l+i

1+1

Private money demand obeys the simple quantity equation:

(14) M = kEy

(t =

1,

2),

where real output is assumed constant. Incorporating a nonzero nominal
interest elasticity of money demand would add nothing to this model,

despite its centrality in models of the Krugman (1979) varIety, so

income as the tax base, but this would only introduce inessential
complications. Notice, however, that since y excludes interest payments
on government debt held by the domestic public, a tax rate r on y in
excess of 1 is not excluded.

27

equation (14) is adopted to simplify the algebraic analysis.22 Note the
unrealistic assumption that the public holds money in period 2 even

though that period is the economy's last and agents could raise
consumption by spending It all. This situation arises in certain models
of money demand (for example, Brock 1975), but different assumptions

about the disposition of period 2 real balances could be made without

altering the model's main thrust.
Consider next the government's position. The government cares only

about the distorting effects of (ex post) inflation and the tax rate.
Since both of these variables are, by assumption, zero in period 1, the
objective function the government minimizes can be written as

(15) .
where

=

2

+ 2c2,

c is the lira's depreciation rate against the mark (the inflation

rate of lira prices) between periods 2 and 1,

(16) c=(E2 —E)/E,2
1

and

0 > 0 measures the weight placed on depreciation relative to other

taxes. The simple quadratic specification in (15) is chosen for
22Adding a traditional interest-rate response of money demand would only
raise the likelihood of the multiple equilibria shown below.

28

simplicity only. There is nothing in (15) to capture the notion that a
realignment per Se, even if small, can cause the government permanently

to lose credibility or face. Such an additional, fixed, cost of
realignment alters the analysis substantially, as is shown later, but it
is easier to see why once the implications of the simpler loss function
(15) have been laid out.

In analyzing the government's behavior it is convenient to

translate (10) and (11) into forms that clarify the fiscal role of the

depreciation rate c. Let the symbol d denote the real value at the
pertod I prtce Level of the lira government debt payment promised on
date

t for date s >

t.

Then (11) and (10) translate into

(17) c(d + d

12

02 +ky)+ry

d + d +g — f — f,
12
02 2 12 02

where

I

(18) d =

12

(1 +

1)1 d

O1

+

g1 —

f
01 1+1*
+

12

Equation (17) states that on date 2 the proceeds of the inflation levy
plus conventional taxes must suffice to repay the government's net debt
and pay for current spending. (Of course, d2 + 0d2 + ky is the total
inflation-tax base.)
In period 2 the government chooses c and t to minimize (15) subject

29

to (17). Importantly, all variables in (17) other than c and t are
predetermined when the government makes its choices in period 2. In

particular, the interest rate i that prevailed in period 1, as well as
the government's mark purchases then (1f2), are past history. If the
government could precommit its period 2 actions in period 1, the
government's choice problem would look quite different and the
possibility of multiple equilibria would not arise: under precommitment
the government would minimize (15) subject to (12)—(14), in effect

choosing the interest rate between dates 1 and 2. The assumption here,
instead, Is that the when period 2 comes the government does whatever
minimizes (15) given the budgetary situation inherited from the past.

The private sector has rational expectations about the government's

objectives, and the forecast of lira depreciation incorporated in the
nominal interest rate i is based on the assumption that the government
will behave in this way.

Minimization of (15) subject to (17) requires the critical
necessary condition:

1
(9)

(d2+0d2+ky)

Equation (19) states that at an optimum, the marginal cost of extra

depreciation per lira raised equals the marginal cost per lira of higher
conventional taxes. Using (19) to eliminate r from (17) gives c as

30

FIGURE 5

Depreciation rate, E

-0.

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3
Nominal interest rate, i

f 02
f)
(d
d +ky)(d
d +g —
12
2
12+02
12+02
—

(20) c=

2
2
(d2 + 0d2 + ky) + Oy

Use of (18) to substitute for 1d2 above shows how the government's

preferred depreciation rate is affected by the market interest rate
prevailing in period 1 and by the currency composition the government

chooses for its debt then.

Figure 5 graphs two schedules that together determine the set of
equilibrium period 1 nominal interest rates. The first is the
depreciation reaction function of the government, that is, which shows

the depreciation rate c it chooses in period 2 when confronted with a

lira interest rate of i. As noted above, this rate can be found by using
(18) to eliminate d from (20). I have assumed that the reaction
function is positively sloped, although this depends on the government's

fiscal position. Intuitively, the positive slope of the reaction
function reflects the possibility that a higher period 1 nominal

interest rate, by raising the inflation tax base in period 2, makes
greater currency depreciation optimal then. For the moment, the quantity

f, equal to period 1 official acquisition of mark assets, is taken as
given. Its role, which clarifies the factors that lend a positive slope
to the reaction function, is explored later.
The second upward-sloping schedule in figure 5, the interest parity

curve, shows the expected rate of depreciation c consistent with the

31

lira interest rate i prevailing in period 1. Equations (12) and (16)
show the equation for this schedule is
i—

1

1+1

which can be viewed as the reaction function of the lira bond market,

that is, the interest rate it sets based on its expectation of c.
In a perfect-foresight equilibrium, the depreciation rate the
market expects must equal the depreciation rate the government finds
optimal, given market expectations. Thus, intersections of the
government reaction function and the interest parity curve determine
possible equilibria of nominal interest rates and currency depreciation.

Figure 5 shows a case in which this equilibrium is not unique. Notice

that the inflation and interest rates illustrated in the figure seem
implausibly high, but remember that this is a two-period model in which

the government must repay its entire debt on date 2.

In figure 5 there are two equilibria. Obviously the government's
loss is lower in the low-depreciation equilibrium, but there is no way

to ensure that the bond market coordinates on the relatively low lira
interest rate. The government faces a dynamic inconsistency problem:

much as it would like to, it cannot credibly promise not to validate

It is obtained by setting y = 1, 0d1 = 1.0,
= 0.35, and i = 0.05.
0, f2 = 0, g1 =
g2

32

0d2 = 0.2, of1 = 0, of2 =

expectations if the bond market settles on the high—inflation

equilibrium's interest rate.
Next consider the implications of this analysis for a regime of
fixed exchange rates. International exchange rates are never irrevocably
fixed. A sovereign government always can abandon a currency peg if
economic conditions warrant a realignment. Assume, however, that the
government faces a fixed cost c of realigning——a cost that could reflect

political embarrassment and lost credibility, among other factors.24 In

this case the loss function is

(21) .

=

+

+ cZ

(Z =

1

if e

0, Z = 0 otherwise),

rather than (15). In figure 6 1 have calculated how the original loss

function (15) rises with the nominal interest rate under the purely
dtscretlonary regime analyzed so far, in which c is given by (20), and

under a fixed exchange rate, in which c is constrained to be 0. (The
parameter settings are the same as in figure 5.) Given the expectations
embodied in the period 1 interest rate i, the loss under discretion is
24De Kock and Grilli (1993) formalize the credibility costs of realigning
through a trigger-strategy model. They also find a possibility of
multiple equilibria. I do not take explore in detail why policymakers
found it optimal to institute the fixed rate and subject themselves to
the realignment cost. Particularly if we ignore the possibility of
strategic debt management (taken up below), it is entirely possible that
a realignment cost has the potential to improve economic welfare by
preventing excessive currency depreciation.

33

FIGURE 6

Government ex post loss

Nominal interest rate, i

below that under a fixed rate, and the relative disadvantage of

maintaining a fixed rate rises with i. Once the excess loss of a fixed
exchange rate exceeds c, the government will find it optimal to devalue.

The figure shows a value of c such that two distinct outcomes are
possible. The first is that the bond market expects no devaluation, in

which case the nominal interest rate is set at 1* and, indeed, no
devaluation occurs.

The second possibility of is a direct consequence of the existence
of two equilibria under pure discretion. Suppose the market expects the

currency to be devalued at the rate

shown in figure 5, and sets the

nominal interest rate at the corresponding level i2. Then the government

will be induced to carry out the anticipated devaluation, the
realignment cost c notwithstanding. This is a first example of a self—
fulfilling speculative attack: there exists an equilibrium in which the
exchange parity is viable, but the government is nonetheless led to
change the parity simply because private expectations of a change make

it too costly not to. Clearly, a sharp fall in c from a previously high
level—-as may have occurred, for example, after the Danish vote on
Maastricht in the summer of 1992--could allow a devaluation equilibrium

to emerge where none existed before.

Equations (18) and (20) show that the lira interest rate i enters
the government's period 2 reaction function only via 1d2, the new debt

incurred in period 1; this new debt would in turn be absent (see (18))

34

if the condition

(22) 0d + g — f

f
+

=0

held true--that is, if the government had a zero total cash flow on date
1. (If equality (22) holds, the government reaction function in figure 5
Is horizontal.)

Abstract for the moment from mark assets and liabilities. Then the
government will have no reason to fear self—fulfilling devaluation

expectations if 0d1 + g = 0, that is, if no domestic-currency debt

needs to be issued or rolled over in period 1. The government will be

closer to this happy state, as Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) stress, if
= 0, so that all the government's debt is long-term. But, as explained

in Obstfeld (1990a), this is not enough: debt management should try to
match total short—term expenditure commitments to net short-term cash

receipts, including repayment of principal (and, in general though not

in this model, tax receipts).25

So far little has been said about reserve losses, which are at
center stage in Krugman's (1979) story. Indeed, the assumption of
25This is not a balanced-budget prescription, since principal repayments
are included in cash flow. Notice that if the government is exposed to
the period 1 lira interest rate, there is always an asymptotic
intersection at which i = + and c = 1: the government's nominal
commitments then are infinite and the only way to meet them is to
eradicate their real value entirely through a confiscatory inflation. I
don't consider this intersection at infinity to be an equilibrium.

35

Interest-inelastic money demand in equation (14) means that period 1
expectations do not Influence international reserves——a highly

unrealistic feature of the model which, if relaxed, would only make
self—fulfilling attacks more likely. Nonetheless, international
reserves——more generally, any government positions in foreign

currencies——can play a strategic role in the model. This point is seen

by abandoning the temporary assumption that the foreign-asset terms in
(22) are
In

zero.

26

principle, the option of official mark borrowing can eliminate

the possibility of multiple equilibria even when the government has a

substantially negative lira cash flow on date 1. As (22) shows, any
foreign—currency receipts (principal or interest) due in period 1 will
mitigate cash-flow needs then. But by setting 1f2/(1+i*) =

—(0d1

+ g

—

that is, by borrowing enough marks to entirely cover payments due,

the government can sidestep the domestic bond market altogether and thus

head off a domestic funding crisis that could lead to devaluation.27
This defensive foreign-currency borrowing would have to be be huge

if, as in the case of Italy, floating interest rates on public debt mean
26 Obstfeld (1990b) I discuss this strategic role of reserve use in the
context of sterilized foreign-exchange intervention. Calvo (1991)

presents a model that illustrates a related point, that sterilization of
reserve inflows in the course of inflation stabilization may raise
inflationary expectations by increasing the outstanding stock of
domestic-currency government debt.
271fl essence,

case.

the government is issuing consumption—indexed debt in this

36

that most of it must effectively be refinanced each period. Some
observers would judge such borrowing to be infeasible. Yet if the debt

can be rolled over in domestic currency it should be possible to roll it
over in foreign currency: in equilibrium the government faces the same
intertemporal budget constraint under either choice.
While sufficient mark borrowing can remove the multiplicity problem

in this model, and thus the possibility of a self—fulfilling attack on

the lira, a small amount of foreign currency borrowing can make matters

worse by lowering the depreciation tax base in period 2 but not
radically reducing the government's incentive to devalue. Figure 7
shows how a relatively small amount of borrowing shifts the government

reaction function downward but doesn't flatten it enough to avoid a high
.
. .
. .
interest rate equilibrium
worse than the original
one.28 Foreign currency
•

borrowing insufficient to eliminate a potential second equilibrium makes

the government worse off if that potential is realized.
The model set out above captures aspects of the Italian crisis in
September 1992, when the government was forced to rely heavily on Bank

of Italy financing to cover sharply higher cash-flow requirements. The

model applies equally to other situations, such as Britain's in the
1950s and 1960s, when authorities sought to avoid the "twin disasters of
28The broken reaction function comes from keeping all the settings of
figure 5 except that for f2, which is lowered from 0 to —0.25.

37

FIGURE 7

Depreciation rate,

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Nominal interest rate, i

internal and external collapse of the value of the pound sterling"29 in

the face of a large and increasing public debt.

3.2. The role of aggregate demand shocks
A second model, based on closed-economy models by Barro and Gordon

(1983) and Kydland and Prescott (1977), shows that a regime of fixed but

adjustable parities can engender multiple equilibria. In some equilibria
the economy may be worse off than under irrevocably fixed exchange
rates, as nominal wage-growth expectations erode competitiveness and

make devaluations more frequent.3° In this model devaluations are

triggered by the government's desire to offset negative output shocks,
but a sudden shift in market sentiment regarding the government's
willingness to tolerate unemployment can trigger a devaluation that
would not have occurred under different private expectations.

In this model, lower case variables denote natural logarithms and

PPP holds, so that e, the (log) .

home—currency

price of foreign

exchange, equals p, the (log) money price of domestic output, given that
p*, the (log) foreign-currency price level, is constant and normalized
to zero. Domestic output y given by

(23) yt =a(et—w)—u,
t
t
29Goodhart (1973, p. 513).

30For a more detailed discussion of a similar model, see Obstfeld (1991).

38

where w is the money wage and u is a mean-zero, sertally independent
shock dependent on foreign interest rates, private and government demand

shifts, and so on. Workers and firms agree to set period t wages w on
date t-1 so as to maintain a constant real wage,

(24) wt =Et—1
(e),
t
where

E1(.) is a conditional expectation based on date t-1

information. This information does not include u, and the wage is not

Indexed to the value of ut that occurs.
While

period t wages cannot adjust to period t demand shocks, the

government can respond to them through changes In the contemporaneous

exchange rate.3' This assumption gives stabilization policy a role.

Assume temporarily, as in the last model, that the exchange rate can be
freely managed and that the government's objective is to minimize the
loss function

(2.5)

where

=

I, 0 <

=

3 <

1,

— e)

+

(y

—

is the government's discount factor. (Later a fixed

31 assume capital mobility and perfect asset substitution, so
realignment is the only form monetary policy can take.

39

cost of realignment will be introduced.) The loss function (25)

penalizes deviations of inflation rates from a target of zero. It also
penalizes deviations of output from a target y. The target y* could be
0, which happens to be the rational-expectations equilibrium output

level when u is at its mean value of zero. I will assume, however, that
the government targets a strictly positive y*. Such targeting could

reflect, for example, entrenched distortions in the labor market that
lead to equilibrium output below the efficient level.32

The government's flow loss for period t can be expressed as

(26)

= e

(e

—

e1)

2

+

1

[cc(e

—

w)

—

u — y*]

2

with the help of (23). Under a regime with credible precommitment, the
government would choose the path of the exchange rate once and for all

in some initial period; this choice, in turn, would tie down
expectations and the path of nominal wages. As in section 3.1, however,

the model assumes that such precommitments aren't possible. Instead, the

government chooses the home currency's exchange rate e each period to

minimize I gtven the nominal wages agreed in period t -

1.

(There is no

intertemporal dimension to the government's exchange—rate decision,

32Serial dependence in the employment shock u works like predictable

time variation in y*

40

which does not affect the policy problem to be faced in later periods).33

Minimization of (26) over e (for given w) requires that

t

8e t
Define

—et—i)+aEo(et —w)—u
t _y*)=O.
t

A to be o2/(e + 2) Then the above derivative condition gives

the government's reaction function:

= A(u /c) + Mw
t
t

)+

(27) e t—

e

According

to (27), the government uses the exchange rate partially to

t—1

— e

t—1

offset shocks u to output. Since wages were set in period t — 1,
however, the government also finds it optimal after the fact to attempt
a "surprise" depreciation whenever wage inflation risks eroding
competitiveness. Similarly, the government will attempt to drive output

above its "natural" level by devaluing. Only as 0 -,

, so that inflation

becomes infinitely undesirable, does a fixed exchange rate become

optimal ex post (A -

In general, A measures the government's

33m1s property would not hold if current government behavior influenced
market expectations of its future behavior, as in the trigger—strategy
equilibria analyzed by De Kock and Grilli (1993). Here, instead, market
expectations are assumed to be history-independent.
341f the government could precommit its exchange—rate reaction function,
It would choose the function et— e t—1 = Au t, that is, it would forswear
accommodating

wage shocks as well as any attempts to offset predictable

41

willingness to accommodate.

Of course, workers and firms understand the strategy in (27) and
set wages accordingly. Equation (24) therefore implies that in a
rational-expectations equilibrium

wt =
or,

(28)

e

t—1

(ut Ia)
t—1

+ XE

since Et—1(ut) =

w=

e

+ A(w

t—e

t—1

)+

0,

+

Combining

(27) and (28) shows that the equilibrium depreciation rate is

(29) e —

e

= Au +

Notice that unless A =

1

0,

the economy is afflicted by a systematic

inflation bias proportional to the deadweight output loss y* This bias
results from the government's (in equilibrium, futile) attempts to

exploit the potential short-run Phillips trade off due to the
predetermination of nominal wages. A fixed exchange rate would eliminate

this inflation bias, but it would also prevent the government from
real distortions through currency depreciation. See Obstfeld (1991).

42

responding to unpredictable output shocks. Whether a fixed rate is

advisable in light of this trade off is an empirical question.
In practice, governments cannot credibly commit to fix exchange

rates between national currencies in all circumstances. A more realistic
assumption, as in the last model, is that domestic policymakers face a
fixed cost c of realignment, making period loss function in (26)

(30)

=

(e

—

e)2 + [c(e

—

w)

—

u

—

y*12 +

cZ,

where Z is defined as in (21).
How does the government behave under the loss function (30)?

Remember that the government faces a pre-set nominal wage w when it

decides its exchange rate for period t, and so, a predetermined expected
(e t) — e t—1 . If the
rate of price inflation, itt = wt — et—1 = Et—1
= 0),
government maintains a fixed exchange rate (thus setting e — e1

(30) shows that its loss is
F

t = 2-(citt + ut
1

+

y*)

2

•

If the government realigns instead, it sets the exchange rate by (27)
and incurs the fixed cost c, so its loss is
R

1

2

+c.

43

Clearly a realignment will occur whenever

£Ft —Rt

1

=-A(a7t
2
t

-s-ut +y*)2 —c>O,

that is, when

(31)

1
X(
+ Ut + y*) > c.
2

Treating (31) as an equality and solving for its two roots, one
finds upper and lower values for the shock u, u < ii,

such

that the

government devalues whenever u >ti and revalues whenever u < U. In either

case, the government will set the new exchange rate at the ex post
optimal level given by (27).

35

In principle, an "escapeclause" arrangement of this sort (such as

the one present in Stage Two of the plan for European Monetary Union)
can raise welfare. It allows exchange—rate flexibility in those extreme

situations where it is most needed, while restraining inflationary
proclivities otherwise; and this effect provides a potential rationale
for imposing a realignment cost c. In practLce, however, a beneficial

escape clause may be hard to implement. The reason for this difficulty,
35There is no point in setting it at a different level because any new

rate is fully incorporated into date t + 1 money wages.

44

as (31) shows, is that the trigger points u and ii at which the escape
option is exercised depend on prior expectations of depreciation it,

and

these, in turn, depend on market perceptions of where the realignment

trigger points lie. This element of circularity creates the potential
for multiple equilibria, and a sudden shift in equilibria can trigger a
crisis for an exchange rate that previously appeared strong on the basis
of fundamentals.

To illustrate this possibility, it simplifies matters to assume
temporarily that devaluation requires policymakers to pay a cost c, but

that revaluattons aren't possible at all. (The validity of this
presumption will be verified later for a particular example.) For
concreteness, the disturbance u IS assumed to be uniformly distributed
over the interval [—,i,,ij.

I

suppose that market participants believe the

domestic currency will be devalued whenever a shock more severe than a
threshold level ti occurs (i.e., when U > i). In an equilibrium, the

market assessment of ti

equals

the highest value of the shock at which

the government still finds it optimal to defend the exchange parity.
Identification of equilibria requires two steps: (1) the
calculation of market depreciation expectations given an anticipated
devaluation threshold ii, and (2) calculation of the actual threshold
given market expectations.

When market participants believe on date t —

1

that the date t

exchange rate will be changed if u > ii, they expect the date t

45

depreciation rate to be

it = Prob(u

(32)

+ Prob(u >

t

where

t

i)•E{et

the last expectation is a date t —

1

—

e

t—1

lut >

expected value of what

depreciation will be next period conditional on U exceeding ti. (it is
not a function of time because the shock u is serially independent.)

Under the assumed uniform probability distribution for

Prob(u > ii) =
;111U

and,

E{ulu

Li

=

>

u,

given the devaluation reaction function (27),

E(e —

e1

I

u>

ii) = A

+

Ait + A(y*/c).

Thus, (33) implies that

It

=

[(' J + Air +

A(y*/c)]

which reduces to

(34) 7 = (ii) = (ti

[( ] + (y*/)]

46

+

—

[1

(i1 _i]]

The government takes the expectations in (34) as given and
minimizes its loss. Equation (31) implies that the largest shock

consistent with a continuing fixed exchange rate is a solution u to the
—

equation A[a.t5(u) + u +

2

yJ

—

.
= c. Since
u must equal u in equilibrium,

and since, moreover, we are only interested in devaluation situations
such

that c5(u) +

devaluation

y > 0, 36 the condition for u to be an equtlLbrtum
—

.

threshold is that

(35) 4Ea(ti)
Figure

u +

+

+ y*]

=

.f.

8 illustrates the possibility that there are multiple

equilibrium thresholds. In the figure, there are two intersections of
the function ac(u) +

u +

y with the (transformed) devaluation cost

(The parameters underlying the figure are a =
and j1 = O.O3.) One threshold occurs at

1,

e=

= 0.0099,

associated expected depreciation rate is (O.OO99) =
period. The second equilibrium threshold is at
expected depreciation is 3(—O.O234) =

5.71

0.15,

y=

0.01,

and at it, the

1.23

percent per

= —0.0234.

There,

percent per period. At this

36When this quantity is negative devaluation is never optimal but
revaluation (which has been excluded) is.
37The choices a = 1 and 0 = 0.15 make A = 0.87, which corresponds to a
rather accommodative government. With distributions for u more
complicated than the uniform, however, multiple equilibria (sometimes
more than two of them) can arise under much less accommodative
governments. See Obstfeld (1991).

47

FIGURE 8

(2c)

0.02

0.03

Size of shock, u

high expected depreciation rate, wage inflation creates a
competitiveness problem and unemployment so painful that a devaluation

will occur unless the output shocks hitting the economy are quite

favorable. Thus, the relatively low credibility of the authorities in
the second equilibrium is self-validating.38

Economists so far have little to say about which particular
equilibrium will occur in a situation where several are possible. In

this model, however, any random event could trigger a shift from an
equilibrium in which markets view devaluation as unlikely to one in

which they view, it as very likely. Figure 8 shows that the shift could
even be from a situation where devaluation is viewed as impossible to

one in which it is viewed as a near certainty. Such a shift would be
accompanied by a sharp rise in domestic interest rates and a loss in
foreign reserves, and unless subsequent economic conditions turned out
exceptionally favorably, a devaluation would likely ensue.

This scenario capture aspects of the EMS crisis that erupted in
September 1992. Notice that reserve losses certainly accompany a crisis,

but they are not the factor that triggers it and not the factor that
ultimately leads the authorities to devalue. Even a version of the model
without multiple equilibria suggests that negative output shocks can
38For the chosen parameters, note that when the public expects discretion
to be exercised at u = —0.03 and above, the monetary authority has a
substantial incentive to devalue, not revalue, even when u = —0.03.
(Apply (34) and (35).) Thus, there was no loss of generality in assuming

from the outset that revaluations never occur.

48

trigger devaluations. If such shocks are persistent (contrary to the
assumption made above), higher interest rates and reserve losses will
tend to precede realignment.39 Persistent output shocks can also throw
the economy from a configuration with a sole equilibrium into one with
several.

Concluding Remarks

If speculative currency crises are a manifestation of possible multiple

equilibria, an obvious barrier to understanding them is the lack of any
convincing account of how and when market expectations coordinate on a

particular self-fulfilling set of expectations.
More generally, we have no more than an inkling of the factors that
cause speculative attacks to occur on some days rather than on others.
Obvious economic and political tensions can endure for some time before

an attack occurs, with the proximate cause of the attack some seemingly
trivial event that takes on significance only when viewed as the
culmination of a series of signals concerning the economies involved and

the resolve of their authorities. Thus, one can make cogent arguments as

to why uncertainty over the Maastricht Treaty's future led to currency
turbulence in the second half of 1992, but why was Black Wednesday not
Black Tuesday or Black Thursday? To explain this timing (if indeed there
39Drazen and Masson (1993) present some empirical evidence supporting

this mechanism as a component in determining the credibility of EMS
exchange-rate commitments.

49

is an explanation), one must postulate a model in which the market's

response to a series of informative signals ultimately precipitates a
crash. Caplin and Leahy (1994) explore such a model in the context of
industry Investment, but its heavy reliance on private information makes

a direct extension to the foreign exchange market context problematic.
More work on this problem is needed and under way.

The models developed in section 3 raise the basic question whether

the crises they portray result from "fundamentals" or from "purely"
self—fulfilling expectations. This dichotomy is a false one. The

fundamental factors in these models are the dynamic-consistency problems

implied by the preferences and constraints of governments. The
constraints themselves are endogenous through their dependence on market

expectations, and this critical endogeneity, combined with the

authorities' inability to adhere to preordained rules, leads to
multiplicity. Institutions that tie authorities' hands can eliminate the
multiplicity problem. Absent such institutions, however, and given

official objectives, the danger always exists that expectations produce

equilibria in which the authorities prefer to abandon their prior
exchange rate targets.

so

References
Agénor, Pierre-Richard, Jagdeep S. Bhandari, and Robert P. Flood.
"Speculative Attacks and Models of Balance-of—Payments Crises."
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 39 (June 1992), 357-94.
Alesina, Alberto, Alessandro Prati, and Guido Tabellini. "Public
Confidence and Debt Management: A Model and a Case Study of Italy."
Public Debt Management: Theory and History, ed. Rudiger Dornbusch and
Mario Draghi. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1990, 94-118.

Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon. "A Positive Theory of Monetary
Policy in a Natural Rate Model." JOurnal of Political Economy 91 (August
1983), 589-610.

Barsky, Robert B., and Lawrence H. Summers. "Gibson's Paradox and the
Gold Standard." Journal of Political Economy 96 (June 1988), 528-50.
Bensaid, Bernard, and Olivier Jeanne. "The Instability of Fixed Exchange
Rate Systems when Raising the Nominal Interest Rate is Costly."
Processed, Banque de France and Ecole Nationale des Ponts et
Chausées-CERAS, December 1993.

Blackburn, Keith, and Martin Sola. "Speculative Currency Attacks and
Balance of Payments Crises." Journal of Economic Surveys 7 (June 1993),
119-44.

Bordo, Michael David, and Richard Wayne Elison. "A Model of the
Classical Gold Standard with Depletion." Journal of Monetary Economics
16 (July 1985), 109-20.

Brock, William A. "A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Model." Journal
of Monetary Economics 1 (April 1975), 133-50.

Buiter, Willem H. "Borrowing to Defend the Exchange Rate and the Timing
and Magnitude of Speculative Attacks." Journal of International
EconomIcs 23 (November 1987), 221-39.
Calvo, Guillermo A. "Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of
Expectations." American Economic Review 78 (September 1988), 647-61.

"The Perils of Sterilization." International Monetary Fund
Staff Papers 38 (December 1991), 921-26.
Caplin, Andrew, and John Leahy. "Business as Usual, Market Crashes and
Wisdom after the Fact." American Economic Review 84 (1994), forthcoming.

51

Dellas, Harris, and Alan C. Stockman. "Self-fulfilling Expectations,
Speculative Attacks, and Capital Controls." Journal of Money, Credit and
BankIng 25 (November 1993), 721-30.
De Kock, Gabriel, and Vittorio Grilli. "Fiscal Policies and the Choice
of Exchange Rate Regime." Economic Journal 103 (March 1993), 347-58.
Drazen, Allan, and Paul R. Masson. "Credibility of Policies versus
Credibility of Policymakers." Working Paper No. 4448, National Bureau of
Economic Research, September 1993.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Charles Wyplosz. "The Unstable EMS." Brooktngs
Papers on Economic Activity 1:1993, 51-143.

Flood, Robert P., and Peter M. Garber. "Gold Monetization and Gold
Discipline." Journal of Political Economy 92 (February 1984a), 90-107.
"Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear Examples."

Journal of International Economics 17 (August l984b), 1-13.
Gale, Douglas. Money: In Equilibrium. Cambridge Economic Handbooks.
Weiwyn and Cambridge, U.K.: Nisbet/Cambridge, 1982.

Giavazzi, Francesco, and Marco Pagano. "Confidence Crises and Public
Debt Management." Public Debt Management: Theory and History, ed.
Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario Draghi. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press, 1990, 12.5-43.
Goldberg, Linda S. "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Shocks and

Biases." Journal of International Money and FInance 10 (June 1991),
252-63.

Goodhart, Charles A.E. "Monetary Policy In the United Kingdom."
Monetary Pot Icy in Twelve Industrial Countries, ed. Karel Holbik.
Boston, MA: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1973, 465-524.

Gros, Daniel. "Capital Controls and Foreign Exchange Market Crises in
the EMS." European Economic Review 36 (December 1992), 1533-44.
Guidotti, Pablo, and Carlos Végh. "Losing Credibility: The Stabilization
Blues." Working Paper No. 92/73, International Monetary Fund, September
1992.

Horngren, Lars, and Hans Lindberg. "The Struggle to Turn the Swedish
Krona into a Hard Currency." Arbetsrapport No. 8, Sveriges Riksbank,
April 1993.

52

Hotelling, Harold. "The Economics of Exhaustible Resources." Journal
Political Economy 39 (April 1931), 137-75.

of

Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. "Rules Rather than Discretion:
The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans." Journal of Political Economy 85
(June 1977), 473-91.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey. "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary
Policy in an Economy without Capital." Journal of Monetary Economics 12
(July 1983), 55-93.
Krugman, Paul. "A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises." Journal
Money, Credit and Banking 11 (August 1979), 311-25.

of

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria. "Do Good or Do Well? Public Debt Management
in a Two-Party Economy." Processed, International Monetary Fund, August
1993.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of—Payments
Crises." American Economic Review 76 (March 1986), 72-81.

"Competitiveness, Realignment, and Speculation: The Role of
Financial Markets." The European Monetary System, ed. Francesco
Giavazzi, Stefano Micossi, Marcus Miller. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press, 1988, 232-47.

"Discussion." Public Debt Management: Theory and History,
ed. Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario Draghi. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press, 1990a, 146-52.
"The Effectiveness of Foreign-Exchange Intervention: Recent
Experience, 1985-1988." International Policy Coordination and Exchange
Rate fluctuations, ed. William H. Branson, Jacob A. Frenkel, and Morris
Goldstein. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990b, 197-237.

"Destabilizing Effects of Exchange Rate Escape Clauses."
Working Paper No. 3603, National Bureau of Economic Research, January
1991.

Ozkan, F. Gulcin, and Alan Sutherland. "A Model of the ERM Crisis."
Processed, University of York, December 1993.

Persson, Mats, Torsten Persson, and Lars E. 0. Svensson. "Time
Consistency of Fiscal and Monetary Policy." Econometrica 55 (November
1987), 1419-31.

53

Persson, Torsten, and Lars E. 0. Svensson. "Time-Consistent Fiscal
Policy and Government Cash-Flow." Journal of Monetary EconomIcs 14
(November 1984), 365-74.

Portes, Richard. "EMS and EMU After the Fall." World Economy 19 (January
1993), 1-16.

Salant, Stephen W. t'The Vulnerability of Price Stabilization Schemes to
Speculative Attack." Journal of Political Economy 91 (February 1983),
1-38.

Salant, Stephen W., and Dale W. Henderson. "Market Anticipations of
Government Policies and the Price of Gold." Journal of Political Economy
86 (August 1978), 627-48.

Stein, Ernesto, and Jorge Streb. "Political Stabilization Cycles in High
Inflation Economies." Processed, University of California at Berkeley,
November 1993.

Velasco, Andrés. "Are Balance of Payments Crises Rational? A Dynamic
Game Approach." Processed, New York University, July 1993.

54

