                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FRANCE AND THE BRETFON WOODS
                           INTERNATIONAL MONETARY
                               SYSTEM: 1960 to 1968




                                    Michael D. Bordo
                                    Dominique Simard
                                     Eugene White




                                 Working Paper No. 4642




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1994




This paper is part of NBER's reseaivh progmms in the Development of the American
Economy, International Finance and Macroeconomics, and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4642
                                                                              February 1994


                          FRANCE AND THE BRETFON WOODS
                             INThRNATIONAL MONETARY
                                 SYSTEM: 1960 to 1968


                                          ABSTRACT


       We reinterpret the commonly held view in the U.S. that France. by following a policy

from 1965 to 1968 of deliberately converting their dollar holdings into gold helped perpetuate

the collapse of the Bretton Woods International Monetary System. We argue that French

international monetary policy under Charles de Gaulle was consistent with suategies developed

in the interwar period and the French Plan of 1943. France used proposals to return to an

orthodox gold standard as well as conversions of its dollar reserves into gold as tactical threats

to induce the United States to initiate the reform of the international monetary system towards

a more symmetrical and cooperative gold-exchange standard regime.




Michael D. Bordo                                                   Dominique Simard
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics
Rutgers University                                                 Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08903                                            New Brunswick, NJ 08903
and NBER

Eugene White
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
and NBER
          France and the Bretton Woods International Monetary System - 1960 to 1968'



                                              Introduction

        France played a crucial role in the breakdown of the Bretton Woods international monetary

system. Aggressive financial diplomacy coupled with the conversion of dollar holdings into gold

weakened confidence in the dollar and helped to precipitate the collapse of fixed exchange rates. Most

standard histories of the period find the motives behind these policies in President de Gaulle's 'anti-

American" political goals rather than any sound economic objectives. President de Gaulle is viewed as

playing to French fears of encroachments on their autonomy)

        Under the Bretton Woods gold-dollar standard, the United States benefited from providing the

principle currency that was held as official reserves by central banks. This position enabled the United

States to finance its persistent balance of payment deficits without making adjustments required of

other deficit countries. As long as the United States financed its balance of payments deficit by

issuing dollars, which its trading partners would automatically hold as reserves, American power

would expand. The conventional histories view the French Government as resenting an international

monetary regime that allowed the United States to extend its influence 'in Europe with military bases

and American investors to increase their control of French industry. De Gaulle's challenge to the

gold-dollar standard is thus interpreted as evidence that French international monetary policy

primarily followed nationalistic political considerations.

        As further evidence that French criticism of the international monetary system obeyed political

considerations, proponents of the conventional view often invoke the lack of consistency of French

international monetary policy during the period 1960 - 1968. The official French position seems to

have changed often, from a position of indifference towards the United States balance of payments

deficit, towards a position of concern, to advocating a return to the originally planned Bretton Woods

system, to advocating a return to the gold standard, to a system of reserves denominated in currency
 units tied in some proportion to gold, and then back again to the gold standard. Finally in 1966, when

 the United States started to view more favorably the modification of the international monetary

 system, the French resisted.

         In this paper, we argue that the French international monetary policy position has been

 misinterpreted. President de Gaulle's political posturing was a weapon to further a French gold policy

 that was an extension of earlier policies dating back to the interwar period. We argue that the French

 government wanted a revision of the international monetary system along the lines of the gold-

 exchange standard of the 1920s and of the Tripartite Agreement of 1936, which the de Gaulle
government perceived as more beneficial to the French economy than the asymmetric Bretton Woods

system. Periodic references to an orthodox gold standard by the French government were tactical

threats to induce the United States to begin negotiations with the Common Market countries to make

the existing   system a more symmetrical one with an improved automatic balance of payments
adjustment mechanism.

        In the first part of this paper, we find strong parallels between the French Plan of 1943 and

its historical antecedents in the interwar period and we follow France's reconstruction as an economic

power after World War IT. In the second part, we offer a chronology of events leading to France's

challenge of the Bretton Woods system. Instead of the gold-dollar Bretton Woods system, the French

would have preferred a system like the one proposed by the Financial Commission at the Genoa

conference or the Tripartite Agreement of 1936, which offered France some of the advantages
enjoyed by the U.S. under Bretton Woods. The historical continuity of French internationalmonetary

diplomacy reveals a consistent rational long-term policy.

                             I. France and Bretton Woods 1945 - 1958

       The Bretton Woods international monetary system was a product of the Articles of Agreement

signed at Bretton Woods in July 1944. The Articles represented a compromise between the White


                                                  2
Plan sponsored by the US and the Keynes Plan sponsored by Britain.2 The history of the Bretton

Woods Conference is sometimes described as an Anglo-American affair, but other countries,

including France, participated and presented their own plans. The French Plan was prepared in

response to the British and American proposals in May 1943 by Messrs. Hervã Alphand and André

Istel, with the help of other officials.' They represented the coterie of experts gathered in London by

General de Gaulle who had strong ties to previous governments and would have strong influence in

future governments. The French Plan required participating countries to fix their official parities in
terms of the currencies of the other participants. These parities would only change after consultation.

The parities would be maintained by intervention of each member transacting with the monetary

authorities of the other members. Up to limits, each member would hold other members' currencies,

to increase liquidity. To protect the members front exchange risk, collateral (in the form of gold.

foreign bills, raw materials, and approved securities) would be required for its own currency held by

the monetary authorities of other countries. A Monetary Stabilization Office was suggested as a

mechanism to facilitate clearings, a depository for the collateral, and a place for international

consultation.4 This plan was considered a first step toward a return to a gold standard because of the

link between the dollar and gold. By pegging their currencies in terms of dollars. gold could be used

by members as an international reserve asset and an international means of settlement. Later,
members could define their currencies in tenns of a fixed weight of gold. The restored gold standard

would not have a classical adjustment mechanism but it would be managed by monetary authorities.!

        The French Plan of 1943 and the French proposals for international monetary reform in the

1960s had strong antecedants in the proposals of the Financial Commission at the Genoa Conference

in 1922 and the Tripartite Agreement of 1936. Taken all together they reveal a coherent and

consistently pursued policy.

        This vision had gold at the center of the world monetary system because it was a means of


                                                  3
exchange that was neutral to the individual countries. If gold was the foundation of the system, its

price had to be stable because it was the standard of reference determining the price of every

country's currency, with a fixed parity. If the price of gold were fixed, the world's gold production

might not grow at the same pace as the world's demand for liquidity to accommodate its transactions.

Therefore, the system would require additional liquidity, complementary to gold. Designing a system

where gold and additional means of liquidity could coexist with one another was intricate because that

system was potentially unstable if the additional liquidity took the form of the currencies of a one or

two countries.

        The source of instability of an international monetary system where one country's currency is

used in addition to gold in official international transactions is known as the Triffin dilemma.' If one

country is responsible for providing the non-gold component (convertible into gold) of official
reserves to the rest of the world via a deficit of its balance of payments, and if these deficits are

persistent, the country's liabilities may soon exceed its reserve assets. As a result, countries which

previously held the currency in lieu of gold in their official reserves may no longer be willing to do

so, fearing a change at some point in the relative price of the reserve currency. The system then risks

collapse. At the same time, if the reserve country takes measures to reduce the outflow of its

currency, this may starve the system of needed liquidity. Thus, a system where a country's currency

coexists with gold as official reserves requires additional safeguards to ensure its stability.

        According to the French vision of the international monetary system, the means for stabilizing

a gold exchange standard system, where one or many gold convertible currencies coexist with gold to

form each country's official reserves, was twofold. First, the currency component of the reserves held

by a country should be tied in fixed proportions to gold. This feature would prevent countries with a

balance of payments surplus from accepting disproportionate amounts of official reserves in the form

of the reserve currency. Second, to be effective, this fixed reserves proportions rule should be


                                                    4
associated with a rule of multilateral surveillance between countries. These two guiding principles

anchored the various French proposals for the reform of the international monetary system, from the

French Plan of 1943 to the Collective Reserve Unit (CRC) and the French Special Drawing Rights

(SDR) proposal.

          The earliest version of the French vision for the international monetary system was based on

recommendations made at the Genoa conference in 1922. The Genoa conference was a forum

studying methods of conducting official international transactions in a way that would economize on

gold. In the aftermath of World War I, there was a mismatch between the depleted gold reserves of

the major European industrial countries and the demand for gold generated by economic recovery. As

a consequence, the participants sought    a temporaq alternative to the pre-war gold standard    as an

international monetaty system. The Financial Commission at Genoa recommended that members be

required to fix their exchange rates and restore gold convertibility.7 To counter a feared gold

shortage, they also recommended that participating countries hold a portion of their reserves in the

form of the currencies of the two reserve centers. These principal creditor countries were encouraged

to move immediately to "establisb a free market in gold and thus become gold centers." Finally

central banks were encouraged to cooperate to prevent "undue fluctuations in the purchasing power of

gold."'

          The second incarnation of the French view appeared in France's proposals for what became

the Tripartite Agreement of 1936. In the turbulent interwar years. competitive devaluations in the

wake of the demise of the gold-exchange standard presented policymalcers in all countries with the

dilemma of how to return to fixed exchange rates. The Tripartite Agreement, where Britain, France

and the U.S. stabilized their exchange rates, represented a major achievement. The French had

initially proposed a system where the franc, the dollar and sterling would fluctuate within narrow

bounds. The three countries would agree not to devalue except: by mutual consent and would


                                                   S
coordinate support for the bilateral rates, with the eventual aim of restoring gold convertibility.

However, American intransigence forced the French to drop fixed parities and the promise of a return

to gold. The joint declaration known as the Tripartite Agrenient issued by Washington, London and

Paris simply affirmed the desire of the three countries to cooperate in minimizing exchange rate

fluctuations and their commitment to free trade. For three years the nations exchange stabiliization

funds successfully reduced currency fluctuations' These predecessors to the French Plan of 1943

shaped French thinking about international financial arrangements.

        But this French voice was drowned out at Bretton Woods)° The Articles of Agreement at

Bretton Woods differed from the French Plan of 1943 and the general French vision in three key

respects: (1) Prompt definition of currencies in gold. Article IV defined the numeraire of the

international monetary system as either gold or the U.S. dollar of the weight and fineness on 1 July

1944. All members were urged to declare a par value and maintain it within a 1 percent margin on

either side of parity. Parity could be changed in the event of a fundamental payments disequilibrium

at the decision of the members, after consultation with the Fund. (2) Prompt convertibility. Members

were supposed to make their currencies convertible for current account transactions (Article VII). but

capital controls were permitted (Article VI.3). Article XIV permitted countries to avoid declaring

their currencies convertible during a three-year transition period after establishment of the Fund. (3)

International aid and assistance. Members could obtain resources from the Fund to help finance short

or medium-term payments disequiibria.

       Numerous problems prevented the system from beginning operation until December 1958

when the Western European countries made their currencies convertible for current account

transactions. Under the system, the U.S. Treasury pegged the price of the dollar at $35.00 per ounce

while all other members intervened in the foreign exchange market, either buying or selling dollars,

to maintain the parity of its currency within the prescribed one per cent margin. This mechanism


                                                  6
anchored each currency to the dollar and indirectly to gold.

        Worse yet from the French point of view, the symmetrical system, conceived by the
architects, was never realized. Instead, Brenon Woods evolved into an asyrnetrical gold dollar

system." Use of the dollar as both a private and official international money increased dramatically

in the 1950s and continued into the 1960s. Even before Ml convertibility, the dollar's fundamental

role as intervention currency led to its use as an international reserve. The convertible Bretton Woods

system that began at the end of 1958 was, in reality, a gold dollar standard under U.S. dominance.

        French influence in the early years of the postwar monetary system was almost minimal

because of France's reconstruction problems which enabled the United States and the IMP, to dictate

terms. Facing chronic external and internal imbalances common to the devastated countries of

Western Europe, France attempted to economize on scarce hard currency by devaluing the franc and

creating a multiple exchange rate system in January 1948. The IMF censured France for this act and

denied her access to the Fund's resources until 1952.12

         Assisted by rapid economic growth under the Marshall Plan, France unified its exchange

rates and adopted a stabilization plan. However, economic recovery bid a large budget deficit. When

growth slowed, inflationary finance was employed and balance of payments problems ensued. This

long term problem was solved under the Fifth Republic in 1958, when President de Gaulle initiated

severe cuts in expenditure, tax increases, and a devaluation of the franc. The tough stabilization plan

rewarded the Fifth Republic with an average annual growth rate of GDP of 5.5 percent. inflation

under 4 percent, and a positive trade balance.

        From the viewpoint of the French Plan of 1943, the stabilization of the French economy

meant France could move away from the use of the dollar as the key reserve asset and towards the

use of gold. This policy continuity, was in part, the result of a continuity in personnel. In 1958.

Jacques Rueff, then Inspector-General of Finance, headed a special commission that wrote Report on


                                                   7
she Financial Situation of France (1963), whose recommendations formed the basis for the Dc

Gaulle's government 1958 reform decrees. Rueff had been an important figure in French policy

during the interwar years, advising the government on the 1926 stabilization program. He was the

financial attaché at the French Embassy in London (1930 - 1936), and Director of the Mouvenient

Général des Fonds, 1936 -     1939,   making him a key player in the Tripartite Agreement of 1936.
Although he did not later have an official role, Rueff exercised considerable influence on the French

government. He had close ties to Maurice Couve de Murville, foreign minister from 1958 to 1968

and then premier who had once been his assistant.

        Ruefrs interpretation of the failure of the Tripartite Agreement is informative about French

intentions in the 1960s. While he praised Britain for leaving gold in 1931, Rueff attacked France for

abandoning its parity in 1936 because it did not turn off 'the inflation tap — thus leaving herself open

to a gradual depreciation of her currency. "' The problem for Rueff was that the French both in the

late 1930s and in the 1950s were living beyond their means. Throughout his 1963 book, Rueff drew

parallels between the two periods, emphasizing the linked problems of the budget deficit, inflation,

and foreign exchange crisis. The report recommended large cuts in social programs and government

subsidies to balance the budget. Only by obtaining internai balance, could the government credibly set

a new exchange rate parity. Rueff believed that France accomplished in 1958 what it was unable to do

in the 1930s. The problem that Rueff saw as threatening the world monetary system was the dominant

role of the U.S. dollar. In an article that received widespread attention and was reprinted in many

newspapers and magazines on both sides of the Atlantic, Rueff criticized U.S. policy with the

apparent approval of the French government.'4 Like Robert Triffln's famous study, Gold and the
Dollar Standard (1960), Rueff pointed to the huge build up U.S. balance of payments deficits

totalling $18.1 billion (over the period 1951 -   1960)   (See Figure 1). These deficits were allowed to

persist for ten years because the U.S. was not required to settle its debts abroad. The new gold


                                                    S
exchange standard thus did not allow the balance of payments to serve as an automatic stabilizer for

the U.S. As a reserve center it was permitted to generate new internal purchasing power. To remove

the danger, Rueff recommended the introduction of a new symmetric monetary system that would not

allow key currency countries to run prolonged deficits. Following the approach of the French Plan of

1943, Rueff offered the evolution of the European Payments Union, with its progressive Thardening'

of the means of settlements, as a good example of how to move towards a gold standard. He insisted

that the U.S. must pay off in gold all dollar assets held by central banks — a process that could be

eased by raising the price of gold.

                              II. France's Strategic Game, 1960- 1968

       Although Rueff's criticism of the U.S. persistent balance of payment deficits and of the

dollar's hegemony was in line with the views of the French government, it is doubtful whether

Rueff's prescriptions for a new international monetary system ever represented the official position.

The return to a pure gold standard advocated by Jacques Rueff appears to have been used by the

French government as a strategic threat to induce the American government to engage in a revision of

the international monetary system. The chronology of events during the 1960 - 1968 period strongly

suggests that official French positions favorable to a pure gold standard typically followed instances

where the American government was more entrenched in its refusal to reconsider an international

monetary regime based on the gold-dollar standard.

       The period from 1960 to 1968 can be divided into two phases. From 1960 to the end of 1964.

French policy was more conciliatory towards the United States, while from January 1965 to May

1968 it became more confrontational. In the latter period, France actively pressed for a reform of the

international monetary system. We end the analysis in May 1968, a month of unforeseen internal

social upheaval in France that followed the demise of the Gold Pool and the creation of a two-tier

gold pricing system in March. These events put an end to the Dc Gaulle government's strategy for the


                                                  9
modification of the gold-dollar standard.

                               A. Preparing for the Game, 1960 - 1964

        In 1960, the French government did not exhibit any official concern about the depletion of

American gold reserves. While Selwyn Lloyd. the British Chancellor of the Exchequer, talked about

the U.S.'s "fundamental disequilibrium, the French Minister of Finance, Wilfrid Baumgartner,

attributed the growing U.S. balance of payment deficit to temporary political uncertainty concerning

U.S. elections.'5 Yet, 1.M.F. statistics show that France more than doubled its holdings of gold,

most of which was purchased from the U.S. Treasury by converting French dollar holdings)' The

year 1961 was marked by a disagreement between France and the reserve currency countries, Britain

and the U.S., over a plan to increase resources. The proposed General Arrangements to Borrow

would have added $6 billion in commitments by member nations'7 to be used by the Fund for

emergencies including, the defence of the dollar against speculative attacks. The French and the Dutch

were unpersuaded that there was a shortage of world reserves and feared that the scheme would thus

water down the 'discipline' imposed on national fmancial policies by the existing system.'8 During

this debate Rueff's famous article first appeared.

        At the annual IMF meetings in 1961, Haumgartner defended his opposition to the British-

American scheme, recommending that care should be taken to avoid having currency convertibility

jeopardized by insufficiently precise procedures.'9 Acting as spokesman for the Common Market

countries, France won this debate. After a meeting of the Finance Ministers of the G-lO in Paris,

Baumgartner announced that the additional credits would not be 'purely and simply' put at the

disposal of the IMP but would be submitted to examination and subordinated to guarantees to be

discussed by meetings of Finance Ministers of member countries of the G-1O.

        This first important strategic victory for the French government conferred on it an enhanced

role as watchdog of the international monetaxy system. Afterwards France began to criticize the


                                                     10
growing deficits of the U.S. and Britain (see Figures   1   and 2, respectively). In September 1962 at the

IMF annual meeting in Washington, Valery Giscard d'Estaing, the new Minister of Finance, warned

that the countries responsible for providing the reserve currencies should reestablish equilibrium to

their balance of payments. He stressed that it was a much more pressing concern than the reform of

the international monetary system21.

        In early 1963, Jacques RudY warned that the surplus of purchasing power in France arising

from an accumulation of international reserves, (see Figure 3) was a grave threat to French growth.

He advocated a return to the Gold Standard and an increase in the price of gold but admitted that such

a shift in regime had no chance of being accepted. Rueff said that there was no end in sight to the

U.S. balance of payments deficit and that the world was heading towards a generalized inflation. He

argued that central banks should agree "as of tomorrow" not to increase their dollar holdings and a

Government initiative at the highest level was needed. Rueff concluded by declaring "the West seeks

a statesman who will restore its currency" a none-too veiled reference to President de OaulIe?

        While Rueff's diagnosis was shared by the French government authorities, neither the

government nor the Bank of France followed his radical prescription. The Bank of France's 1962

annual report condemned any change in the current international monetary system; and on 10

September 1963 Valery Giscard d'Estaing declared that "all participants agreed today that the solution

of the U.S. balance of payments problem should take priority over the development of new

international payments machinery. " Giscard d'Estaing criticized the international monetary system

for a lack of mechanisms to correct balance of payments' deficits, the asynunetty between reserve and

non-reserve currency countries and the uneasiness between countries holding reserves that were

subject to different devaluation risksY Yet, in what appears to be a strategic move, the Elysee

Palace followed Rueff's more orthodox line on the gold standard.r These words of criticism for the

large United States balance of payment deficits stood in contrast to the deeds of the Bank of France.


                                                  11
which engaged in currency swaps with the Federal Reserve Dank       of New York.Th These tactics were
in complete contrast to the official position.

        French policy alternated again on 9 September 1964 when Giscard d'Estaing made the French

government's first official proposal for a reform of the international monetary system at the annual

conference of the IMF in Tokyo. While the French wanted gold at the heart of the international

monetary system, more liquidity was required in the form of a composite or collective reserve unit

(CRU).V Giscard d'Estaing also wanted multilateral surveillance to prevent destabilizing policies and

an end to financing of long term deficits with short term assets!' The French proposal for the new

international reserve was opposed by Douglas Dillon, U.S. Treasury Secretary, and by Reginald

Maudling, the British Chancellor of the Exchequer!' Preparing for the next stage of the game

behind this evolving official policy, the French continued to convert dollar reserves into gold. By 31

December 1964, gold accounted for 73 percent of French reserves (See Figure 4).'°

                                B. Playing the Game, 1965- May 1968

        French conversion of dollars into gold began in earnest in early 1965.31 Claiming that doing

nothing would bring on a crisis faster, Giscard d'Estaing defended the conversions and pleaded for a

reform of the monetary system. Setting the stage for Dc Gaulle, he advocated a return to the original

system created at Bretton Woods.'2

        In a dramatic moment during a press conference at the Elysee Palace on 4 February 1965, De

Gaulle stirred up an international controversy by mentiorthig the possibility of reestablihing the gold

standard. He acknowledged that the gold-dollar standard bad been appropriate for the years

immediately following World War II because all the gold reserves were held by the U.S.. But,

conditions had changed. European economies had been revived and the gold reserves of the Common

Market countries equalled those of the U.S.. The use of the dollar as an international medium of

exchange now clouded the fact that the system provided substantial seignorage to the U.S.. He


                                                  12
recommended that the international monetary system be changed and mentioned a possible

reinstitution of the gold standard. Reform required consultation among all the main financial powers

within the existing forums, including the IMF". After this speech Dc Gaulle was generally

perceived as having publicly adopted Rueff's views and disavowed the Finance Ministry's CRU

proposa1?

        Following the President, Giscard d'Estaing gave a speech at the University of Paris Law

School on February 11. He complained about the asymmetry of the balance of payments adjusuneru

mechanism, its fragility because of the potential of a run on U.S. gold reserves, and its inflationary

bias? The Minister of Finance then called on the world leading financial powers to sign a solemn

declaration pledging themselves to settle their international debts only in gold." Within this context,

the French suggestion of a return to the gold standard or an increase in the price of gold seems to

have been a threat to the U.S. with the apparent aim of furthering international negotiations to reform

the international monetary system. In this scenario, Rueff played a useful role. Everyone knew of his

connections, but he could say he did not speak for the government when he recommended (15 April

1965) that the dollar price of gold be doubled. This statement was widely reported in the American

press only to be followed by Giscard saying on a French television program that France had never

taken a position on the question of a rise in the price of gold.3' The U.S. could thus not be certain

of France's true intentions.

        At the same time the French proceeded to present their proposals for the CRU. The details

showed an explicit link to guidelines established at the Genoa conference of 1922." Under the

French Plan, each member of the 0-10 would subscribe to the CRU account in proportion to their

gold holdings; gold and CRU's would then circulate together in fixed proportions." From the

French perspective, this system would have constituted an improvement over the gold dollar exchange

standard by conferring on the 0-10 countries, rather than just the U.S., the power of reserve currency


                                                   13
creation.

        Although the Ministers and Central Bank Governors of the Group of Ten agreed at the annual

meeting of the IMF in September 1965 to draw up a contingency plan for reserve creation, much of

the second half of 1965 was marred by disagreements between the U.S. and France. They clashed

over how closely the proposed new reserve units should be tied to gold and how the power of reserve

creation should be divided between the different countries. The French and American positions were

highlighted in Group of Ten's Ossola Report which considered the merits of alternative proposals

for increasing world liquidity. While reserve countries argued over the French proposal for

international monetary reform, the percentage of gold in French official reserves had climbed to 86

percent.' (See Figure 4). Furthermore, Michel Debrd replaced Oiscard d'Estaing as Minister of

Finance, a move that was perceived as a strengthening of the orthodox Gaullist line.

        The entire year 1966 witnessed a theater of confrontation between the U.S. and France over

their respective visions for international monetary reform. Various representatives of the French

government publicly discussed the possibility of returning to a gold standard and of increasing the

official price of gold. In our view, this was a bargaining threat to induce the American government to

approve of a closer link between the new reserve asset (to be called the Special Drawing Right

(SDR)) and gold and a sharing of power between the Common Market countries and the United

States. The immediate payoffs to the French strategy in 1966 were twofold, if small. First, at a

meeting at the Hague on 26 July, the Finance Ministers of the 0-10 countries partially espoused a

view stated earlier by the French and the other EEC countries. They recommended that "there should

be a better balance of payments equilibriwn between members' before any monetary reform could

take place! They also indicated that decisions to create new monetary units should be made on the

basis of approval between the deputies of the 0-10 and the executive directors of the IMF (thus

conferring a stronger voice to Europe than if the reform was left to the IMF alone). Secondly, a


                                                  14
gentleman's agreement was reported to have taken place in December between Michel Debré, U.S.

Treasury Secretary Fowler, and British Chancellor of the Exchequer Callaghan. The terms of the

agreement were that the U.S. would agree to let any new liquidity unit devised by the IMP be

linked to gold if in return that France would make it clear that she would not favor an increase in the

world price of gold.'3

        The U.S. then seems to have backtracked some at a January 1966 meeting of the Deputies of

the 0-10 in Paris. Frederick Denting, the U.S. Undersecretary of the Treasury, suggested a currency

reserve unit not linked to gold as a possible way to increase world liquidity." The American plan

also offered to increase the drawing rights of member nations in the IMF. In return, the French

government, adopted a hard bargaining line by publicly considering a return to the gold standard and

temporarily dropping support for the CRU. For nearly nine months, France opposed new discussions

on international monetary refonn. In an isolated position, France finally agreed on 12 September,

after a meeting of the Common Market Finance Ministers, that it would take part in studying how to

increase international liquidity; but it maintained its opposition to any increase until the U.S. achieved

payments balances.°

        This conciliatory position espoused by Debré was maintained throughout the annual IMF

meetings and contrasted with the French government's posturing in the first semester on gold "

During these meetings, Debré tacitly accepted U.S. Treasury Secretary Fowler's timetable for

approving a contingency plan for the creation of a new international reserve instrument at the next

annual IMF meeting.' Debrd also distanced himself from the Rueff thesis when he told journalists

during a press conference that under no cirasmstances did he favor an increase in the price of

gold.4 This conciliatory position was matched by a hiatus, during the months of October and

November, in the French government's practice of convening its dollar holdings into gold.'9

       On 29 November in Washington, at the first Joint meeting of the Deputies of the Group of


                                                   15
Ten and the 20 Executive Directors of the IMF meeting on reserve creation, the negotiators agreed to

the French demands of adding the issue of gold to their agenda. This occurred shortly after the

French government leaked to the press a report on the role of gold in the international monetary

system by Maurice Pérousse, director of the French Treasury and chief delegate at the monetary

talks.'° The most provocative aspect of this report was that it considered the possibility., of a gold

price increase and urged that "increased quotas by member countries to the IMP be paid in gold in

accordance with the find's statutes."5' The Ministry of Finance's spokesman first said that the report

reflected the opinion of the French government and then issued a denial that France actually favored a

higher gold price. By first leaking the report and then issuing ambiguous comments on it, Paris had

"clearly succeeded in putting loose a well-conceived cat among the pigeons"".

       From the beginning of 1967 until May 1968, French international monetary policy followed

essentially the same guidelines that it had followed since proposing the CRU in 1964. It also made the

same strategic use of gold as it had in 1965. The French persisted in demanding that the U.S. share

its veto power over the creation of new liquidity with Europe and in advocating the creation of an

international currency reserve unit that would be tied in some proportion to gold. Whenever their

demands were not given due consideration by the United States, representatives of the French

government resorted to recommending either an increase in the price of gold or the return to the gold
standard.

       The greater world economic turbulence difference between the January 1967 and May 1968

exacerbated existing problems. Growing world gold scarcity and a rise in U.S. inflation undermined

the dollar's relationship to gold and bred speculation on the gold market." Following the devaluation

of the pound in November 1967, the dollar began to weaken. The lack of Franco-American agreement

and French pronouncements may have contributed further to the speculative attacks against the dollar.

Although the French may have thought that the weakened position of the reserve currency countries


                                                 16
benefited them, their strategy backfired. The Gold Pool broke down and a two-tier gold pricing

system was created. The gold dollar standard was defacto terminated, ending the leverage conferred

by dollar to gold conversions.

        To see how France overplayed her hand we take a more detailed look at the important events

of January 1967 to May 1968. On 9 January 1967, a weekend statement by Michel Debré, suggesting

a reexamination of the official price gold caused a fever of gold speculation in France, putting the

U.S. on the defensive?' On 13 January 1967 in a speech to La Chambre de Commerce Franaise au

Canada, in Montreal, Debré restated France's position on revising the International Monetary System.

His position was identical to the position adopted earlier by Giscard d'Estaing while he was the
Minister of Finance", except for the fact that Debré maintained the possibility of revising the price

of gold. This position was consistent with the French strategy of using gold as a 'bargaining chip" to

obtain a more important voice for Europe in the revision of the international monetary systett.

       Confronted by a lack of support from other EEC countries, Debre's stance became more

conciliatory. Debré abandoned his demands for a reexamination of the price of gold". Instead, he

proposed that the Common Market countries' voting powers in the IMF be increased to a level

comparable with that of the U.S." No progress on this issue was, however, made at the joint

meeting on 27 January 1967 between the Executive Directors of the IMF and the Deputies of the C-

10 in London.

       As presented in Figure 5, the gold component of U.S. reserves had been constantly falling

since 1957. Their level was so low in 1967 that in March they provoked American officials to urge

major dollar holding nations to consider the dwindling stock at Fort Knox as generally 'off limits'

and to ask them not to buy gold except in the case of unavoidable need." France quietly
accommodated the U.S., making advance repayments on its debt to the U.S. and refraining from

purchasing U.S. gold for a few months. This perceived inability of the United States to ensure the


                                                 17
full convertibility of dollars did not bring it closer to an agreement with the French or the other

Common Market countries, regarding the proposed new reserve assets. Both a joint IMF/G-lO

meeting in Washington on 26 April and a 0-10 meeting in Paris on 20 May ended in a deadlock".

        Once again the French response was to harden its position on the creation of new liquidity.

On 24 May 1967 René Lane, financial counsellor to the French embassy in Washington and

executive director of the IMP, declared that the unwillingness of the U.S. to curb its chronic balance

of payment deficit presented a formidable obstacle to the agreement on the creation of a new reserve

asset.' During June 1967, France quietly decided to make no further contributions to the eight

nations gold pool, through which the price of gold was stabilized at $ 35.00 per ounce.' The United

States then had to increase its contribution to the gold pool by the same amount, an additional 9

percent."

       The closest the United States and France ever came to an agreement on international monetary

reform was on 27 August 1967 at the conclusion of a 6-10 meeting in London. Representatives of

both the United States and France declared their satisfaction with the new monetary reform formula to

be presented for the approval of the Governors of the IMP at the 1967 annual meetings in Rio. This

new proposition had a Special Drawing Rights (SOR) scheme where a majority of 85 percent at IME

Governors meetings was required to male decisions about SDRs, thus conferring veto powers to the

Common Market countries. This proposition was in line with the multilateral surveillance power

constantly advocated by France. In contrast to the earlier CRU scheme, access to SDRs was available

to all members1 not just the 0-10. Members were credited SDRs in proportion to their quotas with

one SDR equivalent to one gold dollarM Also, unlike the CRU, the SDR was a flat obligation; it was

not backed by gold. Its acceptability stemmed from the obligation by members to accept SDRS —

similar to the legal tender provision of domestic fiat money. Members must accept SDRS when the

Fund mandates their acceptance, as long as their holdings are less than three times their cumulative


                                                  18
allocation. This put a limit on the amount of a potentiality inferior asset that would have to be

absorbed.' To prevent the SDR from aggravating the confidence problem, the SDR could be used to

finance only balance of payments deficits. In addition, members were required to hold on average a

balance over a five year period of at least 30 percent of their allocationa. The latter was a

compromise between France, which wanted the new facility to be a form of credit, and the United

States, which wanted a reserve asset.'7 Otherwise, to use SDRs, a member would noti' the Fund,

which would then designate a surplus country to receive SDRs and provide the deficit country an

equal value of some convertible currency to use in intervention."

         The apparent harmony between Europe and the United States disintegrated at the annual

meeting of the World Bank and the IMF in Rio in September. U.S. Treasury Secretary Fowler

reconsidered giving a veto to the Common Market countries within the year." In turn, Michel Debré

replied by declaring that the agreements on reforming the IMP were an absolute condition for

France's agreement to the liquidity plan. He emphasized that France would not have supported the

SDRS if they had thought they would be a substitute for gold and laid down new conditions for the

activation of the SDR plan2U France's bargaining hand was improved because she had built a unified

front with the five other Common Market countries to demand veto power within the IMP and a

reduction in the balance of payments deficits of the United States and Great Britain. the reserve

currency countries. In early November, when representatives of the 0-10 countries conducted secret

negotiations to support the pound she flexed her muscles. France was reported to be the only country

of that group which did not firmly pledge against the devaluation of its own currency, should Britain

decide to devalue the pound.7' The effects of this stronger position was seen, in part, on 18

November 1967 when the United Kingdom, which had been experiencing serious balance of payments

problems since 1967. devalued the pound by 14.30 percent. The British felt that their position was

untenable after their effort to join the Common Market was effectively rebuffed by new conditions


                                                 19
that Maurice Couve de Murville, the French foreign minister, had laid down for British membership.

The French insisted that the British had to drop sterling as an international reserve currency and they

had to achieve equilibrium in their international balance of payments!2

        In the aftermath of the devaluation, the news that France had stopped contributing to the gold

pool in June was leaked to the press." This set off a wave of buying on the London and Paris gold

markets.7' Since the United States was furnishing about 60 percent of the gold pooi supplies and was

attempting to maintain the price of gold in the neighborhood of $35.00 per ounce, these speculative

attacks on the gold markets entailed a considerable drain on American gold reserves." In light of the

difficulties of the reserve currency countries, it was time for the French to intensify their pressures

for a reform of the international monetary system, and on 27 November, President de Gaulle declared

during a press conference in Paris:    1t is possthleTh that the problems resulting from the devaluation

of the pound will lead to the reestablishment of the international monetary system founded on the

immutability, impartiality and universality which are the privileges of gold" 77

        From the beginning of 1968 until May. the French hardened their stand on the reform of the

international monetary system. The drain on the U.S. gold reserves (see Figure 5) from the events of

the previous years led the United States in January 1968 to impose austerity measures which included

a curb on capital exports that lowered the outflow of reserves. All the Common Market countries

except France perceived that this reduction in U.S. reserve outflow was creating a shortage of

international liquidity. Consequently, they did not want to impose a U.S. balance of payments

equilibrium as a prior condition to the of new instniments of international liquidity. The Common

Market countries' united front in international monetary negotiations was showing some strain."

        During a February meeting in Rome of the ministers of finance of the Common Market

countries, all participants agreed that the reform of the IMF, giving them veto power, had to be

accepted simultaneously with the creation of a new liquidity scheme. However, in contrast to the


                                                   20
other participants. France wanted to maintain the condition that the United States balance of payments

be in equilibrium for a certain amount of time before starting the process of new liquidity creation.

Isolated on this matter. Michel Debré suggested instead that France could join in participating in the

discussions on the creation of the liquidity scheme but requested the chance to opt out of the

agreement if it did not consider the circumstances favorable to the creation of new liquidity. Thus.

the Rome meeting failed to produce unanimous agreement of all the Common Market countries.

        Mounting speculative pressure on the U.S. dollar in the gold markets led to a momentous

change in international monetary arrangements. On 17 March, the remaining members" of the gold

poo1 created a two tier pricing system for gold. whereby the official price of $35.00 per ounce would

only be maintained for inter-central bank transactions and the market price for all others. This marked

their determination to deflate the importance of gold in the international monetary system. The

member countries also agreed not to draw gold from U.S. reserves nor to sell gold to private

buyers.'2 The key decision of the meeting was a partial demonetization of gold, since the only gold

that would be counted as international reserves would be the amount already owned by the central

banking systems of the world and the IMF. Newly minted gold would still have a value, but not as

money within the international monetary system."

        The French reacted by restating their public support for an international monetary system tied

to gold. It was reported on 24 March that President de Gaulle declared that France would not

participate in any effort to strengthen the dollar until the present world monetary system was scrapped

in favor of a new one tied to gold. In effect, what the French President wanted was a new Bretton

Woods conference.M On 29 March, at the opening of the Ministerial meeting of the Group of Ten in

Stockholm, Debré declared that there was a case for considering an increase in the price of gold,

adopting this controversial move as official policy. He insisted on a restrictive interpretation of the

outline agreements reached between the Ten in London and at the IMF in Rio in 196V On 30


                                                    2i
March, however, all other countries but France voted to adopt the Special Drawing Rights plan. By

doing so, the Western powers demonstrated for the first time that they could bypass France in the

drafting of international monetary agreements.

        Michel Debré justified the French decision not to ratify the Stockholm agreement during the

regular monthly meeting of the Parisians economic and financial press. He declared that the definition

of the SDR's proposed in Stockholm was markedly different than their definition at the Rio

conference because they were closer to money than to credit. Furthermore, he said, the proposal

offered no guarantees on the implementation date of the new liquidity or on the condition of

reestablishing   equilibrium of the U.S. balance of payments before implementing the new liquidity

scheme. Debré stated that the sterling devaluation of 1967 and the gold pool decisions of March 1968

had generated a new economic environment that warranted closer scrutiny before designing a new

liquidity scheme. However, he declared that the Stockholm agreement was coincident in many

respects with the French position on international monetary polic)fl'.

        Debré enumerated the two fundamental principles guiding French international monetary

policy: the international monetary system should be based on the equality of the industrialized

countries and all these countries' currencies should be convertible in gold. The currencies' values in

terms of gold could be revised, after due negotiations among the major industrialized countries, every

twenty-five years or so. He claimed that these principles were closer in spirit to the initial intention of

the Bretton Woods conference: "Dire cell, ce n'est pas revenir vers Ic passé. C'est au contraire

rappeler les principes solides établis I Bretton Woods: Ia convertibilité de toutes les monnaies ci leur

rattachement I l'or. "

        In conclusion, French international monetary policy throughout the 1960s was conducted with

the constant objective of modifying the international monetary system on a basis that would be closer

in spirit to the French plan of 1943 and to the experts' recommendations at the Genoa conference in


                                                    22
 1922. It was for a gold exchange standard where all currencies would be linked to gold in fixed

proportions and where the major industrialized countries had equal say in the rules of the international

 monetary system. Raising the specter of a return to an orthodox gold standard was a strategy used by

the French government to induce the Americans to discuss a modification of the international

monetary system'9. As argued by Triflin, 'de Gaulle had not proposed the return to a pure gold

standard, and what has collapsed in 1931 was not the pure gold standard but the sterling component

of a gold exchange standard. De Gaulle foresaw correctly, as has now become clear to all — that the

perpetuation of the same system would inevitably pose a similar threat to the dollar itself. '9°

        The collapse of the gold dollar standard and the creation of the two-tier gold market in March

 1968 effectively ended France's leverage over the international monetary system. No longer could the

threat of converting her (and other EEC members') gold reserves into dollars be used as a viable

threat to convert the gold dollar standard into a multiple currency gold exchange standard because the

system had now evolved into a pure dollar standard. Having overplayed its hand in international

financial diplomacy, France lost whatever additional influence it had on the streets of Paris in May

1968 and in the ensuing recession.

                                               Conclusion

France's international monetary policy in the 1960s, which contributed to the demise of the Bretton

Woods system, was not an iastniment to further President de Gaulle's political goals. It was instead,

conducted according to a vision of the international monetary system that was rooted in the monetary

arrangements of the interwar period. Expressed in a consistent fashion through the 1960s, this policy

opposed the Bretton Woods gold-dollar standard and sought a gold-exchange standard with more

cooperation between Europe and the United States and more equitable balance of payments

settlements. To pressure the U.S., France cautiously used well-timed calls for a return to a classical

gold standard and/or a rise in the price of gold along with conversions of dollars into gold. in spite of


                                                   23
this orchestrated diplomacy designed to achieve a well-defined and long desired change in the

international monetary system, France's effort failed when it pushed too hard and the already fragile

exchange rate system collapsed.




                                                 24
                                               Endnotes

          *For helpful comments and suggestions we would like to thank Stanley Engerman, Adam

Kiug. David Liewelyn, Jacques Melitz, Alan Milwarcl, Jacques Polak, Leslie Pressnell. Angela

Redish, and Hugh Rockoff. Able research assistance was provided by Jakob Koenes.

1.    Volcker and Gyothen. p. 42.

2. For a discussion of the Plans and of the literature on the origins of the Bretton Woods conference.

See Bordo, 1993.

3. Horsefield, 1969, Volume Ill. p. 97.

4. Horsefield, 1969, Vol. 1. p. 37.

5. A similar plan, which received considerable attention at the time but was never seriously

considered by the negotiators at Bretton Woods, was John Williams' Key Currency plan, 1936. 1943.

6. Triffin, 1960; Solomon, 1982; Bordo, 1993.

7. Two prior conferences,    the Brussels International Financial Conference in 1920 and the Caimes

Conference in 1922, had considered, the design   of a gold-exchange standard in less detail.
8.    Eichengreen, 1992, pp. 158-159.

9. Fichengreen, 1992, pp. 278-281.

10. Bordo, 1993, pp. 34-36.

11. Bordo, 1993, p. 49. Initially it was a gold exchange standard with two key currencies, the dollar

and the pound, but the role of the pound as key currency declined steadily throughout the l960s.

12. Horsefield, 1969. p. 203. Italy also followed a similar practice but was not denied access to the

Fund.

13. Rueff, 1963, p. 19.

14.   Rueff, 1%!.

15. The Journal of Commerce, 29 September 1960.



                                                  25
16. IMF statistics show that.. .in January of 1959 France's gold reserve stood at $812 million. In

September of this year the French gold stock had risen to $1,627 million. French short term dollar

assets in the meantime rose from $656 million in the first quarter of 1959 to only $726 million in

mid-1960. The Journal of Commerce, 4 November 1960.

17. Horsefield, 1969, Vol I. pp. 502-520. The Wall Street Journal, 11 April 1961.

18. The New   York limes, 1 May 1961.

19. The Journal of Commerce, 21 September 1%!.
20. The Financial limes, 14 December 1961.
21. Giscard D'Estaing, 18 September 1962.

22. The Financial limes, 6 March 1963.
23. The New   York Times, 11 September 2963.

24. Devries, 1976, Vol. 1, p. 30.
25. Le Monde,   15   December 1963.

26. The New York limes, 11 June 1964.

27. This scheme was first sugested by Edward Bernstein, former Research Director of the IMF.
28.   Summary Proceedings of the Tokyo Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors of the

international Monetary Fund, Washington, 1964, pp. 201-207.

29. The New York limes, 12 September 1964; The
                                            New York limes, 11 September 1964.

30. The New York limes, 20 April 1966.
31. The New York limes, 5 January 1965.
32. The New York limes, 13 January 1965.

33. Charles tie Gaulle, 1965, p.7.

34. One leading authority, Triffin, 1965, disputes this interpretation.

35. DeVries, 1976, Vol 1, p. 62.

36. Triffin, 1965.

                                                   26
37. The New York limes, and The Journal of Commerce, 16Apr11 1965.

38. Giscard d'Estaing, 1965. Speech by Giscard d'Estaing at the Institut d'Etudes Bauccires ci

Financiéres, 15 June 1965.

39. Williamson, 1977, p. 20 and Solomon, 1982, p. 76.

40. The Financial limes, 11 August 1965.

41. The New York Times, 20 April 1966.

42. The French Finance Minister, Michael Debré was not entirely satisfied and said 'he couldn't

accept the agreement's implied hypotheses that money creating machinery should be established

before the United States payments had been in balance for a lengthy period of time, The Washington

Post, 27 July 1966.

43. The Financial limes, 31 December 1966. The distinction between a CRU arrangement whereby

the reserve unit could be issued in proportion to a member's gold holdings and a special drawing

right whose value could be defined as a specific weight in gold was not made.

44. Solomon, 1982 pp. 128-129; The Journal of Commerce, I February 66.

45. The limes (London), 13 September 1966.

46. However, it should be noted that in a speech during the meetings, Debré took the same line of

criticism of the dollar exchange standard as his predecessor Giscard d'Estaing. The Financial limes,

28 September 1966.

47. The Wall Street Journal, 30 September 1966.

48. The Wall Street Journal, 30 September 1966.

49. The New York limes, 3 December 1966.

50. The Washington Post, 30 November 1966.

51. The New York limes, 30 November 1966.

52. Nossiter, 30 November 1966.

53. Bordo, 1993.

                                                  27
54. The market of Napoléons     —   favorite coin among the Frenchmen who hoard gold — rose that day

to a fifteen year high of 50.4 francs (almost $10.24). The New York Times, 11 January 1967.

55. Revue de Ia chambre de commerce francaise au Canada, février 1967.

56. Brittan, The Financial Times, 2 January 1967.

57. The Wall Street Journal, 18 January 1967.

58. Voting inside the IMP required then a 80 percent majority. As the U.S. had 22.29 percent of

voting rights, the S common market nations currently had a total of 16.84 percent
                                                                                    of voting rights.

France's suggestion was to increase this to over 20 percent. so that the Common Market nations, as

long as they took a common line, would also have had veto powers. They could thus block Anglo-
American proposals for the creation of a new reserve unit to supplement gold, dollars and pounds.

The Wall Street Journal, 1-20-67.

59. Janssen, The Wall Street Journal, 20 March 1967.

60. The Wall Street Journal, 20 March 1967; The New York Times, 17 April 1967.

61. The Financial Times, 22 May 1967.
62. The Journal of Commerce, 25 May         1967.

63. The   Washington Post, 26 November 1967.

64. Vicker, 28 November 1967.

65. Bordo, 1993, p. 66-67.
66. Dam, 1982, p. 154.

67. Dam, 1982, pp. 163-164.
 68. Williamson, 1977, p. 22-23. France and the U.S. interpreted the agreement differently, France

 believed that the SDR scheme could be activated only when the U.S. balance of payments deficit was

 eliminated. However, the French were not successftil In maldng the elinination of the U.S. deficit a

 condition. This was in opposition to the American view that the introduction of SOPS would allow a

 reduction of its deficit.

                                                     28
69. The Financial 7irnes, 27 September 1967; Fisher, 27 September 1967.

70. These conditions were a collective agreement that a liquidity shortage existed; an improvement in

the operation of the adjustment process, and the elimination of payments deficits of reserve currency

countries. Jay, The Times (London). 27 September 1967.

71. Tanner. 23 November 1967; Tanner. 25 November 1967.

72. The Journal of Commerce, 6 November 1967.

73. Lee, 24 November     1967.

74. Farnsworth, 24 November 1967.

75. Lee, 24 November 1967. At the end of January 1968, as reported by the Federal Reserve

Board, the total U.S. gold stock was at $12,003,000,000 down about $1,200,000,000 from a year

before and at the lowest level since 1936. The Wail Street Journal, 29 February 1968.

76. Our emphasis.

77. Vicker, 28 November 1967.

78. Farnsworth, 25 January 1968; The Wall Street Journal, 29 February 1968.

79. Davidson, 26 February 1968.

80. This was a clever way of pressuring the remaining common market countries since they would

lose their veto power with the IMF at the time of implementation of the new liquidity scheme if the

French opted out of the implementation of the new liquidity plan (Fabra, 29 February 1968).

81. Despite the fact that France was no longer a participant to the gold pool, its importance on
financial markets should have dictated its presence at these meetings. It was said that France was

excluded from these Washington meetings due to its pattern of consistently leaking news to Le

Mande. Heinemann, 19 March 1968. Indeed, "On the crucial Monday following the devaluation of

the pound, Paul Fabra, one of the financial editors of I.e Monde printed the highly confidential figures

of the loss suffered during the previous months by the gold pool. Since then, he has had exclusive

stories, many of them correct, often     at   precise moments when they hurt American       and British

                                                   29
policies. But high officials of the French foreign and finance ministries staunchly deny that Mr.

Fabra's "leab' came from any French source. They countercharge that the information must have
come   from other European sources." Tanner 24 March 1968.

82. Heinemann, 19 March 1968.

83. Rowen, 20 March 1967.

84. Tanner, 24 March 1968.

85. Davidson, 30 March 1968.

86. Lee, 31 March 1968.

87. Le Monde, 6 April 1968.

88. Le Monde, 6 April 1968.

89. Mathieu, 6 April 1968.

90. Triffin, 1968.




                                              30
                                            Biblioaphy

Edward M. Bernstein, 'A Practical Program for International Monetary Reserves.'
                                                                                  Model, Roland
      and Co., Quanerly Review and Investment Survey, Fourth Quarter, 1963, pp. 1-8.

Michael D. Bordo, 'The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: An Historical Overview' in
        A Retrospective of the Bretton Woods System, eds. Michael D. Bordo and Barry Eichengreen,
        Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1993.

Samuel Brittan, 'What M. Rueff's Gold Plan Would Mean', The Financial Times, 2 January 1967

Edwin L. Dale Jr. 'No Big Shift Seen in Money Set-Up', The New York Times, I May 1961.

Edwin L. Dale Jr. 'Dillon Attacks French on Fund', The New York Times, 12 September 1964.

Kenneth Dam, The Rules of the Game: Rrm and Evolution in the International Monetary System.
      Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1982.

Ian Davidson, 'French Hard Line on New Liquidity', The FITSOJZCIO.! limes, 26 February 1968.

Ian Davidson, 'Tough French Bargaining in Monetary Talks', The Financial Times, 30 March 1968.

Michel Debré, 'Problêmes monétaires internationaux', Revue de La chanthre de commerce francaise
       au Canada, No. 592, pp. 58, février 1967.

Margaret DeVries, The International Monetary Fund, 1966-1971: The System Under Stress, 2
       Volumes, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC., 1976.

Peter Dreyer, 'World Fund's Resources Hike in Doubt', The Journal of Commerce, 21 September
       1961.

Barry Eichengreen, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression. 1919 - 1939,
       Oxford 1992.

Clyde H. Farnsworth, 'Gold-Buying Wave Swells, Battering Dollar in Europe: Paris Trading Brisk',
       The New York limes, 24 November 1967.

Clyde H. Farnsworth, 'New Reserve Unit Foreseen for '69', The New York Times, 25 January 1968.

M. H. Fisher, 'U.S. German Clash Over SDR's and IMP Voting Procedure', The Financial Times,
       27 September 1967.

Charles de Gaulle, 11th Press Conference, Palais de l'Elysee, 2 February 1965. Ambassade de
       France, service de presse et d'inforrnation, Speeches and Press Conferences No.216

Philip Geyelin, 'President to Play Down Dollar Aid Bid, Push closer Western Ties'. The Wall Street


                                                31
       Journal, 11 April 1961.

Valery Giscard d'Estaing, address delivered in Washington on 18 September 1962 at the annual
       meeting of the International Financial Institutions.

Valery Giscard d'Estaing, 'The Policy of France in the International Monetary Field", A lecture
       delivered on 15 June 1965 at the "Institut d'Etudes Bancaires et Financieres".

H. Erich Heinemann, 'Members of Pool Said to Agree Not to Draw from U.S. Stocks', The New
        York limes, 19 March 1968.

J. Keith Horsefield, The International Monetary Fund 1945 - 1965: Twenty Years of International
        Monetary Cooperation, Vol. III: Documents, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
        1969.

Richard F. Janssen, 'France Lifts Opposition to Monetary Reform; U.S. Gold Stock Fell $94 Million
       in August," The Wall Street Journal, 30 September 1966.

Richard F. Janssen, "Some Nations Secretly Promise U.S. They Will Avoid Buying Our Gold', The
       Wall Street Journal, 20 March 1967.

Peter Jay. 'Franco-Gernian Move Brings Liquidity Split", The Times, (London), 27 September 1967.

John M. Lee, "Gold-Buying Wave Swells, Battering Dollar in Europe: London Price Steady". The
      New York Times, 24 November 1967.

John M. Lee, "Nine Nations Vote to Adopt 'Paper Gold' Money Plan; France Refuses to Join', The
      New York limes, 31 March 1968.

Paul Lewis, 'Six Hopes of Compromise In Liquidity Talks", The Financial limes, 22 May 1967.

Gilbert Mathieu, 'Us propositions françaises', U Monde, 6 and 1968.

Sheldon Meyer, 'French Aide Pessimistic on Liquidity'. TheJournal of Commerce, 25 May 1967.

Richard E. Mooney, "Europe Terms Payments Woes Most Urgent Trading Problem', The New York
       limes, 11 September 1963.

Richard E. Mooney, "Gold for Dollars is Goal in France', The New York limes, 5 January 1965.

Richard E. Mooney, 'French Reserves Dip for 4th Month", The New York Times, 3 December 1966.

Richard E. Mooney, "France Softens Monetary Stand', The New York Times, 17 April 1967.

Bernard D. Nossiter, 'Ten Nations Continue Search for Acceptable Monetary Unit". The Washington
       Post, 27 July 1966.



                                                   32
 Bernard D. Nossiter, "France Upsets Monetary Talks with Call for Gold Discussion', The
         Washington Post, 30 November 30 1966.

 Hobart Rowen, "Tough Stand Against French Was Key Gold Pool Decision", The
        20 March 1967.                                                      Washington Post,

 Jacques Rueff, L'âge de l'inflazion; Payot, France, 1963.

 Jacques Rueff, 'The West is Risking a Credit Collapse,' Fortune, July 1961.

 Robert Solomon, The International Monetaty .S'ystem 1945 - 1981, Harper and
                                                                             Row, New York.
         1982.

 Henry Tanner, 'Paris Didn't Pledge Firm Franc on Eve of London's Devaluation', The New York
        Times,   25 November 1967.

 Henry Tanner, "France Hints Aid for British Loan", The New York Times, 23 November 1967.

Henry Tanner, "France Seeks New Monetary Summit', The New York limes, 24 March         1968,

Robert Triftin, Gold and the Dollar Crisis, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1960.

Robert Triffin, 'Sterling, the Dollar, Dc Gaulle and Gold", Challenge, New York, Vol 13. no.4,
        pp.19-23 April 1965.

Robert Triffin, 'Dc Gaulle at Stockholm: Villain, Hero, or
                                                           Sphinx'?', Interplay of American/Europec.n
       Affairs, No.10, pp.15 - 17 May 1968.

Ed Tyng, "French Economist Speaks Out: Universal Devaluation Put
                                                                 Forward', The Journal of
        Commerce, 16 April 1965.

Ray Vicker, 'Dc Gaulle Renews Push to Get the World Bank on the Gold Standard", The Wall Street
      Journal, 28 November 1967.

Paul Volcker and Toyoo Gyohten. flanging Fortunes: The World's
                                                               Money and the Threat to
      American Leadership, Times Books, 1992.

John H. Williams, 1936, 1969a.  Extract from a paper on "The Adequacy of
                                                                            Existing Currency
       Mechanisms Under Varying Circumstances,' 28 December. In Horsefield 1969. p. 119-23.

_________ 1943, 1969b. Extract from 'Currency Stabilization: The Keynes and White Plans.' In
       Horsefield 1969, p. 24-127.

John Williamson, The   Failure of World Monetoiy Reform, 1971-74, Sunbury on Thames: Thomas
      Nelson, 1977.




                                                 33
                           Unattributed Newspaper Articles

—, "French Experts Attribute U.S. Gold Losses to Political Uncertainty", The Journal of
Commerce. 29 September 1960.

   "French Bought U.S. Gold for Payoff of Fund Loan", The Journal of Commerce,
4 November 1960.

  • "The New Club", The Financial Times, 14 December 1961.

  • "M. Rueff's Plans to Help French Economy". The Financial Times, 6 March 1963.

  • 'Les Dix vont faire I Paris Ic point de leurs premiers travaux', Le Monde, 15 decembre
1963.

  • "Bank of U.S. and France Agree to $50 Miltion Currency Swap", The New York limes,
 11   June 1964.

   • "Le discours de M. Giscard d'Estaing I Ia conference de Tokyo", Agence économique et
financiEre. 10 septembre 1964.

      "Maudling Assails Stand by France", The New York runes, 11 September 1964.

  • "France Defends Gold Purchases", The New York Times, 13 January 1965.
    "The World's Money", The Financial Times, 11 August 1965.

      "U.S. Proposes CRU System for 1st Time", The Jownal of Commerce, 1 February 1966.

      "French Compromise Plan for Liquidity Reform ?", The Financial limes, 31 December
 1966.

  • "France Restates Monetary Stand", The New York Times, 20April20 1966.

      "France Gives Way on Monetary Reform", The Times (London), 13 September 1966.

      "No yielding by M. Debré on liquidity reform", The Financial Times, 28 September 1966.

      "France Proposes Broad Gold Study". The New York limes. 30 November 1966.

      "Gold to Stay $35.00, U.S. Tells France", The New York TImes, 11 January 1967.

      "Common Market Rejects French Effort to Bring Gold Price Into Talks", The Wall Street
Journal, 28 January 1967.

      "France Proposes Rise in Common Market's Voting Power in IMF", The Wall Street
 Journal, 30 January 1967.



                                          34
—    , "Paris Denies Buying Gold During Rush", The Washington Post, 26 November L967,

        A French Faux Pu 7", The Journal of Commerce, 6 November 1967.

       "U.S. Gold Drain Slowed Sharply During January, The Wall Street Journal, 29 February
    1968.




                                         35
                                      Figure 1
                  Balance ol Payments: United States, 1950—1971
  8000


  4000


     0


 —4000


 —8000


—12000



—t6000


—20000


         50 5* 52 53 54 55 58 57 56 59 60 81 62 63 64 85 66 67 68 69 70 7!
         ———— current   accoun     long—term capital       abort—term capital
                                   change   lit reserves

                                 Source Bordo (1993)
                                     Figure 2
 4000
                Balance of Payments: United Kingdom, 1950—1971


 3000


 2000


 1000


    0


—1000



—2000



—3000
        50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 CI 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71
        — current account— — —. long—term c.pitafr     short—term capital
                                  change In reservem


                                 Source Sordo (1993)
                                  Figure 3
                   Balance of Payments: France, 1950—1971
 3000



 2000



 1000



    0


—1000



—2000




—3000
        50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 80 61 62 63
         — current accouM" long—term capitak      short—term capital
                                change In reserve.


                                Source: Bordo (1993)
                                       Figure 4
              France International Reserves
     Illilon, of U.S. S
I0

a


a

4

2


0
     48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71

      C Gold              SDRi   C   Re,nve Poulilon             Forotg £xchaqe

                             Sozrc.: IMF   Flnancal Statlilic,
                                    Figure 5
      United States International Reserves
     Billions of U.S. S
30

25

20

'5
10                                               flhi th
 5

0
     48 4950 51 52 53 5455 56 57 58 5960 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71

      C Gold          $Dfl C Runv. poattloft                 Por.tqri £tbatqs

                          Source: tMF Ftnaoclat Statt.tlcu
