                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MEASURING BUSINESS CYCLES: A
                              MODERN PERSPECTIVE




                                     Francis X. Diebold
                                    Glenn D. Rudebusch




                                  Working Paper No. 4643




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1994



This paper was prepared for the NBER Economic Fluctuations Conference on Developments
in Business Cycle Research, October 22-23, 1993, Cambridge, MA. We thank Alan
Auerbach, Anttilio Bomfim, Russell Cooper, Steve Durlauf, Jim Hamilton, Jim Stock, and
Mark Watson for their constructive comments. We thank the National Science Foundation,
the Sloan Foundation, and the University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation for supporl
The hospitality of the University of Chicago, where parts of this work were completed, is
gratefully acknowledged. We are also grateful to Jos6 Lopez and Marcelle Chauvet. who
provided assistance with many of the computations. The views expressed here are not
necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or its staff, or of
the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4643
                                                                                February 1994


                            MEASURING BUSINESS CYCLES: A
                                MODERN PERSPECTIVE


                                          ABSTRACT


       In the first half of this century, special attention was given to two features of the business

cycle: (1) the comovement of many individual economic series and (2) the different behavior of

the economy during expansions and contractions. Both of these attributes wert ignored in many

subsequent business cycle models, which were often linear representations of a single

macroeconomic aggregate. However, recent theoretical and empirical research has revived

interest in each attribute separately. Notably, dynamic factor models have been used to obtain

a single common factor from a set of macroeconomic variables, and nonlinear models have been

used to describe the regime-switching nature of aggregate output. We survey these two strands

of research and then provide some suggestive empirical analysis in an effort to unite the two

literatures and to assess their usefulness in a statistical characterization of business-cycle

dynamics.




Francis X. Diebold                                            Glenn D. Rudebusch
Department of Economics                                       Federal Reserve Board
3718 Locust Walk                                              20th and Constitution Avenue, NW
University of Pennsylvania                                    Washington. D.C. 20551
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
I. Introduction
       It is desirable to know the facts before attempting to explain them; hence, the
attractiveness of organizing business-cycle regularities within a model-free framework.
During the first.half of this century, much research was devoted to obtaining just such an
empirical characterization of the business cycle. The most prominent example of this work
was Burns and Mitchell (1946), whose summary empirical definition was:
       Business cycles are a type of fluctuation found in the aggregate economic
       activity of nations that organize their work mainly in business enterprises: a
       cycle consists of expansions occurring at about the same time in many
       economic activities, followed by similarly general recessions, contractions, and
       revivals which merge into the expansion phase of the next cycle.
                                                                         (p. 3)
       Bums and Mitchell's definition of business cycles has two key features. The first is
the comovement among individual economic variables. Indeed, the comovement among
series, taking into account possible leads and lags in timing, was the centerpiece of Burns and
Mitchell's methodology. In their analysis, Burns and Mitchell considered the historical

concordance of hundreds of series, including those measuring commodity output, income,
prices, interest rates, banking transactions, and transportation services. They used the clusters
of turning points in these individual series to determine the monthly dates of the turning
points in the overall business cycle.' Similarly, the early emphasis on the consistent pattern
of comovement among various variables over the business cycle led directly to the creation of

composite leading, coincident, and lagging indexes (e.g., Shishkin, 1961).
        The second prominent element of Burns and Mitchell's definition of business cycles

is their division of business cycles into separate phases or regimes. Their analysis, as was
typical at the time, treats expansions separately from contractions. For example, certain series
are classified as leading or lagging indicators of the cycle, depending on the general state of



     See Diebold and Rudebusch (1992) for further discussion of the role of comovement in
determining business-cycle turning points.
                                                1
business conditions.
       Both of the features highlighted by Bums and Mitchell as key attributes of business

cycles were less emphasized in postwar business-cycle models--particularly in empirical
models where the focus was on the time series properties of the cycle. Most subsequent
econometric work on business cycles followed Tinbergen (1939) in using the linear difference
equation as the instrument of analysis. This empirical work has generally focused on the
time-series properties of just one or a few macroeconomic aggregates, ignoring the pervasive
comovement stressed by Bums and Mitchell. Likewise, the linear structure imposed
eliminated consideration of any nonlinearity of business cycles that would require separate
analyses of expansions and contractions.
       Recently, however, empirical research has revived consideration of each of the
attributes highlighted by Bums and Mitchell. Notably, Stock and Watson (1989, 1991, 1993)
have used a dynamic factor model to capture comovement by obtaining a single common
factor from a set of many macroeconomic series, and Hamilton (1989) has estimated a
nonlinear model for real GNP with discrete regime switching between periods of expansion
and contraction.
       This paper is part survey, part interpretation, and part new contribution. We describe
the dynamic-factor and regime-switching models in some detail in sections 11 and HI, and we
sketch their links to recent developments in macroeconomics in section IV. The modern

dynamic-factor and regime-switching literatures, however, have generally considered the
comovement and regime-switching aspects of the business cycle in isolation of each other.
Thus, in section V, we attempt at an empirical synthesis in a comprehensive framework that
admits the possibility of both factor structure and regime switching. We conclude in
section VI.




                                               2
II. Comovement: Factor Structure
       In a famous essay, Lucas (1976) drew attention to a key business-cycle fact: outputs
of broadly-defined sectors move together. Lucas' view is part of a long tradition that has
stressed the coordination of activity among various economic actors and the resulting
comovement in sectoral outputs. In this.section, we focus on a modern dynamic model that
captures such comovement.
       Analysis of comovement in dynamic settings typically makes use of two
nonparametric tools, the autocorrelation function and the spectral density function. In the
time domain, one examines multivariate dynamics via the autocorrelation function, which
gives the correlations of each variable with its own past and with the past of all other
variables in the system. Such analyses are now done routinely, as in Backus and Kehoe
(1992), who characterize the dynamics of output, consumption, investment, government
purchases, net exports, money, and prices across ten countries and a hundred years.
        Alternatively, one examines dynamics in the frequency domain via the spectral density
function, the Fourier transform of the autocovariancc function, which presents the same
dynamic information but in a complementary fashion. The spectral density matrix
decomposes variation and covariation among variables by frequency, permitting one to
concentrate on the dynamics of interest (business-cycle dynamics, for example, correspond to
periods of roughly 2-8 years). Transformations of both the real and imaginary parts of the
spectral density matrix have immediate interpretation in business-cycle analysis; the coherence

between any two economic time series effectively charts the strength of their correlation by

frequency, while the phase charts lead/lag relationships by frequency. A good example of
business-cycle analysis in the frequency domain is Sargent (1987), who examines the spectral
density matrix of seven U.S. data series: real GNP, the unemployment rate, the interest rate,




                                                3
the change in real money stock, inflation, productivity, and real wages.2
        Of course, one can analyze business-cycle data parametrically as well, by
approximating the dynamic relationships with a particular statistical model. In this regard, the

vector autoregression, introduced by Sims (1980), is ubiquitous. The moving-average
representation (that is, the impulse-response function) of a vector autoregression of a set of
macroeconomic variables provides a readily-interpretable characterization of dynamics, by
charting the response of each variable to shocks in the other variables.

        Unfortunately, a vector-autoregressive study that attempts to capture the pervasive
comovement among hundreds of series emphasized by Bums and Mitchell requires more
degrees of freedom than are available in macroeconomic samples. However, recent work
provides crucial dimensionality reduction because the dynamic comovements among large sets
of macroeconomic variables can often be well described by a particular configuration of the
vector autoregression associated with index structure, or factor structure.
        Factor models have a long history of use in cross-sectional settings, and their
generalization to dynamic environments is due to Sargent and Sims (1977), Geweke (1977)
and Watson and Engle (1983). Important recent contributions include Stock and Watson
(1989, 1991, 1993) and Quah and Sargent (1993), among others. The idea is simply that the
comovement of contemporaneous economic variables may be due to the fact that they are
driven, at least in part, by common shocks. Thus, the behavior of the set of N variables is
qualitatively similar to the behavior of just one variable, the common factor. This allows
parsimonious modeling while nevertheless maintaining fidelity to the notion of pervasive




    2
     In the frequency domain, Sargent (1987, p. 282) offers the following update of Bums
and Mitchell's definition: ". . . the business cycle is the phenomenon of a number of
important economic aggregates (such as GNP, unemployment, and layoffs) being
characterized by high pairwise coherences at the low business cycle frequencies."

                                                4
macroeconomic conlovement.3
       Let us focus on the dynamic factor model of Stock and Watson (1991), which was
developed as a modem statistical framework for computing a composite index of coincident
indicators. In their one-factor model, movements in the N macroeconomic variables of
interest, (x1), are determined by changes in the one-dimensional unobserved common factor.

I, and by the N-dimensional idiosyncratic component, u:

                                      x+X f+u
                                   Nxl NxI Nxl lxi Nxl

                                         D(L) u
                                        NxN Nxi Nxl



                                        lxi lxi lxi
All idiosyncratic stochastic dynamics are driven by e, while all common stochastic
dynamics, which are embodied in the common factor, are driven by r . Following Stock
and Watson, identification is achieved by assuming that    {   u, ..., UNt, f)   are orthogonal at
all leads and lags, which is achieved by making D(L) diagonal and (c1                  ii}
orthogonal at all leads and lags, and by setting the scale of the factor by imposing
 var(fl, — 1)

       The idea of common shocks permeates dynamic econometrics. Besides the dynamic
factor setup, a number of other econometric tools are also intimately connected to the idea of

shock commonality. For example, the EYigle-Granger (1987) cointegration concept fits


      It is interesting to note that parallel structures may to exist in many financial markets,
which makes sense to the extent that asset prices accurately reflect fundamentals. See
Singleton (1980), Bollerslev, Engle and Wooldridge (1988), and Diebold and Nerlove (1989),
among others, for examples of factor structure in both the conditional means and conditional
variances of various asset returns.

                                               5
precisely into the common-factor setup. The key feature of a cointegrated system is that,
although all variables in the system are integrated, there are fewer unit roots than variables.

It is the common underlying unit roots in cointegrated systems--characterized formally in the
"common trends" representation of Stock and Watson (1988)--that links cointegration to the
idea of common factors. Furthermore, the recent idea of common features, introduced by
Engle and Kozicki (1993), is a direct generalization of cointegration and is therefore
intimately connected to factor structure as well.



111. Nonlinearity: Regime Switching
       Underlyiig much of the traditional business cycle literature is the notion that a good
statistical characterization of business-cycle dynamics may require some notion of regime
switching between "good" and "bad" states.4 Models incorporating regime switching have a
long tradition in dynamic econometrics.5 One recent time-series model squarely in line with
the regime-switching tradition is the "threshold" model (e.g., Tong, 1983; Potter, 1992). In a
threshold model, the regime switches according to the observable past history of the system.
While the threshold approach is of interest, it may be more appropriate for our purposes to
use a model in which the state is latent, rather than observable. The recent work of Hamilton
(1989, 1990, 1993) achieves just that. In Hamilton's regime-switching model, time-series
dynamics are governed by a finite-dimensional parameter vector that switches (potentially
each period) depending upon which of two unobservable states is realized, with state
transitions governed by a first-order Markov process.


     Again, parallel suctures may exist in financial markets. Regime switching has been
found in the conditional mean dynamics of interest rates (Hamilton, 1988; Cecchetti, Lam and
Mark, 1990) and exchange rates (Engel and Hamilton, 1990), and in the conditional variance
dynamics of stock returns (Hamilton and Susmel, 1992).

    Key early contributions include the early work of Quandt (1958) and Goldfeld and
Quandt (1973).

                                                6
       Economic considerations suggest the potential desirability of allowing the transition
probabilities associated with the Markov process to vary through time. For example, in the
context of business-cycle dynamics, it is plausible that the likelihood of a turning point
depends upon the duration-to-date of the current regime (expansion or contraction); certainly,
one would not want to exclude that possibility from the outset. For this reason, we shall
sketch a version of Hamilton's model that allows for time-varying transition probabilities, due
to Diebold, Lee and Weinbach (1993) and Filardo (1993).
       Let (s1}1 be the sample path of a latent first-order, two-state Markov process, taking
values 0 or 1. with transition probability matrix illustrated in Figure 1. As is apparent from
the figure, the two transition probabilities are potentially time-varying, evolving as logistic
functions of        ,   = 0. 1, where the conditioning vector x contains variables that affect

the state transition probabilities. When all but the first elements of the 3 vectors are set to
zero, the transition probabilities are constant.
       Now let {y1)1 be the sample path of a time series that depends on {s}1j such that
the density of y conditional upon s is


                                               1             —(Y1—)2                              (2)
                             f(ys; 6)                  exp
                                                              2&

Thus, y1 is white noise with a potentially switching mean. The two means around which y

moves are of particular interest and may, for example, correspond to episodes of differing

growth rates ("expansions" and 'contractions").
       The central idea of regime switching is simply that expansions and contractions may
be usefully treated as different probabilistic objects. This idea has been an essential part of
the Bums-Mitchell-NBER tradition of business-cycle analysis and is also manifest in the great

interest in the popular press, for example, in identifying and predicting turning points in
economic activity. Yet it is only within a regime-switching framework that the concept of a

                                                   7
turning point has intrinsic meaning. Recent contributions that have emphasized the use of

probabilistic models in the construction and evaluation of turning-point forecasts and
chronologies include Neftci (1982) and Diebold and Rudebusch (1989).
       Numerous recent contributions revolve around the basic switching model, implicitly or
explicitly. For example, Neftci's (1984) well-known analysis of business-cycle asymmetry
amounts to asking whether the Markov transition probability matrix (assumed to be constant)

is symmetric. Similarly, analyses of business-cycle duration dependence amount to asking
whether the transition probabilities are constant. Diebold and Rudebusch (1990), Filardo
(1993), and Diebold, Rudebusch and Sichel (1993) have found positive duration dependence
in postwar U.S. contractions; that is, the longer a contraction persists, the more likely it is to
end. This confirms the desirability of allowing the transition probabilities in Markov regime-
switching models to vary. Similar results have been obtained by Durland and McCurdy

(1992) using the technology of semi-Markov processes.
       Other forms of time-varying transition probabilities may be important as well.

Ghysels (1993a, b), in particular, argues that business-cycle state transition probabilities vary
seasonally and provides formal methods for analyzing such variation. General models of
time-varying hazard rates (transition probabilities) have also been studied recently by Dc
Toldi, Gourieroux and Monfort (1992).
       Finally, the possibility of more than two states may of course be entertained. Sichel
(1992), for example, provides some evidence of a third state in business-cycle dynamics.
Sichel's third state is a "recovery" period at the beginning of expansions, corresponding to
much faster than usual expansionary growth. Potter (1992) produces evidence that leads to a
similar view.




                                                 8
IV. Factor Structure and Regime Switching: Links to Macroeconomic Theory
       In this section, as further motivation, we describe some of the links between
macroeconomic theory and factor structure and regime switching. We use convex equilibrium
business-cycle models to motivate the appearance of factor structure and non-convex models
with multiple equilibria to motivate regime switching; however, we hasten to add that these
pairings are by no means exclusive. Moreover, of course, our ultimate interest lies in models
that simultaneously display factor structure and regime-switching behavior, which as the

following discussion suggests might occur in a variety of ways.


A. Macroeconomic Theory and Factor Structure
       The econometric tradition of comovement through factor structure is consistent with a
variety of modern dynamic macroeconomic models. Here we highlight just one--a linear-
quadratic equilibrium model--in order to motivate the appearance of factor structure. We
follow the basic setup of Hansen and Sargent (1993), which although arguably rigid in some
respects, has two very Convenient properties. First, the discounted dynamic programming
problem associated with the model may be solved easily and exactly. Second, the equilibria
of such models are precisely linear (that is, precisely a vector autoregression), thereby
bringing theory into close contact with econometrics.
       Assume preferences are quadratic and are defined over consumption of services, s,
and work effort, l, with shocks b determining a stochastic bliss point. There are four linear
constraints on the utility maximization. The first specifies that a weighted average of the

output of consumption goods, c0 intermediate goods, & and investment goods, i, equals a
linear combination of lagged capital stock, Ic1, and work effort, plus the technology shock, d1.
The second is the law of motion for the capital stock: Capital accumulates through additional
investment minus depreciation. The third is the law of motion for "household capital," h,
which is driven by consumption expenditures. The last constraint specifies that consumption

                                                9
services today depend on lagged household capital and current consumption. The planning
problem associated with this model is


                             max —!   E         p'   [(s1—b)
                                                                   (se—b) + 12]


subject to the four constraints6



                              ac1   + ;g       +
                                                   cz3i1     a4k + a5l      +
                                                                                  d1


                                           's        1k11 +
                                                               +
                                           h1        y1h1          y2c1

                                                             +
                                          s1         61h1

The exogenous uncertainty in the model evolves according to


                                          zt,I — p1; 4 p2w,1

and the preference and technology shocks (b and ci.) are linear transformations        of the ;,

                                     b1    Ubzt,           d — Ud;

Most importantly for our purposes, note that this franiework can potentially describe the
determination of a large set of series. All variables (except lJ can be considered as vectors of
different goods or services with the parameters interpreted as conformable matrices.
       The equilibrium of this economy is a linear stochastic process and can be represented
by a vector autoregression constrained by cross-equation restrictions. Most importantly, this
vector autoregression will have factor structure so long as the number of shocks is less than
the number of variables in the system. The equilibrium has state space form

   6 Consumption appears in both of the last two equations in order to capture both its
durable and nondurable aspects.

                                                      10
                                           — Ax1    + Cw1,

                                              —
                                                  Gx1


where the state vector x1 contains h1, k1, and ;, and Yt can contain any variable that can be
expressed as a linear function of the state variables. The Kalman filter can be used with the
model in state space form to obtain the innovations and hence construct the Gaussian
likelihood.
       Fewer shocks than observables is the rule, not the exception. The standard setups
have just a few preference and technology shocks driving a comparatively large number of
decision variables, thereby building in factor structure. In fact, in the leading case of a single
technology shock and no preference shocks, one shock is responsible for all variation in the
choice variables, resulting in an equilibrium that maps into a special (singular) case of the
one-factor model discussed earlier. In that special case, there are no idiosyncratic shocks (or

equivalently, they have zero variance).
       To reconcile the singular equilibrium from the model economy with the clearly non-
singular nature of the data, measurement error is often introduced.7 The state-space

representation becomes

                                       x,1 — Ax + Cw1,1

                                          yt_Gxt+vt

where v is a martingale difference sequence. In single-shock linear-quadratic models with
measurement error, the equilibria are precisely of the single-factor form, with non-degenerate

idiosyncratic effects.
        Feeling constrained by linear technology and quadratic preferences, many authors have
recently focused on models that are trot linear-quadratic. See, for example, Kydland and


      See Sargent (1989), and Hansen and Sargent (1993), among others.

                                               11
Prescott (1982), Hansen (1985), Cooley and Hansen (1990), and Cooley (1993). The
formulation is basically the same as in the linear-quadratic case, but the mechanics are more
complicated. The discounted dynamic programming problem associated with the recursive
competitive equilibrium can only be solved approximately; however, the decision rules are
nevertheless well-approximated linearly near the steady state. Under regularity conditions, the
equilibrium is a Markov process in the state variables, and if that Markov process converges
to an invariant distribution, then a vector-autoregressive representation exists. Again, the
vector autoregression is only an approximation to the generally nonlinear decision rules, and
its computation can be tedious. However, the availability of a factor structure for modelling
this approximation remains.


B. Macroeconomic Theory and Regime Switching
       Regime-switching behavior is also consistent with a variety of macroeconomic models.
Here we focus on models with coordination failures, which produce multiple equilibria. In
what follows, we shall provide a brief overview of this theoretical literature and its relation to
the regime-switching model.
       Much has been made of the role of spillovers and strategic complementarities in
macroeconomics (Cooper and John, 1988). "Spillover" simply refers to a situation in which
others' strategies affect one's own payoff. "Sttategic complementarity' refers to a situation in
which others' strategies affect one's own optimal strategy. Spillovers and strategic

complementarities arise, for example, in models of optimal search (e.g., Diamond, 1982),
where thick-market externalities ensure that the likelihood of successful search depends on the
intensity of search undertaken by others, which in turn affects one's own optimal search
intensity. In short, search is more desirable when other agents are also searching, because it
is likely to be more productive.

       Spillovers and strategic complementarities may have important macroeconomic effects.

                                                12
For example, the appearance of aggregate increasing returns to scale (e.g., Hall, 1989) may
simply be an artifact of the positive externalities associated with high output levels in the
presence of spillovers and strategic complementarities rather than true increasing returns in
firms' technologies. Indeed, Caballero and Lyons (1992) find little evidence of increasing
returns at the individual level, yet substantial evidence at the aggregate level, suggesting the

importance of spillovers and strategic complementarities.
        Spillovers and strategic complementarities can produce multiple equilibria, the
dynamics of which may be well-approximated by statistical models involving regime
switching.8 In fact, Cooper and John (1988) stress the existence of multiple equilibria, with
no coordination mechanism, as a common theme in a variety of seemingly-unrelated models

displaying spillovers and strategic complementarities. Moreover, the equilibria are frequently
Pareto-rankable. Situations arise, for example, in which an economy is in a low-output
equilibrium such that all agents would be better off at higher output levels, but there is no
coordination device to facilitate the change.
        Most work on coordination failures fails to deliver a mechanism for endogenizing
switches between equilibria, although some very recent work is progressing in that direction.
One approach involves variations on Keynesian "animal spirits,' or self-fulfilling waves of
optimism and pessimism, as formalized by Azariadis (1981) and Cass and Shell (1983).
Notably, Diamond and Fudenberg (1989) demonstrate in a search framework the existence of
rational-expectations sunspot equilibria in which agents' beliefs about cycles are self-
fulfilling. Howit and McAfee (1992) obtain results even more in line with our thesis in a
model in which waves of optimism and pessimism evolve according to a Markov process.
The statistical properties of equilibria from their model are well-characterized by a Markov




    S
      Durlauf (1991) and Cooper and Durlauf (1993) provide insightful discussion of this
point.
                                                13
regime-switching process.9
       Finally, Cooper (1993) proposes a history-dependent selection criterion in an economy
with multiple Nash equilibria corresponding to different levels of productivity. The Cooper
criterion reflects the idea that history may create a focal point: a person's recent experience
is likely to influence her expectations of others' future strategic behavior, resulting in a slow
evolution of conjectures about others' actions. Cooper's analysis highlights the importance of
learning to respond optimally to the strategic actions of others. The Cooper criterion leads to
persistence in the equilibrium selected, with switching occurring as a consequence of large
shocks, phenomena which again may be well-characterized by statistical models involving

regime switching.


V. Synthesis: Regime Switching in a Dynamic Factor Model
       We have argued above that both comovement through factor structure and nonlinearity

through regime switching are important elements to be considered in an analysis of business
cycles. It is unfortunate, therefore, that the two have recently been considered largely in
isolation from each other. In what follows, we sketch a framework for the analysis of
business-cycle data that incorporates both factor structure and regime switching in a natural
way. We believe that this framework, although not formally utilized before, may be a good
approximation to the one implicitly adopted by many scholars of the cycle.


A. A Model
        We propose a dynamic factor model in which the factor switches regimes. First
consider a switching model for the factor we work with a slightly richer regime-switching
model than before. Again let            be the sample path of a latent first-order two-state


     Related approaches have been proposed by Durlauf (1994) and Evans and Honkapohja
(1993), among others.

                                                14
Markov process (taking on values 0 and 1) with the potentially time-varying transition
probability matrix illustrated in Figure 1, let                    be the sample path of the factor (which
depends on {s,)1), and collect the relevant history of the factor and state in the
vector z1 — (s,,          ..., S11. f,.1, ...,       Y. We postulate that the probabilistic dependence
of f, on z, is summarized by the conditional density


                                                                      -E
                            ti
                         P(flz; 0)
                                                 1
                                                        exp
                                                                        2a2

The latent factor, then, follows a pth-order Gaussian autoregression with potentially changing

mean.'° The two means around which the factor moves are of particular interest; call

them p1 (slow growth) and p2 (fast growth).
         Now let us build the rest of the model around the regime-switching factor. We write

                                                  13 + X f, +
                                             Nxl Nxl Nxl lxi Nxl

                                                        D(L) u —
                                                       NxN Nxl Nxl

where {f, s} follows the regime-switching process detailed above. To identify the model, we
assume that     (u11, ..., UN f,} are orthogonal at all leads and lags, which is achieved by

making D(L) diagonal and {e,, ••• N,'flt) orthogonal at all leads and lags. So as not to
interfere with the possible regime switching in the variance of i, however, we discard the
earlier normalization on r, in favor of a normalization on one of the factor loadings



        For notational purposes, we shall continue to refer to the innovation driving the factor

as ,.    That is,   i,               —
                                         E j(f;j—pç)

                                                              15
 (X1      I, say).11


B. A Look at the Data
          Let us first describe the data. We examine quarterly economic indicators, 1952.1 -
1993.1,   as described in detail in Table 1. The data include three composite indexes of
coincident indicators, corresponding to three alternative methodologies: Commerce
Department, modified Commerce Department, and Stock-Watson. The component indicators
underlying the Commerce Department and modified Commerce Department indexes are
identical (personal income less transfer payments, index of industrial production,

manufacturing and trade sales, and employees on non-agricultural payrolls); only their
processing differs slightly (see Green and Beckman, 1992). The Stock-Watson index
introduces a change in the list of underlying indicators (employees on nonagricultural payrolls
is replaced by hours of employees on nonagricultural payrolls) and of course processes the
underlying component indicators differently than either the Commerce Department or
modified Commerce Department indexes. We obtained qualitatively similar results from all
of the indexes; thus, we shall focus here on the Commerce Department's modified Composite
Coincident Index. Henceforth, we shall refer to it simply as the "Composite Coincident
Index."

          We graph the log of the Composite Coincident Index in Figure 2. It tracks the
business cycle well, with obvious and pronounced drops corresponding to the NBER-
designated recessions of 1958, 1960, 1970, 1974, 1980, 1982 and 1990. We similarly graph




       Numerous variations on the identifying restrictions suggested here may of course be
entertained; in any case, the identifying assumptions are not used in the preliminary empirical
work below, because we do not estimate the full model.

                                                16
the logs of the four components of the Composite Coincident Index in figure 3l2 Their
behavior closely follows that of the Composite Coincident Index.
       We shall not provide maximum-likelihood estimates (or any other estimates) of a
fully-specified dynamic-factor model with regime-switching factor. To do so would be overly
ambitious for a broad survey like this one. Instead, we shall sift the data in two simple
exercises to provide suggestive evidence as to whether the data accord with our basic thesis.
       First, we work directly with the Composite Coincident Index, which is essentially an
estimate of the common factor underlying aggregate economic activity.'3 We ask whether
its dynamics are well-approximated by a switching model. We fit a Markov-switching model
to one hundred times the change in the natural logarithm of the Composite Coincident Index,
with one autoregressive lag and a potentially switching mean. The results appear in the
second column of Table 2.14
       A notable feature of the results is the high level of statistical significance of the
regime switching, which requires some elaboration. The vast majority of the dozens of
papers fitting Markov switching models make no attempt to test the null hypothesis of one
state against the alternative of two. This is because the econometrics of resting for regime
switching are nonstandard. Hansen (1991, 1992) points out that the transition probabilities
are not identified under the one-state null, and moreover, that the score with respect to the
mean parameter of interest is identically zero if the probability of staying in state 1 is either 0
or 1. In either event, the information matrix is singular. Hansen proposes a bounds test that


    12 Each of the four component indicators is graphed on a different scale to enable their
presentation in one graph. For this reason, no scale appears on the vertical axis of the graph.

   ' Stock and Watson motivate and derive their index in precisely this way. The
Commerce indexes are attempts at the same methodology, albeit less formally.

      We give the startup values for iteration in the first column of Table 2.

       See Hamilton's (1993) survey, and the many papers cited there.
                                                 17
is valid in spite of these difficulties, but its computational difficulty has limited its

applicability.
        A closely related approach is operational, however. The key is to treat the transition
probabilities as nuisance parameters (ruling out from the start the problematic boundary
values 0 and I) and to exploit another of Hansen's (1991, 1992) result that the likelihood
ratio test statistic for the null hypothesis of one state is the supremum over all admissible
values of the nuisance parameters (the transition probabilities). Formally, let

                                LR 2[lnL(O, Ii 22 — 1nL()J

and


                     LR(p, pfl)       2[lnL(O(p'1, p2), p, pfl)        —
                                                                           lnL(O)J,

where

                        InL(O, p, pfl)       InP(y1, ...,   y. heta, p". p2),
with 0      (p1. p2. a2)'. Then

                                LR —         Sup        LR(p", p22).
                                       p ",pE(O,1)

The asymptotic distribution of LR has been tabulated by Garcia (1992) for the AR(l) case
and shown to be highly accurate in samples of our size.'6 The critical values depend on the
value of the autoregressive parameter, but in no case is the 1% critical value greater than
twelve. Our test statistic is much larger than twelve.


     16 This makes clear the intimate connection of this testing problem to Andrews' (1993)
test of structural change with breakpoint identified from the data. Therefore the results of
Giné and Zion (1990) and Stinchcombe and White (1993), used by Diebold and Chen (1993)
use to argue the validity of the bootstrap in Andrews' case, are relevant here as well. We
shall not pursue the bootstrap here, however.

                                                   18
       Several other aspects of the results are notable. First, the state-O mean is significantly
negative, and the state-i mean is significantly positive, and the magnitudes of the estimates
accord with our priors. Second, the within-state dynamics display substantial persistence.
Third, the estimated staying probabilities accord with the well-known fact that expansion
durations are longer than contraction durations on average. Finally, we graph in Figure 4 the
time series of smoothed (that is, conditional upon all observations in the sample) probabilities
that the Composite Coincident Index was in state 0; the smoothed state-0 probabilities are in
striking accord with the professional consensus as to the history of U.S. business cycles.'7
       in our second exercise, we fit switching models to the individual indicators underlying
the Composite Coincident Index and examine the switch times for commonality. In a similar
fashion to our analysis of the Composite Coincident Index, we fit models to one hundred
times the change in the natural logarithm of each of the underlying coincident indicators, with

one autoregressive lag and potentially switching means.
       The results appear in columns three through six of Table 2.18 The component-by-
component results are qualitatively similar to those for the Composite Coincident Index, as
would be expected in the presence of a regime-switching common factor. Further evidence in
support of factor structure emerges in Figure 5, in which we graph the time series of
smoothed state-0 probabilities for each of the four component coincident indicators. There is
commonality in switch times, which again is indicative of factor structure. Note, however,
that the evidence of switching in the individual series is generally weaker than the evidence
of switching in the index. This is consistent with the our switching-factor argument.
Individual series are swamped my measurement error, but moving to a multivanate
framework enables a more precise extraction of the factor.



      They follow the NBER chronology closely, for example.

      Again, we use the startup values shown in the first column of Table 2.

                                               19
VI. Concluding Remarks
       We have argued that a model with factor structure and regime switching is a useful

modern contribution to a long tradition in the analysis of business-cycle data. We proposed a

stylized version of such a model and suggested its compatibility with macroeconomic data
and macroeconomic theory.
       Let us summarize our stance on the importance of the two attributes of the business
cycle that we have focused on. It appears to us that comovement among business-cycle

indicators is undeniable. This comovement could perhaps be captured by a VAR

representation. The factor structure that we have advocated goes further, in that it implies
restrictions on the VAR representation, restrictions that could be at odds with the data.

Although more research is needed on that issue, the factor model is nothing more than a

simple way of empirically implementing the common idea of fewer sources of uncertainty
than variables.

       The alleged nonlinearity of the business cycle is open to more dispute. The linear

model has two key virtues: (1) it works very well much of the time, in economics as in all
the sciences, in   spite of the fact that there is no compelling a priori reason why it should, and

(2) there is only one linear model, in contrast to the many varieties of nonlinearity. Why

worry, then, about nonlinearity in general, and regimeswitching in particular?
       First, a long tradition in macroeconomics, culminating with the earlier-discussed

theories of strategic complementarities and spillovers in imperfectly competitive
environments, thick-market externalities in search, self-fulfilling prophesies, and so on, makes
predictions that seem to accord with the regime-switching idea.
        Second, regime-switching models seem to provide a good fit to aggregate output data.
Our rejections of the no-switching null hypothesis, in particular, are very strong.
        Third, the cost of ignoring regime switching, if in fact it occurs, may be large.
Business people, for example, want to have the best assessments of current and likely future

                                                  20
economic activity, and they are particularly concerned with turning points. Even tiny forecast
improvements that may arise from recognizing regime switching may lead to large differences
in profits.'9 Similarly, for policy makers, if regime switching corresponds to movements
between Pareto-rankable equilibria, there are important policy implications. Finally,
macroeconomists, more generally, are interested in a host of issues impinged upon by the
existence or non-existence of regime switching. Optimal decision rules for consumption and
investment (including inventory investment), for example, may switch with regime, as may
agents' ability to borrow.
         There are many directions for future research. For example, we are pursuing the
possibility of constructing and maximizing the exact likelihood function, which is
straightforward conceptually but has been computationally infeasible thus far. The
multimove Gibbs sampler, in conjunction with a partially non-Gaussian state space

representation and a simulated EM algorithm, as developed recently by Shephard (1994) and
de Jong and Shephard (1993), may provide the key.




    ' For an example of forecast improvements from a model with regime switching see Huh
(1993).
    20
       Moreover, countercycical policy may itself introduce nonlinearities if it is applied only
in extreme situations. See Zarnowitz and Moore (1982) and Becketti and Haltiwanger (1987).

                                              21
                                          References

 Andrews, D.W.K. (1993), 'Tests for parameter instability and structural change with unknown
       change point," Econometrica, forthcoming.

Azariadis, C. (1981), "Self-Fulfilling Prophesies," Journal of Econo,nic Theory, 25, 380-396.
Backus, D.K. and Kehoc, P.J. (1992), "International Evidence on the Historical Properties of
      Business Cycles," American Economic Review, 82, 864.888.
Becketti, S. and Haltiwanger, J. (1987), "Limited Countercycical Policies,' Journal of Public
      Economics, 34, 311-328.

Bollerslev, T., R.F. Engle, and J.M. Wooldridge (1988), "A Capital Asset Pricing Model with
       Time Varying Covariances," Journal of Political Economy, 95, 116-131.
Burns, A.F. and Mitchell, W.C. (1946), Meo.suring Business Cycles. New York: National
       Bureau of Economic Research.

Caballero, R.J. and Lyons, R.K. (1992), "External Effects in U.S. Procyclical Productivity,"
      Journal of Monetary Economics, 30, 107-128.
Cass, D. and Shell, K. (1983), 'Do Sunspots Matter?," Journal of Political Economy, 91, 193-
       227.

Cecchetti, S. G., Lam, P. and Mark, N. C. (1990), "Mean Reversion in Equilibrium Asset
      Prices," American Economic Review, 80, 398-418.
Cooley, T.F., ed. (1993), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, forthcoming.
Cooley, T.F. and Hansen, G.D. (1990), "The Inflation Tax in a Real Business Cycle Model,"
      American Economic Review, 79, 733-748.

Cooper, R. (1993), "Equilibrium Selection in Imperfectly Competitive Economies With
      Multiple Equilibria," manuscript, department of economics, Boston University.
Cooper, R. and John, A. (1988), 'Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Models,"
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103, 441-463.
de Jong, P. and N. Shephard (1993), "Efficient Sampling From the Smoothing Density in
      Time Series Models," Manuscript, Faculty of Commerce and Business Administration,
      University of British Columbia.

Dc Toldi, M., C. Gourieroux, and A. Monfort (1992), "On Seasonal Effects in Duration
      Models," Working Paper #9216, INSEE, Paris.
Diamond, P. (1982), "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,' Journal of
     Political Economy, 90, 881-894.

Diamond, P. and Fudenberg, D. (1989), "Rational Expectations Business Cycles in Search
     Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy, 97, 606-19.

                                             22
Diebold, F.X. and Chen, C. (1993), "Testing Structural Stability With Endogenous Break
       Point: A Size Comparison of Analytic and Bootstrap Procedures,' Manuscript,
       Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.
Diebold, F.X., Lee, J.-H,, and Weinbach, G.C. (1993), "Regime Switching with Time-Varying
       Transition Probabilities," in C. Hargreaves (ed.), Nonstationary Time Series Analysis
       and Cointegration (Advanced Texts in Econometrics, C.W.J. Granger and G. Mizon,
       eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.

Diebold, F.X. and Nerlove, M. (1989), "The Dynamics of Exchange Rate Volatility: A
      Multivariate Latent-Factor ARCH Model," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 4, 1-22.
Diebold, F.X. and Rudebusch, G.D. (1989), "Scoring the Leading Indicators," Journal of
       Business, 64, 369-392.
Diebold, F.X., and Rudebusch, G.D. (1990), "A Nonparametric Investigation of Duration
      Dependence in the American Business Cycle," Journal of Political Economy, 98,
       596-6 16.

Diebold, F.X. and Rudebusch, G,D. (1992), "Have Postwar Economic Fluctuations Been
      Stabilized?," American Economic Review, 82, 993-1005, 1992.
Diebold, F.X., G.D. Rudebusch, and D. Sichel (1993), "Further Evidence on Business Cycle
      Duration Dependence," in J.H. Stock and M.W. Watson (eds.), Business Cycles,
      Indicators and Forecasting, 255-284. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
       NB ER.

Durland, J.M. and McCurdy, T.H. (1992), "Modelling Duration Dependence in Cyclical Data
      Using a Restricted Semi-Markov Process," Manuscript, Department of Economics,
      Queen's University.
Durlauf, S.N. (1991), "Multiple Equilibria and Persistence in Aggregate fluctuations,"
      American Economic Review, 81 (May), 70-74.

Durlauf, S. N. (1994), "An Incomplete Markets Theory of Business Cycle fluctuations," in C.
      Hargreaves (ed.), Non.stationary Time Series Analysis and Cointegrarion (Advanced
      Texts in Econometrics, C.W.J. Granger and 0. Mizon, eds.). Oxford: Oxford
      University Press, forthcoming.
Engel, C. and J.D. Hamilton (1990), "Long Swings in the Dollar: Are They in the Data and
       do Markets Know It?' American Economic Review, 80, 4, 689-713.
Engle, R.F. and Granger, C.W.J. (1987), "Co-Integration and Error Correction:
       Representation, Estimation and Testing," Econometrica, 55, 25 1-276.
Engle, R.F, and Kozicki,S. (1993), "Testing for Common Features,' Journal of Business and
       Economic Statistics, forthcoming.
Evans, G. and Honkapohja, S. (1993), "Increasing Social Returns, Learning and Bifurcation
       Phenomena," in A. Kirman and M. Salmon (eds.), Learning and Rationality in
       Economics, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

                                             23
Filardo, A.J. (1993), "Business Cycle Phases and Their Transitions," Manuscript, Research
       Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Garcia, R. (1992), "Asymptotic Null Distribution of the Likelihood Ratio Test in Markov
       Switching Models," Manuscript, Department of Economics, University of Montreal.
Gene, E. and Zinn, J. (1990), "Bootstrapping General Empirical Measures,' Annals of
      Probability, 18, 851-869.
Geweke, J. (1977), "The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time Series Models," in DJ.
     Aigner and A.S. Goldberger (eds.), Latent Variables in Socioeconomic Models.
     Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Ghysels, E. (1993a), "On the Periodic Structure of the Business Cycle," Journal of Business
      and Economic Statistics, forthcoming.
Ghysels, E. (1993b), "A Time Series Model with Periodic Stochastic Regime Switching,"
      Discussion Paper #84, Institute for Empirical Macroeconomics.
Goldfeld, S.M. and R.E. Quandt (1973), "A Markov Model for Switching Regressions,"
       Journal of Econometrics, 1, 3-16.
Green, G.R. and B.A. Beckman (1992), "The Composite Index of Coincident Indicators and
       Alternative Coincident Indexes," Survey of Current Business, 72, 42-45.
Hall, R.E. (1989), "Temporal Agglomeration," Working Paper #3143, National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Hamilton, J.D. (1988), "Rational-Expectations Econometric Analysis of Changes in Regime:
      An Investigation of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Economic
      Dynamics and Control, 12, 385-423.
Hamilton, J.D. (1989), "A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time
      Series and the Business Cycle," Econometrica, 57, 357-384.
Hamilton, J.D. (1990), "Analysis of Time Series Subject to Changes in Regime," Journal of
      Econometrics, 45, 39-70.
Hamilton, J.D. (1993), "State-Space Models," in R. Engle and D. McFadden (eds.), Handbook
      of Econometrics, Volume 4. Amsterdam: North-Holland, forthcoming.
Hamilton, J.D. and Susmel, R. (1992), "Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity and
      Changes in Regime," Manuscript, Department of Economics, University of California,
      San Diego.
Hansen, B.E. (1991), "Inference When a Nuisance Parameter is not Identified Under the Null
      Hypothesis," Manuscript, Department of Economics, University of Rochester.
Hansen, B.E. (1992), "The Likelihood Ratio Test Under Non-Standard Conditions: Testing
      the Markov Trend Model of GNP," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 7, S6l-S82.


                                             24
Hansen, G.D. (1985), "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 16, 309-327.
Hansen, L.P. and Sargent, T.J. (1993), Recursive Linear Models of Dynamic Economies.
      Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Howit, P. and P. McAfee (1992), "Animal Spirits,' American Economic Review, 82, 493-507.
Huh, C.G. (1993), "Forecasting Industrial Production Using Models with Business Cycle
      Asymmetry," Manuscript, Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of San
      Francisco.

Kydland, F.E. and Prescott, E.C. (1982), "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,
      Econometrica, 50, 1345-1371.
Lucas, R.E. (1976), "Understanding Business Cycles," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds),
       Stabilization of the Domestic and International Economy (Carnegie-Rochester Series
       on Public Policy, 5, 7-29.) Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Neftci, S.N. (1984), "Are Economic Time Series Asymmetric Over the Business Cycle?,
       Journal of Political Economy, 92, 307-328.
Potter, S.M. (1992), "A Nonlinear Appräach to U.S. GNP,' Manuscript, Department of
        Economics, University of California, Los Angeles.
Quah, D. and Sargent, T.J. (1993), 'A Dynamic Index Model for Large Cross Sections,' in
      J.H. Stock and M.W. Watson (eds.), Business Cycles, Indicators and Forecasting, 285-
      310. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Quandt, R.E. (1958), "The Estimation of Parameters of Linear Regression System Obeying
      Two Separate Regimes," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55, 873-880.
Sargent, T.J. (1987), Macroeconomic Theory, 2nd edition. Boston: Academic Press.
Sargent, T.J. (1989), "Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator," Journal
      of Political Economy, 97, 251-287.
Sargent, T.J. and Sims, C. (1977), "Business Cycle Modeling Without Pretending to Have
      Too Much a Priori Theory," in C. Sims (ed.), New Methods of Business Cycle
      Research. Minneapolis: FederalReserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Shephard, N. (1994), "Partial Non-Gaussian State Space," Biometrika, forthcoming.
Shishkin, J. (1961), Signals of Recession and Recovery, NBER Occasional Paper #77. New
       York: NBER.
Sichel, D.E. (1992), "Inventories and the Three Phases of the Business Cycle," Manuscript,
        Economic Activity Section, Federal Reserve Board.
Sims, C.A. (1980), "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica, 48, 1-48.


                                             25
Singleton, K. (1980), "A Latent Time Series Model of the Cyclical Behavior of Interest
       Rates," International Economic Review, 21, 559-575.
Stinchcombe, M.B. and White, H. (1993), "Consistent Specification Testing With Unidentified
       Nuisance Parameters Using Duality and Banach Space Limit Theory," Discussion
       Paper 93-14, Department of Economics, University of California, San Diego.
Stock, J.H., and Watson, M.W. (1989), "New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Economic
       Indicators," in 0. Blanchard and S. Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
       1989. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Stock, J.H. and Watson, M.W. (1991), "A Probability Model of the Coincident Economic
       Indicators," in K. Lahiri and G.H. Moore (eds.), Leading Economic Indicators: New
       Approaches and Forecasting Records. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stock, J.H. and Watson, M.W. (1993), "A Procedure for Predicting Recessions with Leading
       Indicators: Econometric Issues and Recent Experience," in J.H. Stock and M.W.
       Watson (eds.), Business Cycles, Indicators and Forecasting, 255-284. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Tinbergen, J. (1939), Statistical Testing of Business Cycle Theories, Voiwne II: Business
       Cycles in the United States of America, 1919-1932. Geneva: League of Nations.

Tong, H. (1983), Threshold Models in Non-linear Time Series Analysis. New York:
      Springer-Verlag.
Watson, M.W. and Engle, R.F. (1983), "Alternative Algorithms for the Estimation of
      Dynamic Factor, Mimic and Varying Coefficient Models," Journal of Econometrics,
      15, 385-400.

Zarnowitz, V. and Moore, G.H. (1982), "Sequential Signals of Recession and Recovery,'
      Journal of Business, 55, 57-85.




                                              26
                                        Table I
                                   Data Description
          Composite Indexes of Coincident Indicators, Alternative Methodologies

CCI: Composite Index of Four Coincident Indicators, Commerce Department Methodology.
      1982 = 100

CCIM: Experimental Composite Index of Four Coincident Indicators, Modified Commerce
     Department Methodology, 1982 = 100
CCISW: Experimental Composite Index of Four Coincident Indicators, Stock-Watson
     Methodology, August 1982 = 100

            Components of the Composite Index of Four Coincident Indicators
                   Commerce Department Methodology (CCI) and
                Modified Commerce Department Methodology (CCIM)
PILTP: Personal Income Less Transfer Payments, Seasonally Adjusted at an Annual Rate,
      Trillions of 1987 Dollars
MW: Index of Industrial Production, Seasonally Adjusted, 1987 = 100
MTS: Manufacturing and Trade Sales, Seasonally Adjusted at an Annual Rate, Millions of
     1982 Dollars
ENAP: Employees on Non-Agricultural Payrolls, Seasonally Adjusted at an Annual Rate,
     Millions of People

             Components of the Composite Index of Four Coincident Indicators
                         Stock-Watson Methodology (CCISW)

Same as CCI, except Employees on Nonagricultural Payrolls (ENAP) is replaced by:
HENAP: Hours of Employees on Nonagricultural Payrolls, Seasonally Adjusted at an Annual
      Rate, Billions of Hours




                                            27
                                         Table 2
                         Estimated AR(1) Markov-Switching Models
              START          CCIM          PJLTP          ENAP           IP             MTS

              -0.50          -0.91          -0.75         -0.54          -4.12          -2.26
                             (0.17)         (0.45)        (0.13)         (0.70)         (0.96)
              0.50           0.97           0.88          0.61           1.16           1.01
                             (0.11)         (0.15)        (0.09)         (0.29)         (0.27)

 p1           0.40           0.66           0.35          0.97           0.52           0.38
                             (0.10)         (0.10)        (0.08)         (0.09)         (0.11)
              0.80           0.31           0.48          0.10           2.04           2.13
                             (0.04)         (0.08)        (0.01)         (0.24)         (0.38)

 p            0.75           0.70
                             (0.10)
                                            0.68
                                            (0.16)
                                                          0.63
                                                          (0.11)
                                                                         0.57
                                                                         (0.15)
                                                                                        0.45
                                                                                        (0.28)

 p11          0.90           0.92           0.96          0.95           0.96           0.95
                             (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.04)
LR                           37.41***       25.16***      3535***        116.33***      73.19***


Notes to table: The column labeled "START" contains the startup values used for iteration.
The other column labels denote the variable (defined in Table 1) to which the Markov-switching
model is fitted. Asymptotic standard errors appear in parentheses. The sample period is 1952.1
- 1993.!. LR is the likelihood-ratio statistic for the null hypothesis of a one-state model against
the alternative of a two-state model;     denotes significance at the I % level using the Garcia
(1992) critical values.




                                                28
                                                Figure 1
                                     Transition Probability Matrix

                                              Time t
                                 State 0                      State 1

                                  pt
                                      tO
                                                          p01
                                                                    (1-pr')
        State 0
                      P(s=O js,1 rO,x;       )        P(s= ls1 'Ox.0)

                             exp(x1 L)                1
                                                                exp(x1
Time t-1                  i+                                1   +
                                                                    exp(x')


       State 1
                          ptID = (I—pill)         I              p11


                      P(s1=01s1_1 =l,x1;1)


                         -       exp(X11)                 _____________
                             I   +
                                     exp(x11)             1 + exp(x'.1p1)




Note to figure: Xr_i = (1, XL t1, ••• x(k-1). i—i)/ and         = (p10, 1jj, •.., P1>)   i O 1.




                                                 29
                    Figure 2
         Log of Composite Coincident Index

5,00


4.75


4.50


4.25


4.00


3.75
       1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985    1990




                          30
                           Figure 3
                 Logs of Coincident Indicators

                                     Production       -

                                                  Income




l,jIt1I
'SI
      ._/
            _1

      I 111111111! iii I 'I I lillIlIlIllIll 1111111
      1955 1960     1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990




                               31
                 Figure 4
   Smoothed Probabilities of Being in State 0
        Composite Coincident Index




1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990




                        32
                        Figure 5
         Smoothed Probabilities of Being in State 0
                  Coincident Indicators




                                  •1
                                  A &
                                     i' ' •rn i• ••    j.j
                                          tmploymsnt




U   Li _ LI
    uN     1!I a75 1 1




                             33
