                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SAVING BABIES: THE EFFICACY AND
                         COST OF RECENT EXPANSIONS OF
                           MEDICAID EUGIBILITY FOR
                               PREGNANT WOMEN




                                       Janet Carrie
                                     Jonathan Oniber




                                 Working Paper No. 4644


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1994


We are grateful to Peter Diamond, Sarah Feldman, Guido lmbens, Alan Krueger, Jim Poterba,
Jon Skinner, Doug Staiger, Steve Stem, Duncan Thomas, Aaron Yelowitz, and to seminar
participants at Cornell, UVA, and the NBER for helpful discussions, to Sharieff Mansour and
Nancy Cole for excellent research assistance, and to Marilyn Eliwood, Michael Fischer, Jan
Hill, and Aaron Yelowitz for providing information on Medicaid policies. Janet Currie
gratefully acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation (SES-9122640) and
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views expressed are solely the authors' and should not
be atthbuted to either organization, or to the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
paper is part of NBER's research programs in Health Care and Health Economics.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4644
                                                                               February 1994


                          SAVING BABIES: THE EFFICACY AND
                           COST OF RECENT EXPANSIONS OF
                                MEDICAID ELIGIB1LY FOR
                                     PREGNANT WOMEN


                                          ABSTRACT


         A key question for health care reform in the U.S. is whether expanded health insurance
eligibility will lead to improvements in health outcomes. We address this question in the context
of dramatic expansions in the Medicaid eligibility for pregnant women that took place during the
1980s. We build a detailed simulation model of each state's Medicaid policy during the 1979-
1990 period, and use this model to estimate 1) the effect of changes in the rules on the eligibility
of pregnant women for Medicaid, and 2) the effect of Medicaid eligibility changes on birth
outcomes in aggregate Vital Statistics data.
         We have three main findings. Vust, the expansions did dramatically increase the
Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women, but did so at quite differential rates across the states.
Second. the expansions lowered the incidence of infant mortality and low birthweight we
estimate that the 20 percentage point increase in eligibility among 15-44 year old women was
associated with a decrease in infant mortality of 7%. Thin!, earlier, targeted changes in Medicaid
eligibility, such as through relaxations of the family structure requirements from the AFDC
program, had much larger effects on birth outcomes than broader expansions of eligibility to all
women with somewhat higher income levels. We suggest that the source of this difference was
the much lower takeup of Medicaid coverage by individuals who became eligible under the
broader expansions. We find that the targeted expansions, which raised Medicaid expenditures
by $1.7 million per infant life saved, wete in line with conventional estimates of the value of a
life. We conclude that insurance expansions can improve health, but that translating eligibility
to coverage may be the key link in maldng insurance policy effective.




Janet Currie                                                Jonathan Umber
Department of Economics                                     National Bureau of Economic Reseaivh
University of California, Los Angeles                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
405 Hilgard Avenue                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
Los Angeles, CA 90024                                       and NBER
and NBER
        Will the extension of health insurance to the uninsured improve their health? This is a key

question underlying the current debate over health care reform. Although insurance coverage may

be a necessasy precondition for improvements in the utilization of medical care, expansions in

eligibility for insurance may not translate into increased utilization of care, or even into increases in

insurance coverage.      It is also possible that increased utilization of care will not result in

improvements in health.

        This paper sheds light on these issues by investigating the relationship between the health of

newborns and recent expansions of the insurance coverage provided to pregnant women under the

Medicaid program. With 10 infant deaths per 1000 bIrths, the U.S. infant mortality rate exceeds that

of 20 other industrialized nations (U.S. House of Representatives, 1992). This high rare isthought

to reflect large numbers of unhealthy newborns. Hence, to the extent that adequate prenatal care

improves neonatal health, there is scope for a decrease in this rate through the promotion of prenatal

care (Institute of Medicine, 1985).

        In an effort to increase the use of prenatal care, the past decade has seen a rapid expansion

in the eligibility of pregnant women for Medicaid, a federal-state matching entitlement program that

provides health insurance for the poor. Eligibility for Medicaid had waditionally been tied to the

receipt of cash welfare payments under the Aid for Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)

program. This generally limited eligibility to very low income women in single parent households.

However, eligibility was extended to a number of additional groups of pregnant women during the

1980s. This experience provides a case study of whether expanding health insurance eligibility can

actually improve infant health, or whether poor Infant health in the U.S. simply reflects other factors

beyond the reach of government insurance policy.

        To study the effect of this government intervention, we exploit the fact that the eligibility

changes occurred at different rates across the states in order to ldenti their effects on birth
 outcomes, birth inputs, Medicaid coverage, and Medicaid expenditures. The backbone of our

 analysis is a detailed simulation model of each state's Medicaid eligibility rules for pregnant Women

over the 1979-90 period. We apply this model to data from the Current Population Surveys (CI'S)

 in order to quantii the effects of changes in the rules on eligibility and on actual Medicaid coverage.

We then use aggregate Visa! Statisda data to examine the effect of the expansions on two widely

used indicators of infant health: the Incidence of low birthweight, and infant mortality. Using these

estimates in conjunction with data on Medicaid expenditures from the Health Care Financing

Administration (HCFA), we then examine the costliness of Medicaid expansions. Finally, we use

information on the use of medical services by pregnant women from the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth (NLSY) to ask how the policy changes affected the use of birth inputs.

        We have three rnor findings. First, we estimate that the expansions of the 1980s increased

the fraction of women eligible for public insurance in the event of pregnancy from 14.2 to 34%, an

increase of 140%. This increase occurred at quite different rates across the states, causing dramatic

changes in relative state generosity. Second, increases in Medicaid eligibility were associated with

a lower incidence of low birthweight births and a decrease in infant mortaiity; the effect on infant

mortality was stronger than the effect on low birthweight.      Third, all MedIcaid eligibility changes

are not created equal. In particular, the changes can be divided into two categories. 'Targeted

expansions' were narrowly targeted changes which included changes In eligibility criteria for cash

welfare under the AFDC program, and expansions of Medicaid eligibility to demographic groups

who had been ineligible for AFDC for reasons of family structure. 'Broad expansions' were

extensions of Medicaid coverage to all women with incomes less than specified levels (e.g. 185%

of the federal poverty level). These two types of policy changes affected quite different populations,

suggesting the potential for heterogeneity in their effects.


                                                   2
        In fact, we find that the targeted expansions had siz.eable and significant effects on birth

outcomes, while the broad expansions had little effect. We suggest that the source of this difference

is in the differential effects that these policies had on Medicaid coverage; the broader expansions

featured much lower cakeup rates, even among otherwise uninsured mothers. The targeted

expansions were associated with a Medicaid expenditure increase of $1.7 million per infant life

saved. This figure is fairly low compared to recent estimates of the value of a life. However, it is

high relative to clinical estimates of the costs of saving a life through improved prenatal care. We

are unable to resolve whether this reflects a failure of prenatal care to deliver its promised savings,

or a failure of mothers to obtain such care once they were eligible for Medicaid.

        The rest of the paper is laid out as follows: In Part I, we provide background information

about our measures of newborn health. In Part II. we discuss the Medicaid expansions, and their

effects on eligibility. Part III investigates the effect of these expansions on birth outcomes. Part IV

discusses the differential effects of the targeted and broad expansions on Medicaid coverage. Part

V investigates the cost-effectiveness of the targeted expansions using information on Medicaid

expenditures and individual use of prenatal care. Part VI concludes with a discussion of the policy

implications of our findings.



                           I. Background on Birth Outcomes In the U.S.

        The infant mortality rate and the incidence of low birthweight are two of the most frequently

examined indicators of infant health. Figures is and lb plot the trends in these measures over the

 1980s. The incidence of low blrthwelght, defined as the number of live births per 1000 weighing

less than 2500 grains (approximately 5.5 pounds). declined from 68.7 in 1979 to 66.6 In 1984, but

then rose to 69.4 by 1990. In contrast, infant mortality declined throughout the decade, although


                                                   3
 it declined at a slower rate between 1984 and 1989 than It had earlier. These differing trends

underscore the fact that although they are related, low blrthweight and infant mortality measure
different aspects of birth outcomes.

        Low birthweight is a key indicator of the underlying health of thà fetus. Children who are

of low birthweight are at high risk of neonatal mortality and experience post.neonatal mortality rates

10 to 15 times those found among normal birthweigln Infants (Office of Technology Assessment,

1987a). Horbar ci a!. (1993) found that in a sample of very low birthweight children weighing

between 60! and 1300 grams at birth, each increase in birthweight of 100 grams was associated with

a decrease of approximately 10% in the probability of death, other things being equal.

        In contrast, infant mortality rates reflect not only the health of the fetus as measured by

blrthweigln, but also the effect of any interventions that occur during or shortly after birth. New

technologies have had dramatic effects on the survival rate of low birthweight infants. Buehler ci

a!. (1983) report that improvements in birthweight-speciflc mortality rates accounted for 91% of the

overall decline in neonatal mortality between 1960 and 1980.'

       These interventions, however, are often very expensive. Schwn (1989) reports that

although babies weighing less than 2500 grams account for only 9% of neonatal hospital caseloads,

they account for 57% of the cost of neonatal hospital care. The average cost of caring for a

surviving low birthweigln baby was $9,712 compared to $678 for an infant weighing more than
2,500 grams. These costs rise as birthweight falls; in 1984, the cost of saving an infant with

birthweight below 1000 grams was $118,000 (OTA, 1987b). Moreover, survivors are at high risk


   'More recently, Horbar a at (1993) report that as much as half of the decline in national infant
mortality reported between 1989 and 1990 may be axuibutable to the introduction of a new therapy
for artificially replacing an essentiaj substance in the Jung (pulmonary surfactant) that Is not
manufactured by the fetus in significant quamJdes until the 33rd week. This therapy was introduced
in October 1989.

                                                 4
of handicaps such as cerebral palsy of significant degree, major seizure disorders, blindness,

deafness, and learning disorders (McCormick ci a!., .1992; OTA, 1987b, Chaikind and Corman,

l990
       The high cost of caring for low birthwcight infants and their uncertain future should they

survive, have led policy makers to emphasize the prevention of low birthweight through the

promotion of appropriate prenatal care. There are a number of ways that early prenatal care can

improve fetal health. For example, approximately two-thirds of all low-birthweight births are pre-

term, and Creasy a a!. (1980) found that over 60% of these cases could have been identified using

inexpensive ($10 to $20) screenings in the first prenatal care visit. Several clinical studies cited in

the Institute of Medicine's influential 1985 report suggest that providing appropriate prenatal care

to women identified by these screenings (at a cost of between $400. and $500. per woman) could

reduce the incidence of low birthweight of more than 20%. These figures imply that the cost of

saving a life through improved prenatal care is at most $142,000 per life saved.2

        As has been noted by a number of economists, however, studies based on differences in

outcomes among women who do and do not receive prenatal care are likely to be biased by selection;

see Harris (1982) for an extensive discussion. Compared to clinical studies, studies based on survey

data that attempt to control for this selection typically find much smaller effects of prenatal care on




     'This figure Is calculated as follows. To screen 1000 pregnancies at a cost of $20 each would
cost $20,000. One would expect 10 of these pregnancies to result In low birthweight births in the
absence of any Intervention. Of these, 47 will be pre-term, and 28(60%) wIll be caught by this
screening. Prenatal care for these 28 women wilt then cost $14,000, and will reduce the incidence
of low birthwelght by 20%, or six babies. Using the Vital Statistics data below, we estimate that
a decrease of one low birthweight baby per 1000 births lowers the Infant mortality rate by 0.04
deaths per 1.000 births. Thus, the $34,000 spent to reduce low birthwelght births by six babies will
save 0.24 lives, for a cost of $141,661 per life saved. This figure is an understatement of the
benefits of prenatal care, since some of the babies who would not have died, but who are now of
higher birthweight, will be less impaired later in life.

                                                   S
birthweight (Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1982, 1983, 1988; Frank etaL, 1991; Connan etaL, 1987;

Grossman and Joyce, 1990). These differences in results        may also reflect the fact that clinical

studies locus on the gains that could be attained under ideal circumstances, whereas surveys reflect

the impact of prenatal care as it is practiced in the field. Forexample, if prenatal care designed to

reduce pre-term delivery were delivered not only to the women identified as high risk by screenings,

but to all pregnant women, the cost of saving an infant life would rise to over $1.3 million.3

       In summary, the available clinical evidence suggests that while both reductions in the

incidence of Jow binhweigjfl and high-tech neonatal care can reduce infant mortality rates, the former

is the more cost effective policy. Decreasing the incidence of low birthweigin through increases in

theuseolprenatalcarewuinfacttheprimarymotivadonfortheexpaJisionsintheMeJicaj
coverage of pregnant woman that took place during the 1980s.




                                   11.   The Medicaid Expansions

a) Background

       Historically, Medicaid eligibility for women and children has been closely tied to participation

in AFDC. This linkage with AFDC restricted access to the program in three ways. First, despite

the existence of the AFDC-Unemployed Parents program which provides benefits to households in

which the primary earner is unemployed, AFDC benefits are generally restricted to female-headed



   3Tha1 Is, there would be $500,000 spent in delivering prenatal care to all 1000 women in the
sample, and 9.4 pre-tenn low birthweight births would be prevented (since 100% of these cases
would now be caught). This implies a cost per life saved of 1.33 million.

    'The policies discussed in this section are those for which Federal matching fluids were
available. States can cover add itioS groups under Medicaid, but only If they pay the Ml cost of
coverage. We do not have information about these 'staze-only policies. In addition, we only
discuss policies that applied to pregnant women. There were also expansions of the Medicaid
coverage provided to children in this era; see Yelowitz (1993) for details.

                                                  6
households.5 Second, income cutoffs for cash welfare vary across states, and can be very low. For

example, in Texas. the cutoff for a family of 4 in 1979 was only 24% of the poverty line. Third,

the stigma of applying for cash welfare programs may have prevented eligible families from

receiving Medicaid benefits (Moffitt, t992).

       However, from the inception of the Medicaid program, stases have had the option of

extending Medicaid benefits to some groups of pregnant women who were not on AFDC. These

options expanded rapidly during 1980s, In a manner that is detailed in the Appendix. In brief, these

eligibility changes can be divided into two types. The first type expanded coverage to narrowly

defined groups who had not traditionally qualified for AFDC. This included first time pregnant

women and two parent families whose income was below AFDC cutoffs, and 'Medically Needy

individuals whose income was somewhat above these cutoffs but who had large medical expenses.

Also included in this category are changes in APDC income limits, which cany with them changes

in Medicaid eligibility. Because these eligibility changes are narrowly targeted, we label them

'targeted expansions'.

       Beginning in April 1987, the income requirements for Medicaid were also greatly liberalized.

States were first given the option and then required to provide Medicaid coverage to women with

income levels that greatly exceeded the APDC income limits in most states. By April 1990, a

uniform minimum threshold had been established - all states were required to cover pregnant women

with incomes up to 133% of the poverty line, and stases had the option of covering women with

incomes   up to 185% of the poverty line. In what follows, we will denote these relaxations of the

income requirements as 'broad expansions'.


          every state had an AFDC-UP program over our sampleperiod, and elIgibility requirements
are strict. As a result, as of 1990 only 5% of the AFDC caseload qualified under this program(U.S.
House of Representatives. 1992).

                                                 7
 b) ar on Eligibility
        In order to estimate the effects of these eligibility expansions, we have built a detailed

simulation of Medicaid policy in 49 states and the District of Columbia, over the 1979-1990 period.6

The construction of this simulation is described in detail in the Appendix. In this section, we use

 12 years of CI'S data to simulate the effect of the expansions on Medicaid eligibility. The CI'S is

the largest available annual data source with the requisite demographic and income information for

undertaking this simulation.

        Figure 2a shows the fraction of 15 to 44 year old women in the CI'S who would have been

eligible for Medicaid coverage in each year had they become pregnant. The percent eligible rose

from 14.2% to 34% of this population between 1979 and 1990. However, the eligibility Increases

of the early SOs show that these estimates are sensitive to business cycle effects. During the

recession years, many women became eligible because they fell into poverty, so eligibility increased

even as eligibility criteria became stricter in the early years of the Reagan administration.

        In Figure 2b. the sample is restricted to women with incomes below twice the poverty line.

The figure indIcates that when business cycle effects are controlled forth this way, eligibility fell

nl9S2asaresukofcuthackstotheAncprogramththey'8os. Bothtiguresshowa
moderate increase in eligibility associated with increases in the coverage of unborn children and two-

earner families mandated in the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 (DEFRA '84). But the figures clearly

show that the most dramatic changes in the number of eligibles were associated with the relaxation




    'We exclude Arizona from the analysis because it does not have a conventional Medicaid
program.

                                                  8
of income restrictions in the late SOs — eligibility increased almost 100% between 1987 and 1990,'

           The aggregate time trends shown in Figures 2a and 2b mask considerable variability.ln the

growth of eligibility across states. Figures 3a and 3b show two states with veq different pasterns:

On the one hand, Ohio saw steady rises in eligibility from 1979 to 1988, and a relatively small jump

between 1988 and 1990. On the other hand, Florida experienced little change in eligibility until

1988, but large jumps in the last two years of the sample.

        This variation is explored farther in Table 1. Here, we show the fraction of 15-44 year old

women eligible for Medicaid in each state, in each of the years 1979, 1986. and 1990. For 1990,

we examine, eligibility under the targeted and broad expansions separately, as well as overall

eligibility. The growth from 1979 to 1986 under the targeted expansions Is very dramatic in some

states, such as Colorado, Minnesota, and Virginia, while there Is little growth in Delaware and even

a reduction in states such as New Jersey. The growth from 1986 to 1990 is positive for all stases,

but there is also substantial variation; eligibility growth in Mississippi is over three times that of New

Jersey.'

        It is this substantial change within states and over time that provides the identifying variation

(or our study. If states are ranked by the fraction of.the 1544 year old female population that is

eligible, the correlation between rank in 1990 and rank in 1979 is only 0.33. Twenty•seven states

experienced a change in ranking of at least 10 positions: Illinois fell from the 8th most generous state




   'Within the set of targeted expansions, the policies that had the biggest effect were those that
covered first-time pregnant women. The fact that these changes, and not the coverage of two-parent
families, had the largest Impact reflects the fact that few married couples were poor enough to
quality for the Medicaid program under the APDC Income cutoffs.

    $ Clearly, not all of the targeted eligibIlity changes were expansions; half of the states
increased eligibility from 1986-1990, and half of them reduced it. On the other hand, almost evezy
state shows a sizeable increase in eligibility under the broad expansions.

                                                    9
 to the 38th most generoOs, while Mississippi rose from the 44th most generous state to the state that

 makes the highest fraction of Its population eligible.




 C) Targeted vs. Broad Ezpaasknts

        Throughout this paper, we will distinguish between the effects of the early and broad

expansions, Our rationale for doing so is presented In Table 2, which highlights the heterogeneity

of the populations affected by these two types of expansions. The first column shows the

characteristics of the entire eligible sample. The second column examines the set of Individuals

covered under the targeted expansions, while the third looks at Individuals who would not have been

eligible under the targeted expansions, but were eligible under the broad expansions. All columns

are based on data from the 1990 CPS.

        While individuais covered by either the targeted or broad expansions appear disadvantaged

relative to the hill sample, the broad group appears to be more similar to the sample average than

to the targeted group. Compared to the targeted group, the group covered by the broad expansions

is somewhat wealthier, more likely to be white and married, and slightly older on average.

Furthermore, the broad-expansion group is much more likely to be working, and less likely to be

receiving any form of public assistance than the group covered by the targeted expansions; in fact,

the group covered by the broad expansions is less likely to be receivingpublic assistance than the

average 15-44 yeas old female. While the two groups are equally likely to be uninsured, the

composition of insurance coverage differs substantially. Thirty-eight percent of the targeted-

expansion group is covered by Medicaid, while only 13% of the broad-expansion group is; and only

7% of the targeted group has employer-provided health insurance in their own name, while 25% of

the broad group does.



                                                  10
         This population heterogeneity suggests that the two types of expansions may have had very

different effects on birth outcomes. We will ailow for such a differential effect in the estimation

below.




                                  Ill. Eligibility and Birth Outcomes
a) Methodology

         We examine the effect of the eligibility expansions on birth outcomes using aggregate data

from Vual S:w&ics, which reports the incidence of low birthweight (less than 2500 grams) and

infant mortaiity in each state and year for the MI sample of births in that state/year.' We match

this data to two measures of eligibility among all 15-44 year old women in each state and year over

the 1979-1990 period. The first is the actuai percentage of women made eligible under expansions;

that is, we use the data presented In Table I for each of these years, matched to the birth outcomes

data for that state/year.

         A potential drawback to this strategy, however, is that the CI'S fraction-eligible measures

may incorporate business cycle effects, or other shocks specific to states and years. Figure 2a

showed, for example, that the recession of 1982 was associated with increases In Medicaid eligibility

despite the adoption of stricter eligibility criteria. Similarly, the fact that in 1990 Mississippi had

the highest fraction eligible of any state reflects both the generosity of the state program and the

relative poverty of Mississippians.

         To the extent that relevant state and year specific characteristics are not captured by state and




    'In an earlier draft, we explored the effect of the expansions on low birthweight in the NLSY
data discussed below. While the findings were supportive of our conclusions using aggregate data,
the confidence intervals were too large to draw any useful conclusions. Furthermore, we were
unable to investigate infant mortality with the NLSY due to small sample sizes.

                                                    11
 year dummies, (i.e. they are not constant within a state, or across states within a year), the

 coefficient on the fraction eligible will be biased by omitted variables. Suppose, for example, that

 a state recession Is associated both with Increases in eligibility and with a higher incidence of low

 birthwelghc. Then this source of variation in eligibility could induce a spurious positive correlation

 between Medicaid eligibility and low birthweight.'°

        In order to overcome this problem, we have created a measure of 'simulated eligibility'.

We first took a 1-in-b sample of our CPS cohort of women for each year. We then calculated the

fraction of thIs same sample of women who would have been eligible for Medicaid in each state in

that year. By using the same group of approximately 1000 women in each state simulation, we

obtain an estimate of the fraction eligible that depends only on state rules, and is independent of other

characteristics of states." Furthermore, we reduce the sampling variability hi our estimate that

derives from having relatively small cells for some states inthe CPS.

        These models treat state Medicaid policy as exogenous to birth outcomes; there is in fact

some evidence which suggests that this assumption is not ne. Gold a at (1993) report that stares

with high proportions of low blrthwelght births and high fractions of women who delayed obtaining

prenatal care were more likely to adopt optional expansions and to set up complementary advertising

and outreach programs. In the models below, we will include state faxed effects which will control




    '°A similar bias could arise if adverse tends in birth outcomes are correlated with the absolute
level of poverty, since expansions may have their largest impact where the population is poorest.

     "We find for example thai in Connecticut, actuai eligibility for this cohort of women fell sharply
In the mid-to-late-Sos. Simulated eligibility Is much flatter, which indicates that on average, young
women in Connecticut fared better than those hi other states. On the other hand, the increase in
simulated eligibility Is much flatter than the increase in actual eligibility in Mississippi, which
indicates that women in Mississippi were poorer than a nationally representative group of women.
Simulated eligibility will still vary with aggregate cyclical conditions, but this variation is absorbed
in the year dummies included In the regression.

                                                   12
for such spurious correlation between time invariant state characteristics and Medicaid policy.




I') Overall Results

        Table 3 presents the basic regression results. All regressions include a fill set of year

effects, to conuol for the strong trends in Infant mortality and low birthweight illustrated in Figures

la and lb. They also include a fill set of state effects, to control for time invariant differences

across states that may be correlated with both Medicaid policy and birth outcomes. Thus, the model

is identified by the deviation of Medicaid eligibility from its state-specific mean.

        The top panel of Table 3 models the overall effects of changes in Medicaid eligibility in the

1980s. When we use the actual fraction eligible, we find a negative effect on the incidence of low

birthweight, but it is not statistically significant. The estimate rises when we use the simulated

fraction eligible, and becomes significant at the 5% level. The coefficient suggests that a 20

percentage point increase in eligibility (roughly the magnitude of the expansions of the 1980a) would

lead to a reduction of 2% in the rate of low bizihweight. We conclude that there is some evidence

of an effect of these expansions on the incidence of low birthweight, but the effect Is relatively small.

        On the other hand, there is a sizeabk and significant effect of expanding Medicaid eligibility

on infant mortality, regardless of the measure of eligibility used. The estimate from the simulated

eligibility regression indicates that a 20 percentage point rise in eligibility under Medicaid led to a

7% decline in the infant mortality raze. In the final two columns, we regress the incidence of infant

mortality on the incidence of low birthweight and on our eligibility measure. The strong effect of

eligibility on mortality is apparent even after conditioning on the positive correlation between

eligibility changes and birthweight improvements.

        Thus, there is evidence that eligibility for health insurance improves health, as measured by


                                                    13
birth outcomes. In terms of their stated goal of reducing infant mortality, the expansions of the

 1980s were a success.' We will explore the cost of this success below. First, however, we

examine    the heterogeneous effects of the different types of eligibility policies pursued over this

period.



C) D(ffèrenzial Effects of Targeted   and Broad £zpansio,u

          The bottom panel of Table 3 regresses the incidence of low birthweight and the infant

mortality rate in each state and year on estimates of the percentage of women eligible for Medicaid

under the targeted and broad expansions constructed from the CI'S. The targeted regression is run

over the hill set olyears(1979-1990), while the broad regression is run over only 1987-1990, the

years that the broad expansions were In place. All the regressions include a full set of year and State

dummies.

          Table 3 shows that the targeted expansions have much stronger effects on both measures of

infant health than the broad expansions. This result is strongest when we use the simulated fraction

eligible, despite the fact that the estimates on percent eligible are equally precise across the two

regressions. Using the simulated fraction eligible, we find that a 20 percentage point increase in

eligibility was associated with a highly signIficant 4.5% decline in the incidence of low birthweight

under the targeted expansions, but with only an insignificant 0.4%         declIne   under the broad

expansions. Similarly. a20 percentage point eligibility rise was associated with a 7.3% decline in



    UOur finding of stronger effects on infant mortality than on the incidence of low birthweight is
consistent with that of Hanratty (1992), who examined the introduction of National Health Insurance
in Canada, and found significant effects on mortality but mixed effects on birthweight. It does
contrast with the finding of Fischer (1992). who also swdied the effects of the Medicaid expansions
from 1984 onwards. He found strong effects on the incidence of low birthweight for blacks, but no
effects on mortality for either race.

                                                 14
infant mortality under the targeted expansions, but with only a 0.6% decline under the broad

expansions. The findings for infant mortality persist when we condition on the incidence of low

birthweight."



           IV. Explaining the Heterogeneous Effects: The Role of Medicaid Talceup

        The birth outcome results presented above provide a mixed message. On the one hand, there

is strong evidence that insurance eligibility can improve birth outcomes. On the other hand, the

nature of the policy appears to be key. Why is it that the targeted expansions were so much more

successful than the broad expansions in improving birth outcomes? We suggest that the answer may

lie in the differential takeup of these different types of eligibility changes by pregnant women.

        As a number of researchers have emphasized, eligibility for social Insurance and welfare

programs does not automatically translate into coverage. For example, Blank and Ruggles find that

only about two-thirds of women eligible for AFDC take up their benefits, and Blank and Card (1991)

rind a similar takeup rate for unemployment insurance. Eligibility can not be expected to have an

effect on fetal health unless individuals takeup their newly available Medicaid benefits.

        The March CPS asks individuals if they were covered by Medicaid at any point in the




    "We have also attempted finer divisions of the data. For example, we have tried separating the
fraction eligible under the targeted expansions into those eligible under AFDC or the APDC-
Unemployed Parent program, and those eligible under any other targeted expansion. We find that
only the other targeted expansions' had a statistically significant effect on the Incidence of low
birthweight. However the standard errors are large, and in the estimates using the simulated
fractions eligible, we cannot reject the hypothesis that both types of targeted expansions had similar
effects. Foi infant mortality we find using simulated eligibility that both types of targeted expansions
had quite similar effects, although once again the standard errors are large.

                                                   15
previous year)4 We can therefore estimate the takeuf elasticity of these expansions; that is, for

every 100 women made eligible for coverage of pregnancy, how many additional women report

coverage? Of women 15w 44 years old, 6.5% had a child in any given year during our sample

period, so that about 11.5% of women In the relevant age range were pregnant at some point during

the year)3 By this calculation, a takeup raze of 0.115 in the entire population would represent full

takeup by pregnant women. This figure is only a lower bound, however, since some of the Medicaid

eligibility changes (those associated with the adoption of the AFDC-UP program, for example)

covered not only pregnancy but also other conditions. Hence, the number of women who became

pregnant is an undercount of those who became eligible for coverage under all eligibility changes.

         We examine the relationship between Medicaid coverage and state/year average eligibility

using linear probability models that conwol (or other observable characteristics, including race,

marital status, employment status, and income. Our data set consists of 455,774 observations over

a 12 year period. All regressions include a full set of state and year dummies."

         lnthefIrstcolurnnofTabk4,weInudeanrreqtc, 1 ifawomanwaseligible
under either the targeted or the broad expansion. We ibid that there is an increase in the probability



    14
       Unfortunately, prior to March 1988, health insurance coverage in the CI'S was assigned
according to whether one received coverage under the policy held by the head of the household.
Thus, those dependents deriving coverage from outside the household were counted as uninsured.
After March 1988. each family member was asked about health Insurance coverage from any source.
This questionnaire change had its largest effect on children below the age of 15. so that it should not
significantly bias our results; furthennore, the inclusion of year dummies will capture overall changes
in the nature of responses.

    "MI women who give birth In a yeas, must have been pregnant at some time during that year.
In addition, between 2/3 and 3/4 of women whose pregnancies begin in one year will give birth in
the next year. Hence, the percent pregnant in any year is at least (1 + .67)*6.5, or 11.5%.

    "We use a linear probability model In order to ftcilitate the use of Insnmental variables below,
and for computational ease with our large sample size.

                                                 16
of coverage of 2.4% for every 10% rise in eligibility. This estimate appears relatively high

compared to the calculations given above. The other covariates have the expected effects; Medicaid

coverage is less likely if individuals are white, married, working, or high income, and the probability

of coverage increases with the number of children.

       In the second and third columns, we disaggregate the eligibility measure into eligibility for

a targeted expansion (over the 1979-1990 period) and eligibility for a broad expansion (over the

1987-1990 period). We find that the targeted expansions had much larger effects on coverage than

the broad expansions; a 10% rise in the eligibility under the targeted expansions increased coverage

by 2.7%, while a 10% rise in eligibility under the broad expansions is actually estimated to decrease

coverage.

       Why did the targeted expansions have a bigger effect on coverage? One possibility is that

the results are subject to omitted variables bias: there may be omitted characteristics that are

correlated both with coverage and with eligibility. Suppose for example, that women whose mother's

were on AFDC are both more likely to be eligible (because they are poor), and more likely to be

covered (because they are familiar with the system). The bias associated with omitting the family's

history of welfare dependency is likely to be more important In the case of the targeted expansions,

because they applied to   a lower income portion of the population.

       In order to address this issue, we present insuumemal variables estimates of the probability

of Medicaid coverage in columns (4) through (7) of Table 4. The instrument is the fraction eligible

in each state and year; in column (4) and (5) we use the actuaJ value, and in columns (6) and (7)

we use the simulated measure.'7 In both cases, the targeted expansions have much larger effects



    '7Using actual eligibility in each state and year is similar to instrumenting using the full set of
stateyear dummies (it is equally consistent but less efficient), but Is much less computaLionally
burdensome. Actual eligibility remains potentially problematic in this context, since state/year

                                                  17
than the broad expansions; In neither case is the coefficient for the broad expansions significant.

When we use our preferred simulated instruments, we estimate that coverage increased by roughly

 1% for every 10% rise in targeted eligibility. This elasticity appears more reasonable in light of the

calculations discussed above, and suggests that takeup was fairly high among the population eligible

for the targeted expansions, but low among the populatiOfl eligible for the broad expansions."

        We can think of two other possible explanations for lower takeup rates under the broad

expansions. First, the population eligible for the broad expansions was less needy; as Table 2

shows, this group had higher Incomes and better access to employer provided health Insurance.

Second, given a level of need, the broader expansions may have been less effective. It may be

difficult to bring women who have never received any sort of sociai assistance into the Medicaid

program, either because they do not know about It or because of stigma effects. kymer and Adler

(1987) report that many low-income families and their physicians are unaware that they can quaIi'

for Medicaid even if they do not receive AFDC benefits. It may have been easier for program

administrators to find and notify women eligible for the targeted expansions because these women

had more frequent interactions with the government assistance system, as Illustrated In Table 2.

These two explanations clearly have differing welfare Implications; the first suggests that the

difference in takeup rates was fairly benign since the women who did not take up coverage were less

likely to need it; the second suggests that women who needed the program were not aware of it.




recessions will increase both Medicaid eligibility and coverage.

    "AS discussed above, the targeted expansions are at least partiaily comprised of AFDC eligibility
changes, which should have more lasting effects on coverage than pregnancy only expansions, while
the broad expansions consist of pregnancy coverage only. It seems unlikely that this factor can
explain a difference in coefficients of the magniiude of those In Table 4; the mority of the total
growth In eligibility under the targeted expansions was accounted for by changes In pregnancy-only
coverage.

                                                  18
        In an effort to differentiate between these two hypotheses, we reran the instrumental variables

models using the subsample of women without sources of health insurance coverage other than

Medicaid. We present the results using the simulated instrument; the relative findings using the

acxuai instrument are   similar. The results are showo in the fmal two columns of Table 4. The

estimates are similar to those for the full sample, and show that even among otherwise uninsured

women, the targeted expansions had significant effects on coverage while the broad expansions did

not. This suggests,therefore, that
                                the broad expansions of eligibility Called to affect birth outcomes

because they   were not effectively translated Into increases in coverage, even among needy women.



                      V. Exploring the Cost-Effectiveness of the Expansions

a) Medicaid Payments per Infant Saved

        While the Medicaid eipansions of the 1980s appear to have been successfiul in improving

birth outcomes, this improvement came at a cost to the Medicaid program. In this section, we use

data on Medicaid expenditures to assess the cost effectiveness of the expansions.

        States report their payments made under the Medicaid program to the Health Care Financing

Administration each year.19 These reports break down expenditures according to the class of

provider, and the category of recipient. We examine total expenditures on physicians, clinics, and

inpatient and outpatient hospital costs for all non-disabled children and non-disabled/non-elderly

adults. Unfortunately, these data are not available by type of service (le. childbirth) or by detailed

population type (ie. pregnant women and Infants). We normalize the expenditures using the state's

15-44 year old female population In that year.         All figures are in 1986 doUars; we deflate



    "We are grateful to Killard Marnache of Health Services Research, Inc. for providing us with
these data.

                                                  19
    expenditures on hospital inpatient and outpatient expenditures by the Consumer Price Index for

    hospital services, and expenditures for physician and clinic services    by the ci rot    physician's

    services. Once again, we regress this measure of expenditures on the actual and simulated measures

    of Medicaid eligibility, and disaggregate by the type of expansion (targeted versus broad).

           The results are reported in Table 5. As would be expected, the expansions significantly

    increased Medicaid expenditures; regressions using the simulated eligibility measure indicate that an

additional eligible wOman was associated with an increase lit expenditures of $232 per year.

Expenditures on the targeted expansions were much larger, amounting to $449 per eligible woman.

In contrast, although the coefficient on eligibility under the broad expansions is sizeable, it is not

statistically significant.
•
           These data can be used to provide a rough estimate of the cost-effectiveness of the targeted

Medicaid expansions. Using the simulated measure, we estimate that Medicaid spending increased

by $449 per woman who became eligible under the targeted expansions. We also ftnd that a one

percentage point rise in (simulated) targeted eligibility decreases the incidence of infant mortality by

0.04 deaths per 1000 births. Taken together, these findings imply that the cost of saving a life

through the targeted expansions was $1.73 million.

           What does this imply for the efficiency of Medicaid policy? This figure appears high



     2This figure is calculated as follows. To generate 1000 births, given the average fertility rate
of 0.065 in our sample, would require 15,385 mothers. A one percentage point increase in eligibility
in this sample would therefore cost $69,079 ($449 tbr each of 153.85 women). This would reduce
the number of Infant deaths by 0.04. So, to reduce the number of infant deaths by one would cost
SI .73 million. Note that to the extent that the newly eligible women (under either type of expansion)
were getting treated for free when they were uninsured, the net cost to society of the Medicaid
expansions is lower than the costs to the Medicaid program. Saywell et al. (1989) show that the
average cost of uncompensated care for pregnancy and childbirth in 1986 In Indiana was $2668.
Subtracting this from the cost per birth of the targeted expansions lowers the cost to society per life
saved to $1.66 million.

                                                    20
compared to the cost of saving a low birthweight Infant through technological intervention; as

discussed above, the office of Technological Assessment found that the avenge cost of saving an

infant with birthweight less than 1000 grams was $135,000.21 However, this figure uiiderstates the

effective cost of high-tech interventions, for two reasons. First, over 30% of these infants died, and

we only have information on expenditures per infant that lived. In comparing the OTA figure to

ours, the coat per lived saved should be inflated to account for babies that used resources, but were

not saved. Second, we have no information on the quality of life of infants who are kept alive. As

described in Part I, there is a distinct possibility that surviving low birthweight infants will suffer

serious handicaps. Hence, to the extent that the Medicaid expansions were effective in reducing

infant mortality through improvements in fetal health, their costs (per life of a given level of health)

will be overstated relative to high-tech Interventions.

        Moreover, $1.73 million is as the low end of the recent range of estimates for the value of

a life. Manning et al. (1989) use data from studies of willingness to pay for a small change in the

probability of survival to estimate that the value of a life Is $1.66 million. Cropper and Oases (1992)

report that studies based on compensating differentials for risk of death on the Job yield a value of

life of between $1.6 and $9.0 million; Viscusi (1992) presents a broader range, with a preferred

estimate of $12.1 million. Judged by this yardstick, the targeted Medicaid expansions appear to

bavespent,atmost,asmuchtokeepanlnfantauveasthatpersOnwouldhavebeenwiliingtopay



     2tThis and all subsequent figures are expressed in 1986 dollars. Where deflation is necessary,
it is done using the Medical care component of the CPI, for comparison to our expenditure figures.
The correct deflator for this exercise is not obvious, but using different deflators would not
substantially alter our conclusions.

     Furthermore, compensating wage differentials understate the amount than an average person
would pay to reduce the risk of death, because the least risk-averse persons tend to take the riskiest


                                                   21
to be kept alive.

        Alternatively, we can compare the cost of saving a life through the Medicaid expansions to

the cost of keeping individuals alive through other public policy interventions. Graham and Vaupel

(1920) report the cost of saving a life-year through 57 different public policy interventions, ranging

from mandatory seat belts or air bags to reduced emissions. Using a life expectancy of 74.8 years

(the U.S. average for 1986), 38 of their 57 interventIons cost less than $1.7 million per life saved.

However, the other 19 interventions cost much more, and in some cases, the costs were as high as

$30 million? Cropper et al. (1992) estimate that regulations on the use of pesticides cost $60,000

per consumer life saved, but that regulations on the production of pesticides cog $35 million per

producer life saved. Thus, while the targeted Medicaid expansions were not the most cost effective

government life-saving intervention, they were much more efficient than some of the policies

currently being pursued.



1,) Evidence from Jndlviduoi-Lewl Data

        The results above suggest that the targeted Medicaid expansions may have been a cost

effective means of saving infant lives. Nevertheless, the cost of doing so appears to be quite high

relative to the promised cost savings from prenatal care discussed in Part 1. There are two possible

explanations forthis high cost estimate. The first is that women failed to make use of cost-effective



    Relatlve to these other studies, our findings are subject to at least two (offsetting) biases. First,
our estimates are likely to be too low, since we are valuing saving a life at birth, whereas the other
studies are valuing saving the lives of workers or survey respondents. Second, our estimates may
be too high, since the infants kept alIve by medical interventions may be of worse health later in life,
as described above.

    Funhermore, their calculation do not consider the cost of the intervention to the consumer;
mandatory air bags have no cost to the government, but do increase the societal cost of saving a life.

                                                  22
prenatal care when they were covered by Medicaid; that is, the infant lives that were saved may have

come primarily through expensive hospital interventionsY The second is that, in practice, prenatal

care is not as cost effective as clinical studies suggest, perhaps because it is not appropriately

targeted. These alternative views obviously have very different implication for future policy design.

        Evidence from case studies of Medicaid expansions suggest that the former is the explanation

for the high cost of saving an infant life. For example, Piper a at (1990) found that a 1985

expansion of eligibility in Tennessee to married women increased Medicaid enrollments, but that

most of the increase took place within the thirty days prior to delivery. Enrollment at such a late

date would not allow for the effective use of prenatal care.

        In this section, we attempt to distinguish between these views by examining the effect of the

expansions on the use of prenatal care. We do so using Individual-level data from the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) to examine the effects of eligibility under the targeted

expansions on two Indices of prenatal care use. The first is an indicator equal to one if the woman

saw a doctor during the first trimester of pregnancy. Early initiation of prenatal care is important




    Women may have failed to take advantage of prenatal care because they were unaware of
Medicaid eligibility, or because available providers were unwilling to accept Medicaid coverage.
Neither of these problems would deter the use of expensive hospital care because hospitals that
participate in Medicare are prohibited from refusing to a or from uansfefflng, any women
already in labor (0Th, 198Th). Furthennore, childbirth is the largest single component of hospital
uncompensated care, accounting for 17.4% of these expenditures (Saywell a at, 1989). Ma result,
hospitals make every effort to enroll eligible uninsured women in Medicaid for the costs of childbirth
(Gold a aL, 1993). Once enrolled, women may receive much more expensive services than their
uninsured counterparts; Hadley a at (1991) and Wenneker nat (1990) find that uninsured patients
receive less intensive hospital weaunent than insured patients along a number of margins.

    ThThe expenditure data do not offer much Insight Into this question. Both physician md hospital
expenditures rose significantly under the targeted expansions. It Is difficult to draw further
inferences from the relative changes In these categories, sInce the distinction between them is not
clear; for instance, the physician category will include the costs of deliveries done by outside
doctors, but perhaps not the costs of deliveries done by resident interns.

                                                 23
both for conducting initial screenings, and for establishing a base-line (or the monitoring of fetal

development (07k 198Th). The second measure is an indicator equal to one if the woman had a

sonogram during the first six months of the pregnancy. While there is no evidence that the use of

ultrasound itself has any effect on the fetus, we view the receipt of an ultrasound before the point

of delivery as a sign that a physician is monitoring the pregnancy.

       The NLSY began in 1979 with a sample of 6,283 women between the ages of 14 and 21.

Since 1983. women have been asked bi-annual questions about the prenatal care that preceded each

birth, including when they initiated prenatal care and question about sonogram use. Retrospective

information has also been collected for births before 1983. The NLSY also contains enough

information about income, family structure, and state of residence to allow us to determine whether

the woman was eligible (or Medicaid coverage in the first trimester of the pregnancy. We do so

using the same simulation program we applied to the CPS data.

       After the exclusion of missing values, we are left with 4759 observations on births that

occurred between 1979 and 1990? It is important to note that the NLSY is not a representative

sample of U.S. mothers in the relevant age range because African-Americans, Hispanics, and the

poor were over-sampled. Almost half of the infants are African-American or Hispanic, and 73%

of the African-American infants, 78% of the Hispanic infants, and 32% of the other infants were

born to mothers from the supplemental 'poverty" sample.

       The data indicate that throughout most of our sample period, women eligible for Medicaid

coverage of their pregnancies are poorer, less educated, and more likely   to   be African-American or

Hispanic relative to the sample as a whole, and even relative to the subsample of women with


      One shortcoming of these data is that the last available survey that asked aboutprenatal care
and birth outcomes took place in the spring of 1990. Information about births in the rest of 1990
must await the release of the 1992 survey.                 -


                                                24
incomes below the poverty line.3' They also have much lower scores on the Armed Forces

Qualification   Test (AFQT), a standardized test of ability? Hence, It is not surprising that

Medicaid-eligible women are 32% more likely to delay obtaining prenatal care: 27% of Medicaid-

eligible women delay care compared to 20% in the entire sample. Similarly, 43% of Medicaid-

eligible received a sonogram in the first 6 months compared to 48% of non-eligible women.

       These comparisons highlight the possibility that estimates of the effects of individual Medicaid

eligibility on the usage of prenatal care may be biased towards zero by omitted variables correlated

with both eligibility and propensity to seek care. In order to address this problem, we instrument

individual eligibility using first both the actual and the simulated fraction eligible measures from the

Cl'S, calculated for this cohort of young women.'° We examine only the impact of the targeted
àpansions because the post-1987 sample size Is quite small Also, since only the targeted
expansions affected Medicaid coverage, it seems reasonable to assume that the broad expansions had


       In order to attenuate the effects of random measurement error and minimize the amount of
missing data, we use the average income in the two years preceding the birth as our measure of
income. If the woman was living with her parents then we use the parents' income less the need
standard for a family of that size (following the procedure use by the AFDC program to impute
family resources to minors living at home). Otherwise, we use the sum of the woman's own income,
the spouse or partner's income, and •other' income. The use of this measure also avoids the
imputation of eligibility for prenatal care on the basis of temporary income losses suffered after the
birth.
   3Since the AFQT was administered to all the women at the same point in time, scores were
normalized using the mother's age. Some readers may prefer to regard the AFQT as a summary
measure of background and education, rather than as a measure of native ability.

    '°The problem that Individual eligibility may be correlated with unobserved determinants of
outcomes has been noted in the wider social insurance literature. For example, unemployment
insurance benefits are a function of lagged wages, and this may confound interpretation of the effect
of those benefits on unemployment durations (Meyer, 1989). In that context, it may be easiest to
control for the wage, or nonlinear functions of the wage, directly. Since Medicaid eligibility is a
complicated function of a large number of individual characteristics, we prefer the instrumental
variables strategy.


                                                   25
lithe impact on the use of prenatal care.

        We estimate logits models which include exogenous characteristics of the mother and child,

in addition to a full set of year dummies.3' We also estimate models with and without a set of state

dummies. As discussed above, the inclusion of state fixed effects controls for Lime invariant

characteristics of states that may be correlated with state Medicaid policy. However, models with

state fixed effects demand a lot of our data — although there are over 600 observations for the largest

state (California), 9 states represented in our sample have fewer than 15 observations. We do not

include fixed effects for these 9 states, so together they form the omitted state'.

        The instrumental variables results are presented in Table 6. In the models without state

effras, we find some evidence that the targeted expansions led to increased use of early prenatal

care. Using the simulated instrument, our estimates imply that eligibility for Medicaid under the

targeted expansions decreased the probability that the initiation of prenatal care was delayed beyond

the first trimester by 13%. There is no statistically significant effect on the use of sonograms in the

first six months; the coefficient is wrong-signed. Once state effects are included in the model, none

of the results are significant, although the sonograzn result for the simulated instrument becomes

right-signed (eligibility raises the probability of a sonogram in the. first six months). However, the

state effects themselves are not jointly statistically significant.     Thus, the evidence on whether

the targeted expansions were successful in increasing early contacts with physicians is mixed. These

data are unable to definitively resolve whether prenatal care did or did not rise under the targeted

expansions.

                                   VI. Discussion and Conclusions


    "We use the predicted value of eligibility from the first stage linear probability model (individual
eligibility regressed on state/year eligibility) directly in the second stage logit. This procedure is
consistent but not efficient, and our standard errors are somewhat under-stated as a result.

                                                    26
       A key question for health reform is whether covering the uninsured will actually lead to

improvements in health. While a number of studies have shown that the uninsured are in worse

health, they are generally unable to surmount the problem that the uninsured may be fundamentally

less healthy, independent of insurance status.32 Our approach to this problem is to examine

exogenous changes in the Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women in the 1980s. Judged by the most

frequently used indicator of birth outcomes, the Medicaid expansions were a great success; infant

mortality was reduced by 7% for every 20 percentage point rise in the fraction of IS to 44 year old

women eligible for Medicaid. Moreover, the cost of the policy seems to have been reasonable,

relative to the value of a life or the cost of other government policies designed to save lives.

        However, a closer look at the effects of the Medicaid expansions suggests that their success

was limited, along two dimensions. First, the later broad expansions of Medicaid eligibility to all

low income women appear to have had little effect, primarily because they were not effectively

translated into increased Medicaid coverage, even among needy (otherwise uninsured) women.

Second, the cost of saving a life under the targeted expansions was much higher than that suggested

by clinical studies of prenatal care. We were unable to resolve whether this was due to the failure

of women to obtain such care, or whether prenatal care is simply not as cost effective as clinical

studies suggest. A fruitful direction for future research would be to investigate more carefully,

perhaps through additional case studies of targeted expansions, the utilization of different types of

prenatal and hospital care in response to the increased availability of public insurance.

        Thus, our research offers two insights for the design of Insurance policy. First, increased

insurance eligibility can improve health outcomes, and the cost of doing so appears to be lower than



    One study which does surmount this problem is that of Lurie a a!. (1984), which finds that
individuals (exogenously) terminated from Medicaid due to California budget cutbacks saw reductions
in their self.reported health.

                                                  27
Income below                    .760           .858           -.149            -.155        .612            .786       -.365            -.440
Poverty                        (.128)         (.126)          (.108)           (.104)      (.181)          (.201)      (.157)           (.169)

Member Poverty                 -.036          -.033           -.108            -.109           .047        -.045       -.111            -.107
Sample                         (.083)         (.083)          (.071)           (.071)      (.088)          (.088)      (.076)           (.076)

Urban Resident                 -.125          -.115           .134              .138       -.113           -.111           .109          .116
at   Age   14                  (.089)         (.089)          (.078)           (.078)      (.093)          (.093)      (.081)           (.081)


                              -1.007         -1.037         -1.751            -1.749      -1.055          -1.093      -2.231           -2.255
Intercept
                               (.293)         (.293)          (.269)           (.266)       (.558)         (.556)       (.481)          (.478)

Year Dummies                yes             yes            yes            yes            yes             yes         yes              yes
State Dummies                no              no             no             no            yes             yes         yes              yes

-2 Log                     4581.910       4578.522       5467.517        5468.059       4746.705       4746.705     6585.165        6585.165
Likelihood

Number 0's                  946            946            1647           1647            946            946         2259            2259
Number 1s                  3813           3813           2018            2018           3813           3813         2500            2500



Notes: Standard errors    in parentheses. 'DeIay indicates that the woman waited until beyond the third month to intiate prenatal care. Sonograrn'
indicates that the womanbad a sonogramduring the first 6 months of pregnancy. Individual eligibility is instrumentedby the fraction eligible in the
state and   year from the CPS.




                                                                         36
                        Table I: Eligibility by State ov Time

ST    1979       1986                                        1990

      Any Exp.   Any Exp.          Any Exp.           Targeted      Broad
AL    .146       .214              .342               .148          .194

AiC   .058       .181              .243               .216          .026

AR    .123       .151              .307               .137          .169
CA    .189       .252              .423               .271          .151

CO    .095       .192              .236                107          .128

CT    .154       .165              .253               .161          .091

DE    .114       .114               .243              .092          .150

DC    .286       .215              .454               .308          .145

Fl.   .094       .133               .361              .170          .190

GA    .090       .178               .280              .200          .079

HI    .202       .179               .389              .222          .167

10    .095       .168               .300              .159          .141

IL    .171       .186               .268              .181          .086

IN    .081       .137               .300              .140          .159

LA    .103       .165               .380              .136          .243

KS    .117       .157               .293              .131          .161

KY    .119       .154               .396              .210          .186

LA    .164       .225               .391              .226          .164

ME    .141       .200               .420              .222          .198

MD    .137       .167               .350              .156          .194

MA    .156       .165               .352              .209          .142

Ml    .173       .225               .390              .222          .161

MN    .099       .209               .375              .184          .191

MS    .111       .233               .567              .233          .334

MO    .092       .155               .273              .109          .164

MT    .165       .137               .334              .117          .157

NE    .133       .153               .233              .114          .118

NV    .095       .088               .254              .123          .13!

NH    .096       .072               .184              .128          .055




                                           29
ST       1979               1986                                            1990

         %ny Eq.            Any Exp.           Any Exp.              Targeted               Broad

 Ni      .157               .149               .232                  .157                   .074

 NM      .110               .147               .347                  .137                   .210

 NY      .238               .242               .411                  .257                   .153

 NC      .106               .150               .364                  .202                   .162

 ND      .110               .134               .2'79                 .146                   .133

 OH      .131               .187               .278                  .172                   .105

 OK      .139               .162               .314                  .198                   .116

 OR      .161               .155               .264                  .145                   .119

 PA      .138               .164               .293                  .182                   .111

 RI      .197               .152               .352                  .187                   .164

 SC      .150               .228               .401                  .160                   .241

 SD      .110               .149               .277                  .131                   .146

 TN      .104               .162               .361                  .216                   .145

 TX      .079               .143               .318                  .141                   .176

 UT      .132               .255               .243                  .140                   .102

 VT      .228               .234               .396                  .239                   .157

 VA      .129               .245               .271                  .136                   .135

 WA      .110               .242               .262                  .165                   .097

 WV      .105               .215               .408                  .206                   .201

 WI      .126               .232               .271                  .175                   .096

 WY       .068              .140               .245                  .127                   .118

g: Eiguns sit friction of 15.44 yw old wvc in each isaseiyw eligible (or Medicaid under any eapaasion
(columns 1,2, and 3). targeted expansions only (column 4). and broad expansions only (column 5). TabUlated from
March 1980. 19W?. and 1991 CPS.




                                                       30
               Table 2: Characteristics of the Population Covered Under
                    "Targeted' and 'Broad' Expansions, CPS Data

     Characteristic      FuU Sample         Targeted             Broad
                                           Expansions          Expansions


 Family income              38,403              18,775           22,164
                           (29,768)            (27,676)         (22,232)
 Poor                       24.9%              99.1%             38.5%
 Number of Kids              1.26                1.34             1.31
                            (1.26)             (1.41)            (1.39)
 White                      839.%              71.7%             80.9%
 Age                         29.9                25.8             28.4
                            (8.35)              (7.54)           (7.67)
.Married                    51.8%               12.7%            38.0%
 Working                    74.7%              52.6%             72.4%
 Received Public             6.1%              26.2%             5.08%
 Assistance
 Uninsured                  16.4%              30.1%             31.7%
 Employer-Provided HI       33.2%              6.91%             25.4%
 Medicaid                   10.1%              37.6%             12.8%

N!n: Data from 1990 sample of CPS. Working is defined as working at Least one week in
previous year; poor is family income below poverty line for that family size.




                                          31
             Table 3: OLS Repasions of Low Birthweiglzt and Infant Mortality on Eligibility
                           Using Vita! 5L'M.Wn Data for Each Stat. and Yar


                            Low Birthweight                     Infant Mortality
                           Actual       Simul.        Aelual       Smul.           Actual     Simul
                            Eli8.        Elig          Lug          Lug.            Lug.      Elig.


 Models Using Fraction Eligible Under Any Expansion

 Friction                  -4.211       -7.431        -2.093       -3.458          -1.926     -3.171
 Eligible                  (2.886)      (3.848)       (0.819)      (1.090)         (0.813)    (1.085)

 Low Birtbweigbt                                                                    0.040      0.039
                                                                                   (0.012)    (0.012)

 Intercept                 14.29         75.25         9.162        9.571           6.206      6.662
                           (1.14$)      (1.371        (0.325)      (0.388)         (0.957)    (0.990)

 Adjusted K1                .969         .969          .906         .906            .907       .908


 Modete Using Fraction Eligible Under Targeted Expansions


 Friction                  .7.749       -35.37        -1.752       -3.989          -1.439     -3.391
 Eligible                  (4.123)      (5.920)       (1.176)      (1.689)         (1.170)    (1.685)

 Law Birtbweighi                                                                    0.040     0.039
                                                                                   (0.012)    (0.012)

 Intercept                  74.13        75.49         8.814        9.201           5.821      6.267
                           (0.983)      (1.226)       (0.280)      (0.350)         (0.945)    (0.984)

 Adjusted R'                .969         .969          .905         506             .907       .907


 Models Using Fraction Eligible Under Broad Expansions

 Fraction                   -0.565      -1.451        .0.108       -0.336          -t067      -0.232
 Eligible                  (2.458)      (6.178)       (0.699)      (3.757)         (0.679)    (1.706)
 Low Birthweight                                                                    0.072      0.072
                                                                                   (0.023)    (0.023)

 Inititept                 74.35         74.35         8.440        8.447           3.081      3.089
                           (1.406)      (2.397)       (0.400)      (0.397)         (1.743)    (1.742)

 Adjusted K'                .931         .98!          .910     .910        .916        .916
Not: All regressions included atlaS SSWynr dummies. Standard more in pazn'thsat. N a 6(L) for any
ezpansioo sod targeted expansious N - 200 to, broad expansions.




                                                    32
                                            Tiibk 4:
                                                   Medicaid Eligibility and Medicaid Covenige in the CPS
                                      Using the   Full Sample, iind thoee without ritrate litsuniace Coverage
                       (I)            (2)               (3)       (4)           (5)            (6)             (1)             (8)            (9)

                      OLS           OIS                OLS         IV            IV            IV               IV             IV             IV
                                                                 Actual        Actual        Simul.          Simul.          Simul.         Simul.

Any                   0.244
      Eligibility    (0.001)

Targeted                             0.265                       0.232                        0.096                           0.122
      Eligibility                   (0.001)                     (0.019)                      (0.025)                         (0.036)
 Broad                                              -0.030                      0.035                         0.027                          0.034
      Eligibility                                  (0.003)                     (0.022)                       (0.024)                        (0.051)

Age                   0.014          0.014          0.020        0.015          0.019         0.017           0.019           0.027          0.023
                     (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.007)      (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.002)

Age Squared           -0.193        -0.196          -0.302       -0.207        -0.294        -0.255          -0.294          -0.414         -0.374
     #1000           (0.006)       (0.006)         (0.011)      (0.009)        (0.011)       (0.011)         (0.011)        (0.031)         (0.036)
White                 -0.070        -0.068             -0.085   -0.070         -0.085        -0.082          -0.085          -0.108          -0J08
                     (OMOI)         (0.001)        (0M02)       (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.004)        (0.006)

Working               -0.092        .0.089             -0.141    •0.093         4.141        -0.112          -0.141          4.144           4.205
                     (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.002)      (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.006)         (0.005)
 Married              -0.051        -0048           .0.113      -0.056         -0.111        -t091           -0.111          -0.138          4.180
                     (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.002)      (0M05)         (0.002)       (0.006)         (0.002)        (0.013)         (0.006)
 V   Kids              0.024         0.024          0.03 I       0.025         0.03 I         0.027           0.031          0.066           0.077
                      (0.001)       (0.001)        (01)01)      (0.002)        (tOOl)        (0.001)         (01)01)        (0.00!)         (0.002)

 Family Income        4.158          .0.167            -0.205   .0.177         4.197          -0.219         -0.198          .0.446         4.421
  110'                (0.002)       (01)02)        (0.003)      (&006)         (0.004)       (0.008)        (0.004)         (0.027)         (0.028)
 Number of Ohs        455154        455754         144575       455754         144575        455754          244575          126147          35555

      Regressions also include MI set of state and year dummies. Standard earns in parentheses. The last two columns show the results for the sub-sample
without private health insurance coverage.

                                                                          33
                      Table 5: Medicaid Eligibility and Medicaid Payments:
                                  Evidence from HCFA Data


       Measure or Fraction Elig:               Actual                      Simulated

Overall Eligibility                              .206                          .232
                                                (.077)                        (.102)


Targeted Expansions                              .357                          .449
                                                (.110)                        (.156)


Broad Expansions                                 .137                          .262
                                                (.154)                        (.187)




tIti:  This table shows the coefficient on various Medicaid eligibility variables from regressions
including year and state dummies. For example, the coefficient under 'actuC in the targeted
expansions row refers to the coefficient on the actual fraction made eligible under the targeted
expansions. Standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is payments in thousands of
1986 dollars per 15-44 year old woman.




                                                34
                        Table 6: Effects of Medicaid Eligibilityon the Utilization    of Prenatal Care: Logits Using the NLSV

                                         Deliv                    Suttonins                             Delisv                      Sonoerams

        Instrument:           Actual             Simulated   Actual       Simulated           Actual          Simulated     Actual         Simulated


Eligible Under                 -.289               -.685      -.277           -.253             .292              -.413     .627             .927
Targeted Exp.                  (.360)              (.341)     (.211)          (.292)           (.652)             (.717)   (.555)           (.609)

Child Characteristics
Firstborn                      -.052               -.059       .026            .026            -.026              -.039     .032             .039
                               (.080)              (.080)     (.068)          (.068)           (.081)             (.082)   (.069)           (.069)

                              -1.310              -1.286       .735            .733           -1.380             -1.330      .697               .680
Multiple Birth
                                (.603)             (.603)     (.328)          (.328)           (.611)             (.611)   (.332)           (.332)

Male                           -.076               -.077      -.021           -.021            -.069              -.071    -.022            -.021
                               (.074)              (.014)     (.063)          (.063)           (.075)             (.075)   (.064)           (.064)

Maternal Characteristics
African-American                .189                .181       .176            .176             .163               .170     .168                .145
                               (.105)              (.105)     (.091)          (.091)           (.114)             (.114)   (.098)           (.099)

Hispanic                        .373                .395      -.144           -.145             .392               .425    -.214                -.224
                               (.111)              (.111)     (.099)          (.099)•          (.128)             (.129)   (.112)               (.112)



HighestGrade                   -.086                -.086      M44             .044            -.081              -.082     444               .044
                               (.022)               (.022)    (.019)          (.019)           (.023)             023)     (.020)           (.020)

       Score                    .162                .151      -.182           -.181             .171               .150    -.136            -.124
AFQT
                               (.081)               (.081)    (.069)          (.069)           (.084)             (.085)   (.072)           (.073)




                                                                         35
Income below                    .760           .858           -.149            -.155        .612            .786       -.365            -.440
Poverty                        (.128)         (.126)          (.108)           (.104)      (.181)          (.201)      (.157)           (.169)

Member Poverty                 -.036          -.033           -.108            -.109           .047        -.045       -.111            -.107
Sample                         (.083)         (.083)          (.071)           (.071)      (.088)          (.088)      (.076)           (.076)

Urban Resident                 -.125          -.115           .134              .138       -.113           -.111           .109          .116
at   Age   14                  (.089)         (.089)          (.078)           (.078)      (.093)          (.093)      (.081)           (.081)


                              -1.007         -1.037         -1.751            -1.749      -1.055          -1.093      -2.231           -2.255
Intercept
                               (.293)         (.293)          (.269)           (.266)       (.558)         (.556)       (.481)          (.478)

Year Dummies                yes             yes            yes            yes            yes             yes         yes              yes
State Dummies                no              no             no             no            yes             yes         yes              yes

-2 Log                     4581.910       4578.522       5467.517        5468.059       4746.705       4746.705     6585.165        6585.165
Likelihood

Number 0's                  946            946            1647           1647            946            946         2259            2259
Number 1s                  3813           3813           2018            2018           3813           3813         2500            2500



Notes: Standard errors    in parentheses. 'DeIay indicates that the woman waited until beyond the third month to intiate prenatal care. Sonograrn'
indicates that the womanbad a sonogramduring the first 6 months of pregnancy. Individual eligibility is instrumentedby the fraction eligible in the
state and   year from the CPS.




                                                                         36
               :3




     0
     0
     00
     C
               II.
     C
     C
     C
     C
     2C        10




                9
                    *919        1982        19b5        id     190
                                          year
                     Figure Ia: Infant Mortality in the I8Os




          70




C
L
n
00
 0
          68
C
C-
a
03
•0        67




          66
            igg                                   2988
                                  yew
             Figure Ib: Low Btrttuweigflt in tne t8os
             35



C
II
a
0
3
.7


             25

Lu
0

              2
C
9
x


            .15

                   1979
                                   I
                                 1982           1985
                                              year
                                                     I
                                                           1989    '9'
                       Figure 2a: Medicaid Eligibility Trends




                  .9


     C


     'IV

     0            .6
     LU
     C
     C
     U
     0
     4b
                  -5
     z


                  .4
                       1979        1982
                                          -
                                               yew
                                                     It     1988    1990

           Ftgure 2a: Medicaid Eligibility Trends tar' <2*Paverty
              21




              .21

    7
    a
              'I
    V




              12
                              t92
                                       YW
                                         IceS            18       iggo
                    Fzgise 3a Mecicaw Eligtbility In   Oflio




        .37




         3




a
         3

I

                            19h2       IllS          t181      1990
                                     Itt
              Figure   30: MeicasQ Eligibility in Florida
                                              References

Alan Guarnacher Institute. The Financin of Maternity Care in the United States. New York: AG!, 1987.

American Public Welfare Association. Voluntary Contributions and Provider-Specific Taxes: Survey
       Results', Washington, D.C.: APWA, 1991.

Buehler. 1W.. 1. Kleizunan, and C. Rogue. 'Birth Weight-Specific Infant Mortality, U.S., 1960 and
       1980,' Public Health Reoorts, 102 #2, 1985, 3564-3567.

Buescher, a at. 'An Evaluation of the Impact of Maternity Care Coordination on Medicaid Birth
       Outcomes in North Carolina,' American Journal of Public Hea1th 81, 1991, 1625-1629.

Blank, Rebecca and David Card. 'Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Unemployment: Is There an
       Explanation?,' Ouarterlv Journal of Economics 106, November 1991, [157-1190.

Blank, Rebecca and Patricia Ruggles. 'When Do Women Use AFDC & Food Stamps? The Dynamics
       of Eligibility vs. Participation.' mimec, July 1993.

Braveman, Paula, a a!. - Adverse Outcomes and Lack of Health Insurance Among Newborns in an Eight-
      County Area of California, 1982 to 1986,' The New England Journal of Medicine, 321 #8, August
      24, 1989, 508-513.

Buehler, J.W., 3. Kleinman, C. Rogue. 'Birth Weight-Specific Infant Mortality, United Stases, 1960 and
       1980,' Public Health Renorts 102 #2, 1985, 3564-3567.

Chaikind, Stephen and Hope Connan. 'The Special Education Costs of Low Birthweight,' NBER Working
       Paper #3461, October 1990.

Children's Defense Fund. The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984. Washington, D.C.: Children's Defense
       Fund, 1984.

Creasy, R.K., B.A. Gummer, and G.C. Liggins, 'System in Predicting Spontaneous Preterrn Birth,'
      Obstetrics and Gynecolon, 6. 1980. 692ff.

Corman, Hope, Theodore Joyce. and Michael Grossman. 'Birth Outcome Production ftinctions in the
      United States', Journal of Human Resources, 22, Summer 1987. 339-360.

Cropper. Maureen L., and Wallace E. Oases.         'Environmental Economic,: A Survey.' Journal of
       Economic Literature, 30, june 1992, 675-140.

Cropper. Maureen L. a aL. 'The Determinant of Pesticide Regulation: A Statistical Analysis of EPA
      Decision-Making,' Journal of Political Economy; 100, 1992, 175-197.

Currie, Janet and Nancy Cole. 'Welfare and Child Health: The Link Between AFDC Participation and
        Birth Weight,' The American Economic Review. 283 #3, September 1993.




                                                 31
Fischer. Michael.   Weighing the Evidence: An Empirical Analysis of the Expansions of Medicaid
       Coverage for Pregnant Women. 1984-1990'. Thesis, Harvard College, 1992.

Frank, Richard, Donna Storbino, David Salkever, Catherine Jackson. Updated Estimates of the Impact
       of Prenatal Care on Birthweight Outcomes by Race,' NBER Working Paper #3624, February 1991.

Gold, Rachel, Susheela Singli and Jennifer Frost. 'The Medicaid Eligibility Expansions for Pregnant
       Women: Evaluating the Strength of State Implementation Efforts', Family Plannina Persnectives,
       25 #5, September/October 1993, 196-207.

Government Accounting Office. Medicaid Exnansions: Coveran Imoroves but State Fiscal Problems
      Jeooardize Continued Protress. Washington, D.C.: GAO, June 1991.

Graham. John D., and James W. Vaupel. •Value of a Life: What Difference Does it Make?,' jg
     Analysis, I #1, 1981, 89-95.

Grossman. Michael, and Steven Jacobowilz. 'Variations In Infant Mortality Rates Among Counties of the
      United States: The Roles of Public Policies and Programs,' Demonaohv, 18. November 1981.
      695-713.

Grossman, Michael and Theodore Joyce. 'Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions and Birth Weight
      Production Functions in New York City,' Journal of Political Economy, 98 #5, October 1990,983-
       1007.

Gnjber, Jonathan. 'The Effect of Price Shopping in Medical Markets: Hospital Responses to PPOs in
       California,' forthcoming, Journal of Health Economics

Hanratty, Maria. 'Canadian National Health Insurance and Infant Health'. Mimeo, Cornell University,
       1992.

Harris, Jeffrey. 'Prenatal Medical Care and Infant Mortality.' in Victor Fuchs, S., Economic Asoects
       of Health, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.

Health Care Financing Mministradon. Analysis of State Medicaid Protram Characteristics. Washington,
       D.C.: HCFA, 1982. 1983. 1984.

Health Insurance Association of America. 'The Cost of Maternity Care and Childbirth In the United States.
       i2. Washington, D.C.: HIAA, 1990.
Hill, Ian. Medicaid EliEibilitv: A Descrincive Reoort of OBRA. TEFRA. and DEFRA Provisions, and
       State Resoonses. Washington, D.C.: National Governors Association, 1985.

Hill, Ian. BroadeninE Medicaid Covera2e of Prefnant Women and Children: State Policy Resnonses.
         Washington. D.C.: National Governors Association, 1987.

Horbar, Jeffrey. Elizabeth Wright, Lynn Onstad ci at, 'Decreasing Mortality Associated with the




                                                 38
       Introduction of Surfactant Therapy: An Observationai Study of Neonates Weighing 601 to 1300
       Grams at Birth,' Pediatrics, 92 *2, August 1993, 191.196.

Hutchens, Robert, George Jakubson, and Saul Schwartz (1989). 'AFDC and the Formation of
       Subfaznilies,' Journal of Human Resources, 24, 1989, 599.628.

Institute of Medicine, Preventint Law Birthwei2ht, Washington D.C.: National Academy Press, 1985.

Intergovernmental Health Policy Project. 'Mor Changes in State Medicaid and Indigent Care Prograxnf.
       Eds. Debra J. Lipson eta!. Washington, D.C.: The George Washington University, various years.

Manning, Williard G. e: aL The Taxes of Sin: Do Smokers and Drinkers Pay Their Way?,' Journal of
      the American Medical Association, 26! #11, March 17, 1989, 1604-1609.

McConnick, Barbara, n a!., 'The Health and Developmental Status of Very-Law-Birthweight Children
     at School Age,' Journal of the American Medical Association, 267, 1992.

Meyer. Bruce. A Quasi-Experimental Approach to the Effects of Unemployment Insurance,' NBER
       Working Paper #3159, 1989.

Moffiu, Robert. 'Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review,' Journal of Economic
       Literature, 30, March 1992, 1-61.

Piper. J.M. ci at 'Effects of Medicaid Eligibility Expansion on Prenatal Care and Pregnancy Outcomes
        in Tennessee,' Journal of the American Medical Association, 264, 1990, 2219-2223.

Rosenzweig, Mark and T. Paul Schultz. 'The Behavior of Mothers as Inputs to Child Health: The
     Determinants of Birth Weight, Gestation, and Rate of Fetal Growth,' in Economic Asnects of
       Health. Victor Fuchs (ed), University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1982.

Rosenzweig, Mark and T. Paul Schultz. 'Estimating a Household Production Function: Heterogeneity, the
      Demand for Health Inputs, and Their Effects on Birth Weight,' Journal of Political Economy, 9!,
      October 1933. 723-746.

Rosenzweig, Mark and T. Paul Schultz. 'The Stability of Household Production Technology, A
       Replication1' The Journal of Human Resources, 23, Fall 1983, 535-549.

Rymer, Marilyn and Gerald Adler. 'Children and Medicaid: The Experience in Four States.' Health Care
       Financini Review. 9411, Fall 1981, 1-20.

Sayweil, ci a!.    'Hospital and Patient Characteristics of Uncompensated Hospital Care: Policy
       implications.' Journal of Health Politics. Policy, and Law, 14, 2989, 287-3W.

Schwartz, Rachel. 'What Price Prematurity,' Family PlanninE Persoectives. 21, July/August 1939, 170-
       174.




                                                 39
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (various years). Characteristics of State Plans for Aid
      to Families With Deoendent Children. Washington, D.C.: US DHHS.

U.S. House of Representatives, Green Book 1992: Backzround Staterial on Pro2rarns Under the
       Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means, Washington D.C.: GPO, 1992

U.S. Office of Technology Assessment. Healthy Children: 1nvestin in the Future, OTA-H-34-*.
      Washington, D.C.: GPO, l987a.

U.S. Office of Technology Assessment. Neonatal Intensive Care for Low Birthwei2hl Infants: Costs and
       Effectiveness, OTA-HCS-38, Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1987b.

Viscusi, Kip. Fatal Tradeoffs. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Weitx, Judith. Testimony before House of Representatives on DEFRA (PL 98-369), 1983.

Yelowitz, Aaron. 'The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply and Welfare Participation: Evidence from Eligibility
       Eqansions, MIT mimea, July 1993.
Lurie, N.. et al.. 'Termination from Medi-Cal: Does it Affect Health?,' New En2lad Journal
       of Medicine, 311, 1984, 480-484.




                                                  40
                                     Appendix: uigiwiity Sbaulatlons

        During the entire period studied, 1979-90. the fundamental basis fé eligibility for Medicaid was
 receipt of AFDC. The core of our eligibility calculation was therefore a simulation of eligibility for
welfare receipt. In order to qualifr (or AFDC, a family must pass three tests: their gross income must be
below a multiple of the state's nSa standard (this test was applied from 1982 onwards only);33 their
gross income less certain disregards for work expenses and child care must be below the state's needs
standard; and their gross income less certain disregards less a portion of their óarnings must be below the
state's Davment standard.

        The exactdefmition of a family unit is the fnt source of difficulty in itaking this calculation. If
a minor (which we define as less than age 19) is living with her parents, then a portion of the parents'
income is deemed to that individual in making the eligibility calculation. This fraction is calculated by
subtracting from family income the needs standard for a family of that size. If the individual is age 19 or
above, then the treamient of family resources is less clear, and varies across states; see Hutchens e: aL
(1989) for a description of these differing treatments. We assume, following the practice of the majority
of the states, that the parent's resources are ignored if the individual is not a minor.

        Before OBRA '81, there was no standardized allowance for work and child care expenses under
AFDC. Beginning in October 1981, the allowance was standardized to be $75 per month for work
expenses, and a maximum of $160 per child fbr child care costs. This was not changed until the Family
Support Act of 1988, WhIch raised the allowances to $90 for work expenses and $175 per child for child
care, effective October, 1989. For years before 1982, we assume that states allowed the same level of
disregards as was designated under OBRA.

         Before OBRA 'SI • there was a work Incentive feature of AFDC known as 30 and one-third'. This
incentive allowed families to keep the first $30 of earned income, and one third of the remainder, while
the other two-thirds led to reduced AFDC benefits. Since individuals must quali' for an AFDC payment
in order to receive Medicaid, this meant that the individual's Income, less disregards, and less $30 and one-
third, was compared to the payment standard (or the third test described above. From 1982 to 1984, this
incentive was limited to the first four months that Individuals were on APDC. In order to model this, we
assume that for our sample it is their first Ml year on AFDC, so that they get $120 and 1/9 of their
earnings for the year. From 1985 onwards, indIviduals who would have lost Medicaid due to the end of
the $30 and 1/3 rule after 4 months were allowed to remain on Medicaid for an additional 9 to 15 months
(the length was at state discretion). We modelled this as amounting to a full 30 and I/S exclusion after
 1984, parallel to the pre-1982 rules. Our object was to consistently model the maximum amount that an
individual could have received under AFDC.

       Finally, a key restriction on the receipt of AFDC is family structure. In all states, single women
with at least one child are eligible. In addition, in some states, married women with an unemployed spouse
are eligible under the 'AEDC-UP' program. Eligibility for AFDC-UP conditions on both current
employment status and work history. Lacking longitudinal data on work histories, we assume that families
are eligible if the state has a program and the spouse had worked less than 40 weeks in the previous year.



       33From 1982 to 1984, this multiple was 1.5; from 1985 onwards, the multiple was 1.85.




                                                    41
 Since families eligible for AFDC-UP 'flake up only a small fraction of the overall APDC population, this
 should not greatly affect oUr estimates

          For most Medicaid recipients, AFDC receipt summarizes the necessary conditions for Medicajd
eligibility. However, from the inception of the program, there have been a number of special options, to
be used at state discretion, which allow forther means of eligibility for certain populations, and, in
particular, for pregnant women.

       The first of these are state programs to cover single mothers who are pregnant for the first lime,
who are therefore not yet eligible for APDC. Before 1982. a number of states had first-time pregnancy
options under their AFDC programs, which covered women from some point In their pregnancy even if
they had no other children. Generally, women were covered from the point of medical verification,
although some states covered them at a later point; we only counted those states that covered women during
the first trimester, In most states, the stases counted only the mother in the family unit size (i.e. the uze
of the family was one), although a few states counted the future child as well. The states which had these
programs are identified in U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (various years).

         After OBR.A '81, states with these programs were no longer allowed to cover women before the
sixth month of pregnancy. However, states were offered the option of deeming first-time pregnant women
eligible for Medicaid from the moment of verification, even though AFDC payments had not yet begun
to flow. As with most Medicaid-only options, Information about which states took up this option Is spotty
and often contradictory. Based on information in Health Care Financing Administration (1982,1983,1984),
Weitz (1983), and Hill (1985, 1987), we cant up with a list of states which appeared to have taken up this
option in each year. We also assumed this, under this program, states did not count the unborn child in
determining the size of the assistance unit.

        Under DEFRA '84, which was effective from 1985 onwards, states were required to cover a
pregnant woman who would be eligible for Aid to Families with Dependent Children ... as if her child had
been born and was living with her ..., (ifi such pregnancy has been medically verified' (P.L. 98-369, Sec.
2361. Subtitle B). Thus, first-time pregnant women are covered In all states from 1985 onwards, and the
effective family size for AFDC receipt Is Increased by one for all pregnant women,

        Mother important state Medicaid option is coverage of 'Ribicoffchildre,C, who are children who
would quali for AFDC under income considerations alone, but who would not qualifr due to family
stnscture (it children In poor two-parent families). Before 1981, states could cover selected categories
of such children (Ic. only those In institutions, only those In two-parent families, etc.), or all categories,
up to age 21. From 1982 onwards, they were also offered the option of resnicting the coverage of children
between 18 and 21 years of age. Thus, for teens inour sample in states with comprehensive Ribicoff
children programs, we Ignored the family structure requirements of AFDC and only screened on
income.M



       34j theory, we should do this for any state which took up the Ribicoff option to cover poor
  children in two-parent families. However, the data on this program are spotty, and this category is
  never presented. Thus, we only inchaded those states which were listed as having programs that
  covered all categories of Ribicoff children.            The data on this program are from HCFA




                                                     42
       Furthermore, although OBRA '81 restrIcted the APDC coverage of unborn children, states were
given the option of covering unborn children under their Ribicoff children programs. This amounted to
covering pregnant women whose Income qualified them for AFDC, regardless of family sflcture. We
gathered Information on this Rlblcoff option from HCFA (1982,1983,1984) and from Weltz (1983), and
modelled It as being in place front 1982 onwards.

        In addition, since the Inception of the Medicaid program, states have had the option of covering
all pregnant women whose Income qualified them for AFDC but who were not single mothers. This little
known option is only discussed In Welts (1983), Children's Defense Fund (1984). and Hill (1987); the last
of these sources gives the dates of the inception of these programs.

         Each of the three options Just listed (Ribicoff teens, Ribicoff unborn, and no family structure
restrictions for pregnant women) apply only to the pregnant women herself, or only to her unborn child,
so the family unit size (for example) tots first time pregnancy would be one. However, we assumed that
when states had more than one of these programs, the family unit sIze was Increased by the nature child.

        The futal state option of Importance Is the Medically Needy program, which Is designed to cover
Individuals who meet the family suucwre requirements for AFDC and whose gross resources are above
AFDC levels, but whose high medical expenditures bring their net resources below some certain minimal
level. States who take up this option may establish Medically Needy thresholds that are no more than
133% of the gate's AFDC needs standard. Individuals can then 'spend down' to these thresholds by
subtracting their medical expenditures from their gross Income If they.do, MnIull will pay the remainder
of their expenditures."

         While this program may be quite usefUl for covering the birth expenditures of a pregnant woman
whose Income Is somewhat above the APDC cutoff, It Is unclear how Important the Medically Needy
option is for covering her prenatal care expenditures. We therefore model this program In two ways.
First, we simply compare the woman's net Income to the Medically Needy threshold; that Is, this program
will help to pay lbr the medical costs of women whose gross Incomes are between the AFDC threshold
and the Medically Needy threshold. Second, we subtract from gross income the expected global fee for
an obstetrician, from Alan Gutsmsdier in'a (1987))' The notion here Is that, If obstetricians bill the
pregnant mother for their global fee at the first prenatal care visIt, then the mother will be able to use this
bill to qualify for the Medically Weedy program. Since the measures were very similar, we only used the
former In the analysis.

       Beginning with DEFRA '84, the Federal government began a series of mandates which extended



  (1982,1983,1984) and Hill (1987).

     "The time frant over which such spend-down occurs varies across the states, and we do not
  model it.

      *The global to. is the bill for all obstetric services, Including pre-natal care, delivery, and post-
  natal care. This toe averaged $830 In 1986, and Is deflated (and inflated) to other years using the
  physician's services component of the Consumer Price Index.




                                                   43
the Medicaid coverage of pregnant women. DEFRA '84 included two features: mandatory
                                                                                                coverage of
pregnant women under AFUC (described above), and mandatory coverage otpregnajit women in AFDC-
UP type families, even if the state did not have an AFDC-UP program. COBRA '85 then mandated that
pregnant women who met the AFDC resource standards were eligible regardless of family suucture (similar
to the state programs described above). This law was effective in July, 1986. Since we are focusing
primarily on the effect of Medicaid on early prenatal care, we model this law as being effective from 1987
onwards.

        Beginning with OBRA '86. states were mt given the option, and then mandated to, increase the
income thresholds for Medicaid eligibility, regardless of family sncture. OBRA '86 gave stases the option
of covering pregnant women up to 100% of the poverty threshold, beginning in April, 1987. OBRA '87
increased that optional level to 185% of poverty. Under the Medicare Catastrophic Care Act states were
mandated to cover pregnant women up to 75% of poverty by July 1. Then under OBRA '89, they were
required to cover women up to 133% of poverty by April, 1990. Using data from Government Accounting
Office (1991), Fischer (1992), and Intergovernmental Health Policy Project (various years). we modelled
women as being covered if their income was below the avenge percentage of poverty that was covered
during the year.




                                                  44
