                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
                             FUND THAT DIDNT BARK
                                  IN THE NIGHT




                                    Edward I. Kane
                                   Robert Hendershoct




                                 Working Paper No. 4648




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge. MA 02138
                                  February 1994



The authors wish to thank Albert Burger and Thomas Cargill for helpful comments and to
acknowledge financial support from the Filene Research Institute and the Center for Credit
Union Research at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Opinions expressed are those of the
authors and should not be construed to represent the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Corporate Finance.
                                                                 NBER Working Paper #4648
                                                                            February 1994


                          THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
                              FUND ThAT DIDN'T BARK
                                   IN THE NIGHT


                                        ABSTRACT


       Unlike the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and the Bank Insurance Fund,

the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF) entered the 1990s in a state of

accounting solvency. This paper develops evidence to show the more important fact that

NCUSIF remained solvent in a market-value sense as well. Differences in institutional product

lines and risk-taking opportunities between credit unions and banks and thrifts are not

consequential enough to explain the differences in their funds' health. This paper explains how

differences in decisionmaking environments made managerial and regulatory risk-taking

incentives in the credit-union industry diverge substantially from those governing banks and

S&Ls. The differences in incentive mucture support the hypothesis that private coinsurance

could lessen taxpayer loss exposure elsewhere in the federal deposit insurance system.




Edward I. Kane                                            Robert Hendershott
Finance Department                                        Finance Department
Boston College                                            Santa Clara University
Chestnut Hill, 02167                                      Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
                                                                                               2



                    THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE FUND
                       THAT DIDN'T BARK IN THE NIGHT

        During the last decade, the United States' two major deposit insurance funds were
tested severely. After accumulating a negative net worth of roughly$200 billion in
present value, the Federal Savings & Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) became
defunct in 1989. Although it has since recovered, at the turn of the decade the Federal

Deposit Insurance Corporation's Bank Insurance Fund (RIP) showed a shortfall in the
accounting value of its net assets as well.

        The question of how these deposit insurance funds become insolvent is hotly
disputed. One school of thought blames the accessiori of incompetent and dishonest
managers to positions of control at insured institutions. A second school associates fund
losses with unlucky movements in important economic variables: interest rates, federal
tax laws, and real-estate prices. A third school blames federal legislation for

"deregulating" simultaneously the explicit interest rates deposit institutions could pay on
deposits and the range of risky activities in which they could engage. A fourth school of

thought fingers politicians and regulators for "desupervising" undercapitalized
institutions in an environment that was rich in opportunities to shift risk to their deposit
insurance fund.

       To account for delays in identifying and adequately disciplining insolvent banks

and thrifts, each explanation appeals to information blockages and incentive
incompatibilities across an array of deposit-institution stakeholders. So far, little effort
has been devoted to studying why these same blockages and incompatibilities failed to
forte the insolvency of a third federal deposit insurance fund. Just as the other funds, the
National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF) was exposed to managerial

turnover, unlucky economic events, and financial deregulation. This paper's tide implies
that analysis of the incentive structure in which NCUSIF is embedded might give
                                                                                             3


 onomist detectives evidence of the type that the fictional Sherlock Holmes gleaned
 from observing a watchdog that failed to bark during a nocturnal raid by horse thieves.
        To establish that NCUSJF remained economically solvent, our paper offers
 straightforward measures of the market value of the fund's net worth during 1987-1990.

 Analysis focuses on how managerial and regulatoiy incentives in the credit union
 industry differ from those for banks and S&Ls. This analysis of differential incentives
 sparks a concluding discussion of whether and how increased privatization might improve

 the federal deposit insurance system for intermediaries of any stripe.
 L Estimating NCUSIF Net Worth
    a. Opportunity-Cost versus Accounting Values of Credit-Union Net Worth
        Credit unions are tax-exempt deposit institutions that are owned and operated

cooperatively by a community of "member customers. Net earnings from loans that are
not distributed to depositors flow into a capital account. As at a bank or S&L, capital is
the value of an institution's assets net of its nonownership liabilities.

        However, the beneficial ownership of a credit union's net worth is not fixed by
ontract. At each institution, the flow of benefits depends on how far loan and deposit
interest rates vary respectively from members' opportunity costs (Smith, Cargill, and
Meyer, 1981). A credit union's interest-rate policies vary dynamically with community
politics. Boards and committees are nominated from the membership and elected on a
one-member, one-vote basis. Even if each member's influence on loan and deposit
pricing varied proportionately with the volume of business each member has currently
booked with the credit union, large borrowers may have small deposits and large

depositors may have small loans.

       In 1970, a system of federal deposit insurance for credit unions was established
and assigned to a newly created National Credit Union Administration (NCUA). Until

then, federal responsibility for regulating credit unions lacked a permanent home.
                                                                                              4

          Call-report data collected by NCUA develops accounting estimates of aggregate
 credit-union net worth. To trinslate these book values into opportunity-cost measures of

 net worth requires follow-up financial analysis. This paper estimates unbooked capital
 gains and losses for tangible balance-sheet items as a straightforward application of
 discounted present value.
    b. Data Set

          Our analysis values the NCUSIF fund in two steps. First, to mark theaccounting
net worth of individual credit unions to market, we rely on NCUA call-report data for
 1987-1990. These data comprise morn than 57,500 credit-union years of financial

information. Yearend reporting is mandatory for federally insured credit unions and
develops data on asset and liability portfolios, income and expenses for the previousyear,

and interest rates charged on loans and paid on deposits. Our second step is to link these
data on individual credit-union condition with data on the determinants of institutional

closures and NCUSIF losses. Our purpose in combining the two files is to extract an
opportunity-cost measure of the fund's anticipatable loss exposure in operating credit
unions.

          Data on credit-union closures and closure costs cover 1988-1991. Some

observations had to be deleted because we could not generate opportunity-cost measures

of capital for the institution being closed. The edited sample includes 324 closures: 61 in
1988,97 in 1989, 104 in 1990, and 62 during the first three quarters of 1991.

       The time frame of the analysis is restricted by secular changes in the categorical
format used by NCIJA call reports. Formats in use before 1987 are unsuitable for
opportunity-cost valuation. Our methods could be used by NCUA both to cover years
after 1990 and to adapt reporting formats for future years to improve measurement

accuracy.
   c. Opportunity-cost estimates of individual credit-union capital
                                                                                              5


         Call report income statements permit future cash flows to be projected and

 discounted for loans (real estate, auto, and unsecured loans) and shares (drafts, savings,
 money market accounts, share certificates, and retirement accounts). Beginning in 1988,
 market values are reported directly (page 5, item 5 of the call report) for investments:

 Treasury securities; federal agency securities; and deposits in other institutions.

         Variation in categorizations for different years require small adaptations in our
 methods. For concreteness, we concentrate on the procedure used for the 1990 format.
         1) Investments
        Table 1 presents average annual rates of return on credit-union investments.

 Reflecting the short maturity of the securities credit unions hold, realized returns move up
and down with the yield on one-year Treasuries. The excess of investment returns over
this Treasury yield tracks the extent to which credit-union portfolios include slightly
longer and riskier securities.

        Assigning a market value to investments took managers as long as two years to
master. In 1988 and 1989, enough zeros were reported to force theavenge ratio of
market to book for this item to 72 and 87 percent. When reporting problems resolved

themselves in 1990, the market value of investments fell only 1.4 percent below book.

        Attempts to "back-cast" the interest-induced losses assignable to prioryears
produced only a small increase in credit-union capital for 1989 and small decreases for
1987 and 1988. Combined with the arbitrariness of the back-casting assumptions we had
to make, the small size of the imputed effects persuaded us to neglect unbooked net gains
on investments in 1987-1989.

        2) Loans
        The market value of a loan portfolio may be conceived to be the discounted

present value of well-informed projections of its net future cash flows. This value
represents the dollar amount an informed institution would be willing to pay to acquire
the loan portfolio.
                                                                                               6


        Discounting seeks to apply an "appropriate" opportunity-cost rate to "appropriate"
array of projected returns. We calculate the opportunity cost in each year as the industry-
average rate of return nuoted for each portfolio type. Returns are projected from
observed rates of return and maturities on outstanding instruments.
        The call report quotes a credit union's interest income 1mm loans (page 3, item

47), loan servicing expenses (page 3, item 59), and loan portfolio's book value (page 1,
item 8). A loan portfolio's projected rate of return, R10 , is defined as the ratio of
interest income net of loan servicing expense to the book value of loans. Avenge annual
rates of return for credit-union loan portfolios are given in the second column of Table 1.
        The call report quotes the current interest rates (page 4, items 5-9) charged on
seven categories of loans: unsecured loans, new auto loans, used auto loans, first

mortgages (fixed and adjustable), and second mortgages (fixed and adjustable). For each
loan category, the industry average interest rate on new loans is defined to be the
opportunity-cost or market rate of return, E (Ri), for that type of loan.
       To minimize distortions from outliers and recording errors, the data are passed
through screens that eliminate doubtful observations. Any credit union whose loan
portfolio returns less than zero or greater than 100% is excluded from opportunity-cost

calculation and its loan portfolio is valued at book. This exception develops in 73 cases.
        A second screen protects against reporting enors in the book value of loans. Any
credit union is excluded from the opportunity-cost routine if the book value of any type of

loan proves less than zero or greater than the book value of the firm's total loan portfolio.
In the 9 cases in which this exception is triggered, the loan portfolio is valued at book.

       For each credit union's loan portfolio, the opportunity-cost rate of return,
E (Ri€,.4), is defined as a weighted average of opportunity-cost interest rates for each

category of loan. The weights are taken as the fraction of the book value of the credit
union's total loan portfolio that is allocated to each loan type (page 1, items 1-7; page 4,

items 18-19):
                                                                                              7


                              7
                             E
                             j=I
                   —
                      By of loans of type
                     BV total loan portfolio
                H (R1) = opportunity-cost rate of return on loans of type i.


        Credit-union loan portfolios are modelled as fixed-annual-payment, T-year
annuities. This assumption makes market values equal to:
               MVioans = [BVb,ansJ      Ri
                                      E(R103)
                                                      1 - (1÷E(R1))-T
                                                       1 -(1 + R1)-T                        (I)


This formula is derived and applied to S&Ls by Yu (1991). Our model assigns the

following maturity to each of the seven loan types: 1 year for unsecured loans; 2 years for
new auto loans; 1 1/2 yeass for used auto loans; 15 years for fixed-rate first mortgages;

1/2 year for adjustable-rate mortgages (both firsts and seconds); and 10years for fixed-
rate second mortgages.

        Sensitivity experiments Welt used to investigate the effects of: (1) narrowing the
limits of our data screens; (2) lengthening the maturities assumed; and (3) avenging
opportunity-cost loan rates over a subsample of strongly capitalized institutions. The
values found for NCUSIF net worth prove relatively insensitive to these variations.
       iii. Deposits
       Credit-union deposits an marked to market value in the same way as loans.

Revaluing deposits turns out to have little impact on credit-union capital because most
credit-union deposits mature in less than one year (over 95% at yeaiend 1990).
       iv. Market-value capital
       The book value of capital shown on the credit-union call report is defined as

reserves (page 2, items 43-44) plus retained earnings (page 2, item 45). Opportunity-cost
adjustments axe made for the difference between book and market values of investment,

loans, and deposits, and allowances axe added for reserves against investment and loan
                                                                                           8


losses (page 1, items 9 and 22). We choose not to capitalize fee income into credit-union

capital because, during the sample time frame, fee income does is too small even to cover

unclassified operating expenses.
       The rt column of Table 2 gives market-value estimates of aggregate credit-
union capital. In each sample year, the credit-union industry as a whole shows positive
net worth.
   d. Opportunity-cost estimates of NCUSIF's capital position
       Barth and Brumbaugh (1991) show that NCUSIF remained solvent on an

accounting or book-value basis. However, accounting solvency need not imply economic

solvency. The deposit-insurance literature hypothesizes that economic insolvency
precedes accounting insolvency, because officials have strong incentives to mask
weaknesses in a government fund when it first emerges (Kane, 1989; Office of
Management and Budget, 1991). To determine whether NCUSIF's net worth remained
positive on an opportunity-cost bases, analysts must look to the present value of projected
future cash flows.

       Industrial-organization theory implies that the forces of competitor entry and
client substitution can be expected to drive the permanent economic value of NCUS IFs

net premium income to zero. Invoking this condition makes it simpler to calculate the
opportunity cost of NCIJSIP net worth. It is necessary only to mark to market NCUSIFs
tangible balance sheet and then to deduct its anticipatable exposure to future loss from
client operations. We break the anticipatable loss exposure into two components: 1)
NCLJSIF's exposure to loss in the set of insured credit unions that our calculations assign
negative market-value capital and 2) its exposure to loss in other credit unions.

       NCIJSIFs loss exposure in MV-insolvent credit unions can be conservatively
estimated by these institutions' aggregate shortfall in market-value capital (MV shortfall).
In open MV-insolvent institutions, NCUSIF is responsible for the downside of all future
                                                                                                9


returns, although a share of upside returns still promises to accrue to the credit union.
The third column of Table 2 reports the MV shortfall.
        NCUSIFs complementary exposure in MV-solvent credit unions is estimated in
two steps. First, we estimate the probability that each credit union will be closed in the
following year. Then, we apply this probability to an estimate of the costs of closure that
would conditionally accrue.
        The probability of closure is conceived to be a function of the ratio of a credit

union's market-value capital to its outstanding shares (MVratio), the ratio of its book-

value capita] to outstanding shares (BVrado), and the inverse of the book value of shares
(lirotaiShares). To estimate this probability, we use a logistic regression. The
endogenous variable, CLOSED, takes the value 1 if the credit union is closed and the
value 0 if it is not. Table 3 summarizes the regression estimates.

       These probability estimates are doubly downward-biased if, as agency-cost theory
and our market-value capital measures suggest, NCUA practices capital forbearance.
First, the closure data are censored. We only classify a credit union as closed if NCUA
closes it during a single-year time frame. Second, because we exuapolate from actual
closures, our estimates of the probability of closure depend jointly on NCUA's ability to
detect and its willingness to tolerate instances of unbooked market-value insolvency.

       The statistical analysis shows that the probability of closure increases with the
difference between a credit union's book-value and marketvalue capital ratios. To

highlight this finding, Table 3 reports regression coefficients for this difference (132) and
for the total effect of MVratio (Bj -132). We interpret the coefficient pattern observed as

evidence of forbearance. It implies that any leeway in accounting standards that is
allowed to conceal an institution's accruing economic losses in the prior year influences

significantly this yeats odds of closure. This interpretation is supported by alternatively
deleting market-value and book-value capital information from the regression. Using
only the BVratio and lfrotalShares as regressors, the influence of the BVratio becomes
                                                                                              10


 negative, but is insignificant. Its coefficient becomes -.726, with a p-value of .257.

 Using only the MVratio and 1/TotaiShares as regressors, the MVratio receives a
 coefficient of -1.31 and a p-value less than .001.

        The logistic regression in Table 3 models the probability of closing an MV-
 solvent credit union as:
            =      eZi
                1+eZi                                                                        (2)

        where Zj = -5.35 - 14.94MVratio1 + 17.55BVratjo1 + 20.6TotajShares.



        The conditional cost of closing a credit union is estimated from three sources:

NCUA's 1988-1991 closure-loss data, our market-value capital figures, and call-report
infonnation We portray closure cost as a function of the market value of a credit union's
capital (MVcap), the book value of its capital (BVcap), and the book value of its total
shares (TotaiShares). Table 4 develops the cost function as a heteroskedasticity-adjusted
OLS regression (White, 1980). As we observed for the probability of closure, the
conditional cost of closure increases with the gap between the book and market values of

a credit union's capital. Table 4 reports regression coefficients for this gap (BJ and for
the total effect of the MVcap (Bi - BiJ by itself. Our model portrays the cost of closing a
credit union as:

        COST1 = max (0, -61010 -l.llMVcap1 +7.28BVcap1 +.O5TotalShares).                  (3)
        The expected ç of closing an individual credit union may be represented as the
product: it COST1. The probability the credit union would be closed comes from
equation (2), and while the conditional cost of closure is given by equation (3).
NCIJSIFs total exposure in MV-solvent credit unions is the sum of the cost expected in
each solvent institution. This exposure is given in the fourth column of Table 2.
       The fifth column of Table 2 deducts the two categories of loss exposure from

NCUSIF's reserves. The resulting measure of NCUSIFs marker-value net worth remains
positive between 1987 and 1990.
                                                                                              11




 II. The Managerial Environment for Credit Unions
         The cooperative structure of a credit union creates sources of firm value and
 systems for distributing claims on the value an institution accumulates that differ

 markedly from those of other deposit institutions. These differences make it less feasible
 for managers to pursue and to benefit from either corrupt lending or go-for-broke

 strategies of risk-taking.
    a. Incentives for Private Monitoring
        Three factors intensify the extent and quality of the private monitoring to which

 the actions and strategies of credit-union managers are subject. First, the economic net
 worth of the typical credit union includes the present discounted value of time and

resources contributed by members and sponsors. Members and sponsors that contribute
time and resources have both the incentive and the opportunity to monitor conflicts of
interest and risk-taking activities undertaken by professional managers. In cases where

the field of membership provides a meaningful link between members (e.g., a common

employer or place of residence), sponsors and volunteers have considerable "inside"
information about loan applicants' credit history and earnings potential that should make
shifts in lending strategies easy for these parties to spot.

        Second, the activities of credit-union managers and governing boards are bonded
more extensively by outside private "sureties" than the managers of other depositories

are. The term surety describes an entity that accepts responsibility for the performance of
a designated contract between two other parties. In the credit-union movement,

committee members and managers routinely bond themselves not only against fraud but
also against failures to perform their duties faithfully and competently. This tradition of

extensive bonding is rooted in credit unions' heavy use of volunteer staff, whose financial

acumen and background are costly to assess and credibly signal to the membership. Bank
and S&L managers are seldom bonded privately for anything but fraud, while
                                                                                               12


 complementary insurance coverage purchased for directors and officers typically
 excludes all damage claims brought by regulatory agencies. Far more fully than is the
 case for the other two deposit-insurance funds, comprehensive bonding coverageexposes
 the industry's private sureties to claims treaceable to managerial mistakes and
 misbehavior that parallel the sources of liability their federal insurance fund faces. This
 makes the private surety into a coinsurer that has a strong financial incentive to monitor

 internal controls and managerial policies to restrain behaviors that threaten the federal
 fund.

         The Credit Union Mutual Insurance Society (CUMIS, 1991) writes about 98
percent of credit union bonds and liability insurance. CIJMIS focuses its audits on fraud

and internal management controls. It reports that it targets a good portion of its audits
each year as followups to tips it receives from government examiners andthird-party
credit-union managers.

         Agency theory suggests that the monitoring done by a private surety whose
profitability and survival are at risk may be expected to be superior to the quality and

frequency of the monitoring done by federal employees. Shirking ought to be less,
because the jobs and future incomes of the surety's employees would be contingent on

the joint success of employee loss-contml efforts. But even if private monitoring were

merely of equal quality, complementary monitoring activity by independent private
sureties that accept parallel exposures to loss-control events may be expected to reduce
the federal insurer's loss exposure.

         Third, since 1985 credit unions have faced what can be considered a deposit

insurance premium "prepayment" system. Insured credit unions are required to hold one
percent of theft shares on deposit with NCUSIF. The Deposit is adjusted annually to

reflect growth. Income from this "Capitalization Deposit" is assigned to meet NCIJSIF's

operating expenses and to cover the costs of closing insolvent credit unions. To

supplement this income, NCUA can and does levy additional assessments as it deems
                                                                                                  13


   necessary. (As recently as September 1991, NCUA levied a special
                                                                    .0083-percent
   premium assessment on credit-union shares.) A fund of prepaid premiums better aligns
   credit unions' loss exposure with that of NCUSIF than thepay-as-you-go systems that has
  been used by other federal funds. Credit-union managers have strong incentives to alert
  private and federal monitors to corrupt, incompetent, or
                                                             highly speculative activity at
  other credit unions when and as they learn of it. This is because each credit union's full
  Capitalization Deposit is at risk when other credit unions fail. The Deposit is pennanent
  capital that cannot be removed from a credit union. This Deposit must be used up before

  the implicit taxpayer guarantees NCUSIF may be presumed to enjoy could be explicitly
  drawn upon.

         Finally, in the face of widespread weakness NCUSIF cannot be pressured into

  reducing its monitoring effects by Congressional manipulation of budget appropriations
 or Treasury lines of credit. Even in emergencies, the Capitalization Deposit affords
 NCUSLF enough liquidity to close insolventcredit unions in timely fashion. In
                                                                          contrast,
 FSLIC was --and its successor fund and the Bank rnswce Fund remain-- dependent
                                                                                on
 Congress for emergency funding.
     b. Opportunitjn for Managers to Benefit from
                                                  Strategic Risk-Taking
        Opportunities to bet the future of a credit union on large
                                                                      risky projects is limited
 not only by the monitoring system, but also by the field-of-membership requirement.
This requirement has three effects.

        First, it limits the finn's product line to contracts and activities that demonstrably
serve its traditional customer base. For
                                           instance, Tripp and Smith (1993) find that, along
with insdmtionai size, a full-serrice orientation and a residential type of
                                                                              membership
bond serve to distinguish credit unions that decided to offer first
                                                                      mortgage loans from
those that did not. Second,
                             field-of-membership limitations inhibit rapid growth by
                                                                                                       F




restricting the deposit base on which an aggressive credit-union manager might draw.
Third, attempts to distribute a firm's surplus disproportionately to lenders,
                                                                                depositors, or
                                                                                                14


   managers generate countervailing political pressures to protect the stakes of
                                                                                 other
  members.                                               -


            Smith, Cargill, and Meyer (1981) and Smith (1984) emphasize that
                                                                                the political
  nature of claims on accumulating credit-union
                                                  capital makes value maximization an
  unattractive objective for credit-union managers. Moreover, unlike the carryover of net
  worth allowed in converting mutual S&Ls and savings banks into stoclthofrjerwned

  institutions (Maksimovic and IJnal, 1993), the Cooperative structure of claims on a credit

  union must be explicitly resolved before the institution can be rechartered and
  reorganized in a stockholder form. This lessens incentive
                                                              incompatibility vis-a-vis
  private sureties and federal insurers by making it difficult for managers to exuact
 personal rewards from activities designed to increase the value of their institution's
 deposit insurance guarantee. In a stockholder organization, the capitalized value of the
 deposit guarantee is a component of its stock-market capitalization. Increases in

 guarantee value may be partitioned among managers, shareholders, and uninsured
 creditors by implicit and explicit forms of performance contracting.
         Because credit-union members cannot freely convey to other parties their share of
 the institution's capital, the near-permanence of the cooperative form discourages rapid

 institutional growth. Taking additional deposits dilutes existing members' capital stakes.
 At economically solvent institutions, dilution makes rapid growth costly to informed old
members, while credit unions that are known to be insolvent offer losses to informed new

members. For example, let us assume a credit union that finances $120 worth of
marketable assets by raising $10 each from 10 depositor-members in deposits. if this
institution uses an additional $100 in deposits from new members to buy $100 in new

assets, its original members' capital stakes halve, falling from (120- 100)110 = $2 to (220
- 200)/20
             $1. On the other hand, if the credit union's assets were worth only $80, each
new $10 deposited would accrue a neEative capital stake of $1. The inability either to
liquify the value of their organization's deposit guarantee or to withdraw
                                                                                                15


 straightforwardly their claim on organizational capital makes credit-union managers and
 members either less willing or less able to support the high-risk investment strategies and
 high rates of asset growth that many deeply troubled banks and S&Ls have pursued.
 m. Implications for Improving Federal Deposit Insurance Loss Exposure
         Throughout 1987-1990, the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund
 remained market-value solvent. We show that NCUSIFs ability to stay solvent while the
 deposit insurance funds for both banks and S&Ls slid underwater may be attributed to

 better incentives for maintaining solvency imparted by more and better private
 monitoring and by managers' lesser capacity to appropriate institutional capital for
themselves.

        Focusing on 19th century and early 20th century experience, Calomiris (1992)
similarly demonstrates that agency theory can explain historically which of 14 state-
sponsored deposit-insurance schemes did and did not go broke. Agency theory can also
explain how Denmark avoided the banking disaster that overtook Norway and Sweden in
1992 (Bernard, Merton, and Palepu, 1992) Across these samples, agency theory not only

serves to explain why particular government-sponsored deposit insurance funds became
insolvent, it serves to explain how and why others resisted insolvency.

        In any government insurance fund, hard-to-resolve conflicts of interest exist both
for incumbent politicians and for the officials they appoint to administer it. The better
authorities can conceal instances of fund insolvency, the more strongly they are tempted
to defer loss-control actions that threaten to prove politically and reputationally costly to

them. Loss-control deferral need not prove self-defeating for authorities because
inadequacies in loss control have little effect on the value of government guarantees. The
value of government guarantees is rooted in authorities' ability to force taxpayers and

well-capitalized institutions to bail out the fund when and if it serves their interest to do
so.
        To reduce the scope for self-serving procrastination by regulatory officials, the FDIC

Improvement Act of 1991 recognizes that action-forcing pressure is required.
                                                                                     Agency theory
clarifies that this pressure might more appropriately come from resolving and pricing agency
costs across the full chain of deposit-insurance stakeholders. Opportunities for pricing and

resolving agency costs can be expanded by making conflicted behavior easier to observe. One

way to do this is to develop private coinsurance and subordinated-debt arrangements that make

the consequences of loss-control behavior register straightforwardly in financial markets (Barth,

Bartholomew, and Bradley, 1991; Wall. 1989).

        A carefully designed partnership between private sureties and federal deposit insurers can

persist without taxpayer bailouts. Our analysis of NCUSIF experience shows that combining a

private surety with prepayment of government insurance premiums creates incentives that reduce

opportunities for officials to shift deposit-institution losses implicitly to federal taxpayers. The

June 1993 entry of USF&G Corp. into credit-union bonding confinns the instinctive academic

presumption that, thanks to its ability to reduce agency costs, new capital can anticipate earning

an attractive return in a private surety that seeks to coinsure federal deposit-insurance loss

exposure.
                                                                                           17


                                     REFERENCES


  Barth, James R., Philip Bartholomew, and Michael Bradley. "Reforming Federal Deposit
         Insurance: What Can Be Learned from Private Insurance Practices?," Consumer

         Finance Ouarterlv Report 45(1991), pp. 140-147.
  Barth, James R. and R. Dan Brumbaugh. The Credit Union Industry: Financial Condition

        and Policy rssues. California Credit Union League, 1991.

 Bernard, Victor, Robert Merton, and Krishna Palepu. "Market-to-Market
                                                                           Accounting for
        U.S. Banks and Thrifts: Lessons from the Danish Experience," presented at the

        Accounting Research Colloquium, Ohio State University (May 8, 1992).
 Calomiris, Charles W. "Getting the Incentives Right in the Current Deposit Insurance

        System: Successes from the Pre-FDIC Era," in James R. Barth and R. Dan
        Brumbaugh, Jr. (ed.), The Reform of Federal Deposit Insurance:
                                                                         Discinlinig
        Government and Protecting Taxpayers. New York: Harper-Collins, 1992.
 CUMIS Insurance Society, Inc. "The CUMIS Directors and Officers Endorsement and

        the Regulatory Exclusion." Madison, WI (April 4, 1991), unpublished.
 CUNA. Comments on the U.S. Treasury Department's Study on the Federal Denosit

       Insurance System. Credjt Union National Association, Inc., 1990.
Fajna, Eugene and Michael Jensen. "Separation of Ownership and Control," Journal of
       Law and Economics 26(1983), 301-325.
Kane, Edward J. "Changing Incentives
                                       Facing Financial-Services Regulators," Journal of
       Financial Services Research, 2(1989), pp. 263-272.
Office of Management and Budget. Budzetin2 for Federal Deposit Insurance, Office of

       Management and Budget, Washington, D.C., 1991.
Smith, Donald J. "A Theoretic Framework for the Analysis of Credit Union Decision

      Making," Journal of Finance, 39(1984), pp. 1155, 1168.
                                                                                       18


Smith, Donald J., Thomas Cargill, and Robert Meyer. "An Economic Theory of a Credit

       Union," Journal of Finance, 36(198 1), pp.519-528.
Tripp, James D., and Stanley Smith. "U.S. Credit Union Motivation for Involvement in
       the First-Mortgage Market," Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics,
       7(1993) pp. 229-236.

Wall, Larry D. "A Plan for Reducing Future Deposit Insurance Losses: Puttable

       Subordinated Debt," Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, pp.2-
       17.

White, Halbert. "A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Mauix Estimator and a
      Direct test forHetemskedasticity, "Econornetrjcp 48 (1980), 817-838.
Yu, Min-Teh. Taxpayer Losses in the S&L Insurance Fund. 1985-1989, unpublished
      Ph.D. dissertation, Columbus: The Ohio State University, 1991.
                                                                                          19


    Table 1: Average Annual Rates of Return on Credit-Union ASsets, 1987-1990
                                   (in percent per annum)




          Year                Investments               Loans

           1987                   8.43                  11.79                   6.77
           1988                   9.50                  11.34                   7.65
           1989                   9.87                  11.78                   8.53
           1990                   8.20                  12.07                   7.89




* U.S.
         Treasury series of yields on actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities
         (taken from Federal Reserve Bulletins)
                                                                                  20

  Table 2: Opportunity.Cost (MV) Estimates of Credit-Union Capital and the Net
 Worth of The National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (Yearend, in $billions).




                                              MV Capital NCUSIF's
               Aggregate                      Shortfall in Exposure in NCUSIF's
              MV of CU NCUSIF's                Insolvent MV-Solvent MV Net
    Year        Capital        Reserves0             CUs    CUs
   1987          4.37             1.60               1.02    .37         .21
   1988          7.88             1.86               .43     .69         .74
   1989         11.95             1.97               .03     .73        1.21
   1990         13.53             2.05               .90     .88         .27




* Source: NCUSIF Financial
                             High!iEhts. Sf3 1,93.
** column 2 minus columns
                            3 and 4.   -
                                                                                             21


                Table 3: Logistic Regression Estimating the Probability that
                                  a Credit Union is Closed




   CLOSED = Bç + B1MVratio +         2 (BVratio1 - MVratioj) +     133   (11FotaIShares) +



CLOSED           = 1 if a credit union was closed
                   0 if it was not
MVratio          = market value of capital divided by total shares
BVratio          = book value of capital divided by total shares
TotalShares      = total outstanding shares.

                              Estimated
                              coefficient           Standard error
          130                    535*                     .16                     1109
       61.62                   -14.94'                   2.15                        49
                                17.56'                   2.91                        37
          133                   20.60                   26.10                         2

model loglikelihood = 1151
covarjate Score x2 = 139'
correct predictions = 72.1%
N = 42968




'p C .0001
                                                                                22

      Table 4: OLS Regression Estimates of the Cost of Closure, Using Whitets
                           Adjustment for Heteroskedasticity


        COST = 130 + Si MVcap + 82 (BVcap1 - MVcap) + 83 TotalShares1 +



COST            = NCUSIFS closure cost
MVcap           = market value of closed credit union's capita]
BVcap           = book value of closed credit unions capital
ToralShares = closed credit union's total outstanding shares.

                            Estimated
                            coefficient         Standard error      t-stat
                              -61010                159210            .38
          -                   -1.17 *                   .51          2.30
                              7.28 **                  1.76          4.12
          83                     .051                  .043          1.18



model F = 23.23 **
adj. R2 = .18
N = 324




**p<.0001
*p<.01
