                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            HEALTH, INCOME, AND RISK
                           AVERSION: ASSESSING SOME
                          WELFARE COSTS OF ALCOHOLISM
                               AND POOR HEALTH




                                       John Mullahy
                                      Jody L Sindelar




                                 Working Paper No. 4649



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1994

The research reported here has been supported in part by Grant R01AA08394 from the U.S.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism to Yale University. Many thanks are
owed to Phil Cook Bill Evans, Paul Gertler, Michael Grossman, Don Kenkel, Paul Portney,
Roger Sherman, John Strauss, and seminar participants at Johns Hopkins, Vanderbilt, and the
Rochester Health Economics Workshop for their insightful comments and helpful suggestions
on earlier drafts, and to Maureen Cropper and Rick Freeman for guidance on the literature.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Health Economict Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                     NEER Working Paper #4649
                                                                                February 1994


                              HEALTH. INCOME. AND RISK
                             AVERSION: ASSESSING SOME
                            WELFARE COSTS OF ALCOHOLISM
                                 AND POOR HEALTH


                                          ABSTRA

       The economic costs of adverse health outcomes have typically been evaluated in a context
of risk neutrality, an approach that ignores the potential welfare importance of individuals' risk
preferences. This paper presents a framework that unifies the research in health capital and
earnings with that on risk preferences in the presence of stochastic outcomes. The model is
implemented to obtain estimates of the economic damages due both to general health problems
as well as to one specific health problem that is of considerable interest from society's
perspective: alcoholism. Our empirical findings, based on data from the Epidemiologic
Catchment Area survey, indicate that failure to recognize the possibility of risk averse preferences
leads to a potentially serious underestimation of the magnitudes of the "costs" of alcoholism and
poor health. In particular, it is shown that while alcoholism problems have negative impacts on
the conditional mean of income (consistent with most of the existing literature), they also have
positive impacts on the conditional variance of income. Our conclusions are to some degree
provisional because our estimates of conditional variances are necessarily biased to the extent that
unobserved heterogeneity is an important determinant of the moment structure of income in our
sample.



John Mullahy                                                 Jody L Sindelar
Department of Economics                                      Department of Epidemiology
Trinity College                                               and Public Health
Hartford, Cl' 06106                                          Yale Medical School, Box 3333
and NBER                                                     New Haven, Cl' 06510
                                                             and NBER
L Introduction

    That poor health is costly to society is a proposition few would debate. Apart from the very

real costs associated with pain and suffering themselves, poor health - when characterized as
a depressed stock of one kind of productive human capital — has repeatedly and in many
contexts been shown to result in reduced earnings and income, in disruptions to normal family

life, and in a variety of other undesirable social consequences)
    Nonetheless, despite the rigorous theory and econometrics that have been devoted to
analyzing suéh relationships, the economic damages attributed to adverse health outcomes have
typically been evaluated in contexts that do not account for cx ante uncertainty surrounding
valued outcomes, thereby ignoring the vast literatuke on the importance of risk preferences
towards stochastic outcomes.2 Thus, for instance, if a specific health problem is found to
reduce wages or earnings by $500 on average, then $500 is typically considered to be the per
capita "cost" - or at least the — manifested in the labor market — attributable to the health
problem. Even if implemented in a reasonable manner, such strategies are inherently "a post

productivitybased" rather than "a ante welfare-based approaches for measuring "social costs";
in partiäilar, no allowance is made for risk aversion or the cxante stochastic nature of earnings.

    This paper presents an framework that unifies to some degree the research in health capital
and earnings and in individual attitudes towards and decisionmaking in the presence of a ante

stochastic outcomes.' The fundamental objective is to obtain a more comprehensive picture of




1. See, e.g., Bartel and taubman (1979, 1986) and Rice et al. (1990).

2. Some parallel issues arise in the analysis of uncertain medical expenditures, but for that issue
the importance of cx ante risk aversion has long been recognized as the driving force underlying
the market for health insurance.

3. A good analogy is the agricultural economics literature on estimation of the welfare costs of
output variations; see Antic (1988) for an overview of the key issues.

                                                 1
  the "cost? of general health problems as well as one specific health problem that is of
 considerable interest from society's perspective: alcoholism.' A prevalent health problem,'
 especially among males,' alcoholism has been estimated to result in sizeable costs to society.7
      The basic idea underlying the analysis can be summarized as followâ. Suppose individuals
 have indirect utilities, V(.;y), defined over some measure of income, Y, and that each
 individual confronts a ante a probability disthbution of a post income outcomes, (.
                                                                                          Q;X)
 which is conditioned on a vector of the individual's characteristics,
                                                                         Q=(Z,e).   Only some
 elements of     i.e. Z, are observed by the econometician; et is "unobserved heterogeneity"
 in the usual sense.

     Conditional on      income is stochastic a ante from the individual's perspective, as one

 property of the conditional distribution t(Y1JQ4;X) is assumed to be var(YIQ)>0. In this
 setting, an individual who, due to some policy change or other exogenous shock, experiences
 a shift in    will be confronted with a new a ante income distribution and will accordingly
experience an a ante welfare change whose direction and magnitude depend both on properties

                                                            Ingenera1,evenifthesij
"mean-preserving," there will be welfare consequences so long as there are variance effects and



4. See Cook (1990) and Mullahy (1993) for surveys of the key issues, and NIAAA (1990) for
details. NIAAA's estimate of the "economic cog" of alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence is
$136.3 billion for 1990 (NL&AA (1990), p. 174).

5. See American Psychiatric Association (1980, 1987) for the
of alcoholism as a health disorder.                          medicallpsychiairic perspective

6. Over 10% of males aged 18 to 65 are at any point in time estimated to manifest alcoholism
symptoms, and more than twice this number are estimated to have exhibited symptoms of
alcoholism at some point over the course of their lifetimes. Conversely, only about 3% of
females are estimated to suffer from alcoholism symptoms.

7. See, for instance, Chapters II and VII of NL4AA (1990) and Rice et al. (1990).

                                              2
individuals are not risk neutral.

    The paper has two main objectives. The first is to document empirically how the probability
distribution of income outcomes — in particular, its mean and variancedepends
                                                                       —      on observables
Z, especially those of interest from a policy perspective.' Our particular focus is on how
medically-defined alcoholism as well as general health status affect the moment structure of
incomes.    It might   be   noted that this study was motivated initially by the concern that
econometric studies of how general health status and, in particular, alcoholism' affect labor

market performance may miss an important part of the evaluative picture to the extent that they
focus only on mean effects, as is typically the case in regression analysis of such phenomena.'°

    This observation motivates our second objective, which is to consider in a mean-variance
utility framework how such information might be utilized to gain some understanding of the
welze implications associated 11th policies designed to change various elements of the
observablesZ. To the extent that moments of Yt of higher order than the mean depend on;,
then welfare computations based solely on how shifts in ; affect the mean of       will misstate
the ne welfare effects of the shift in      if individuals are not risk neutral. The empirical



8. There are some commonalities of this paper with that of Low and Ormiston (1991), who
specify and estimate using MS data a stochastic specification akin to that described below.
Their framework did not account for the role of health problems as determinants of the moment
structure of income.

9. See Mullahy (1993) for a survey on the relationships between alcohol use and labor market
performance.

10. Much of the pertinent literature — economics and otherwise - is concerned with the 'cost?
of illness. By explicitly or implicitly invoking a 'wage equals value of marginal product'
assumption, many such studies conclude in essence that the point estimate of the health status
parameter in wage/earnings/income regressions is a measure of the productivity loss associated
with the health problem. However, the relationships between such productivity losses and
welfare in the way economists usually think of welfare are not obvious unless stringent
assumptions (e.g. risk-neutrality) on preferences are invoked.

                                               3
complication is that the economethcian, whose data permit conditioning only on        but not on

all elements of     will tend to measure greater conditional variance from the data a post than
the individual confronts   a ante so long as the role of      in conditioning s(YtIz,et;x) is
nontriviaL"
    The plan is as follows. Section II presents an expected utility framework in which both first

and second moment welfare consequences of poor health can be assessed. Section III discusses

the econometric strategy and data. Section IV presents the estimation results. Section V
presents a setaf estimates of some of the costs of alcoholism and poor health that are manifested
in the labor market Section VI concludes.


U. Health and Welfare

    As above, consider an individual whose preferences can be described by an indirect utility
function defined on income, V=V(Y;y), where Y >0 denotes income, VI> 0, and y is a vector

of parameters that characterize preferences. From an a ante perspective, an individual with
characteristics Q has a wise welfare determined by his or her expected utility (EU)



11. The unobserved heterogeneity S may, for example, have the character of an individual's
knowledge of the quality of his/her job attachment or match or the knowledge of certain
contractual or legal requirements that mitigate the uncertainty of labor market outcomes. With
a reference to Becker (1975), Eden and Pun (1981) state succinctly the empirical implications
of such unobserved heterogeneity in a context similar to that considered here:

       The problem with using the large unexplained portion of the cross-sectional
       dispersion of earnings to construct measures of the uncertainty in different
       earnings profiles is that individuals possess information on their probable future
       positions in the eaniings distribution, that we, in our role as researchers, do not
       Thus Becker concludes his discussion of the variance in the returns to college
       education with the question: How much of this large variation in the gain from
       a college education can be anticipated due to known differences in ability,
       environment, etc., and, therefore, shotald not be considered part of the a ante
       risk?'

                                               4
                                EU(Q;y,X) a
                                              '"(O,o') V(Y;7)dt(YIQ;X),


 where the parameters 'y describe preferences towards risk The explicit dependence of expected
 utility on the parameters of the indirect utility function and the distribution function iswritten

 to emphasize that expected utility depends on the parametric sflcture of both preferences and
 the data generating process, as well as on any covariates that might condition preferences and
 probability distributions.'2
     To focus ideas, the miliar Grossman-Becker-MJncer13 human capital framework provides

 a convenient structure within which such dependencies might be analyzed. Dropping observation

 subscripts, suppose y=In(Y) is determined as



                                    y = fQ.4Z;a), o(Z;$), e, 4.                                   (1)


where tç) and o'(.) denote (in a sense to be made clearer below) conditional mean and variance
conditional functions, respectively, and where e represents the component of log-income that is
a ante stochastic to the individual, Zt(K,H,)Q summarizes all observable covariates, with K
a vector of human capital measures other than health (e.g. schooling, experience), Ha vector



 12. We ignore here the interesting complication that arises when the utility function V(.) is itself
health-state-dependent (e.g. different t values depending on whether or not one is in the poor
health state, or explicitly conditioning V(.) on Z), and instead allows Z to conditiononly the
distribution function. Ignoring state-dependence of this nature may result in an underestimate
of the expected utility losses due to poor health, as the approach proposed here accounts only
for health-related income differentials, not for welfare losses due to "pam and suffering." For
interesting discussions of this and rlnsd issues, see Cook and Grabam (19Th, Smith and
Desvousges (1987), and Viscusi and Evans (1990).

13. Grossman (l972a, 1972b), Becker (1975), MIncer (1974).

                                                 S
of health status measures, and X a vector of other covariates that affect the distribution of y.
    If larger values of H indicate better health, then much empirical research'4 suggests that

aE(YIQ)IOH>O, i.e good health is a productive component of human capital. Any reasonable
specification of preferences would have'3



                            Eu(J%,x,e;7,x)> Eu(H,x,e;7,x),                                      (2)


i.e. eapected utility is greater, ceterif paribas, in the good ((3) health state than in the poor (P)
health state. Of course, even in the absence of risk and variance considerations, one would be
led to this conclusion simply as a consequence of the 3E(Y Q)/ØH >0 result. However, once
risk aversion and health-dependent conditional income variances are admitted, then as suggested

above the standard differences in mean income approach to assessing the costs associated with

adverse health outcomes is seen to provide only a partial picture of the welfare losses that attend
poor health.

    Were it found empiricaily, for instance, that ÔE(yJOJIôH>0 and Ovar(yjOJ/8H<O, i.e.
good health increases conditional mean income and reduces income's conditional variance, then
in the presence of risk aversion there are two channels — a mean effect and a variance effect —

through which poor health diminishes welfare. In such circumstances, welfare analysis must

recognize that in addition to the lower mean incomes they would wish to avoid, risk-averse
individuals would also be willing a awe to incur positive risk premia to avoid adverse health
outcomes.




14. See, for instance, Bartel and Taubman (1979, 1986), Benham and Benham (1982) and Luft
(1975).

15. IC is henceforth absorbed as partofX

                                                6
     The model (1)-fl) provides a convenient analytical framework for assessing the key policy

issue at hand, i.e. whether interventions designed to mitigate, forestall, or prevent adverse health
outcomes may have payoffs in terms of increased expected utility that could well exceed simply
the health-related differences in mean incomes. To the extent that the differences between EU
in the good and poor health states can be described in terms of monetary equivalents (e.g.
compensating or equivalent variations), it is then possible to meaningfuliy identi' one
component of the true economic costs of poor health.

     To this end, if7 (the preference parameters) and X (the probability distribution parameters)
are known or estimable, then measurement of such costs would be feasible. The empirical
analysis of such a structure would be relatively straightforwaid were it not for 0•          whose

presence introduces a fundamental identification problem: the a ante              (and, therefore,

welfare-relevant) variance confronted by the individual and the a post                variance the

econometrician can measure will in general not be the same.

     The empirical and evaluative implications of unobserved heterogeneity depend on precisely
howe enters the model. While several reasonable possibilities can be entertained,.the leading

case of additive heterogeneity is illustrative to consider. Suppose the specific form of f(.) in (1)
is

                                  y=p(Z;a)+s(Z;$)e+0                                            (3)
                                      = 14Z;a) + u,


where s(.)=v'o(.), and suppose that the unobservables (e,0) and covariates satisfy the following
mean-, variance-, and covariance-independence conditions:"




16. See Manski (1988) for a discussion of the implications of these statistical restrictions.

                                                 7
                             E(eZ) = E(IZ)           covfr,eZ) = 0,
                      = var(eZ) =     var(e),   and re     var(OIZ) = var(6).


That is, the observable conditioning covariates Z are assumed to be exogenous in a particular
sense)7 It follows from (.) that


                                        E(yJZ) = s(Z;a),                                        (3a)



and, since var(yjZ)=E(y2Z)-E2(yz),


                                   var(y I Z) = o'(Z;fl)r8 + t.                                 (3b)



Note that a(Z;$)r8 is the true a wile log-income variance confronting the individual whereas

ci(Z;Thre+re is what the econometrician can measure a post.
    The particular manner in which 6 enters the model in conjunction with the true functional



 17. While the discussion of "overdispersion" is cast here in terms of unobserved heterogeneity,
there may be other reasons why the econometrician measures variance that is not relevant a
wise to the individual dcc isionmakej. For example, if any element of Z is measured inaccurately
by the econometriciaji, then there is an extra source of 'error' and, therefore, error variance,
the econometrician confronts that is irrelevant to the individual's a wue welfare.
     Regardless of the interpretation of 6 (measurement error, unobserved covariates, etc.), it
should be stressed that the assumption that the observed covariates Z are exogenous - i.e. Z
serves as its own instruments — amounts to a best-case scenario for identifying the parameters
of interest. Yet, even instrumenting strategies that are suitable for estimating linear conditional
mean functions in the presence of unobserved heterogeneity, errors-in-variables, etc., will not
in general suffice to identify all parameters of interest in a conditional variance function, as will
be seen below.
    Finally, while the exogeneity of some elements of the Z vector used here might be
questioned, there are no obvious instrumental variables that would be manifestly preferred to
using the elements of Z as their own instruments; this issue is taken upagainin section flLb.
                                                 8
 form of cc) will determine which parameters of the variance function are estimable.
                                                                                         The
 simplest case is where re =0 and where the econometrician assumes the correct form for
                                                                                        o(.),
 in which case all elements of$ can in principle be estimated.
                                                                     more relevant case to consider
 is where (3b) is the true variance function and the econometrician assumes a linear variance

function or(Z;$) =Z$=fl0+Z1$1. In this instance, the constant term parameter, o' will
                                                                                     capture
the effects of unobserved heterogeneity, absorbing re as well as r8. As such, $o re, and

are not separately identified but the slope parameters fi1 are, at least in principle, estimable.
If instead the true variance function was o(Z;$)r8r0 and if a(Z;a) was assumed to be
exponential (c(Z;$)=exp(Zfl)), the constant term parameter $ would again absorb re and r.
For other specifications nonzero r may have less straightforward implications for estimating
the variance function parameters.

    The econometric analysis conducted below estimates linear and exponential variance function
models. We stress, however, that so long as re is nonzero, the econometrician's estimates of
the variance function will be biased; the bias may or may not be confined to the intercept
paRameter. For the welfare evaluations undertaken in section V. a key implication of such bias
is that it will tend to result in overestimates of the a ante variance confronted by the individual.

That analysis proceeds as if re=G, but in actuality the magnitudes presented in that section
should be viewed as upper bounds on the true magnitudes.



m. Econometric Methodology and Sample Construction
liLa. &onometdc Strategy
    An econometric model is suggested by (.)        and   (.). Assume the data are T independent
observations on %Zt). Assume ji(.) is linear, ,4Zt;a)=Zta, so that for all t,



                                         y=Za+u,                                                (4)

                                                9
with

                                         E(uIZ) = 0                                           (5a)
and

                                     vaI(yjZ) = o(Z;fl),                                     (5b)



whereZ, a', and fi' are 1 xk vectors and where c(Z;ft)=Z# or 7(Z$)=exp(Zfl).
      Estimation of and inference concerning X=(a',fi']' is carried out via a generalized method

of moments (GMM) approach (Hansen (1982); Newey (1985); Crowder (1987); Davidson and
MacKinnon (1993), chapter 17). Consider the following cross-products of instrwnents           and

residuals -EQlIZt) for yE{1,2}:



                                miQs) Z'(y-Za]= Zp1j
and

                          n'(X) =           - ()2 - o(Zft)] =
with

                                  m1(X) =   [mj(X)', m(X)']'.


E[m(X)] =0 follows as a consequence of (4)-(5a,b), and it is this vector of moment restrictions
that provides the basis for the GMM estimator, which is given by the minimizer of a quadratic
form in the moment functions or estimating equations m(X),"



                                   nm F(X)     m(X)'tF1m(X),


18. In this formulation, if is a consistent estimator of var(V'Tm(X)) obtained using first   sge
residuals from least uares estjmates r of X. Theasymptotic covariance matrix of Vfl is
estimated    as 4G(X)'a"10(X)y1,         where GX)=TETiamt(X)/aXIx$ estimates
G(A)zplizn['r';      18m(A)IôX].
                                               10
where
                                    m(X) =   r1 El....1 °k0
and

                                 r1 rI...1 mh(x')n(r)'       ijE{1,2}.


      In this instance, the GMM estimate of a is seen to be identical to OLS and its asymptotic
covariance matrix identical to a White-type heteroskedasticity consistent covariance estimator.
The GMM approach is taken so that inferences concerning fi can be made in a straightforward
and   distribution-robust maimer and, as will be seen below, so that several useful tests of
misspecification can easily be conducted. Maximum likelihood under a normality assumption

(the Low and Ormiston (1991) approach) in conjunction with a family of score tests is an
alternative strategy that was considered. Although asymptotically less efficient than ML, the
GWvf approach is preferable for the purposes at hand since - unlike ML - it is robust against

a variety of departures from normality.'9


IJLb. Data and Swapling Cosisiderations
      The empirical analysis utilizes data from Wave I of the New Haven; Connecticut site of the

Epidemiological Catchment Area (ECA) 1980 survey of non-institutionalized individuals
conducted under the auspices of the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). The
survey is designed primarily to assess the prevalence of mental disorders -including alcoholism
- in a community setting. The ECA data set is quite well-suited for study of the labor market
consequences of alcoholism as it combines medically sophisticated diagnoses of alcoholism with

information on income and labor force participation and demographic chaiacteristics.


19. Indeed, on the basis of some normality tests that we conduct and report below, there is some
suggestion that a log-normality assumption may be tenuous for our data.

                                               11
     The ECA surveys were conducted by five major university teams in five areas of the
 countiy: New Haven, cr (Yale University); Baltimore, MD (Johns Hopkins University);
 Durham, NC (Duke University); SL Louis, MO (Washington University); and Los Angeles, CA

 (UCLA). Individuals aged 18 years old and older were surveyed the New Haven SMSA,
comprising 13 towns that at the time of the survey had an adult population of 420,000. Wave

I of the survey was completed between 1980 and 1981, ftlding 5,034 observations for the New
Haven site, a 78% completion rate. At the New Haven site, the elderly were substantially

oversainpled; thus explaining the relatively small sample size ultimately used, as described
below.20

    From the 5,034 observations in Wave I of the survey, attention is restricted to ma1es aged

30 to 59, with this age truncation rationalized by results discussed in Mullahy and Sindelar
(19Th) where the importance of accounting for peculiarities in the relationships between
alcoholism and labor market success at both the beginning and end of the working life cycle is

demonstrated. Given the substantial oversampling of the elderly at the New Haven site, thisage
restriction reduces the sample size to 555 usable observations. The extent to which our
results generalize is thus an important consideration.

    Assessment of disorders in the ECA is via a professionally designed survey instrument, the



20. See Eaton and Kessler (1985) for details on the ECA Surveys.

21. We focus on males both because of their far greater propensity to suffer from alcoholism
vis-a.vis females and because of the considerable body of accumulated research regarding the
specification of earnings models for males; sac Willis (1986).

22. To be precise, the reduction from the original 5,034 observations to the sample of 555 used
in this analysis is due to the following restrictions:

       1. Restriction to age 3O59: 1,420 observations remain;
       2. Restriction to males: 604 observations remain;
       3. Miscellaneous missing data: 555 observations remain.

                                              12
Diagnostic Interview Schedule (1)15), which corresponds to the American Psychiatric
Association's DSM-ffl disorder diagnoses. This avoids the self-selection problem in which only
individuals who seek treatment can be determined to be alcoholics, and avoids to a large degree

the potential for self-reporting biases with regard to alcoholism. Although the issue of the

accbncyandquaiityofthediagnosesbasdontheDIsisofcourse,anopeno,EcA'5
DIS-based diagnosis of alcoholism has been found to have reasonably good correspondence with

alternative diagnostic approaches (see Anthony et al. (l985))B
    For this analysis we consider two alternative charactàrizations of alcoholism. In the first,
we define the variable ALCOHOLISM as a binary indicator of whether or not the individual
ever satisfied DSM criteria for alcoholism. In the second, which we implement to determine
whether the timing of the onset of alcoholism symptoms may be important, we define two

variables, EARLY ONSET and LATE ONSET ALCOHOLISM, which subclassify
ALCOHOLISM by whether the initial onset of an individual's alcoholism symptoms were up to

age 18 years or after age 18, respectively.
    If one wished to treat alcoholism as an endogenous consumption behavior, it is not at all

apparent what identifying instruments would (a) be conceptually appropriate and (b) be
practically available? Even if some conceptually appropriate instruments could be identified

(e.g. in general, one might consider using lagged alcoholic beverage prices, although such a
strategy is not available to us since there is no geographic variation in our data), the recent
econometric literature has stressed the dangers associated with using instruments that are weakly

correlated with included endogenous variablesY Measures like ftmily background variables


23. See Mullahy and Sindelar (1993a) for discussion.

24. See Strauss (1986) for a general discussion of such issues.

25. See Staiger and Stock (1993) for a very interesting discussion.

                                               13
 are another possibility, but the circumstances under which their use would be appropriate are

 also liinited3' The empirical analysis, therefore, follows the mainstream tradition in the health
 capital literature (e.g. Bartel and Taubman (1979, 1986)) and maintains that the health capital

 measures (here, those pertaining to alcoholism and physical health status) are econometrically
exogenous?
     Table 1 defines the variables used in this analysis while the sample descriptive statistics are

displayed in table 2. IL should be noted that INCOME and SCHOOLING are created as

pseudo-continuous variables using interval midpoints. For SCHOOLiNG, "17" was used to fill
in the open-ended upper interval "grad school," while for INCOME '120" was used to fill in
the open-ended upper interval "greater than $l0O,0O0." Income is income from allsources;
more precisely, it is how much income the individual "brought into" the household in the




26. See Kenkel and Ribar (1993) and Mullahy and Sindelar (1994) for discussion.

27. The American Psychiatric Association as well as the World HealthOrganization provide
some quasi-official standing for the disorder view of alcoholism in defining alcohol dependence
and abuse as psychological disorders (see NIAAA (1990), Chapter VIII). However, it should
be noted that there are many alternative views on the issue of whethei alcoholism is simply a
health problem or instead is a complex, heterogeneous phenomenoninvolving individual choice,
genetic and metabolic heterogeneity, etc. (see Vaillant (1983), Sournia (1990), Pingarette (19?8),
NIAAA (1990), and, in a more general context, Becker and Murphy (1988)), so that the issue
of the econometric exogeneity of ALCOHOLISM is admittedly unsettled. If exogeneity fails,
then the estimates of the ALCOHOLISM coefficients will be inconsistent, with the bias not
signable a priori.

28. While the upper censoring of the INCOME variable mightappear problematic, only 9 of the
555 observations in the sample report personal income in the $100,000+
                                                                           category. Moreover,
Mullahy and Sindelar (1993a) show that estimates of the conditional mean of LOG-INCOME
are not sensitive to how the upper interval is treated, both by using alternative 'fill in" values
than the one used here and, more explicitly, by accounting for the censoring via an
upper-censored semipaiametric Tobit model due to Powell (1986). In light of these results, and
since the pseudo-continuous approach greatly simplifies theeconometrics, the strategy pursued
here would seem a reasonable one.

                                               14
previous year, which presumably includes transfer payments.V                JENCE is generated
in the standard manner as age minus education minus 6. The two health status variables are
measures of overall physical health and a diagnosis of lifetime alcoholism problems.


IV. Estimation Results

    The estimates are presented in table 3)° Columns 1-3 report the results when the lifetime
alcoholism variable (ALCOHOLISM) is used; columns 4-6 report the results when alcoholism
is subcategorized by the timing of its onset (EARLY and LATE ONSET ALCOHOLISM). The

results in column 1 suggest that both health outcomes of interest have statistically and

quantitatively important effects on mean log-income, with the point estimate associated with
ALCOHOLISM approximately one-half that associated with not being PHYSICALLY
HEALTHY. Using exp(a9-l to estimate the percentage change in E(ytlZt) due to turning on
the j-th dummy variable, the results in column 1 translate into a cererisparibul' 22% increase
in income for individuals not having ALCOHOLISM and a 48% increase in income for
individuals who are PHYSICALLY HEALTHY.

    The results for the X variables are seen to be consistent with the standard results found in

the human capital and earnings literature: a concave EXPERIENCE profile; strong
SCHOOLING effects; and statistically significant estimates for MARRIED and WHim. It



29. A reader has noted that one implication of the income measure including transfers is that the.
welftre losses from a wue income variance may be overstated.

30. Estimation is performed using GAUSS on a personal computer. The GAUSS estimation
code is available on request.

31. The ceterisparibta is an important consideration here since alcoholism may have important
indirect effects on other human capital components over the course of the life cycle, e.g.
presence of alcoholism symptoms may correspond to reduced educational attainment. See Cook
and Moore (1990) and Mullahy and Sindelar (1989, 1990, l993a,b) for further discussion.

                                               15
 might be noted that the EXPERIENCE effects are smaller and statistically somewhat weaker than

might generally be anticipated. By and large, this appears to be attributable not so much to

sampling quirks or data problems, but rather to the fact that the ages of the individuals in the

sample are restricted to 30 to 59. By truncating off the lower end of the age distribution (i.e.

18 to 29), the portion of the profile that is likely to be most steeply sloping in experience is not

observed in the estimation sample?

    Columns 2 and 3 of table 3 display the estimates of the conditional variance functions under

the exponential and linear assumptions, respectively.         The results are qualitatively and

quantitatively similar for both specifications of a(.), and support nicely the hypothesis that health

problems may have important implications for not simply the mean, but also for the variance,
of LOG-INCOME. Having ALCOHOLISM and not being PHYSICALLY HEALTHY both
imply large ce:ertc paribus increases in the conditional variance of LOG-INCOME, with the
magnitude of the ALCOHOLISM effect again approximately one-half that of the effect due to
not being PHYSICALLY HEALTHY? Moreover, it is interesting to see that being
MARRIED is - like good health — a factor that stabilizes income outcomes in the sense of

reducing their conditional variance around a given conditional mean?


32. See Murphy and Welch (1990) for further discussion.

33. We compared the distributions of the OLS residuals for separate
                                                                        subsamples of alcoholics
and nonalcoholics. The key difference in the distributions
                                                           (after adjusting for mean differences)
appears as a greater sprea& in the low end of the distribution for alcoholics as compared with
nonalcoholics.

34. The parameter estimates in table 3 suggest that the partial effects ofALCOHOLISM on the
conditional mean and the conditional variance of LOG-INCOME are negative and positive,
respectively. To determine the partial effects on the conditional mean and variance of INCOME
itself, additional computations are required. From the moment properties of the lognormal
distnbution, and dropping observation subscripts to reduce clutter, then E(YZ)=exp(p+a/2)
and var(Y Z)=exp(2p+a)(exp(o)4) (recall, a denotes variance, not standard deviation). For
                                                                                     (continued...)
                                                16
      Because estimation of$ is of primary focus here, tests for misspeciflcation of the conditional

variance functions are of seine interest. Since misspecificaxion of p(Zta) will in turn cause

problems for consistent estimation of a(Ztfl), testing for misspecification of either is of concern.

Following the methodology developed by Tauchen (1985), Newey (1985), and Pagan and Vella
(1989), the tests involve examining cross-products of the estimated residuals         and p.1 with
a vector of functions of ; other than the vector used to form the moment functions
                                                                                        mjt(X) (i.e.
;   itself). Under correct specification of the conditional mean or variance functions, such

cross-products should tend in the limit to a zero vector. For the null hypotheses that the linear

form of p(Zta) and the exponential and linear forms of o(Z1$) are correct, the test statistics
(each       under the null) are 12.22 (p=.09), 10.39 (p=.17), and 11.10 (p=.13), respectively.

Accordingly, there is no significant indication of misspecification of the kind tested here?


34. (...continued)
a given X-vector of covariates, and using the linear specification of a(Ztfl) to simplify
computations, the signs of the partial effects of ALCOHOLISM are determined by whether the
following ratios are greater or less than one:

         E(YIALCOHOLISM=l,X) I E(YALCOHOLISM=0,x)                     = exp(aA + A12)           (1
and
           var(YIALCOHOUSM=1,X) / var(YIALCOHOLISM=O,X) =
                exp(2aA +   ((exp($A +
                          X                 - 1)1 (exp(X$x) -

where a=(aA,ax')' and                       are conformed to correspond to
Z=(ALCOHOLISM,x')'. Using thepoint estimates from table 3, the ratio ()is seen to be less
than one, so ALCOHOLISM indeed is estimated to have a negative partial effect on E(Y I Z) for
any X. To determine the partial effect on var(Y I Z), particular values of X must be considered
since the first term on the its of (**) is less than one while the second (bracketed) term exceeds
one when evaluated at the estimates of table 3. It turns out, that (**) is substantially greater
than one at every X vector in the sample, with a range of 1.47 to 1.62. It thus seems fair to
conclude, as is the case for LOG-INCOME, that ALCOHOLISM reduces INCOME's mean but
increases its variance.

35. For conducting the tests, the functions of; are specified to be the 7x1 vectors containing
the cross-products: ALCOHOLISM*PHySICALLy HEALTHY;
                                                                                    (continued...)
                                                17
    Columns 4-6 of table 3 report the results obtained when the EARLY and LATE ONSET
ALCOHOLISM variables are used in place of the single alcoholism indicator. In the conditional

mean function, it is seen that alcoholism's largest and most significant deleterious impacts are
when its initial onset occurs after age 18. Conversely, it is when alcoholism's initial onset is
at or before age 18 that the variance of income is most affected. Although both EARLY and
LATE ONSET ALCOHOLISM have positive associations with income variance, the effects of

EARLY ONSET are more than twice as large as those of lATE ONSET (with the estimated

effects somewhat stronger for the exponential variance function specification).



V. An Evaluation of Welfare Losses Due to Alcoholism and Poor Health
    To assess the magnitudes of the welfare losses attributable to alcoholism and to poor health,
the expected utility framework sketched in Section II is adopted. That is, differences -

specifically, as shown below, reductions - in expected utility owe to the shifts in the probability
distribution of INCOME associated with either ALCOHOLISM or not being PHYSICALLY

HEALTHY.
    Such welfare measures can be rationalized in terms of the value individuals attach to
certainty equivalence? in the presence of a a'ue stochastic outcomes? We consider the


35. (...continued)
ALCOHOLISMEXPERIENCE; PHYSICALLY HEALTHYSEXPERIENCE;
ALCOHOLISMSCHOOLINO; PHYSICALLY HEALTHY*SCHOOLING;
ALCOHOLISMMARBIED; and PHYSICALLY HEALTHYMARR[ED. It should be pointed
out that tests of this kind are renowned for having low power against a wide variety of
alternatives; see Bierens (1990).

36. The certainty equivalence of an income lottery is mean income minus the risk premium.

 37. For expositional simplicity the following discussion is cast in terms of a scalar 'poor health"
 measure although the analysis that follows will be conducted for both poor health measures,
 ALCOHOLISM and not being PHYSICALLY HEALTHY.
                                                 18
certain monetary values corresponding to expected utility in the two states, i.e.



                               ce(EU(Hj,Xn'X)) — cc1, jE(G,P}


denotes the certainty equivalence (in dollars) of the expected utility received under the income

lottery the individual confronts if a ante in health status j.
      For the reasons spelled out earlier, we feel that our estimates of the         should be viewed
                                                                               ce1

as   upper bounds on the true measures. Since our estimation procedureis likely to overstate the
a ante variance faced by individuals, and since risk-averse individuals will demand positive risk
premia to accept higher variances, then our estimated risk premia will tend to be too high.
Given this caveat, we nonetheless feel it is useful and interesting to obtain a sense of how such
risk premia affect computations of the costs of poor health.

      For illustrative purposes and for ease of computation, V(Y;7) is specified to have a constant

relative risk version (CRBA) form that depends on the single parameter y, i.e.
V(Y;7)=(Y7-l)/.y, which has as a limiting case V(Y;y)=ln(Y) as r0. and has the property
that it characterizes risk-averse (-neutral; -loving) preferences for y< 1 (=1; > 1)." Focusing
here on non-risk-loving preferences, only values of 1 are considered. The work of Hansen

and Singleton (1983) and Constantithdes (1990), among others, suggests that values in the range
(-2,1) might be reasonable to consider. Accordingly, the sensitivity of the welfare cost estimates

to the assumed degree of risk aversion is assessed by considering values of yE {-2,-1,0,1}, with

7=0 understood to imply V(Y;7)=ln(Y).
      The computations are greatly simplified by assuming that the probability distributions of
         (INCOME) are lognormal. To gauge the reasonableness of such a lognormality



38. See Hey (1979) for a good general discussion.

                                                 19
assumption, a test is undertaken to determine whether conditional normality of LOG-INCOME
is empirically tenable for this sample. The conditional moment restrictions to be tested jointly

are
                                                    I   ;i °
a

                               E( Yt -        - 3n)2       zt]   0,


corresponding, respectively, to conditional symmetry and conditional mesokurtosis. Using only
the lifetime alcoholism variable (ALCOHOLISM) for this exercise, we find that the X2) eP

statistics   for the linear and exponential variance function specifications are 4.45 (p=.ll) and
7.42 (p= .02), respectively. Despite the mixed evidence on lognormality provided by these tests,

maintaining conditional lognormality does not seem terribly far-fetched for thesedala?
       The probability distributions of YtIZt are thus assumed lognormal. Focus is primarily on

the outcomes for two distinct subpopulations (good health and poor health).4° Given the
assumptions on CRRA indirect utilit/' and conditionally lognormal income, it followsthat the


39. See Pagan and Vella (1989) for additional discussion of this genre of misspeci&ation test,
and Kopp and Mullahy (1990) for some recent applications. It should be noted that the
properties of standard normality tests based on third and fourth sample moments of OLS
residuals (see, e.g., Greene (1990). p. 329) are uncertain in this application given the presence
of conditional heteroskedasticity established above. The test proposed here, conversely, should
    have proper asymptotic size regardless of the presence of conditional heteroskedasticity.
    However, since high order moments of the estimated residuals are used in computing the test
    statistics, some caution should be exercised in interpreting them given our relatively small
    sample size.

    40. Henceforth, when examining effects due to ALCOHOLISM, PHYSICALLY HEALTHY will
    beabsorbedaspartofX, andviceversa.
    41. Representations of V(Y;y) less risk averse than ln(Y) (here 'yE(O,l)) actually suggest
    positive willingness to pay for increased a (i.e. downward-sloping indifference curves in (p,)
                                                                                    (continued...)

                                                 20
 expected utility associated with health status j,
                                                     EIJj, is given'2 by


                                    =
                                        7lf(Øc)Y7dt(YIl.,x;x)
                                     = t1exP(711j      + .5'?oj). j        {G,P}



recalling that c denotes variance, not standard deviation. The cej are defined by placing unit
probability mass on some Y in the domain of V(Y;7) such that



                                71cej = 'i'exP(it&j +
giving

                               ce1 = exp(pj   ÷ .57°j) jE{G,PJ.

    The cej computed here can be thought of as ceteiisparibus estimates: holding other factors

constant only the health state variable changes, so this set of estimates conceptually addresses
the question of the worth of recovering from the poor health state while still othenvise being like

a typical person in the poor health state. For ALCOHOLISM, these estimates are computed in

two different ways: first, by turning on the ALCOHOLISM dummy for observations in the

non-ALCOHOLISM subsample ("the healthy become sick"); second, by turning off the



41. (...continued)
space) despite the fact that V(Y;7) is still concave in Y for y€(O,1).                Apparently
counterintuitive results like this have been discussed extensively and resolved by Meyer (1987)
and owe basically to the iognormality assumption. Heuristically, while increases in a1
correspond to an increased risk premium in health state j, they also serve to increase meaá
income as a consequence of the panneterinflon of the lognormal's mean function.

42. Given, that is, up to an additive constant (.(1) that doesn't depend onj. See Aitchison and
Brown (1969) on the moment properties of powers of lognormal variates.

                                               21
ALCOHOLISM dummy for observations in the ALCOHOLISM subsample ('the sick become

healthy). Thus, using the 'healthy become sick' case to illustrate, forjE{G,P}


                  = Etes exp(Xex + 6JP'A + .5txp(XtPx + JPA1 #SG,
            CCj




where      is the Xronecker delta. Again, analogous computations are made to estimate the
PHYSICALLY HEALTHY equivalences.

    The results are presented in table 4. In an important sense, the key comparisons are
between €{-2,-l,O}, the risk averse cases, and =1, the risk neutral case that might be
thought of as the standard approaciL Panelslandfldisplay thecystimates based on the
ceteris paribus assumption. Focusing first on ALCOHOLISM, it is particularly strildng how

the cost' of becoming an alcoholic (panel I) or the 'valu& of recovering from alcoholism
(panel U) depends on the degree of risk aversion. The welfare differences are trivial if risk
neutrality (y=l) is assumed, whereas the differences in the monetary values of the good and
poor health states are considerable at higher degrees of risk aversion. This pattern is similar for
PHYSICALLY HEALTHY.
    We conclude - admittedly provisionally - that failure to recognize the possibility of risk

averse preferences leads to a potentially serious underestimation of the magnitudes of the 'costs'

of alcoholism and poor health. Our conclusions axe provisional, as we have noted several dines
in the course of this discussion, because our estimates of conditional variances are necessarily
biased to the extent that unobserved heterogeneity e is an important determinant of the moment




43. The magnitudes are converted to 1991 dollars via the BLS all items consumer price index.
It should be stressed that all these figures are annual and as such do not represent the present
value of lifetime costs. Such computations, while possible, will depend among other things on
the age of the individual as weli as the rate of discount used.

                                               22
structure of income in our sample.



Vt Snmniry
     This paper has expanded the standard approach to the welfare analysis of health-relaxed
economic costs by accounting for risk aversion and variance in income that depends on health

status. The results presented here suggest that such amendments may be both qualitatively and
—   at least in this application — quantitatively important. Again we stress, however, that the

generalizability of the results beyond the population of "prime age" males must be approached
with caution.

     The present study has provided some empirical insight into the role of alcoholism as a costly

health problem, suggesting that an evaluation of its welfare costs in terms of productivity
differentials alone may significantly understate such costs. In addition, the framework presented

here is a general one that might be applied to a variety of specific andJor general health
problems of concern. The obstacles posed by unobserved heterogeneity are unlikely to be
trivial, but by use of longitudinal data it may be possible to circumvent some of these obstacles
to assessing the cost of poor health. This is the next item on the research agenda.




                                               23
                                          References

Aitchison, I. and LA.C. Brown. 1969. The Lo2normal Distribution, with Snecial Reference to
       Its Uses in Economics. New Yort Cambridge University Press.
American Psychiatric Association. 1980. Dia2nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.

       Third Edition. Washington: American Psychiatric Association.

_______       1987.   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. Third Edition,

       Revised. Washington: American Psychiatric Association.
Anthony, J. et a!. 1985. "Comparisons of the INS and a Standardized Psychiatric Diagnosis."
       Archives of General Psychiatry 42: 667-675.

AnIle, J.M. 1988. Pesticide Policy. Production Risk. and Producer Welfare. Washington:
       Resources for the Future.
Bartel, A. and P. Taubinan. 1979. 'Health and Labor Market Success: The Role of Various
       Diseases." Review of Economics and Statistics 61: 1-8.

________ and ________.           1986.   "Some Economic and Demographic Consequences of
       Mental Illness." Journal of Labor Economics 4: 243-256.

Becker, (3.5. 1975. Human Capital, 2nd Edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

_______ and LM. Murphy. 1988. "A Theory of Rational Addiction. Journal of Political
       Economy 96: 675-700.
Benhant, L. and A. Benhaxn. 1982. "Employment, Earnings, and Psychiatric Diagnosis." in V.

       Fuchs, ed. Economic Asoects of Health. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
       NBER.

Berger, M.C. and J.P. Leigh. 1988. "The Effect of Alcohol Use on Wages." Apolied
       Economics 20: 1343-1351.
Berry, R. and J. Boland. 1977. The Economic Costs of Alcohol Abuse. New Yoric Free Press.

Bierens, H.I. 1990. 'A ConsistentConditiona!MomentTestofPunctionalPorm." Econometrica

                                              24
      58: 1443-1458.

Chavas, 1.-P., R.C. Bishop, and K. Segerson. 1986. "Ex ante Welfare Evaluation in
      Cost-Benefit Analysis." Journal of Environmental Economics and Mana2erneflt 13:
      255-268.

Constantinides, G.M. 1990. "Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle."
      Journal of Political Economy 98: 519-543.
Cook, P.1. 1991. "The Social Costs of Drinking." in Eroert Meeting on Ne2ative Soda!
       Consequences of Alcohol Use. Oslo: Norwegian Ministry of Health and Social Affairs.

_______and D.A. Graham. 1977. "The Demand for Insurance and Protection: The Case of
       Irreplaceable Commodities." Ouarterlv Journal of Economics 91: 143-156.

_______and Mi. Moore. 1990. "Drinking and College Completion." Presented at the 1990
       Annual Meetings of the American Economic Association, Washington, DC.
Crowder, M.J. 1987. "On Linear and Quadratic Estimating Functions." Biometrikal4: 591-597.
Davidson, R. and J.G. MacKinnon. 1993. Estimation and Inference in Econometrics. New
       York: Oxford University Press.
Eaton, W. and L. Kessler. 1985. Epidemioloical Methods in Psychiatry: The NIMH
       Epidemiologic Catchment Area Promm. New Yort Academic Press.

Eden, B. and A. Pakes. 1981. "On Measuring the Variance-Age Profile of Lifetime Earnings."
       Review of Economic Studies 48: 385-394.

Fingarette, H. 1988. Heavy Drinking. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Freeman, A.M. III. 1986. "Uncertainty and Environmental Policy: The Role of Option and
       Quasi-Option Values." in V.K. Smith, S. Advances in Applied Microeconomics, Vol.

       4. Greenwich, Cr: JAI Press.
Greene, W.H. 1990. Econometric Theory. New Yort Matmillan.
Grossman, M. 1972a. "On the Concept of Health Capital andthe Demand for Health." Journal

                                            25
      of Political Economy 80: 223-255.

_______     19'12b.   The Demand for Health: A 'Theoretical and Empirical 1nvestiation. New

      Yoric Columbia University Press for NBER.

Hansen, Li'. 1982. "Large Sample Properties o Generalized Method of Moments Estimators."
      Economefli 50: 1029-1054.

_______ and      1(1. Singleton. 1983. "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the
      Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns." Journal of Political Economy 91: 249-265.

Hey, J.D. 1979. Uncertainty in Microeconomics. New Yoric New York UniversityPress.

Kenkel, D.S. and D.C. Ribar. 1993. "Alcohol Consumption and Young Adults' Socioeconomic
       Status: Evidence on Kin, Moderation, and Past Behavior." Presented at the Brookings

       Institution MICRO-BPEA Conference, Washington. DC.
Kopp, RI. and I. Mullahy. 1990. 'Moment-Based Estimation and Testing of Stochastic Frontier
       Models." Journal of Econometrics 4: 165-183.
Low, S.A. and M.B. Onniston. 1991. "Stochastic Earnings Functions, Rislç and the Rate of
       Return to Schooling." Southern Economic Journal 57: 1124-1132.
Luft, H. 1975. "The Impact of Poor Health on Earnings." Review of Economics and Statistics
       57: 43-47.

Manski, C.F. 1988. Analoe Estimation Methods in Econometrics. London: Chapman and Hall.

Meyer, J. 1987. "Two-Moment Decision Models and Expected Utility Maximization." American

       Economic Review 77: 421-430.
Mincer,!. 1974. Schoolin!. Experience, and Earnin!s. New Yoric Columbia University Press

       for NBER.
Mullahy, 1. 1993. "Alcohol and the Labor Market.' Chapter 6 in 0. Bloss and M. Hilton, eds.

       Economics and the Prevention of Alcohol-Related Problems. Rockville, MD: National

       Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.

                                              26
Mullahy, I. and J. Sindelar. 1989. 'Lifecycle Effects of Alcoholism on Education, Earnings,
      and Occupation.' Inquiry 26: 272-282.

_________    and   ________.      1990.    'An Ounce of Prevention: Productive Remedies for
      Alcoholism? Journal of Policy Analysis and Mana2ement 9: 249-253.

_________   and    _________.    1993a.    'Alcoholism, Work, and Income.' Journal of Labor
       Economics 11: 494-520.

______and ______. 1993b. "Alcoholism and Income: The Role of Indirect Effects.'
       Milbank Onarterly (in press).

_______ and                  .   1994.    'Employment, Unemployment, and Problem Drinking?
       Mimeo.

Murphy, 1CM. and F. Welch. 1990. "Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles.' Journal of Labor
       Economics 8: 202-229.

Newey, W.K. 1985. 'Maximum I ikelihood Specification Testing and Conditional Moment
       Tests.' Econometrica 53: 1047-1070.
Pagan, A. and F. Vella. 1989. 'Diagnostic Tests for Models Based on Individual Data: A
       Survey." Journal of AnvilS Econometrics 4: S29-S59.
Powell, J.L. 1986. Symmetricafly Trimmed Least Squares Estimation for Tobit Models.'
       Econometrica 54: 1435-1460.

Rice, D.P. et a!. 1990. The Economic Costs of Alcohol and Drug Abuse and Mental illness.

       j9. Rockville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,
       Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration.
Smith, V.K. and Wit Desvousges. 1987. 'An Empirical Analysis of the Economic Value of
       Risk Changes.' Journal of Political Economy 95: 89-114.
Sournia, J.-C. 1990. A History of Alcoholism. Oxford: Basil Blackweil.
Staiger, D. and I.E Stoct 1993. "Asymptotics for Instrumental Variables Regressions with

                                                 27
      Weakly Correlated Instruments.' Presented at the NEER Summer Institute, Iuly 1993.

Strauss, 1. 1986. 'Does Better Nutrition Raise Farm Productivity? Journal of Political
      Economy 94: 297-320.
Tauchen, U. 1985. 'Diagnostic Testing and Evaluation of Maximum 1.iln'lihood Models.'
      Journal of Econometrics 30: 415-443.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
      Alcoholism 1990. Seventh Soethl Report to the U.S. Coneress on Alcohol and Health.

      Washington: DHHS Publication No. (ADM) 90-1656.

Vaillant, G.E. 1983. The Natural Histoty of Alcoholism: Causes. Patterns, and Paths to
      Recovery. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univenity Press.
Viscusi, WI. and W.N. Evans. 1990. 'Utility Functions That Depend on Health Status:
      Estimates and Economic Implications.' American Economic Review 80: 353-374.

Willis, LI. 1986. 'Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human Capital
      Earnings Functions.' in 0. Ashenfelter and It. Layard, edt. Handbook of Labor
      Economics, Vol 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.




                                             28
                                      Tals 1
                                Variable Definitions
Incoms Measures
INCOME (1)              Of households total income before taxes for past
                        year, including salaries, wages, social security,
                        welfare, and any other income, how much was earned or
                        brought in by individual (+1000)

LOG—INCOME (y)          Natural log of     INCOME



Independent Variables
ALCOHOLISM              —   1   if symptoms of   alcoholism ever present, — 0   else
EARLY ONSET             —   1   if first alcoholism symptoms were preeent at or before
 ALCOHOLISM             age     18, — 0 else

LATE ONSET              — 1 if first    alcoholism symptoms were present alter age 18,
 ALCOHOLISM             a 0 else
PUYSICIIflY HEALTHY     — 1 it individual reports          physical health is excellent or
                        good, — 0 if reports        fair or   poor

SCHOOLING               Years of     completed   schooling
EXPERIENCE              Age in years minus SCHOOLING minus 6
EXPERIENCE SQUARED      EXPERIENCE squared
WHITE                   —   1   if race is white, •    if race ii nonwhite
                                                       0

MARRIED                 •   1   if currently married, — 0 else




                                         29
                          Table 2
              Sample   Descriptive Statistics
                       (N. obs. • 555)

              Mean       Std. Dev.       Minimua   Maximum
Variable
INCOME        23.42        17.68          0.500     120.0
              2.91         0.785         —0.693      4.79
LOG—INCOME

ALCOUOLISM    0.204        0.403            0          1

                           0.237            0          1
EARLY ONSET 0.059
 ALCOHOLISM
              0.144         0.352           0          1
LATE ONSET
 ALCOHOLISM
              0.899         0.301           0          1
PHYSICALLY
 HEALTHY

EXPERIENCE     22.4         10.15          7.0       49.0
EXPERIENCE    605.2         506.0         49.0       2401
 SQUARED
SCHOOLING     13.44          3.04          2.0       17.0
              0.723         0.448           0          1
MARRIED

WHITE         0.858         0.350           0          1




                               30
                                                                      Table 3

                             OHM                                                 Variance of      L00—INOOHE
                                   Estimates of Conditional Mean and Conditional
                                               (Asymptotic t—statiatica in parentheses)
                                    Lifetime Alcoholism Variable                      Early vs.   t.t. Alcoholism Onset
                                                  vat (It                                     .        var(Itlt)co(ZtD)
                                                             it,) so ( ttp)
          Variable                                                       ttp    E(ytltt)tta        •xp(Ztp)           t
                           E(Yti t)•ta
          ALcOHOLISM         -.0.202            0.679                  0.389
                             (2.33)            (2.36)                 (1.89)
                                                                                  —0.153             1.102           0.669
          EARLY    ONStT
              A1.H0LIS14                                                           (0.88)           (2.19)          (1.40)
                                                                                   —0.222            0.500           0.271
          LATE ONSET
                                                                                   (2.26)           (1.56)          (1.22)
              ALcOHOLISM

                                               —1.107                 —0.855        0.384           —1.187          —0.886
          PHYSICALLY           0.390                                                                                (2.41)
           HEALTHY            (2.55)           (3.06)                 (2.41)       (2.45)           (3.03)
          EXPERIENCE           0.052            0.031                  0.014        0.052            0.029           0.014
                              (3.26)           (0.32)                 (0.32)       (3.25)           (0.29)          (0.32)
          EXPERIENcE         —0.001            —0.001                —0.0003       —0.001           —0.001         —0.0003
              SQUARED         (2.69)           (0.36)                 (0.37)       (2.68)           (0.32)          (0.35)
          SCHOOLING            0.077            0.046                   0.024       0.078            0.053           0.026
                              (6.18)           (0.96)                 (1.03)       46.20)           (1.13)          (1.14)
                                               —0.666                 —0.364        0.313           —0.655          —0.359
          MARRIED              0.312
                              (4.19)           (2.56)                 (2.34)       (4.21)           (2.51)          (2.30)
                               0.290           —0.514                 —0.357        0.268           —0.555          —0.369
          WHITE
                              (2.69)           (1.39)    •             (1.36)      (2.71)            (1.58)         (1.44)
                                               —0.085                   1.289       0.447           —0.092            1.291
          CONSTMID             0.446
                              (1.48)            (0.07)                 (1.98)      (1.49)            (0.07)          (1.98)
                              118.20            iB.98                   17.03      118.61             37.96           16.92
          Wald    test
              fat H    t
              5 lope

* Under   Hthe Maid test statistics are dietributed         and z2  for columns 1—3 and 4—6, respectively. The .05 (.01)
         &alues for these teats are 14.07 (18.48) and ls.Vl  (20.0, respectively.  slopee cetera to all parameters except
critical
coNSTANT.

                                                                          31
                                Table 4
                                    acosoLIsM and pHYSICALLY HEALTHY
certainty Equivalence
               (FiguresEstimates
                        are 1991for
                                 dollar.. in thousands)

                            ALCOHOLISM          pHySIcALLY HEALTHY

 computation             ce          ce,         cc0
I. Well Become
    sick"
                         27.6       17.7         26.7        10.8
           y—   —2

                —1       31.5       22.6         30.7        15.7
                         36.1       29.5         35.7        24.2
                 o
                 1       41.8       40.1         41.7        40.2

II. "Sick Become
    We11
               — —2      22.5       14.1         19.6         8.0
           y
                 —1      26.2       18.6         22.8        11.6
                   0     30.9       25.1         26.7        16.1
                         36.7        36.5        31.7        32.3
                     1




                                     32
