NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THE BUSINESS CYCLE A
NECESSARY CONSEQUENCE CE
STOCHASTIC GROWTH?

Julio J. Rotemberg
Michael Woodford

Working Paper No. 4650

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
Febniazy 1994

We wish to thank Ludwig Chincarini for research assistance, John Cochrane, John Huizingz
Lucrezia Reichlin, and Argia Sbordone for helpful discussions, and the NSF for research
support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #4650
February 1994

IS THE BUSINESS CYCLE A
NECESSARY CONSEQUENCE OF
STOCHASTIC GROWTH?

ABSTRACT

We compute the forecastable changes in output, consumption, and hours implied by a
VAR that includes the growth rate of private value added, the share of output that is consumed,

and the detrended level of private hours. We show that the size of the forecastable changes in
output greatly exceeds that predicted by a standard stochastic growth model,of the kind studied

by real business cycle theorists. Contrary to the model's implications, forecastable movements

in labor productivity are small and only weakly related to forecasted changes in output. Also,

forecasted movements in investment and hours are positively correlated with forecasted
movements in output Finally, and again in contrast to what the growth model implies, forecasted

output movements are positively related to the current level of the consumption share and
negatively related to the level of hours. We also show that these contrasts between the model
and the observations are robust to allowance for measurement error and a variety of other types
of transitory disturbances.

Julio J. Rotemberg
Department of Economics
E52A32
M.I.T.
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago. IL 60637
and NBER

1 Introduction
The recent literature has given considerable attention to the hypothesis that fluctuations in aggregate economic activity result from stochastic variations in the rate of technical progr (Kydland and Prescott, 1982;
Prescott, 1986; King, Plosser and Rebelo, 1988a, 1988b;

Nosier, 1989). One of the most appealing features

of this "real business cycle" (RBC) hypothesis is its parsimony - it is proposed that the same exogenous
changes in the available production technology that determine the long-run changes in output per head also

account for short-run variations in output and employment. Rather than a puzzle to be explained through
the invocation of a complex mechanism that is introduced into one's model of the economy solely for that
purpose, the business cycle is actually a necessary consequence of stochastic growth. It would be predicted

to occur even in the absence of any "frictions" not present in a standard acoclassical model of long-run
growth, and in the absence of any other disturbances to the economy, once one recognizes that the technical

progress responsible for long run growth is itself stochastic.'
The demonstration by Nelson and Plosser (1982) that U.S. real GNP has s"unit root" or stochastic trend,

rather than exhibiting only transitory fluctuations around a deterministic growth trend, greatly increased
the credence given to the real business cycle hypothesis. It is widely accepted that shocks that result in
permanent increases in the level of real GNP can only plausibly be interpreted as permanent productivity
improvements. 2 Here we wish to consider whether accepting that there is a stochastic trend in the aggregate
production technology requires one to believe also that the business cycle is largely due to (and, in essence, an

efficient response to) stochastic productivity growth. This issue has been addressed in the RBC literature
by computing the predictions of a "calibrated" stochastic growth model for the variability of output, hours
worked, and other aggregate quantities, assuming technology shocks of the size indicated by some measure
of the variability of technical progress. The question posed is whether even in the absence of other stochastic

disturbances to the economy, one would expect to see business cycles of the size and character observed.

Typically, such exercises have concluded that technology shocks alone would predict variations in output
cycleJ cbscnaloes should not be pnsIing, for they are what standard
'Thus Prtt (IS) writes, "These (''
.nnn.k thc predicts. For the United Stan, In fact, ._ 'iven lbs nature of the .&sngb.g production possibility set, what
would be p,nsllng is It the

p dId not display these larp Sactuations In o.etpua sad ang4oymad—"

tSee, e.g.. P''d sad Flsdn (1959,

S I).

5We will, for purpos of the Inquiry, tilts at face value the evidence just eluded to. Thu. we will not hat question whether
an really be certain that U.S. real CNP baa a unit root, or whether steôssthc prtOJvIty growth should be regarded
adept, rather than an endogenous consequence of
diangs hi the pastern of resource allocation that may be ultimately caned by shoda of another sort.

as an ezogus pro to whld. lbs pattern of resource siloenalon

2

of roughly the magnitude observed (see, for example, Ploeser 1989). They have also concluded that these

fluctuations have the right characteristics, in the sense that the relative volatility of quantities such as
aggregate consumption and investment spending, and their degree of co-movement with output fluctuations,
correspond roughly to the predictions of the model. Thus it is argued that, granting the existence of the

stochastic technical progress and the essential correctness of the neoclassical growth model used to generate

the predicted effects of technology shocks on aggregate variables, one can conclude that technology shocks
account for a large part of the aggregate fluctuations that are observed. Moreover, it is suggested that such

additional variation in aggregate quantities as may be due to other independent disturbances makes little
difference for the overall character of business cycles.

Here we undertake a similar exercise, but using a different diagnostic for whether the model can account

for the kind of business cycles that we observe. We argue that an important feature of observed business
cycles is variation in the rate at which output can be forecasted to grow in the future. Indeed, it seems to
us that this is an essential aspect of what people mean when they refer to "business cycles" - at different
points in time (different "phases of the cycle" in the language popularized by Wesley Mitchell) the outlook
for the economy is different. Note that output growth could exhibit substantial variation even in the absence

of cycles of this sort. Output might be a random walk, so that the probability distribution over possible

future growth patterns would at all times be the same. We show in the next section that this i. not true
for aggregate fluctuations in the postwar U.S. — instead, there are significant fluctuations in the forecastable

future growth in output and other aggregate quantities.

Indeed, over a horizon of two to three years, we

show that more than half of the variation in output growth is forecastable (even using only a very small set
of forecasting variables).

We then ask whether a stochastic growth model would predict fluctuations in the forecastable changes

in aggregate quantities of the kind observed. We show that, at least for a popular variant of the model
often used in the RBC literature, the answer is absolutely not. Under a standard calibration of the model
W. do not, otmw.e, daint onginality for this ohen..aloa. na Nelson sad Pleaser first directed Miatia. to the extent
so which agp.gas. ostpul was similar to a random walk, and argued that this susse.ted an important role (or •aspply shocks"
in the generation of observed fluctuatioss, ma aaflbon ban shown that output is net In fact a madam walk (even if It has

a uait root). The point of the sIts reported hen I. to characterize the famaataUs fluctuations na way that facilitata
psñ.on with it.. predictions of $ real busiss cycle model.
s1imt model, including tha pastier calibration that we 'a., is sentisiiy identical to the model with a random
walk in tethnolog considered by Pleaser (1%9) and bj King. Please and Rabelo (1988b) (b.aeaMr, K-P-a). The model of
aristiano and Eldbalb.uw (1993) is also quite siagar, thougjt certain of their paseter values as. rather diffesent. W. also
discus. below the consequonce 01 variation in the meat importana of the parameters.

3

parameters, the variability of the forecastable changes in output predicted by the model is much smaller
than that which is indicated by.a VAR model of the U.S. data. Essentially, the model predicts

that output

should be much closer to a random walk than is actually the case.

This finding is related to an observation by Watson (1993). who shows that the RBC model cannot
explain the peak of the spectrum of output growth at business cycle frequencies. It is also related to the
findings of Cogley and Nason (1993), who criticise several variant aBC models on the grounds that the
models cannot account for the observed degree ci serial correlation 1 output growth. We believe that we
have identified an even greater discrepancy between the model and the data by analysing several variables
simultaneously. For one thing, as has been stressed by Cochrane and Sbordone (1988), Coclirane (1994a),

and Evans and Rtichlin (1993), estimates of the forecastability of output growth are greatly increased by

the use of a multivariate system.'
An even more important novelty in our analysis is that we identi4' three features of the co-movement
of various forecasted series that are inconsistent with our basic stochastic growth model. The first is that

predictable movements in output and predictable movements in the average product of labor bear little
relation to each other and, when they are related to each other, they axe often negatively correlated. By
contrast, the model associates predictable increases in output with capital accumulation which raises labor
productivity. Thus predictable movements in output should be strongly positively associated with predictable
movements in productivity. The second is that predictable increases in output axe correlated with predictable

increases in the labor input. By contrast, under standard calibrations, the growth model implies that the
labor input should be above its long run value when output is below its long run value, and vice versa1 so
that the two quantities are always expected to move in opposite directions. Finally, as has been pointed
out repeatedly (see e.g., CampbeU 1987, Cochraae 1994a), the data suggest

that high levels of the ratio of

consumption to output are associated with increases in output (and with smaller increases in consumption).
We show that this too is inconsistent with the growth model.
We thus believe that we have identified important respects in which a simple stochastic growth model

does not predict aegate fluctuations of the kind observed. It might be argued that this is a fine point,
to be addressed by more sophisticated versions of the RBC model1 and that it does not detract from the

Ths problem that this pose for rat b cyde theory I also discussed in Codwsa. (flash).

4

basic model's success in accounting for the overall variability of output, investment, and so on, and for the
correlations between overall variations in these variables. However, the significance that one attaches to the
successes typically cited in the RBC literature depends upon how one proposes to separate out the "cyclical"

movements in aggregate quantities from the trend growth in those quantities (that most economists would
explai, in terms of technical progress, regardless of their view of the cycle).
One simple approach to characterization of the cyclical movements that a business cycle theory should

explain is to subtract a linear trend from (the logarithm of) each of the aggregate time series, as in King,
Plosser and Rebelo (1988a). This approach, however, does not make sense if one accepts the evidence referred

to above for the existence of a stochastic trend. An alternative approach, used by many authors following
Kydland and Prescott (1982), is to extract a complicated nonlinear trend from each aggregate time series

using the 'Hodrick-Prescott filter". ' This allows for a shifting trend, but has the disadvantage that the
shifting trend that is removed from the data (actually, the several shifting trends that are extracted from
the different aggregate series) is not modeled; the theoretical model that is used by Kydland and Prescott to

explain the cyclical variations in the data involves no trend growth at all, and so the effects of shifts in the
trend on the variables' deviations from trend are not modeled. This not only casts doubt upon the reliability
of the authors' numerical results; it undermines a principal intellectual appeal of the RBC approach, namely,

the prospect of an integrated theory of growth and the cycle.
Authors such as K-P-ft and Christiano and Lichenbaum (1992) avoid this dilemma by assuming a random

walk in productivity. In this case, the model predicts the existence of a stochastic trend in real activity, and

indeed the technology shocks that are to explain short-run fluctuations are nothing other than the shifts
in this stochastic trend. There remains, however, the question of how to define "cycliS" variations in the
presence of a stochastic trend. These authors (and likewise Nasser (1989)) simply discuss the unconditional

moments of the growth rates of aggregate quantities such as output and investment, on the ground that
both according to the theoretical model and in the U.S. data, the aggregate quantities are non-stationary
while their growth rates are stationary (and so have well-defined momenta). But it is not obvious that the
features of the aggregate data that are emphasised in this way should be taken to characterize the business
cycle. Probably the most widely accepted proposal for defining a ecycicala component of time series of this
7For di.c,,ssion .1 the propenia of this 6h .nd p.thon .11k other radhods ddetrmdlng, as Kin4 and Rcbao (1903).

5

kind is that of Beveridge and Nelson (1981), namely, to define the "trend" component of &random variable

{X} at date t S'

X't'd limE4X,4r—Tlogyx)

(1)

where the constant lx is the unconditional expected rate of growth of X. The "cyclical" component is then

X7c

= limE4Xg—X,+r+Tlogixl
But in this case, the cyclical component is exactly the (orecastable change in the variable, over an infinite
horizon. Identification of the degree of cyclical variation in various aggregate quantities, and of the co-

movements in these cyclical variations, then amounts to the analysis of the forecnstahle changes in those
variables. The only difference in our approach is that we also consider forecastable changes over shorter
horizons, and in fact we give greatest emphasis to the forecastahle changes over a two- to three-year horizon.

One reason for this is that we find evidence in the U.S. data for a particularly high degree of forecastability

of output growth over this horizon, and it seems natural to us to identify exactly this phenomenon as "the
business cycle". If one does so, however, one must conclude that the stochastic growth model cannot account

at all for either the existence or nature of the cycle.
Of course, a more complex aBC model might do better at explaining the cycle in this sense. In particular,

the assumption of a significant forecastable component to productivity growth (instead of a random walk)

ought to result in a prediction of much more forecastable output growth as well. We discuss some simple
alternative models of technical progress in section 6 below, but do not intend to consider this problem in
any generality. Instead, our main point is that a model with stochastic growth need not possess abusiness
cycle to any significant extent, and insofar as one does, the features of the model that account for the cycle

will be largely independent of those that account for the stochastic trend. this point remains valid whether
the cycle is ultimately due to transitory exogenous shocks to productivity, or to shocks of some other kind.

Thus the mere fact that stochastic productivity growth can be inferred from the presence of a stochastic
trend in output does not, in itself provide support for the real business cycle hypothesis as to the source of
the cycle.

'Here we wu thM {Xi} I .tasiasaz.
6

In section I we document the fbrecastable changes in output and other aggregate quantities for the
postwar US., using a simple vector autoregression (VAR) framework. In addition to showing the importance

of these forecastable changes, we show that a definition of "the business cycle" in terms of variations in
forecasted private output growth coincides empirically with other familiar definitions; for example, we show

that our dating of cycles on these grounds would be similar to the NBER's, or to what one would obtain
from a simple linear detrending of (the logarithm 01) private output. In section 2, we review the predictions
of a simple stochastic growth model (the real business cycle model of K-P-R) regarding forecastable changes

in aggregate quantities. In section 3, we present the numerical predictions from a calibrated version of the
model (intended to match the US. economy) and compare them to our empirical results. Section 4 considers

the effect of varying the preference parameters of the model. We show that this can help the model explain

certain features of the forecastable components of output, consumption and hours but only at the expense
of more counterfactuai implications concerning the unforecastable movements in these variables. Section 5

shows that our conclusions are robust both with respect to transitory measurement error in various series
and to the presence of certain other types of transitory disturbances. Section 6 briefly considers alternative
stochastic processes for technology, and Section 7 concludes.

2

Forecastable Movements in Output, Consumption and Hours

In this section we describe the statistical properties of aggregate US. output, consumption, and hours,
with particular attention to the existence of a "business cycle" in the sense of forecantable changes in these
variables. We use a three-variable VAR to characterize these forecastable movements.
Our results obviously depend upon the VAR specification used, and so we discuss our reasons for particular

interest in the system that we estimate. First of all, we wish to compare the properties of the U.S. data
to the predictions of a standard stochastic growth model. This requires that we use series that represent

empirical correlates of variables that are determined in that model. The aBC literature has stressed its
predictions for the movements in aggregate output, consumption, and hours. Moreover, the estimation of
a joint stochastic process for these variables also implies processes foe labor productivity (output per hour)

arid investment (output that is not consumed). Thus, we are in fact estimating the joint behavior of all of
the variables with which the model is concerned.

7

We do not include in our forecasting regressions certain variables, such as interest-rate spreads, that have
been argued by Friedman and Kuttner (1992) and others to be useful in forecasting output. The reason

is that the co-movement of these variables with output is not modeled in the standard growth model. Of
course, it might be considered a detect of the model that it does not explain relationships of that kind, if
they are in fact found useful in forecasting. But here we wish to consider the extent to which an ItBC model

correctly explains the co-movements of the variables that it clearly aime to explain. Mao, the variables that
we study here are ones that must be modeled in any business cycle theory, so that our characterization of
the data should prove useful in theevaluation of a wide range of potential theories.

Secondly, we wish to avoid the contrasting pitfalls of underestimating the forecastabiity of aggregate
fluctuations due to omission of useful forecasting variables on the one hand, and of overestimating their
forecastability due to insufficient degrees of freedom on the other. To avoid overfitting, we use a small VAR

with only a few lags. On the other hand, the few variables used are ones that are expected to be useful in

the identification of forecastable output growth. Because we are interested in forecastable output growth,
output growth itself must be one of the variables in our system.

It follows from simple "permanent income hypothesis" considerations that the consumption share in
output should forecast future output growth, and the usefulness of the consumption share as a forecasting
variable has been verified by Campbell (1987), Cochrane and Sbordone (1988), Cochrane (1994a), and King,

Plosger, Stock and Watson (1991) [hereafter, IC-P-S-W]. Likewise, the idea that variations in the labor input

can be used to predict future changes in output has been used to identify temporary output fluctuations
in a VAR framework by Blanchard aadQuah (1989) and Evans (1989).

Furthermore, as we explain in

the next section, the stochastic growth model implies that expected growth is a function of a certain state
variable (the aggregate capital stock deflated by the labor force and the state of technology). According to
that model, both the consumption-output ratio and hours relative to the labor force should also be functions

of that state variable, and hence either variable should supply .11 of the information that is relevant for
forecasting future output growth.
We still face a choice between several possible measures of output, consumption and bouts. One issue
'Thss .athon we the unanpIoS raze, niber than heun, — thà meanire of variations in th, labor input. For cit
pupa hours .rc nfesbls. bora,we of lbS elsa Males to lbs labor input with width the RBC model I concerned.
Beanie detrended P"' bows a,. stationary. — disoi..ed bela, they can save — a cyclical Indicator In a way similar to
the unemployment rate.

8

is how to deal with hours and output purchased by the government, given that versions of the model used

in the RBC literature generally ignore government altogether. We have chosen to interpret the staadath
model as a model of fluctuations in private output sad hours; we explain in the next section how such an

interpretation is possible even when the government don bin some hours and purchase some of private
and our hours measure is

output. ID As a consequence, our output measure is real private value added,
hours worked in the private sector.

Another issue is the choice of a measure of consumption. Because the consumption decision modeled in

the standard growth model is demand for a non-durable consumption good, we use consumer expenditure

on non-durable. and services as our measure of consumption. This is also the consumption measure that

one has the most reason to expect to forecast future output on permanent-income grounds, and it is the
one used in the studies of output rorecastability mentioned above. This choice has the consequence that we

identify consumer durable. purchases as part of "investment" in the growth model.

A further issue is how to deal with growth of the labor force (also typically ignored in the literature). In
the next section, we construct a model with deterministic growth in the available labor force and show that

it implies that hour. must be trend stationary. This implication is borne out by the data. The last column
of Table 1 reports a rejection, using a Dicicey-Fuller test, of the hypothesis that private hours have a unit
-

root once one allows for a deterministic trend. IS

The time series that we use, then, are the logarithms of private output, consumption of nondurables

'°By this we do not mean to assert that we present a model in which government purchases have no effect upon tbs
detem,iasaion of private awegasn our model sen- that useinmens purchases, while non-trivial in sire, are non-stochastic.
While this specification would obviously he contradicted by the data on ovemment purchases, we cannot model them ins
more realistic ny without considering a maw pIa. model — in paiticuler, a model with multiple stochastic distrnban to
the economy. A similar caveat applies to our tr
of pepulation 1rowth.
"We measure real pavss. value added, or privale output", — the dulferece between real CNP sad 5overemcz,t sector
value-added, both measured In 3982 dollars,

t3Our m.,n it Sprint, hours" S total man-Lou,. repes-ted by non-agriadtursi establishments, minus man-hours employed
by the ovaan.. We an thus implicitly assuming that changes in .gri.cnjturai bows an proportional to cheng is, private
non-apicuitural hones. Because our aol. metes, below I. with variations in the logarithm of privat, how., the multiplication
of our measlu, by & constant factor grater than one, to reflect the pseca of agricultursl hours, would not ailed any of our

r,dts.

t3flapj,o sad Watson (1988) show, by contrast, that one cannot reject the hypothesis that total hour. are
ben one dow not control t a deterministic umel. Give, the growth In both population and in labor torce participation,
their finding in not narpeiaiug. IC-P-It show instead that pa capita beige ar, stationary. We do not use per capita hours fir
two reasons, The fins is thea pa capita horn, have taUght desaminisaic trend it their own which Is probably due to varying
participation rata that is, if one allows for a trawl Ii, an autoregression of pa capita horns, one can reject the hypotbmia of
a raw coSEde,s on the trend (even though the sales passes ae tat. of etationarity, and the estimated tread growth rate is
email). Second, the use of pa capita variables would require, Ia consistency, that population growth enter as a state variable of
our theoretical model. In this case, stochastic variations in population growth would hecome $ semed sousa of disturbances to
the model, in addition to stochastic technical progs. This conclusion would be avoided only if we. to assume detenniniatic
population growth, 'a, which caee the use of detrended hours sad par capita hours would be equally appropriate.

9

and services, and detrended privite hours. Because we use lower case letters to denote the logarithm of

the respective upper case letter,, these variables are denoted by jig, c, and A1 respectively. ' As K-P-ft

emphasize, a standard growth model with a random walk in technology implies that vi and c1 should be
difference-stationary, and these two variables should be co-integrated, since c1 — yj is predicted to be a

stationary variable. Table I show, that our data are consistent with these predictions as well. One can
reject the hypothesis that the consumption share and the rate of growth of private output have unit roots
at the 1% significance level. The difterence-etationarity of consumption and output, and the stationarity of
the consumption-output ratio, are also reported in K-P-S-W, where the issue is discussed in more detail.
Hence our VAR specification is
= Ax...1 + eg

(2)

where
Cl

(c1—y€)

=

A1

and

=

4
(I

(c,_i — ps—I)

0

and only the first three TOWS of A need to be estimated. This autoregression includes only two lags. One
reason for ignoring further lags is that, when we included them, these were generally not statistically signif-

icantly different from zero. 25 A second reason is that we want to avoid overfitting our VAR. Overfitting

is a particular concern in that it could lead us to overstate the extent to which aggregate variables are
forecsstable, and thus, the extent to which they are subject to cyclical movements. Thble 1 also presents
the estimates from our VAR. As can be seen from the Table, most parameters are statistically different from
zero.

We now turn to the characterization of aggregate fluctuations that can be obtained from the joint stochastic process for these three time series. In Thble 2, we present the estimated values for several unconditional

second moments of the data, of the kind that have been emphasized in the aBC literature. We focus on
the behavior of private output Us, consumption c4, investment i5, detrended private hours A51 and--labor
"We rae.. the notation L, f print. bow., p.1w to dearndlng.
'5Note that a VAR of ibis sest I equiwiast, expt In the way that lap are tnmcated, to an error-correction model of the
kind etimatsd by K.P.S.W .nd by Codirane (1994., 199th).
Addifl dibor just a third or both a third and a fourth lag of all ,ariable. kath to just two aseifidait. that are atatlatically
.ignificaS at the 5% lsnb the third kg of detra.ded he,g, I. $ .ipifiaat -Wa—-'— of both the 1rowth In o,stpui and of the
consumption share.

to

productivity p.. We have discussed above the measures that we use for output, consumption and hours; the

other two series are constructed from these, to ensure that our data satisfy the accounting identities linking
these quantities in the theoretical model. Thus we construct a series for the growth rate of investment using

only our data on the growth in output and consumption, using the relation

scAt, + (1— sc)aig = ày.
In the nat section we derive this accounting relation for our theoretical model, from explicit assumptions

about government behavior. To compute Al using this formula, we need to know sc. The ratio sc/(1—sc) is

the average ratio of consumption to investment spending. Using postwar U.S. data, and letting consumption
be equal to consumer expenditure of nondurables and services while investment equals the turn of gross fixed

investment and consumer spending on durables, we obtain an sc equal to 0.70. We similarly construct our
series for growth in labor productivity from our series for growth of output and hours, using the relation
Ap, = ày, — Ah
(This follows, up to a constant, from the standard definition of average labor productivity.) The first column

of Table 2 presents the unconditional standard deviations of the (stationary) growth rate of private output,

the ratio, of the unconditional standard deviations of the growth rates of each of the other aggregates just
mentioned to the standard deviation of output growth, and a number of unconditional correlations among
these series. As is emphasized in the RBC literature, investment growth ismore volatile than output growth

while consumption growth is less so; productivity growth exhibits considerable variability; and the growth
rates of consumption, investment, hours and productivity are all strongly positively correlated with growth
in output. (The second column presents the theoretical predictions of the calibrated stochastic growth model

discussed in the next section.)

We next compute the expected changes in each of these aggregates implied by our VAR model. We
denote the difference between the expected value at time I of Vt+k and the current value of y, by £4'. This
is givea by
(3)
where

e, is a vector that has a one in the first position and zeros in all others. For the case where k =oo,

'I

we have (minus) the Beveridge-Nelson definition of the cyclical component of log Y1, which is given by

£

The expected percent change in consumption,

=e(I—A)1AZ
is similarly given by
(4)

where e is a vector whose second element equals one while the others equal zero and the second equality
defines B. The expected percent change in hours is given by
(5)
where eg is defined analogously to e1 and c2 while the second equality defines Bt. The expected percentage

changes in investment and in productivity are then computed as linear combinations of these.

Letting V denote the variance-covariance matrix of 2, the variance ofLit is
(6)

and similarly for the variances of the expected changes in each of the other aggregates. The standard
deviations for these expected changes are presented in Table 3. This table also presents a measure of
uncertainty for these standard errors. This measure of uncertainty is the standard deviation of the estimate

based on the uncertainty concerning the elements of A. "
The table shows that the standard error of the expected changes for output grows as the horizon Lengthens

from one to twelve quarters. The largest predictable movements occur in the next twelve quarters and the
standard deviation of these predictable movements is above 32%. This number can be compared tothat in
the next to last column, which gives the standard deviation of the unpredictable movements in output over

the same horizon. This standard deviation equals only 3.0%. Thus the size of the predictable movements
over the next three years exceeds the size of the unpredictable movements. This fact is reflected in the
last column, which gives the ratio of the variance of the expected changes over the total variance of output
changes. This measure of iV is even slightly higher (equal to .55) at the 8 quarter horizon, due to the Lower
variance of the unpredictable movements at the shorter horizon.
'TWe cainp'ifled the vector of derIvative. D of sadi standard deviation with respect to cbs slosass of A.
ow estimate is then D'OD where 0 is the vanana.conñanoe wa4riz at the denenta of A.
12

The verisnes at

For horizons larger than 12 quarters, both the It' and, more surprisingly, the size of expected output
changes falls. However, the declines in the size of this predictable components are very small and, indeed, are

not statistically different from zero given the uncertainty about the parameters of A. ' On the other hand,
the difference between the predictability of output growth at short horizons and the predictability of output

growth over the next two to three years is both substantial and statistically significant. The high frequency

movements in output are largely unpredictable: less than a third of the variance of output i, predictable
over the nat quarter. By contrast, output movements over two to three years are dominated by predictable
'cyclical" components which are our main focus of attention in this paper.
Since the size of these predictable movements is largest at the 12 quarter horizon, we focus mostly on this

horizon. (We also prefer this to a longer horizon because the predictable movements over a shorter horizon

can be estimated with greater precision.) However, it is important to realize that the expected movements

in output over the next eight, twelve or infinite quarters are very similar to each other. To see this, Figure

1 graphs the demeaned expected declines in output over these three horizons using the same scale. We
show expected declines, as opposed to expected increases, because recessions ought tobe associated with
expected increases in output and we wish to represent these as low values for our cyclical indicator. In this
Figure we have also indicated the troughs of recessions as determined by the NBER. We see that output is
expected to grow fast at these NBER troughs so that expected output dedlineshave some similarity with this

particular business cycle indicator. " It is worth noting, however, that our cyclical indicator tends to reach

its lowest value one quarter alter the NBER troughs. The reason may be that the NBER uses subsequent

information to construct its chronolop of troughs. Thus the end of the recession is defined to occur just
before output grows more than it was expected to. This positive innovation in output cannot be predicted
with our method. On the other hand, this positive innovation tends to raise predicted output growth since
lagged output growth predicts future output growth to some extent.
In Figure 2, we superimpose our measure of expected declines over the next twelve quarters with linearly

detrended values of our output measure itselt The Figure shows that our cyclical indicator is very closely
associated with detrended private value added. There are sows interesting differences, however. First, as
"This. po..IW. intapresasioa dsiw fin&np would be thai output I expected to have essensisily completed the sdlustmcid
to iii long.run nit,. within & period o( two to three years, afl which Utile farther change in output can be forecasted.
tTh.ou. cas, where the indicates. differ is In the ca,,d the last recession. As would be suggested by oter series, the recovery
from this "tro,i&C

initially weak.

13

with the NRER troughs, detrended output appears to lead slightly our business cycle indicator. Once again,

this may be due to the fact that unpredictable upturns in activity are responsible for the turning points of
the detrended output series.

20

-

The two lines also differ in some of their low frequency aspects. First, our predicted output growth series

is relatively smaller in the 1960's than the deviation from a linear trend. While the linear detrending method
attributes all the unusually large growth in the 1960'. to an abnormally large cyclical expansion, our method

attributes some of it to variables that affect steady state output. By the same token, linearly detrended

output falls more in the 1970's than our series. Finally, in the 1980'. linearly detrended output remains low
in part because the high growth of the 1960's did not persist. By contrast, our series treats the

Reagan

expansion as unusually large.

In addition to forecastable output movements, we find some forecastable consumption movements as well.
3t As Table 3 shows, the volatility of expected consumption growth is substantially smaller than the volatility

of expected output growth. This is not very surprising given that the volatility of overall consumption growth

is smaller than the volatility of output growth. What is notable about the behavior of consumption is that
the relative variability of consumption is particularly small at short horizons. Expected consumption changes

are less than half as large as output changes at horizons of under one year. As the horizon lengthens, the

standard deviation of expected consumption changes keeps growing while thnt of output does not. The

result is that the standard deviation of the difference between expected long run consumption and current
consumption is about 88% as large as the corresponding standard deviation for output. Table 3 also shows
that expected investment growth i. more volatile than expected growth in output. This is not surprising

given that expected growth in consumption is less volatile than expected growth in output. The magnitude

of the expected changes in hours worked reported in Table 3 is very similar to that of expected changes in
or the growth in
output. This may seem surprising given that K-P-ft report that the standard deviation
the
hours is only 80% as large as the standard deviation of the growth in output. Finally, Table 3 reports
20Wom a puaeiy mechanical point of view the fluding that our Indicator lag. behind output Is not eurpritlog duct ciii

lndiata Is heavily Influenced by hour. nbd, which as. known to lag behind aggcgM. activity. This raises the question
this
of whether our cycLe-al Indicator woi,W have been different fe had allowed detre,ded output to influenos It. To ditch

we r.a a res4oa esp'"1"g output powtb with our wujable and, In aMities, oct lag of detsunded output. The coefficiei,t
on detranded output was .tati.tically Insignificant and the other codtda,t timata did not change. Th' hours, the ratio of
more Information about future output gowth.
conatsnptloa to output, and the rat, of poweb of output tahn
"The enatance of such mo,et. — a violation do .imple version of the rational.expectations permanent .nts bypotla'a

- baa bee demonstrated before (e.g., Campbell and Mankiw, 1089).
14

volatility of expected changes in labor productivity. At horizons above one yea:, the standard deviation of

this is len than one third of the standard deviation of expected output growth.
La Tables 4 and 5 we give further statistics that describe the behavior of cyclical output, consumption and

hours indicated by our VAR model. Table 4 ii devoted to studying which of our regressors is particularly

responsible kr forecasting output growth at various horizons. Table 5 focuses instead on the expected
co-movements of the five aggregate variables.

Table 4 gives the correlations of

and the value at t of our three regressors, Ay1, (ci — yg) and h,.

The forecast of output growth in the next quarter is most higjily correlated with current output growth. By
contrast, the other two variables, especially detrended hours, are more useful for predicting output growth

over longer horizons. Thus hours prove to be an important indicator of the current state of the business
cycle.

Table 5 presents regression coefficients of the expected changes mc, 1., p and ion expected changes in y.

These coefficients indicate the percentage by which a given variable caa be expected to change if one know.

that output is expected to increase by one patent. The covariance between expected consumption growth

over the next k quarters and expected output growth over this same interval ii given by .a'va:. Thus, the
regression coefficient relating changes in c at horizon k to the changes in j over the same period is given by

a:'vB:

7

The other coefficients can be computed analogously.
Table

5 indicates that the elasticity of expected consumption growth with respect to expected output

growth equais about one-fourth for a one quarter horizon. It grows with the horizon so that it exceed.
one-half for the infinite horizon. Given that the standard deviation of consumption changes is smaller than

that (or output, it is not surprising that consumption does not respond one for one to expected changes in

output. While expected consumption growth is not very elastic with respect to expected output growth,
investment growth is, and this is consistent with the large volatility of investment changes.
Expected hours growth responds nearly one for one to expected changes in output. As a result, expected

productivity is largely unrelated to expected changes in output. This lack of correlation may be surprising

given that output growth is generally positively correlated with productivity growth. The table indicates

15

that this correlation is due mainly to unexpected changes in either output or productivity. The data are
thus consistent with the idea

that

measured

productivity growth is strongly associated with current shocks.

The regression coefficients in Table 5 can be used together with the standard deviations reported in Thble

3 to compute correlations between expected changes in consumption and hours on the one band and expected
changes in income on the other. Particularly for horizons above 8 quarters the regression coefficients of both

consumption and hours are close to the ratio of their respective standard deviation. to that ci expected

output growth. If they were equal, Lit and Act (or Lit and Ah5) would be perfectly correlated. As it is,
the correlation between expected changes is high but not equal to one. The correlation between expected
consumption growth over the next 8 quarters and expected output growth is .79 while that between expected

hour. growth and expected output growth is O.9T. The high values of these correlations suggest that there
is a single underlying state variable that determines the position of the economy in the business cycle and
hence the evolution of expected output, consumption and hours.
In the stochastic growth model that we consider in the next section, there is a state variable of this sort.

As we show, this state variable is the ratio of the current capital stock to the capital stock that is expected

to exist in the infinite future. The question then becomes whether this state variable can explain the size
and nature of the movements and co-movements documented in this section.

3

A Simple Stochastic Growth Model

In this section we describe the structure of a stochastic growth model, the predictions of which we wish to
compare with the properties of the aggregate time series just discussed. The model extends the stochastic
growth model of Broth and Mirman (1972) to allow for a labor-leisure choke; it is essentially identical to the

model analyzed in K-P-K and in Plosser (1989). We consider this variant, rather than familiar alternatives
such as the models analyzed in Prescott (1986), because it implies a stochastic trend of the kind assumed

in our treatment of the data. The primary innovations in our own presentation of the model are explicit
treatment of government purchases and labor force growth, in order to tighten the relation between the

theoretical model and our time series."
Tb. pndidla.s of the model that we ps.e. e an n fast almost 'l to those of the K-P.R model. We csnt4.. e.g
t.-t of the govunmest so that ow nodjs jndidios.s regarding the e,oludM of (pe4sas) capital, hours, amsumptloa,
and output an ida,sical to thcse of a modeL with so s.anat.

16

Consider an economy made up of a fixed number of identical infinite-lived households. We will suppose

that there is growth over time in an exogenous state variable N, that we refer to as the size of the labor
force,

but that in our model simply represents a change in the preferences of the representative household.

(Each household may be supposed to be made up of many individuals whose number may grow with time.)
The representative household seeks to maximize the expected value of lifetime utility

u=zof a'5(c1.ç)
where

fi is a constant discount factor, C, again denotes consumption by the members of the household in

period t, and LI°' denotes per total hours worked by the members of the household in period t. We let

14°t/N, be total hours worked as a ratio to the available labor lbrce. The single-period utility
(unction 4C, H) is concave, increasing in C, and decreasing in H.
In order to ensure the existence of a stationary equilibrium (in terms of suitably rescaled state variables)
despite the presence of a non-stationary technology process (specified below), we need further homogeneity
assumptions on the form of this function. The marginal utility of income A, for the representative household

each period must be given by

= uc(C,.11")

(8)

flirthermore, household optimization requires that each period the marginal rate of substitution between C

and Lice must equal the real wage W, so that

uaEr ' nice
Equations

— WU
I I

9

(8) and (9) then implicitly defini Frisch labor supply and consumption demand functions

JP°'(W,N,,A,) and C(WINI,AI), which provide a useful characterization of intra-temporal preferences. 24

Our additional homogeneity assumption can then be stated as follows. There exists a parameter a> 0
such that the Frisch labor supply is homogeneous degree zero in (WN,)rtt'), and the Frisch consumption

demand is homogeneous of degree one in the same arguments. n The consequence of thu assumption is

Our Isbor Iv. yniahls Is a sal. factor for .g.gat. Isb nipply, with as'——j ccnn.ctloa —uk lb. labor f.i

mean. In the SL.S surveys, that mewnn only thai InthvMuais who ether ban a Job or who ass actively aechinj one, and
does not w.11ba them according to the amount of tim. that they wish to woá.
as.., ..g., Rosenberg tad Wo.dford (1992, 1994) for fortbc disaissica of PbMth labor supply and consuniplion

m. family of utility t'mction. will, this property I

-

jrtbor in King, Ploc and Rebclo (1988.) and In kotenb.sg

d Woodlc.d (1992).

17

that a permanent increase in the real wage leaves hours worked unchanged while desired consumption rises
proportionally. An increase in N has the saint effects as an increase in w since it increases the payment that
the household receives per unit of N'°'. Thus an increase in the labor force also lacks any effect on the value

of ff10, while C and L'°4 grow in proportion to the increase in N. Note that the case analyzed in much of
the R.BC literiture.

u(C,Jf) = c— v(Jt),
for t4H) an increasing convex function, satisfies our homogeneity assumption with a = 1.
We assume a constant rate of growth of the labor force N, so that our model has only a single source of

stochastic variation in the endogenous variables. Thus N, = Not5q for some positive constants N0 and 7N

Private output is produced by competitive flrn using a technology

= F(Kg,z,L.)
where Y, denotes private output as before, K, the private capital stock, L is private hours, and £ an
exogenous technology factor, all in period 1. Stochastic variations in the technology factor are the source of

aggregate fluctuations. We introduce a stochastic trend in output, consumption, and so on (as was argued

to exist in the U.S. data) by assuming that the technology factor is • random walk with drift, i.e., that

logz,=log,+logr,_t+c.

(1G)

where y, is a positive constant and {c,} is a mean-zero i.i.d. random variable.

Both factors of production are hired in competitive spot markets each period. 'The evolution of the
private capital stock is given by

= 1,+(1—S)K,
white I denotes private investment and the depredation rate 5 is a positive constant, less than or equal to
one.
The government is assumed to hire a certain constant fraction of the available labor force for its own use.

We denote this fraction by 11', it is recorded in the national income accounts as governmentvalue added.
As a result, the condition for labor market clearing i.

= 1(1+ H'
18

(11)

when H, denotes private bouts per member of the labor force, or 4,/N,.
In addition, the government purchases a quantity 0, of private output in period t. We aseume that

C, = it',
where r is a positive constant, less than one. As a result, the condition for product market clearing is
C1

+1, =(1—r)F(K,,r,N,H.)

(12)

Both H' and r are asumed to be constants (at some cost in realism) sothat the technology shock is the

only source of stochastic variation.

These government purchases are financed by lump-sum taxes equal to W,N,H' each period, and a
proportional tax rater on alt (actor incomes. This results in equilibrium factor demands satisfying

Fi(K,,z,N,H,) =
F2(K,,z,N,H4) =

(1—r)r,

where p, denotes the alter tax rental price of capital goods in period I. These equations hold because p/(l -r)

and W,/(l — r) equal the pre-tax wage and rental rate respectively. These equilibrium conditions, along
with (12), are identical to those of a model with no government purchases in which the production (unction

F(K,zL) is replaced by (1— r)F(K,zL) and the 1usd labor supply function H'°'(W,N,,,) is replaced
by H'°'(W,N,,A,) — H'.

Because neither the steady changes in N, nor the permanent changes in V/,

induced by technology have a permanent effect on H, this variable is stationary. Thus, as we suggested in
the earlier section, private hours must be trend stationary.
The equilibrium for this economy is given by the solution to a planning problem. The levels of output,

consumption and hours that solve this planning problem at any date t depend on K,, N,, the current level

of technology at I,; and on the expected evolution of technology in the future. Because; is Markovian,
the expected future evolution of technology depends only on; itself so the equilibrium at t depends only

on K,, N, and t.

Moreover, it is easy to show that our preference specification implies that, output Y,

'Not. thea this does not Mnl,. say .iotssMn of the vessel psepetia of the Fthth '—'-—¼ the modi&d fandions
wa A—...-L connpoedin to a —-l uIiflty function .4C. H + H').

H(W,N,, A,) aM C(W,N,, A,)n. sim$y the

19

and consumption C1 (and hence investment) are homogeneous of degree one in K1 and z5N,1 while H ii
homogeneous of degree zero in these same two variables. " This means that the rescaled levels of private

consumption, investment, output and bouts at date 1, ç. %-.

, and

respectively, are each functions

of just fr ,and we denote the logarithm of this state variable by x. As a result of this, the resealed level of
labor productivity

P,/z s

is also a function of .c4. It can be shown furthermore that Sc1 is a stationary

variable in the equilibrium, and hence that each it the resealed variables just mentioned is stationary as
well.

In a log-linear approximation to the equilibrium laws of motion, we can then write
(z — 1') =

r(,

—

(13)

where z1 denotes the logarithm of any one of the five stationary variable, just mentioned, f is the mean

valueo(thai variable, and aC isthemeanvalueofc1. (Wewillusesubscriptsc,i,y,handpforxinrefening
subsequently to these elasticities.) The corresponding investment equation, together with the random walk

in technology, then implie. a law of motion for the state variable {cj, an approximation to which ii

(xj+t —c) =
where q

(I — $)r4 + 0, and 8

—C)—cg+i

(14)

(1— S)/y.7g is the average fraction of the capital stock made up of

undepreciated capital from the previous period (as opposed to investment purchases during the previous

period). For the calibrated parameter values discuesed in the next section, 0< q < 1, so that (14) implies
that {cg} is indeed a stationary variable. Given an initial per-capita capital stock k0 and an initial state of
technology go, equations (13) and (14) determine the evolution of the variables {z.Kg,Cs,Ig,Ys,hi,Pi) as
a function of the sequence of technology innovations (cj.

These equations can thus be used to compute impulse response functions to a disturbance c5. As is
apparent from (14). this response simply describes the expected evolution of our variables starting from a
situation where g is away from its steady state value C. This evolution is thus identical to the deterministic

dynamics of a model with constant technology whose initial capital stock is different from its steady-state
level,

Equation (13) then determines the extent to which each particular variable departs from the steady

2tSse K-P.R (a 't1 of this, .nd else lbs la-llossr nppseelmMloa to the aq.flDziin dyu.mia used below.
85Th1s problem Is saslyted in .sakn 3 of Kiag, Pleas and gaâ. (l9Ms) their notasion (or lbs elostidly .i1. tst.

20

state while (14) implies that they all converge exponentially to the steady state at the rate (1— q). The fact

that 0< q <1 indicates that the system don indeed converge. For plausible parameter values (in particular,

a plausibly low depreciation rate 4), the rate of convergence is relatively slow, so that q is near 1.
Using the baseline parameters set out in Table 6 and discussed further below, Figure 3 displays the
response of consumption, hours and output to a disturbance that raises e by one. horn an initial value of
sew,

the increase in e eventually raises output and consumption by

one

unit while hours return to their

original value. Since the increase in £ lowers the capital stock relative to its steady state value, output is

below the new steady state as well. These parameters imply that when output is below the steady state,
consumption is even further below the steady state. This ensures that the ratio of investment to output is
above the steady state and helps raise the capital stock to its steady state value. The figure also shows that
hours are above the steady state. This occurs because the low value of the capital stock implies that wealth
is relatively low so that people reduce their consumption of leisure.

The joint stochastic process for these variable, is predicted to be such that Sy1, (ct-u,), and h, are
stationary variables, though {,p,) each poun a unit root, as is reported in section 2 for the U.S. data.
Specifically, the model predicts that

ap = r,a,c+c.

(15)

= Ir..—r,4Ic

(16)

=

(17)

-

(cs—vt)
14

omitting the constants in each equation. On the other hand, both c and y, are non-stationary, as each can
be expressed as the sum of log xi (a random walk) and a stationary variable. Hence the general form of our
econometric specification in section 2 is consistent with this model.

X-P•ft describe the numerical predictions of the model regarding the variability of the growth rata of

agpegates such as per capita output, consumption, investment and hours. We wish to emphasize Stead
the character of predictable changes in such agpegates. In the case of the aggregates X1 = C,I,,Y,, or
"The modsi doe. Imply that the joint -'—1.—.L- ,.,._ M the three -.-'.—y vasisbiss should be singular. — that Is
.hoà esa pciod to wIdth .11 three lanciasions as. jnpatlonsl, and this Is not in,. of the VAR that -. estimate
In sectIon 2. But this Is not a predictIon of the model that .u p to ta hcxc In this partlailar respect it Is obvious that a
one.ebock model Is Inadequate. It Is stIll of interes to ask to .bat .zts a partiadsr ou.shoth model predicts co.novt5
of awnst. nriabla that are at all .bell., so thee. obeaved. If It do.., that mi#t be mm. hope that one she& maid be
raspoasibin fw the pester part of .hat as. thsuht of as typical b.nlnae cycle?.
only a

21

the laws of motion (13) and (14) imply that the expected growth rates are given by
Ax1

= r,4E1[icg+e — xs] + E4log r,.p

—

log z]

= —r541 — q1)(scs —
In writing this, it is assumed that the date * information set used in forecasting includes the state variable

s• However, since both (c, —jj)

sad h are log-linear functions of this variable, it suffices that either of the

latter variables be in the information set. Since both of these variables are among our regressors in section
2, the model implies that the forecastable changes identified by our VAR specification should coincide with

the variables described above. Similarly, the laws of motion imply that

=

— ICE]

= —r,(l — ,ik)(ic

—

Thus the forecastable changes in all of our five variables are predicted to be perfectly collinear. l¼rthermore,

the forecastable changes in any one of the variables at different horizons are predicted to be perfectly coflinear:

for regardless of the horizon k, the torecastable change should be proportional to (x — sd.

4 Numerical Results for the Baseline Model
We now present the numerical predictions oft calibrated version of the stochastic growth model described in

the previous section, and compare them to our estimates in section 2. The calibrated parameters presented

in Thbte 6 are identical to those used by K-P-K, except that we allow for growth in the labor force. A
regression of the logarithm of private bours on a deterministic trend gives ta, the rate of growth of the labor

force. Our regression implies that this equals 1.004.
Note that preferences are specified in tenus of the coefficient a referred to in the previous section - that

can be interpreted as the reciprocal of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption holding
hours worked constant — and CUW, the elasticity of the Frisch labor supply function h'(wN,A) with respect

to the real wage. As is explained in Rotemberg sad Woodford (1992 1994), the other elasticities of the
Fitch demands can all be computed given numerical values for these two parameters, and the elasticities of
the Fitch demands are the only aspect of preferences that enters the log-linearized equilibriumconditions.

22

The values used in our baseline calibration —

= i,gw = 4-are those that would result from a utility

function

log(Cg) + log(H - If°)

ifon average JP°' is .2 of If—H'.
The other parameter not taken directly from K-P-ft is our assumed standard deviation for the technology

shocks, e1 = .00732. This value is equal to the estimated standard deviation of innovations in the permanent

component of private output, from the VAR described in section 2. 3° According to the theoretical model
of the previous section, the trend component of log private output in the sense of (1) should exactly equal
log z1
31

(plus a constant), so that the variance of innovations in this variable should equal the variance of (j).

Thus we calibrate the variability of the innovations in technology so that the model's prediction regarding

the variability of the permanent component of private output agrees exactly with what we measure. Of
course, the fact that the model predicts variation in the permanent component does not imply anything
about variation in Ibrecastable change. in output; for example, if output were predicted to be a random
walk, there would be none. We turn next to the model's predictions regarding the size and character of the
fluctuations in the aggregate variables discussed in section 2.

First of all, the second column in Table 2 presents the predictions of the calibrated model for each of

the unconditional moments reported in that table. This is the type of test of the model emphasized by
K-p-a and by Plosaer (1989). Using this test, the model meets with a fair degree of success. This picture
of relative succ changes considerably, however, if one considers the variability of the forecastable changes

in the various aggregate variables, rather than the unconditional variability of their growth rates. Table 7

reports the predicted standard deviations of the forecastable changes A4, for each of the five variables r,
and for several different horizons k. The first thing to notice about these results is that the stochastic growth

model does not predict that there should be a great deal of variation in the forecasted change in private
30ur results are In

-'-i agees with these at K-P-SW, who ropers a standard deviation of .7 for the

growth shoth' to that three-veriahie VAR, which differs free Os,. mainly I. .iMag the share of Med Investment In paints

output, resha than lnt. beta. triad.. to th. labor force, — the third variable.

"It has boss cheat by Lippi and RaIn (1993) that IdentIflasia. .1 .hllis In the permanent ajenponent of output using

• VAR in ibis w depend. upon a se.umptioc of

of the mn.ing-svaai. reçrseisasioa implied by the
estimated VAR, an assumption that need not be wild In gcna1. That Is, it need s be poible to rscon the tn pama
.hodc as any linear n'elJ,—'--. of the VAR Innowsions.
aslal model boplia that the
In the ceas cat, one

nfl

MA rersu.esation derived from our VAR should Indeed be "f.adama,sal'. The tine paman shoch can indeed be
free the VAR residuals, for example, equations (14) and (17) imply than, should be aaaly proportional to the rSdual

•r.gnaio,, oft, on

23

from

output. At the 12-quarter horizon, the standard deviation of the forecastable change in output is predicted
to be .0029, whereas we estimate it to be .0326 - the model accounts for variations in forecastable output
growth of only 9% of the amplitude of the observed variations! At the infinite-horizon (the Beveridge.Nelson
cyclical component of output), the model account. for variations of only 21% of the amplitude of the observed

variations.
These results depend on assuming that the standard deviation of the technology shocks a4 is equal to

0.00732. As we explained earlier this is the standard deviation of the shock to the permanent level of
output. This standard deviation also implies that the model's overall standard deviation of output changes
is below the actual standard deviation. This can be seen by comparing the 6th column of Table 7 with the
corresponding column of Thble 3. These columns present the standard deviations of the unexpected changes

in output from one period to the next. The standard deviation of unexpected changes over one quarter

predicted by the model equals about 60% of the actual one. For the 24 quarter horizon, the model predicts
a standard deviation of unexpected changes that is much closer to the actual one.

Obviously, one could raise both the predictable and the unpredictable variability of output changes
generated by the model by raising one's estimate of o. But our value of o is not solely responsible for the
results concerning the lack of predictable output changes in the model. To see this, suppose that we set a4

so that the standard deviation of overall quarterly changes in output predicted by the model equals 0.012,

the actual standard deviation of the one quarter changes in private value added. This requires that a4 be
equal 0.0157, which is more than twice as large as our estimate. Even then, the model's predicted standard
deviation of expected output changes over eight quarters equals only 18% of the standard deviation implied

by our VAR.
Another way to see that the lack of predictable movements is not solely due to our choice of a4 is to
compare the H3'. in the last columns of the two tables. These H' 'a give the ratio of the variance of expected

changes to the total variance of changes in output and are thus independent of the level of a. The R3's
predicted by the model are much lower than the actual ones. At the 12 quarter horizon, the estimates imply

52IIe ide. lasted the fredisa of the ..ñ

of the S—-' &aas that Is w.dict.d by the modal, one M& that

the modal ac,unts (or only 1% in the Sawer case and oaly 4% In the late. 7W. Is a prdesal. matric In certain respect.
because the total vañanoe equals the sum it the nñaa Induced by Mdspedons .ho&s. Thus, If a suocesaful modal meld be
Sound that added other independa's disturbances to this model the other sLoths would has's to aessiat for 99% of the vaflance

of the faucastable thsns in the (01W case, and 06% in the latin.

24

that over 50% of the variance of output is predictable. By contrast, if the model were correct, only about
2% of the variance of output over this horizon would be predictable.
Another difference between the model and the data ii that the model predicts that the standard deviation
of forecasted changes in output rises whenever the horizon is lengthened. By contrast, the data suggest that

this standard deviation peaks at the 12 quarter horizon, or at any rate increases little after that horizon.

Similarly, the model predicts that the R2 should rise from the 12 to the 24 quarter horizon and this is
not true of our empirical results. Thus the forecasted fluctuations predicted by the model have a somewhat
different character than those we find in the data. The model's forecasted changes involve adjustments to the

steady state that occur over very long spans of time. Instead, the data suggest that the large (brecastable

changes occur over shorter Thusiness cycle5 frequencies. This finding is related to the demonstration by
Watson (1993) that the model is unable to replicate the fact that spectra of output growth have a great deal
of power at business cycle frequencies.
Perhaps

the most counterintuitive contrast between the model and the data concerns the behavior of

the variability of consumption. As we saw, the estimated standard deviation of expected consumption
changes equals between one third and one half the corresponding standard deviation for output. By contrast,

the model predicts that the standard deviation of expected consumption changes should equal over twice

the standard deviation of output changes. This may be surprising since the RBC literature often counts
the prediction of relatively smooth consumption as one of the model's important successes. But because
technology shocks raise the marginal product of capital they raise interest rates and this promotes a reduction

in consumption relative to its steady state level. This reduction is so large in the case of our preference
parameters that the ratio of consumption to income actually falls. This means that consumption is expected
to grow more than income and thus the size of expected changes in con_suanption exceeds the size of expected

output changes. Another way of seeing this is to note that, in Figure 3, departures of output from the steady
state are associated with even bigger departures of consumption from its steady state. Thus the predictable
movements of consumption (towards its steady state) are larger.

In the case of investment, by contrast, the model is more accurate. While its underprediction of the total

variability of forecastable output movements leads it to underpredict the standard deviation of investment

movements, it correctly predicts that this standard deviation should be larger than that for output move-

25

meats. Investment is very large in the immediate aftermath of a positive technolo' shock because capital
is below the steady state. Later, investment is much smaller and, for this reason, the predictable movements

are large. In the data the ratio of the standard deviation of investment movements is to that of output
movements is actually slightly larger than the ratio predicted by the modeL This is just the flip side of the
model's relative overprediction of consumption movements.

The model generates predictable movement. in hours that are of roughly the same magnitude as the
predictable changes in output. This prediction is validated in the data. This is interesting because, as far
as the total variability is concerned, Table 2 shows (a. do K-P-K) that the model underpredicta the ratio of

the standard deviation of hours growth to that of output growth.
Unlike in the case of output movements, the model predicts labor productivity movements that are too

large, particularly for horizons longer than 24 months. This means that the ratio of the standard deviation
of productivity changes to that of output changes is much larger in the model than in the data, particularly

at long horizons. As we will emphasize below, these counterfactual predictions concerning productivity

movement. are particularly bothersome b.r.ne it wn unlikely that simple variants of the model can
account for it.
Because the model has just one state variable, ic, the expected changes in all the variables are perfectly

correlated. Moreover, since x is deterministically related to both current hours and the consumption share,
these variables are also perfectly correlated with all expected changes. Such perfect correlations are obviously
absent from our data. Nonetheless, all our estimates of expected changes are highly correlated with each other

and, at least for long horizons, they are also highly correlated with initial hours and the initial consumption
share. This suggests that a model with a single state variable can in principle explain a large fraction of the
cyclical movements in our variables.

While these correlations are high in our data, their sign is often not that predicted by our model. It is
apparent from Figure 3 that our parameters imply that when output is below the steady state (and rising),

hours ate above the steady state while the consumption share ii below the steady state. This means that
expected future output growth should be positively associated with the current level of hours and negatively

associated with the consumption share.

Empirically, both these correlations have the opposite sign from

Notc that this laster t..,,lL...*L.., I. the opposite of what S hspU.d by the simple pemanet lucerne boU.eiis.

26

that predicted by our model. in the data, a high consumption share and a low level of hours both predict

high future growth in output.
Similar difficulties arise when we analyse the sign of the correlations between the expected changes in
our variables. These can be seen in ThbIe B which report. the regression coefficients of expected changes in

various variables on expected output growth. We do not report different coefficients for different horizons
because the model predicts that these coefficients are independent of the horizon in question. If the model

were literally correct these regressions would have no error but this is not our main concern here. Rather
we are most interested in the form of the predicted co-movement.

Our model predicts that expected consumption growth is positive when expected output growth is pos-

itive. Therefore, the regression coefficient of expected consumption growth on expected output growth is
positive. Our earlier discussion suggests the model predicts that this coefficient is well above 2. By contrast,

it is less than .5 in the data. The problem is once again that the model predicts that consumption will rise
faster than income alter a positive technology shock.
By the same token, the model implies that expected changes in investment are very negatively related to

expected increases in output. The corresponding regression coefficient is about -1.7. Investment is highest

immediately after a positive technology shock. After that, investment is expected to fall while output is
expected to rise. By contrast, our estimated regression coefficient is above 2, and implies that expected
investment growth is positively related to expected output growth.

With our parameters, our model predicts that the regression coefficient of expected hours growth on
expected output growth is negative. The reason is that a positive technology shock leads to an immediate

increase in hours. As is clear in Figure 3, hours are then expected to tall even though output rises as a
result of capital accumulation. In the data, expected output growth is positively associated with expected
hours growth. This is simply the flip side of the observation that a low level of hours is associated with an
expected increase in output in the data while it is associated with a decline in the model.

A somewhat different contrast is provided by the regression coefficient of expected labor productivity
growth on expected output growth. The model predicts this to be positive and larger than one. This is not

surprising since output is expected to rise when hours are expected to fall. The extra output is expected
to be produced by increased capital. By contrast our estimates indicate that expected productivity growth

27

S nearly unrelated to expected output growth. While the standard errors are large relative to the point
estimates, many of the coefficients in the last column of Thble 5 are negative suggesting that productivity
should fall when output rwes.

5

Alternative Preference Specifications

One obvious question that arises at this point is whether these discrepancies can be resolved by changing the
preference parameters in plwzsible ways. To shed some light on this question, we have investigated whether

changes in o'and qiw could reverie the sign of some of the predicted correlations in ways that would make
them more consistent with the data.

The results are presented in Thble 9. This table presents the standard

deviation of output changes forecasted to occur in the next 12 quarters in the third column. The fourth and

111th columns present the correlation of output changes with the initial level of (C/Y) and I. respectively.
Finally, the last three columns report the regression coefficients of expected consumption growth1 expected

hours growth and expected productivity growth on expected output growth.

it is apparent from this table that, keeping a equal to 1, varying (11W does not make the model more
successful. As is well known, raising the elasticity of labor supply, raise the immediate increase in hours in
response to a positive technology shock. This means that hours are expected to decline further after such
a shock. The result is that the regression coefficient of expected hours changes on expected output changes
becomes even more negative. Moreover, the volatility of expected output falls because the increase in output

due to capital accumulation is now offset by a bigger decline in hours worked. Thus raising the elasticity of

labor supply, which has been demonstrated to help the model explain the unconditional volatility of hours
makes the predictions concerning the expected changes in hours more counterfactual.

It is possible to make some of the model's predictions more consistent with our facts by changing a.

Consider first the effect of lowering a so that utility is more nearly linear in consumption. This has the
effect of making consumption rise less in response to a technology shock so that C/V falls by more. The fall

in consumption also tends to raise labor supply so that hours rise by more. U, one assumes also that HW

is large, then hours can rise so much that output initially overshoots its long run level. This possibility is

3Tha psrtmfles of the modsi dill. from lbs others In th.s they cannot he Idatified Inn obeantion ci lbs long nan
of ststnnay vasisbies sicas, as opposed to usIng evidence on the dasracter ci aggregate fluctuations to — them
down. The parameter sw in particular is quite controversial tim within the RBC literature, sad lbs coasequenme of
averages

.._.E: aIt.eniati,e values fer It as. often considered. See, e.g., Prescott (1986) sad King, floss. and Rsbeic (1988.).

28

illustrated in Figure 4 which shows impulse responses fore equal to 0.6 and IfW e(lUal to 10.
Because output overshoots its long run level, output and hours are expected to decline together. This

expected decline in output is associated with a low initial level of (dY) and a high initial level of how..
Thus the model now fits the sign of these correlations as well as the positive co-movement of expected
hours and expected output. Another possible advantage of these parameters is that they imply that labor
productivity moves in the opposite direction as output. The reason is that the output declines that follow a
positive technology shock are accompanied by capital accumulation and labor decumulation, both of which

raise labor productivity. The problem, however, is that, because both factor movements are causing labor

productivity to rise, the predicted relationship is too strong productivity is expected to fall by more than
4% for each 1% increase in output.
There is another problem with this specification of preferences. Because consumption is expected to grow

after a technology shock, its growth occurs when output is expected to decline (the regression coefficient
of expected consumption growth on expected output growth equals -5.3). While the precise magnitude of
this coefficient depends on the parameters employed, it should be clear that the fact that consumption and
output move in opposite directions is an immediate consequence of making a so low that output overshoots
its long run level. Thus, such low a's do not seem appealing.

The alternative is to consider high levels of a. Raising a lowers the elisticity of substitution of consumption so that consumption rises more in the immediate aftermath of a technology shock. Tbis has two

effects, both of which make the model more consistent with the data. The first is that, if the increase in
consumption is large enough, the consumption share actually rises. Since output is still predicted to grow
after the shock, the current consumption share becomes positively correlated with expected output growth.

The second effect of raising a is that, because consumption rises more, hours rise less. If one also lowers
the elasticity of labor supply, then hours actually fall sifter a positive shock to technology. This means that
hours are expected to rise together with output, as our estimates suggest.

We document these effects in Figure 5 where we plot the impulse response linctions when a is equal
to 4 and ENW is equal to 0.2. As Table 9 indicates, these parameters again imply that high values of is

and low values of (CIV) are associated with output declines. They also imply that the predicted elasticity

of consumption growth with respect to expected output growth is only .90 and this lower value is more

29

consistent with our estimates. Indeed, the fact that this elasticity is below 1/sc implies that the elasticity

of expected investment growth with respect to expected output growth is positive, as in the data. Finally,
the elasticity of expected hours growth with respect to expected output growth is positive although it equals

only 0.06 which is much lower than in the data. Nonetheless, these preference parameters capture the main

qualitative features of the forecasted movements in consumption, output and hours. The exception is that
they still imply that productivity is expected to grow substantially with output, and this is not the case in

our data.
While the use of these preference parameters improves the ability of the model to explain the correlations

reported in Tables 4 and 5, it worsens its ability to explain several of the moments reported in 'hble 2. In
particular, the predicted standard deviation of the overall one quarter change in hours falls significantly. It
now equals only about 3% of the standard deviation of changes in output. On the other hand, the model now

predicts an excessive volatility of consumption. The predicted standard deviation of consumption changes

front one quarter to the next now exceeds the corresponding standard deviation for output. But perhaps
the biggest problem with assuming suck a low elasticity of substitution of consumption is that it results in a

strong negative correlation between the overall change in hours and the overall change in output. This may

be surprising because the correlation between the predicted changes in the two variables is now positive,

as in the data. The problem is that the predictable movements remain small relative to the unpredictable
movements. And, positive shocks to productivity now lower hours while raising output, contributing to an
overall negative correlation between these variables.
Thus, using the parameters that fit better the expected changes implies that the unexpected changes must
largely be due to shocks other than technology shocks. Hence simple variation of the preference parameters
does not solve the problem poeed in section 4.

6 Consequences of Measurement Error and Transitory Disturbances
We now consider whether the difficulties of the standard stochastic growth model can be explained by the
simple hypothesis that our time series on consumption, output and hours art subject to classical measurement

30

error. as That I., we wish to consider the hypothesis that the equations of section 3 correctly describe the

evolution of a vector of true state variables i1

= (th,a., Is,), but that our data are for a vector
(18)

where {i) is vector white noise procs, independent of the technolo' shock process and hence of the

variables {i,}.
We can also consider simultaneously the consequences of adding various types of transitory shocks to

the model set out in section 3. Suppose that the equilibrium conditions of section 3 are correct, except for
the presence of a vector of white noise disturbance ternr v1, that may enter any of the equations involved

in the determination of variables at date t. For example, we may allow for preference shocks, so that the
Frisch demand functions become W°'(w,N1, A,, v) and C(W,N,, A,, &j). (We continue to asume the same

homogeneity properties as before, for each value of s.) We may allow for stochastic government purchases
and fiscal policy, so that

=
0, = rfr,)Yg
Or we may allow for stochastic variation in the rate of depreciation, so that
K,.,1 —I,+(1—6(ai))K,
We can also allow p, to be an argument of the dates production function, as long as the homogeneity and
concavity properties of the function continue to hold for all values of r; in this case there would be, in effect,
both permanent and transitory technology shocks. A more complex possibility (that we cannot develop here

in detail) would be to allow for a wedge between the marginal products in date S production and factor prices,
or for a wedge between the representative household's marginal

rate of substitution between consumption

and leisure and the real wage, that depends upon the difference between the logarithm of the nominal price

level at date t and what this price level was expected to be at date 5—1. as ilere we do not wish to discuss
has ofte bee. .uggen.d in the RBC litmsur. that Important &aatp.ncles betwee. the predictions of the .tothsatic

ls

pvth model and the flMisdcaJ propatiea of agpeate tIme saim are due to measunme.t elu', peci.Jly in the hour. series.
See,

e.g., Precott (1986) or Christisno sad Ele&s'n (1992).

mi. ouulJ resell fresa nominal wege or s,ce being flieS • peáod In advance, or from asymmetric Information regasding
the airrest — level — In the model of Lucas (lSfl). Sn Cooley sad Hansen (1903) for disa,ssIoe of complete stoáe.tic
growth models Ins. which eva sourte of monetary non.naitraiity an Introduced.

31

extension of the model to include nominal price level determination, but it is clear that such a price level
surprise" variable must be white noise, regardless of the nature of the underlying shock that determines it.
In any of these cases, the perturbed equilibrium conditions have a solution in which g, can be expressed

as a time-invariant function of ,c1 and v. For the variables s are determined as before by equilibrium
conditions that are the same at all times, except for their dependence upon the current value of c5, and now

also their dependence upon the current value of x's and the distribution of possible future histories of the
shocks (i's.,,). But the distribution of possible future histories of the shocks ft's.,,) is the same at all times,
because of the assumption that the shocks are white noise. (Actually, it suffices that the vector process {u1}

be Markovian.) Tbusx4 is determined solely by Ic1 and s'. Log-linearization around the mean values of the
latter two variables then yields

(r, — zs) = r,.(1c

—

aC) + r,(Lj — in)

(19)

as a generalization of(13), and similarly
(icc.,1 — aC) = q(c5 — .C) + ,i,."g — c.+

(20)

as a generalization of (14). flzrtherniore, due the usual certainty-equivalence property of the log-linear
equilibrium conditions, the coefficients r,5 and q are the saint as in the previous model (corresponding to
the case o( p5 a constant vector).

Both the model of measurement error (18) and the model with white noise disturbances (19H20) have
a common set of implications. These are that

=

—

— yi+,J = (r — r,]q'Eg(icgt — aC

= —r,(1 — q)p/_tEg[ict+i —iC]

(21)
(22)
(23)

for any j> 1, where the coefficient. r,5 and q are the same as in the previous model. Note that we have
used the assumption that the disturbance. v in (18)-(20) are white noise to eliminate terms of the form

E[v,.,j for 5 1. Both models similarly imply that

a E(r.,+e — i+j] = —r2(I — q5)/1E4ic1+i — .C]
32

(24)

for anyj

1, and for each of the variables: = y,c,i,p, or h. All of equations (21)—{24) are also implications

of the model in section 3; the only difference is that corresponding equations with * +1 replaced by * need
no longer hold.

Because each of these conditional expectations is a amltiple of the sane variable E4ac..pi — C), it follows

that their relative variances and their correlations are all identical to those predicted by the model of section
3, Hence these implications of the model can be tested, independently of which variables one believes to be

most contaminated by measurement error or of which of the types of transitory disturbances one believes

are most important.
Up to this point we have considered the effects of measurement error and transitory disturbances that are

independently distributed through time so that forecasts of future variables depend only on

—

C).

A similar analysis applies to the case where the transitory disturbances or the measurement error follow a
moving average process of order in. Then, the expectations at t of variables at I + 5,where 5 is no smaller
than in + 1, depend only on the Es[c,+m+a — e). The reason is that any effect betond I + m+ 1 of shocks

that have impinged on the system up to must be due only to the slow adjustment of capital from I + in + 1

to the steady state.
Table 10 presents the implications of the estimated VAR for several statistics involving expectntions at

& of k period changes starting at I +5. Specifically, for each value of 5 and k, the first column reports

the standard deviation of &i,. The next two columns report the correlations between

on the one

hand, and Es[cs+, — vi+jl and E[h') on the other. The remaining three columns report the respective

on ru;,.

coefficients of the regressions of &, A4,, and

The theoretical predictions for these last

six quantities are independent of both j and k; the correlations in columns two and three ought to be-i and
+1 respectively (in the case of the calibration described in Table 6), while the regression coefficientsin the
remaining columns ought to take the values given in Thble 8.

Table 10 shows that the co.movements between variables are not very sensitive to the choice of 5. The

correlations of expected output growth from quarter I + 5 with the expectation of Is at * + j always ha.
the wrong sign as does the regression coefficient of expected hour. growth on expected output growth.
Because this latter coefficient is always estimated to be near one, expected productivity is either unrelated

or negatively related to expected output growth. The sign of the correlation between the expected value

33

of (c — y) and expected output growth as well as the coefficient in the regression of expected consumption
growth on output growth remain inconsistent with the model until j reaches 8 quarters. For longer horizons,

these correlations become unstable, though the standard errors become very large as well. The overall

stability of the results as one varies the point from which expected changes in output are computed suggest.

that measurement error and transitory disturbances are not responsible for our results concerning the comovement of different series.
There remains the question of whether the estimates of the standard deviation of

can be compared to

the predictions of the model. In the case of transitory disturbances, such comparison is impossible because,

depending on the disturbance, a transitory disturbance at * can have quantitatively important effects on

cg/C. On the other hand, measurement error at I should not have a large effect on

— .Cj. It

is thus of interest to compare the actual variability of b.jj, with the variability induced by random walk
disturbances with

e equal to 0.00732. The corresponding theoretical predictions are displayed in Thble II.

We see that, for low values of 5, the model still generates predictable movements whose variability is too
small. For higher values off, the correspondence between the two is closer because the data suggest that,
beyond a 12 quarter horison, predictable movements of output tend to be quite small.

7

Slow Diffusion of Technical Progress

One possible answer to the difficulties encountered by the stochastic growth model hi the previous sections
is to consider a more complex stochastic process for technology. it is rather obvious that one way to obtain

larger forecastable movements in output and other variables is to assume forecastable movements in the
production technology itself. It is also obvious that generalizing the specification of the technology process
can in principle introduce a large number of additional degree. of freedom, perhaps enough to allow cue to
fit the finite set of statistics discussed above.

But such a resolution, even if possible, does not detract from our main point here. The demonstration

above that a particular form of technical progr that yields stochastic growth does not generate business

cycles suffices to establish that the business cycle is not a necary concomitant of stochastic growth. In
a4dition, allowing oneself a large number of free parameters in the assumed technology process — that are not

to be pinned down by reference either to microeconomic evidence or to growth facts — is hardly in the spirit of

34

the aBC literature. This literature has emphasized the benefits of eliminating free parameters whose values

are deduced from the cyclical fluctuations that one seeks to explain. It is precisely this desire to conserve

on parameter, that has led the asc literature to an almost exclusive focus on the case when z follow.
a random walk. This is the simplest possible specification that allows for stochastic growth; for it is the

unique type of process with the property that all conditional expectations of the form E4logzsj) forj 0

- the only aspects of expectations of future technology that matter for equilibrium determination in the loglinear approximation - can be summarized by a single state variable. srthermore, it has often been argued
to be reasonable a priori because technical inventions, once discovered, should be permanent additions to
knowledge. Thus while one might assume dynamics of some complex sort for expected productivity changes,

and thus obtain a model that can explain both a cycle of the kind observed and stochastic growth as
consequences of technology shocks, there is no reason to regard such a modification of the model as any
less ad hoc than would be the introduction of any other additional source of transitory dynamics1 such as
nominal contracts and monetary policy shocks.

For this reason, we do not here attempt to consider the implications of a general class of stochastic
processes for technology; this sort of extension, like the investigation of other sources of transitory dynamics,
is left for further work. We do, however, wish to briefly consider an alternative specification for the technology

shock process, that is both relatively simple, and that generalizes the random walk specification in a way
that is suggested by studies of the actual nature of technical progress, rather than being chosen simply for
its usefulness in producing dynamics of the desired sort. Specifically, we wish to allow for the possibility that

technical innovations, once discovered, diffuse slowly through the economy rather than being immediately
adopted to the fullest poesibte extent. The evidence that actual innovations are adopted slowly is ubiquitous,

' though the reasons why the diffusion is so slow are unclear, ss and it is not obvious how this specification

is to be reconciled with the low serial correlation of measured Solow productivity residuals. '
"S.. ManMisId (1968) ore caaptehenaiv. "'.'k" and foe aMecs.. Jovanovic and Lad. (1993) also discs., the n.
qua .1 the .1.. diIf,ala, of innovatious for lb. ability of. .tothaMic growth model to amS for awtgals fluctuatiocs,
although In egroti. fnmewo,k rather dilleent from o'r own.
3E111.an and P\sde.be (1003) .t,. the pea of slow learning about the quality of an Innovation.
"Under the a...ptioos of the model .n.ly.ad hat, the Solow residual should measur, th. growth nrc of the tod.n4o
factor r,, — that the oheavasion of aerial correlation ncr see peovide. .pt for the .enunptioa thea at follows a random
walk. However, It I. oftan argued that much of the higb.frequeecy variation In maaeur.ed Solow residuals results from S
mwwonent of Inputs (e.g., du, to "labor ho.rdlag, vasiatio.s in capital uti or Isnpropc aggiflsLioe) rather than
Ins. technical ogs This the tcchnolou apedficatlon coesideed ha. should probably not be dlaS.acd on this basis alone,
though we do not bee model any of these po..ibl. anm of spurious variations In the Solow residual.

35

Formalization of this idea requires that we introduce a new variable, namely the "long run" level of
technology expected at , v1. In direct analogy with (1), we define it as

logy.

tim
T-.co E,[Iogzgqr —Tlog.]

(25)

where z continues to denote the technology factor in the period t aggregate production function, and .

is the unconditional average rate of growth of z. The variable v can be thouzjit of as the level of basic
knowledge about technological opportunities that the society has at t. Actual technology can differ from this

because of the time taken for new technologies to be adopted. To be consistent with (25), v, must follow a
random walk. The reason is that the revisions in the expectation of the level of expected long run technology

must be independent of any information available at t. Thus, we have that

logv = logv,_l + I.

(26)

Ouranalysisin section3asuzned tbatz, wasalwaysequai toy.. Here wepropoeetorelaxthisassumption,
but in the simplest possible way. Thus we assume that

log; =fllogz,_1 + (1 —fl)logv1

(27)

This equation implies that
(28)

so that the rate of growth of technology follows a first-order Alt process. It follows that all conditional
expectations of the form Eg[logzg+j] ate functions of only two state variables, zg and Vt.

This equation defines a one-parameter family of stochastic proces for technology, with the case considered in section 3 corresponding to fi =0. We now consider values ranging over the interval 0 ft < 1, where

higher ft corresponds to slower diffusion of the innovation. Mansfield (1968) contains estimates of rates of
diffusion for many innovations. 4° He shows that the time elapsed before half the firms in an industry adopt

a major innovation has varied between 1 and 15 yeats. We thus consider a rate of diffusion such that half
"Mansfield (1988) straw that the .tock of adoptars follows an Scwve and one could view this — evidece that lbs stoobastic

pros for • Is . .-....,,'

than in (37; an S-áapwi Impulss rrs_ of: to an Innovation requires that the powth rate
of: be sn AR of at least second oSa. We do sat pursued this Auth. has, (or two reasons. Th. first I. the sasSy .1
imfonnssioa on the basis of wIdth to alifrate anal .llffaeg panmdas. The second Is that the S-cane a.....a In the
empirical litastw. I an a — daiptiou of — ---'ul innovasia Because unsuccessful Innovations probably start out
looking similar to successful on, It I hard to now at wIdth point I. the S-cantons should lmsóni that people knew thai
the long-ron .4.nalnc will be diffas This Idea fits well with Ellison and flada,berg's (1993) explanatIon of sian' diffusion
based on slow kanüng.

36

the change in t' is embedded in a change in z after 30 quarters. This implies that ft is equal to about 0.98.
We thus give special emphasis to this value.

In this variant of the model, output, consumption and hours depend on four variables, the current capital

stock, P4, the current level of technology z and the eventual level of technology t,1. But, once again it is
straightforward to show that consumption and output are homogeneous of degree one in K1, rjN1 and v4/l,,

while h, is homogeneous of degree zero in this tint set of variables. This means that the transformed
variables

,

and A1 depend on two variables, namely c4 and the ratio of v, to zg (or equivalently,

(logy4 — log;). Since C,/Y, and A, depend just on these two state variables, it ii generally possible to
reconstruct the state variables from the two stationary variables included in our VAR. 'Thus the theoretical
model implies that the forecastable changes estimated by our VAR. should correspond to the forecastable
changes given the information set of agents in the model. 41

Table 12 presents the theoretical predictions for a model with our baseline preference specifications, but
for alternative values of fi. These predictions are computed keeping the standard deviation of c,, Ør, equal to
0.00732. The table shows that the K', the fraction of changes in output over 12 quarters that are predictable,

rises with ft. This is due to the fact that higher values of ft make the future rate of technical progress more
predictable. While this increase in K' seems desirable, increases in ft also lower the standard deviation of

predictable output changes. The reason is that higher values of ft make the rate of growth of technology
smoother (since it becomes more serially correlated as $ is increased, in the limit approaching a random
wall). Thus, for a given a,, the variance of changes in log £ falls, and consequently the variance of changes

in logY as well. This reduction in the variability of output also leads to a reduction in the amount of
predictable variability. Thus slow diffusion of technology don Dot lead to larger forecastable movements in

output.
Table 12 also shows that many of the correlations between output growth and other variables that were

problematic in the case of ft = 0 remain problematic for higher values of ft. in particular, high expected

growth ii still correlated with high value, of hours and low values of C/Y. This is surprising, because
consumption rises more than output immediately following a positive innovation if ft 1. large. This can be
"Thus the possibility of mls4dcitiñcadon of technology shocks Gun Sb. VAR rSdusis that Lippi and Beichlin show can
wise in Sb. case of slow diffusion of technical p.0gw doe. not oa'z in this model. Hence for purposes of calibrating this
nodd, we an again able to uSe Sb. estimated variance of Innovatiesis in the long-nan fecast of output (roan the VAR — the

vasiaaaoflnao,asioaslav,.

37

seen in

Figure 6, which shows the impulse responses of consumption, output and hours to a unit innovation

c when

is equal to 0.98. The reason consumption jumps so much is that there continues to be a strong

wealth effect of the innovation, even though the productivity of existing inputs ha. increased very little. But,
while

C/Y rises immediately, it soon falls, and spends most of the transition period below its steady state

value. For that reason, the overall correlation between output growth and C/Y continues to be negative.
With this high value of fi, the regression coefficients of expected consumption growth and expected hours

growth on expected output growth are closer to their empirical counterparts. The first is now below I,

as in the data, while the second is now larger. On the other hand, the model still predicts that labor
productivity should rise together with output. This prediction seems hard to avoid in models where the
transitory dynamics are due to persistent technology shocks that cause long run growth. It i. probably the

single biggest reason for our feeling that the shocks that lead to long run growth do not seem capable of
generating the sort of predictable output movements that we have been exploring in this paper.

Thus allowing for forecsstable technical progr of this particular kind does not help to explain the size

or character of the forecastable variations in output growth. What is more, in the case of a high value
of fi, the model implies that technology shocks account for only a trivial fraction of the overall variability

of output growth as well. Whereas in the case fi = 0, the predicted standard deviation of output growth

is .0053 (nearly half the standard deviation of actually observed output growth), in the case = .98, the
predicted standard deviation of output growth is only .0009. This allows us to sharpen the point made
earlier: Accepting the existence of a stochastic trend does not require us to believe that innovations in that
trend play any significant role in the generation of business cycles. It is now clear that this is true not only
when by Thusiness cycles" we mean forecastable output movements; innovations in the trend need not play

any significant role in the generation of period to period variability in aggregate quantities, forecastable or
otherwise. If the correct model were of this kind, but with additional independent disturbances in addition

to the technology shocks, essentially all of the variability in aggregate quantities would have to be due to
the other shocks. Thus the existence of a 'unit root" in output does not, in itself, imply anything about the

role of technology shocks in generating output variability. 42

"The ,sflan decompositioss reported by K-PS-W do, of wun, p.ot4de further evidence in this regard. the iris
of the vadsace In output and other quantities ow, say, a 12.quarte honison that they sitribute to the innovajioss In the
"SlsncsA.gowth shock" I. cextainly not omsista* with • thso.tical model like the 'me discussed here, with £ hl8h talus of

$ but with additional transitory distiubsnces.
38

8 Conclusions
We have demonstrated that the forecastable movements in output - what we would argue is the essence of

the "business cycle" — are inconsistent with a standard growth model disturbed solely by random shocks

to the rate of technical progress. In the case of a standard calibration of parameter values, the model
predicts neither the magnitude of these forecastable changes nor their basic features, such as the signs of
the correlations among the forecastable changes in various aggregate quantities. We have also argued that

contemplation of parameter values outside the range typically assumed in the real business cycle literature

does little to improve the model's performance in this regard, while significantly worsening the model's
performance on dimensions emphasized in that literature.

Various possible interpretations might be given for the failure of this particular type of stochastic growth
model to explain the business cycle. It may be that the business cycle is mainly caused by disturbances other

than technology shocks, that the model errs in its account of the dynamic response to technology shocks,

or that the technology shocks that account for the business cycle have serial correlation properties very
different from those assumed here. Whichever possibility turns out to account for more of the failure, one
can conclude that the standard growth model provides a poor description of the (dpropagation mechanism"

by which the effects of shocks evolve over time. For we can show that the mere introduction of additional
disturbances to the equilibrium conditions of the model cannot solve the problem, regardless of the nature
or magnitude of the disturbances contemplated, if these additional disturbances are purely transitory. Thus

the additional disturbances (whether they represent additional transitory components of the productivity
factor, or shocks of some other kind) would have to exhibit significant persistence, and the mechanism by
which these disturbances persist over many quarters would turn out to be a crucial source of business cycle

dynamics - in essence, a propagation mechanism in addition to those present in the basic growth model.
But it is not obvious that one should assume that the equations of the basic model are correct except for
the absence of stochastic disturbance terms, quite possibly, the standard growth model must be modified to
include other sources of dynamic before it can be used to model business cycles. Some obvious candidates

would include inventory dynamics, slow adjustment of the work force as is implied in models of "labor
hoarding,' or slow adjustment of nominal wages and/or prices as is implied by models with overlapping
contracts or costs of price adjustment. The degree to which mechanisms of these sorts might better account
39

for the size and nature of the forecastabte movements in output and other variables documented here remains

a topic for future research.

9

References

Beveridge, Stephen and Charles It Nelson:"A New Approach to the Decomposition of Economic Time

Series into Permanent and Thasitory Components with Particular Attention to Measurement of
the 'Business Cycle'," Journal of Monetary Economics 7, March 1981, 151-74.

Blanchard, Olivier I. and Danny Qush:"The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Supply and Demand Disturbeaten," American Economic Review, 79, September 1989, 655-73.
Blanchard, Olivia 3. and Stanley Fischer: Lectures on Macroeconomics, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989.
Brock, William A. and Leonard I. Mirman, "Optimal Economic Growth and Uncertainty: The Discounted
Case," Journal of Economic Theoay, 4, 1972, 497-513.

Campbell, John Y,:"Does Saving Anticipate Declining Labor Income? An Mternative Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis," Econometrics, 55, November 1987, 1249-73.

—

and N. Gregory Manldw:"Consumption, Income and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time series

Evidence," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, 185-216.

Cbristiano, Lawrence 3. and Martin Eichenbaunif'Current Real-Business-Cycle Theories and Aggregate
Labor Market Fluctuations," American Economic Review,82, June 1992, 430-50.
Cocbrane, John H.:"Pennanent and Transitory Components of GNP and Stock Prices," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1994a, forthcoming.
Cochrane, John H.: "Shocks," Carnegie-Rochester Conference, 1994b, forthcomin&

— and Argia Sbordone:'Multivariate Estimates of the Permanent Components of GNP and Stock
Prices," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 12, June/September 1988, 255-96.
Cogley, Timothy and James Pd. Nason:"Do Real Business Cycle Pass the Nelson-Plosser That?," mimeo,
August 1992.

Cootey, Thomas F. and Gary D. Hansen, "Money and the Business Cycle," mimeo, October 1993.
Forthcoming in T.F. Cooley, ed., kontiers of Business Cycle Research, Princeton University
Press.
EDison, Glenn and Drew FUdenberg: "Rules of Thumb for Social Learning," Journal of Political Economy,

40

101, August 1993, 61243.
Evans, George:"Output and Unemployment Dynamics in the United States: 1950-1985,' Journal
Applied Econometrics, 4, July-September 1989, 213-37.

of

Evans, George and Lucrezia Reicblin:"lnformation, Forecasts and Measurement of the Business Cycle,"
mimeo, OFCE, Paris, May 1993.

Friedman, Benjamin and Kenneth N. Kuttuer:'Money, Income, Prices and Interest Rates," American
Economic Review, 82, 472-92.

Gordon, Robert J.:"Fbe 'End-of-Expansion' Phenomenon in Short Run Productivity Behavior,' Brookinga papers on Economic Activity, (1979), 447-83.

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Saul Lack, "Diffusion Lags and Aggregate Fluctuations," NBER Working Paper
No. 4455, September 1993.
King, Robert C., Charles I. Plosser and Sergio RebtProduction, Growth and Business Cycles: I. The
Basic Neoclassical Model," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21, March 1988a, 195-232.

_sProduction, Growth and Business Cycles: II. New Directions," Journal of Monetary Economics,
21, March 1988b, 309-342.

King, Robert G., Charles 1. Plosser, James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson:'Stochastic 'flenda and
Economic Fluctuations," American Economic Review,81, September 1991. 819-40.
King, Robert C. and Sergio Rebelo:"Low Frequency Filtering and Real Business Cycles,"Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 1993, 207-31.
Kydlaad, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott:"Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica,
50, (November 1982): 1345-70.

Lippi, Marco and Lucrezia Reichlin:"The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances: Comment," American Economic Review, 83, June 1993, 644-52.
Mansfield, Edwin:The Economics of Technological Change, New York:Norton, 1968.

Nelson, Charles a.. and Charles I. Plosser:"flends and Random Walks Lu Macroeconomic Tame Series:
Some Evidence and Implications,' Journal of Monetary Economics, 10,1982, t39-62.
Plosser, Charles

l.:"Understanding Real Business Cycles," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 3, Summer

1989, 51-78.

41

Prescott, Edward C.:Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall 1986, 9-22.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Wood(ord:sOligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of Aggregate Demand
on Economic Activity," Journal of Political Econonu', 100, December 1992, 1153-207.

— and —:"Dynamic General Equilibrium Models with Imperfectly CompetitiveProduct Marketa,"
forthcoming in T. Cooley,

S.

hontien o(Businas Cycle Research, Princeton: Princeton Uni-

versity Press, 1994

Shapiro, Matthew I). and Mark W. Watson:"Sourcn of Business Cycle Fluctuations," KEEn Macroeconomics Annual, 1988, 111-148.

Sbus, Christopher A.:Output and Labor Input in Manufacturing," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, III, (1914), 695-731.
Watson, Mark W.:Meaaures of Fit for Calibrated Models," Journal of Political Ecooonv', 101, December
1993, 1011-41.

42

Table 1 Regression Results

Sy

(c—y)

ii

0.023
0.016

-0.042
0.014

0.0 10

0.570

-0.469
0.147

0.570

0.167
0.002
0.087

0.017
0.077

-0.005
0.066

(c— v)—i

0.663
0.166

0.330
0.146

0.490
0.126

(c — y)—i

-0.618

0468 -0.458

My A(c—y)

Ala

Explanatory van.
Constant

0.012

0_In

0.158

0.139

0.120

0.215
0.128

-0.283
0.113

1.450
0.097

-0.314
0.135

0.316
0.119

-0.503

0.005
0.001

-0.044
0.013

0.344
0.080

-0.696
0.098

0.098
0.030

-0.079
0.019

0.102
0.0 13
0.091

0.129
0.075

My_ti
A(c— y)—a

0.122
0.074

— v)—z

0.126
0.075

Sh_1

0.760

Ah_3

-0.135
0.074

Thnd

3e-4

0.070

Se-S

Data from 1948.4 to 1993.2. Standard Errors below coefficient estimata

43

Table 2
Unconditional Second Moments
Moment

Baseline Model U.S. Data
0.0053

0.0113

S.D.Sc/S.DAy

0.585

0.478

S.DAI/S.DAy

2.019

2.911

S.DAA/S.D.Sy

0.358

0.934

S.DAp/S.D.y

0.660

0.690

Con.(a.cAy)

0.987

0.5223

Corr.(Ah,Av)

0.917

0.7475

Corr.(4i,Ay)

0.994

0.9452

Con4Ap, âp)

0.994

0.4373

44

Table 3
Estimated standaid deviations of forecAsted changes

it
Horizon
1.

&A'

4'

0.0062 0.0023 0.0175 0.0077 0.0037
0.0007

0.0004

0.0021

R!
0.0094

0.308

0.0005 0.0005

2.

0.0108 0.0044 0.0288 0.0130 0.0059
0.0014 0.0007 0.0039 0.0013 0.0009

0.0148

0.347

4.

0.0190 0.0082 0.0494 0.0204 0.0081
0.0029 0.0014 0.0077 0.0029 0.0014

0.0220

0.429

8.

0.0299 0.0139 0.0761 0.0309 0.0080
0.0039 0.0022 0.0096 0.0045 0.0017

0.0273

0.550

12

0.0326 0.0172 0.0825 0.0341 0.0072
0.0034 0.0027 0.0068 0.0031 0.0018

0.0304

0.537

24

0.0309 0.0224 0.0772 0.0323 0.0067
0.0037 0.0046 0.0053 0.0012 0.0020

0.0394

0.384

0.0272 0.0585 0.0325 0.0068
0.0044 0.0089 0.0039 0.0000 0.0023
0.0310

Standaid Errors based on coefficient uncertainty below estirnata

45

0.000

Table 4
Estimated correlations of predicted output changes

with the reressors

Regressor: y, (c— yg)

h,

Horizon:

0.597
0.090

0.214

-0.599

0.109

0.090

0.530
0.095

0.3 12

-0.793

0.132

0.077

4.

0.201
0.095

0.451
0.142

-0.960
0.030

8.

0.009
0.062

0.53
0.127

-0.995
0.007

12.

.0.087
0.058

0.546

0.119

-0.979
0.013

24.

-0.093
0.058

0.544
0.171

-0.978
0.012

00

-0.092
0.071

0.541
0.240

-0.978
0.014

1.

2.

Standard Errors based on coefficient uncertainty below estimates.

46

flble5
Estimated regression coefficients among fbrecaa ted changes

coat axj; &&j rt,

Horizon:
1.

0.2537
0.0590

3.7413
0.1376

1.0922
0.1103

-0.0922
0.1102

2.

0.3119
0.0603

2.6057
0.1406

1.0741

0.1154

-0.0741
0.1154

0.34-43

2.5299
0.1463

0.9881
0.1079

0.0119
0.1079

0.3678
0.0595

2.4751

0.1389

0.9964
0.1098

0.0036
0.1098

13.

0.3997
0.0614

2.4008
0.1434

1.0230
0.1134

.0.0230
0.1134

24.

0.4970
0.1212

2.1738
0.2828

1.0253
0.1215

-0.0253
0.1215

__

0.5711

2.0008
0.5502

1.0252
0.1375

-0.0252
0.1375

4.

0.0637
8.

0.2358

Standard Errors based on coefficient uncertainty below esthnaI.

47

TabLe 6

The Calibrated Parameter,
Parameter

Defined by

Values

Description

y.

1.004

Steady state growth rate of technology (per quarter)

'7..

1.004

Labor force growth rate (per quarter)

so

0.70

Share of private consumption expenditure in private

value added net of govt. purchases

6

0.025

Rate of depreciation of capital stock (per quarter)

0.42

Share of capital costs in total teats

I

CXL

r

Fx-4

Elasticity of substitution between capital and hours

0.01625 Steady state real rate of return (per quarter)

or

1/.r

0

1

IntertemporaJ elasticity of substitution of consumption
holding hours worked constant

4

Intertemporal elasticity of Labor supply

.00732

Standard deviation of permanent tecbnology aback

Note: Except for rate of population growth, parameters displayed above p take the same values as in King,
Ploeser and Rebelo (1988a).

48

Table 7
Predicted standard deviation, of forecasted changes
Horizon:

s11—&jt

it3

1

0.0003 0.0001 0.0005 0.0003 0.0006

0.0053

0.0035

2

0.0006 0.0013 0.0010 0.0006 0.0012

0.0076

0.0065

4

0.0012 0.0025 0.0019 0.0011 0.0022

0.0109

0.0113

8

0.0021 0.0046 0.0036 0.0020 0.0041

0.0159

0.0176

12

0.0029 0.0063 0.0049 0.0027 0.0056

0.0200

0.0208

24

0.0045 0.0097 0.0076 0.0042 0.0087

0.0300

0.0224

0.0066 0.0141 0.0110 0.0060 0.0126

0.0000

Table 8
Predicted regression coefficients among forecasted changes

49

Table 9

The £flct of Varying the Pretceace Paraineten
o

'aw S.D..&j,' Con

—

y)

Coa(&j,",h) IC oa

on

&j,: x

0.6

0.2

0.0041

-1.0

1.0

2.0990

-0.1799

1.1799

0.6

1.0

0.0030

-1.0

1.0

3.1763

-1.0312

2.0312

0.6

4.0

0.0003

-1.0

1.0

39.0290

-27.9521

28.9527

0.6

10.0

0.0025

1.0

-1.0

-6.3574

5.2520

-4.2520

1

0.2

0.0039

-1.0

1.0

1.5827

-0.0978

1.0978

1

1.0

0.0035

-1.0

1.0

1.7813

-0.3018

1.3918

I

4.0

0.0029

.1.0

1.0

2.1460

-0.9193

1.0193

1

10.0

0.0026

-1.0

1.0

23765

-1.2504

2.2504

0.0023

-1.0

1.0

2.6845

-1.6862

2.6862

4

0.2

0.0031

1.0

-1.0

0.8975

0.0621

0.9379

4

1

0.0029

1.0

1.0

0.8854

-0.0488

1.0488

4

4

0.0029

1.0

1.0

0.8867

-0.0365

1.0365

4

10

0.0030

1.0

1.0

0.8869

4.0348

1.0348

0.0030

1.0

1.0

0.8870

-0.0337

1.0337

I
10

0.2

0.0022

1.0

1.0

0.6531

-0.0426

1.0425

tO

I

0.0022

1.0

1.0

0.6680

-0.0281

1.0281

10

4

0.0022

1.0

1.0

0.6686

-0.0264

1.0264

10

10

0.0022

1.0

1.0

0.6587

-0.0261

1.0281

0.0022

1.0

1.0

0.6688

-0.0259

1.0259

10

50

Table 10
kbrecasts fbr b Period. Starting in Period t + j

j

k

0.0051
0.0008

0.284
0.160

-0.838
0.087

2

0.0099
0.0017

0.372
0.158

4

0.0186
0.0030

8

24

xi,;

xj.; xi;

xi,;

1.005
0.116

-0.005
0.116

-0.920
0.053

0.349

0.062

0.980
0.109

0.020
0,109

0.469
0.148

-0.987
0.015

0.349
0.059

0.991
0.108

0.009
0.108

0.0288
0.0035

0.533
0.127

-0.998
0.004

0.364
0.056

1.050
0.114

-0.050
0.114

12

0.0303
0.0033

0.548
0.125

-0.989
0.009

0.396
0.062

1.080
0.118

-0.080
0.118

24

0.0286
0.0037

0346
0.189

-0.988
0.009

0.492
0.133

1.082
0.127

-0.082
0.127

0.0288
0.0043

0.543
0.261

-0.988
0.010

0.564
0.256

1.082

0.145

-0.082
0.145

0.0257
0.0033

0.501
0.135

-0.999
0.004

0.362
0.057

0.122

-0.111
0.122

0.0252
0.0042

0.510
0.312

0.566
0.314

1.142
0.1569

-0.142
0.157

0.0178
0.0034

0.348
0.183

-0.993
0.011
-0.999
0.005

0.376
0.019

1.223
0.146

-0.223
0.146

0.0166
0.0043

0.355
0.536

-0.995
0.015

0.619
0.632

1.251
0.202

-0.251

0.0046
0.0028

0.066
0.791

-0.995
0.046

0.407
0.919

1.455
0.188

-0.455
0.188

0.0038
0.0025

0.089
2.463

-0.914
0.168

0.680
8.921

1.476
0.189

-0.476
0.189

0.0016
0.0025

0.517
1.720

-0.988
0.143

-0.955
4.617

0.977
0.554

0.023
0.554

0.0016
0.0032

0.453
4.250

-0.957
0.142

-2.191
25.65

0.988
1.041

0.012
1.041

0.0001
0.0011

-0.718
5.846

-0.965
1.159

13.11
37.90

0.998
5.316

0.002
5.316

0.0002
0.0031

-0.871
4.826

-0.983
0.477

26.17
330.9

1.026
10.57

-0.026
10.57

48

12

r;

0.349
0.063

28

8

S.Dsi,; Corr(&jt,(c — y)j) Corr(&jt,hj)

1

8

8

8

Standard Errors based on coefficient uncertainty below ntimates.

51

1.111

0.202

Predicted Stands:d DeviaUon of k PerIod 0utput CLangsa Starting at I + .1
1

2

4

8

12

f*:
I8

0.0020 0.0019 0.0012 0.0014 0.0012 0.0007

[o 0.0063 0.0060 0.0054 0.0045 0.0037 0.0020

Table 12
The Effect of Slow Diffu.ion of Technical Progreu

S.DZP"

IL'

Corr(4'21c — y)

0.99

0.0001

0.990

-0.535

0.523

0.885

0.091

0.908

0.98

0.0002

0.975

-0.394

0.393

0.806

0.155

0.845

0.95

0.0006

0.827

-0.213

0.213

0.685

0.252

0.748

0.9

0.0012

0.695

-0.125

0.125

0.630

0.296

0.704

0.8

0.0022

0.409

-0.132

0.132

0.634

0.293

0.707

ft

Corr(t"h) &' on Lj, &i:' Li,:' Li,:'

•

0.7

0.0027

0.256

-0.205

0.205

0.676

0.259

0.741

0.6

0.0030

0.170

-0.304

0304

0.746

0.203

0.797

0.5

0.0032

0.118

-0.420

0.420

0.849

0.121

0.879

0.4

0.0033

0.083

-0.550

0.550

0.992

0M06

0.994

03

0.0033

0.059

-0.688

0428

1.191

-0.153

1.153

0.2

0.0032

0.041

-0.826

0426

L459

-0.367

1.367

0.1

t0030

0.029

-0.945

0345

1.798

-0.638

1.638

62

—0.1

—0.09

—0.08

—0.07

—0.06

—0.05

—0.04

—0.03

—0.02

—0.01

0

0.01

0.03
0.02

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.08
0.07

0.09

0.1

50 52 54

60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82

Figure 1
Expected Declines in Private Output and NBER Troughs

92

—0.1

—0.09

—0.08

—0.07

—0.06

—0.05

—0.04

—0.03

—0.02

—0.01

0

0.01

0.02

0.04
0.03

0.07
0.06
0.05

0.08

0.09

0.1

586062646668 7072 7476 788082

PREFI 2

0ETCOP

84

86889092

Figure 2
Expected Declines in Next 12 Quarters and Detrended Output

I.

—

CO

I

-0.5-

05

I

.

****

+++ ++

15-

2

+

10

++

* *

•*

.

t . * * t..*.* t,
S

a=1;e=4

.

• S S * *..

20

30

40

50

60

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
+++++ + ++
Hours

o:l?:t. * * * . * * +

A1%Shocktoz;

Figure 3

I

t•

I

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

•
•
*
•
*
•
•
*
•
•
*
o

*

o

*

•
¶
•
•
•
*
•

d

+
+
+
+
+
+
+

t*

0'
hdb

+
+
+

::
*:
•:

o

4—

+
+
+

*

8

*
•

o
*
*

*

4

*

•
•

o•..

I

+

+

0

+

•

+

0
(N

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

*
*

b
c

0
cn

+
+

•
•

DO

.0

+

*

'S

0
0

+
+

+
I

In

d

I

0

In

4os eqiuz wo.q uogw lU9OlOd

Output

::::0:...
4.

Hours

.s

•

o=4; e,,=O.2

4

..

44 4..o

—I

.05.

10

20

I

30

40

50

0 r++++++++++++++++++÷+++÷+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

0.5

1L.

15

2

A1%Shocktoz;

Figure 5

60

I

I

it

________ 0
0
.1

I

S.

4:
4.
4.

S..

0'0

.

t

C'.'

'S...

t*

o

en
—
C.

*
*4

E

4•+
+

4+
•+

——

—

I

0

'q.
0 0I

0
I

4+
5+
I,,4i
c

OW3S AP8QIS !BI2IUJ UIO.IJ UOTIE!A9a 2UOOIOd

9

9

