                           NBER WORKING PAPER SEPJES




                             EXPLAINING THE DURATION
                              OF EXCHANGE-RATE PEGS




                                    Michael W. Klein
                                    Nancy P. Marion




                                Working Paper No. 4651



                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                February 1994




We thank Hank Farber for helpful discussions. Nancy Marion gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Lewis Haney Fund. This paper is part of NBER'S research
program in International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                     NEER Working Paper #465 1
                                                                                February 1994


                                EXPLAINING THE DURATION
                                 OF EXCHANGE-RATE PEGS


                                           ABSTRACT


       This paper is a theoretical and empirical investigation into the duration of exchange-rate

pegs. The theoretical model considers a policy-maker who must trade off the economic costs of

real exchange-rate misalignment against the political cost of realignment. The optimal time to

spend on a peg is derived and factors that influence peg duration are identified. The predictions

of the model are tested using logit analysis with a data set of exchange-rate pegs for sixteen Latin

American counu-ics and Jamaica during the 1957-199 1 period. We find that the real exchange

rate is a significant detemiinant of the likelihood of a devaluation. Structural variables, such as

the openness of the economy and its geographical trade concenhation, also significantly affect

the likelihood of a devaluation. Finally, political events that change the political cost of

realignment, such as regular and inegular executive transfers, are empirically important
detemiinants of the likelihood of a devaluation.




Michael W. Klein                                             Nancy P. Marion
The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy                     Department of Economics
Tufts University                                             Dartmouth College
Medford, MA 02155                                            Hanover, N}I 03755
and NBER
 1     Entroduction
                An important characteristic of exchange-rate pegs is their impermanence. hi the
face of adverse circumstances, governments often devalue a currency or abandon attempts to peg

altogether. These adverse circumstances may arise suddenly because of unusually large economic
shocks or more gradually because of persistent inflation differentials between the economy that
pegs its rate and the economy to which the currency is pegged. The devaluation that accompanies

the end of a peg is politically costly and therefore policy-makers are often reticent about

undertaking such a highly visible and unpopular measure. The choice of how long to maintain a

fixed exchange rate will likely involve weighing chc economic costs of a misalignment against the

political costs of a devaluation.
                This paper is a theoretical and empirical investigation into the determinants of the

duration of fixed exchange-raw pegs. The theoretical model in Section 2 portrays policy-makers

who must ta4e off the economic costs of a misalignment against the political costs of a

devaluation. The model shows how different factors in an economy affect the optimal time spent
on a given peg. These factors include thc accumulated real exchange-rate misalignment, structural
factors which change slowly, if at all, during the course of a peg, such as the openness of the
economy or the amount of its trade going to the country with which it pegs, and the political cost

accompanying the end of a peg.
               The theoretical model motivates the empirical analysis in Section 3. We have

consti-ucteda data set which consists of 87 spells of dollar pegs drawn from the experience of

sixteen Latin American countries and Jamaica during the period fmm the late 19 SOs through the

early 1990s. We use logit analysis to consider tbe effect of a variety of variables on the likelihood

of a devaluation over the course of these spells. The use of a Jogit model is an innovative stategy

for estimating the monthly probability of leaving an exchange-rate peg, particularly for developing

countries. In a world of perfect capital mobility and risk-neunilty, the interest differential
between the home county and the rest of the world should be equal to the expected rate of change
 of the exchange rate which, in turn, equals the probability-weighted average of the different

 expected depreciation rates. For most developing countries, however, capital-account nunsacrions
    controlled, permitted financial transactions involve a risk premium, domestic interest rates do
 not reflect market conditions, and time-series interest-rate data is often unavailable. In those

 circumstances. the probability of leaving the peg caimot be extracted from the interest-rate

differential Using a logit model which focuses on the roles of structure, misalignment and
 political costs of exchange-ratechanges can provide new insights into the factors that influence the

decision to maintain the peg month by month.
         The logit analysis yields several important results. For example, not only is there sliong
evidence that a more appreciated real exchange rate is associated with a higher likelihood of a

devaluation, there is also strong evidence that snucwral factors matter. The more open the

economy, the lower the likelihood of devaluation. The greater the degree of geographical trade

concentration, the higher the likelihood of devaluation. Political events, such as regular and

irregular executive transfers, also significantly increase the likelihood of a devaluation.

               The model of exchange-rate choice presented in this paper as well as its empirical
implementation may be considered as a complement to two other strands in the international

economics literature. One strand focuses on the optimal choice of an exchange-rate regime.1

Empirical investigation in this area. such as Hdfler (1978). Holden, Holden and Suss (1979). and
Melvin and Edison (1990). considers how different structural factors are correlated with the choice
of whether to have a fixed or floating exchange rate. As with this literature, we consider structural

factors, but we focus on the likelihood of a devaluation (and thus the duration of a peg) rather than

the initial choice of regime.2 Another related strand is the speculative attack literature.3 Our

Lsee, for example, McKinnon (1963) and Mundell (1961).
2 The duration of exchange rate pegs is also studied by Rood, Shandari and Home (1989). but
they focus on the effects of real and monetary shocks rather than structural factors.

3Theoredcal models in this area include Krugmazi (1979) and Flood and Gather (1984).
Empirical research that attempts to test speculative attack models includes Blanco and Gather
(1986). Cumby and van Wijnbergen (1989) and Goldberg (forthcoming).


                                              2
model emphasizes the role of competitiveness and the choice of when to devalue rather than

money-market factors which force the hand of authorities. This emphasis may be more appropriate

when studying economies with pervasive con trots on capital mobility which limit access to the

reserves of central banks.


2. A Model of the Duration of an Exchange-Rate Peg
        In this section we present a framework for analyzing the determinants of the duration of

exchange-rate   peg. At the heart of this mode! is the atde-offbetwecn the economic cost of a
misaligned real exchange rate and the political cost of a devaluation.4 The setting for this model is
a small open economy which pegs its currency to that of another country. un anticipation of the
data set we study in the next section, we denote the othcr country as the United States d define
the pegged exchange tate as the bilateral dollar exchange race, S , measured in units of domestic

currency per dollar.
         International track is conducted with both the United States and the rest of the world.
Agents in the country devote a constant proportion (1-a) of consumption expenditures to rgrn-
traded goods. The remaining proportion a of consumption expenditures is divided between traded

goods from the United States and waded goods from The rest of the world. with the proportion u

spent on the former and the proportion (I- w) spent on the latter.5

41n this model we assume capital conutls prevent a speculative attack from occurring. Thus the
policy-maker chooses when to devalue rather than having his band forced by a sudden depletion of
reserves. The reserve position of the central bank srili affects the ability of chc policy-maker to
maintain the peg, but the level of reserves changes gradually in response m current-account
imbalances. False invoicing and other measures m circumvent controlsmay erode the reserve
posidon over dine. Capital controls are pzvvalcnt in the data set wc study in the next section.

5This assumption is consistent with a represencadve consumer model in which the utility function
is a weighted average of the logarithm of the goods consumed from the abroad and from home as
follows
         U(NPT,TROW) = czw1nT + cx.(1 w)1nT0 +0. — a)lnN
                                            —



subject to the budget constraint

              + 0'us 'Qus) C"ROW 'QROW)


                                              3
        The shares of expenditures on non-traded goods and on traded goods from each of the two
trading partners provide us with two structural parameters- openness and trade concentration.
We denote the weight given to traded goods in the representative basket of total expenditures. a,

as the openness of the economy. A more open economy is one which has a larger value of a.
Trade concennrion in our model. a measures the extent to which trade occurs with the country

co which the nominal exchange rate is pegged (here the United States) relative to crade with the rest
of the world. A larger value for co denotes greater mile conceithadon.

        There are two "bilateral" real exchange rates. Qus represents the real exchange rate
between the domestic country and tbe United States and QROW represents the real exchange rate

between the domestic counu and the rest of the world other than the United States. The

multilateral real exchange rate equals the geometrically-weighted product of the bilateral rates, i.e.
  Qus'°QRow'i      The muldlateral real exchange rate as well as the bilateral real exchange rates are

defined as the price of foreign goods relative w the price of domestic goods; therefore an increase

in any of these represent a real depreciation

        Price indices in the domestic country, the United States and the rest of the world are

weighted geometric averagcs of the price of traded goods, Pj'1 and the price of non-traded goods,
Pri. The domestic price index equals TN' while the price indices in the United States and in
the rest of the world equal PT°PNU7'and P                   'P.410S7, respectively, where 8 is the

weight of craded goods in these latter indices. Furthcr simplification is obtained by assuming that
the law of one price holds so P1 Su5P.j.            =    S S$PTow. With these assumptions. the
multilateral real exchange rate equais


[1)     Q=                                          K.




where QTJS and QROW rtpresent the bilateni real exchange rates of the domestic country with the
United States and the rest of the world, respectively, N is non-traded goods, and Tus and TROW
represent traded goods from the United Stares and the rest of the world, respectively.



                                                4
 where       is the cross exchange rate between the United States and the rest of the worj&

         The overvaluaüon Of the real exchange rate at time t equals Q*. Q(t) + e(t), where           is

 the non-stochastic long-mn equilibrium multilateral real exchange rate, Q is the actual mu1cilaet-a1
real exchange rate, and E(t) is a temporary shock that is distributed identically and independcncjy

 through time with mean zero and variance G.6 The trend change in the multilateral real exchange
rate is due to exogenous inflation in the price of domestic non-traded goods, 7 At any moment
i, P$t) = PL,(O) exp(ict), where the peg begins at time 0.
         The authorities face a loss arising from the amount of misalignment of the real exchange

rate over the course Of a nominal peg. They also face a political cost of abandoning the peg and
realigning the currency which they bear at the time of the realignment. We now analyze the

authority's optimal response to the trade-off between the costs of a misalignment and the costs of a

realignnlenL
         We approach the determination of the optimal duration of a nominal peg from the

perspective of the outset of a given peg. The basis of our analysis is the loss function facing the
policy-maker. The loss funcon includes the total amount of misalignment over the course of the

peg and also the political cost of realignment. We assume that the loss associated with
misalignment is quadratic in the amount of misalignment8 The political cost of devaluing is
incurred at the time of devaluation and is equal to the (possibly time-varying) amount C(r), where t


6Thc tarn e(t) can represent a shock either to the price of non-traded goods 'or to the equilibrium
real exchange raxe.The equilibrium real exchange rate can be considered the real exchange rate that
provides br external balance. For a thorough discussion of the concept of an equilibrium real
exchange rate see Edwards (1989).

7The assumption of an exogenous rate of inflation is also found in the speculadve attack literature.
One radonaic for this assumpdon is the exogenous seigniorage revenue requirements of the
government.
8The quadrade form of the loss function presented below provides for symmetry between the COStS
of an overvalued and an uncJcrvalucd real exchange rate. An overvalued currency adversely affects
the export sector while an undervalued currency raises the prices of imported intermediate goods
and worsens the terms of trade for domestic consumers. In the data set we study, exchange nte
pegs always end with devaluations. Therefore we present the theoretical discussion in this section
in the context of a trend appreciation of the real exchange rate and a subsequent devaluation.



                                              5
 is the time of devaluation. The policy-maker must choose a duration of the peg. ; that miiiimizes

 the expected cost of the accumulated misaligmnent and die political cost of devaluing :



           mm L = EOJ(Q* -Q(t)÷ E (t))2eutdt ÷
 (2]


where 3 represents the relative cost of devaluing as compared to the cost of a misalignment, p is

the discount factor and E0 represents expectations at dine 0.

           The value of t that minimizes the loss to policy-makers 1510



(3]         = {[ ::)1n(sx) ÷                  ln(P1)
                                                       —
                                                                   — Jn(Qs —4pf3C(x) — a)}




This solution demonsntes how the expected time on the peg varies with the sUucture of the

economy, the economic fundamentals that determine the equilibrium real exchange raxe, the

expected rate of appreciation of the actual real exchange rate, stochastic disturbances and political
factors.

       The expected duration of the peg is longer with a smaller ram of appreciation (it. a smaller
value of it) since this results in less accumulated misalignment at any moment Given x, the


9An alternative approach involves modeling the optimum length of apeg over a time horizon that
exceeds the length of the peg; that is, to model a repeated series of episodes. We found that this
approach, unlike the approach presented in the paper, did not yield a closed-form solution. The
main difference conceptually between the two approaches involves the cost of devaluing. In the
single episode approach the discounting of the futuic tends to delay devaluing, lit the multiple
episode approach there is the additional factor that the number of devaluations over a given time
pal oddecreases the longer the average length of the peg. The problem of not obtaining a closed-
form solution in the multiple episode case is similar to the same problem that arises in (S,s) models
of pricing.

LOWe also assume that (p J3C(v)) > a (i.e. thit the present value of the relative cost of a
devaluation exceeds the vaxiability of the misaligmnent around trend), that 2(1-u)n> p (i.e. that a
function of the rate of misalignment exceeds the rate at which the future is discounted) and
QP >4(pt3c(t)—a).



                                              6
 expected duration of the peg increases with a more appreciated equilibrium real exchange t-ate (a
 decrease in Q*) or a decline in non .traded goods prices (a fall in N(0 )) Given K, expected

 duration also increases with an increase in any of the variables in K (which include the prices of
 non-unded goods in the United States and the rest of the world as well as the cross exchange racc
SR.) or a more depreciated S.1I The effect of a change in the price of traded goods, T'
 the expected time on the peg depends upon the openness of the domestic economy relative to the

openness of other countries. If the domestic economy is more open than other countries (that is, if
a > 8), a lower price of traded goods will be associated with a more depreciated domestic real

exchange rate since the price of the domestic consumption basket falls by more than the price of the

foreign consumption basket. In this case, the lower price of traded goods is associated with a
longer duration of the peg.

        Expected duration Increases with openness if the price of non-traded goods in the United
States and the rest of the world is greater than the price of traded goods (i.e. if
SUSK > P. then     at! a a> O).12 The cxpccted duration of the peg increases with an increase in
trade concentration if the price of non-traded goods in the United States is greater than the dollar
price of non-traded goods in the rest of the world (i.e.   since ?t/&K >0, atlao) > 0 if N US
> NROw because this implies aKiao> 0).
        An increase in the variance of the nisa]ignment, a, by raising the expected cost of a peg of

any given duration, causes the optimal peg duration to be shorter. An increase in the political cost
of a realignment of the nominal peg, C(t), leads to a longer duration. A greater weight given to



'1We can allow more latitude to policy-makers in ow model if we enable them to optimally choose
the initial value of the peg given the expected value of the variables of the model. The greater
generality obtained through this approach, however, comes at the cost of foregoing a closed-foxut
solution.

t2Relatcd to this point is the effect of Openness on the choice of a fixed or a flexible exchange-rate
regime. The argument that a more open economy would prefer a fixed exchange t-ate to a flexible
exchange rate is presented in McKinnon (1963). HeIler (1978) finds that openness, as measured
by the raüo of exports to GNP, is highly conelated with regime choice; with relatively open
economies more often having fixed exchange rates.



                                              7
 the cost of devaluing, that is.a bigger value of 3, also increases the expected duration of the peg, as

does a greater discounting of the future (i.e. an increase in p).



 3. Empirical determinants of peg duration


3.1 The Data
        Ta this section we use poled monthly data from 16 Latin American counuies and Jamaica
in order to assess whether ihe duration of an exchange-rate peg is related to the economic variables

identified in the previous section. We define a spell as a the when there is a particular fixed value
of a country's currency with respect to the United States dollar. The duration of the spell is
measured in months.13 We set the condition that the fixed exchange race must last for at least three

months to constitute a spelL We have identified spells by examining end-of-the-month exchange

rate data published in the International Monetary Funds liuernationai Financial Statistics.14 Our

sample consists of 87 spells. Data availability dictates that the earliest spells are ones that began
after 1956. The data set ends in January     1991.

          Information about the duration of the pegs is provided in Table 1. The average duration

of a dollar peg is 29 months while the median duration is tO months. The standard deviation

around the mean and the range of the sample are substantiaL The standard deviation of the
duration is over 44 months. The range of the peg durations is 3 months (by construction) to 281


t3We could have used a higher-frequency measure of duration, such as weeks or days, but the
explanatory variables are not available ii these frequencies. A lower-frequency disaggregation,
such as quarters or years, would result in the loss of valuable information.

 '4The exchange rate reported in the international Financia) Statistics represents the tmprimaiy"
exchange rate of the country. In a number of the peg episodes we study there are multiple
exchange rates The exchange rate reported in the International Financial Statistics is probably the
best choice for the one which defines the duration of a peg. Nevertheless, the existence of multiple
exchange rates can lead to a somewhat ambiguous definition of the duration of a peg. A single peg
episode may include changes in the value of some of the (non-primary) exchange rates or changes
in the rules governing which transactions apply to which exchange rates. We supplement our use
of IFS data with descriptive material in crder to obtain precise intormation about the starting and
ending dates of the pegs in our sample.



                                               8
                                          TABLE I

                         SUMMARY STATISTICS OF THE SPELLS


Observations                                                           a7

Mean   Duration in   months                                            29.01
(standard devtadon)                                                   (44.48)
Median Duration in months                                              10

Number of exits under Bretton Woods                                   32

Number of Spells with Multiple Exchange Races                           0.71
                                                                       (0.46)
Mean Value for Openness                                                20.30
(standard   deviation)                                                (11.68)
Mean Value for Trade Concentration                                     32.22
(scandrd deviation)                                                   (16.08)
Proportion of Spells Beginning Directly After a Previous Peg            0.52
 (standard deviacion)                                                  (0.50)
Proportion of Spells Ending with a Devaluation to a New Peg             0.62
(standard   deviation)                                                 (0.49)
Annual Rate of Change in Bilateral Real Exch. Rate Index During Peg    -0.4322
(standard deviation)                                                   (0.82)




                                          9
 months (the longest spell represents Paraguay's peg of 126 guaranies to the dollar between 1960
and 1984). In our sample, the exit rate is high in the early months of a peg. Twelve of the eighty-

seven spells in our data set end in their fourth month, one-third are over by the seventh month and

more than half end within one year. About a third of the spells in the sample end during the

Breuon Woods era, that is before March. 1973. In about 70% of the spells there are two or more

official exchange rates.
        Some information about the economic sutcture of countries at the start of spells is also

provided in Table 1. The two smictural components discussed in the theoretical model are

openness and trade concentration. Openness in the theoretical model is defined as the share of

traded goods in total expenditures. Operationally, however, there is no easy way of

disdnguishingbetween traded and nontraded goods. In lieu of this, we measure opcnness as the
sum of exports and imports dividedby GDP. Using this definidon, average openness at the start of
a spell is about 20 percent in our sample. Trade concentration is calculated as the share of total

trade (exports plus imports) conducted with the United States. This corresponds closely to the
definition of trade concentration in the theoretical model. On avenge, about one-third of total nde
is conducted with the United States at the start of spells.
        Table 1 also presents information on exchange-rate history before the spells and the manner
in which the spells are terminated. About half the spells in our sample begin immediately after a

previous peg. All the spells in our sample end with a weakening of the currency against the
dollar. Sixty-two percent of the spells end with a devaluation to a new. more depreciated peg,

while the remainder end with a switch to a regime of mini-devaluations, a controlled float or a
float. The table also reports that the real bilateral exchange rate index with the United States

appreciates an average of 43.7% per annum during a spell.


3.2     Estimation of the Determinants of the Duration of a Fixed Exchange Rate
       The theoretical model presented in Section 2 suggests a number of important determinants

for the duration of a £LXed exchange-rate spell. While some of these determinants may remain



                                              I0
constant over a spell, others will change. Therefore we cannot Simply correlate the length of each

of the 87 spells in our data set with some constant measure of each explanatory variable for

one spell using ordinary least squares or duration analyis. Using the value of an explanatory
variable at the beginning or at the end of a spell or using its change over the spell or its avenge

value during the speU fails to Capture importain information about the time path of the variable

during the spell.15
         We instead employ an empirical approach that allows us to consider time-varying
dewrrninanrs.16 We construct our data set such that each observation represents the value of

variables during one month of one of the 87 spells in the sample. Thus our data set contains about

2000 possible monthly observations. The dependent variable equals zero in any month when the
peg is in effect and equals one in the month that the spell ends. Variables from month are used to

determine the probability of exit in month t+1 using logit analysis.17 In this framework, the
probability of maintaining the peg up until month t+1, that is D4.j =0, and the probability of a

devaluation in month u-i, that is D1+j =1, depend upon the vector of variables X1      as   follows:


                                       1
        Prob(DL+lzO(Xl)=
                              1+ exp(y0 + y1X)


                               exp(y0 +y1X1)
        Prob(D., = iIx1) =
                              I + exp(y0 + y1X1)


We can rewrite these equations in tcrms of the logarithm of the odds ratio as follows:



15For a discussion of this problem in the context of duration analysis see Hecknian and Singer
(1984).
16For a use of this technique in the context of a study of job turnover see Farber (1993).

17WC do not use any information available after the spell, such as whether the spell ended with a
devaluation to a new peg or with a change to a floating exchange rar,e. Because our data set
includes only pegs that have survived a minimum of three months. we exclude observations on the
first two months in order to avoid underestimating the monthly hazard of exit in the first months.


                                              ii
         '4::::: :ixJJ=i
 This odds ntio demonstrates that the elements of the vector Yj represent the partial elasticity of the

 likelihood of a devaluation with respect to the vector of variables Xt

         Our choice of variables that may Serve as determinants of the likelihood of a devaluation is
guided by the theoretical modeL One time-varying element of the vector          is an index of the

bilateral real exchange rate between the country on the peg and the United States)8 We also

include the squared value d this index to capture possible non-linearides in the relationship. An

appreciation of tbe real exchange rate increases ti-s degree of misalignment, cererLs paribus, §rre in

each spell there is a nend appreciation of the currency vis-a-vis the dollar. A lower value of the

exchange rate izicJn implies a more appreciated domestic real exchange rate. Therefore, we expect
the coefficient on the real exchange rate index to be negative. The coefficient on the squared real

exchange rate index may be positive (ii there is a diminishing effect) or negative (ii the effect is

increasthg).
        The real exchange rate encem the theoretical model to the extent that it differs from the

equilibrium real exchange rate. Thercfore we would ideally like to include the equilibrium real
exchange rate in the empirical analysis.t9 Unfortunately there is no consensus on how to measure

the (unobservable) equilibrium teal exchange rate. As a first approximation, we assume that a

number of the disntrbances affecting the equilibrium real exchange rate will be correlated with
international liquidity. Disturbances that bing about a depreciation of the equilibrium real


18Thc bilateral real exchange rata mdcx uses the end-of-the month bilateral nominal dollar
exchange rate aod the consumer price indices in the domestic country and in the United States. The
index is set equal to 100 at the start of each spell.

19 Edwards (1989) describes how the path of the equilibrium real exchange rate can be affected by
anticipated future import tariffs, changes in pmducüvicy, changes in fiscal policy, changes in
capital-account or current-account connoIs, changcs in world interest rates, and changes in the
terms-of-trade.




                                               12
 exchange rate will, ceteris paribus, increase misalignment and deplete the foreign assets hcld by

 the central bank and the monetary system. We therefore use movements in foreign asset holdings

 to capture the unobserved movements in the underlying equilibrium real exchange rate. Since we

 are dealing with pooled daz we measure international liquidity as a ratio, specifically the ratio of

 net foreign assets of the monetary sector to the quantity of money (Ml  )3      We expect a negative

 coefficient on the net foreign assets variable since a decline in net foreign asset holdings increases

 the probability of leaving a peg. We also include a squared term to take account of possible non-

linearides.

        The two structural variables identified in the theoretical model, openness and cnde

concentration, are also included in the empirical analysis. Both variables are measured as

percentages and are allowed to vary over the course of a single peg spell. As discussed above, the

effects of these variables on the expected duration of the peg depcnd upon the relationship among

other variables in the model. If the price of foreign non-traded goods is greater than the price of

traded goods, then a more open economy is expected to have a peg of longer duration, and

conversely. If the price of non-traded goods in the United States is greater than the price of foreign

non-traded gods, then trade concentration is positively associated with duration, and

conversely.21
        We also include two political dummy variabLes as possible determinants of the likelihood of

a devaluation- "regular" executive cnnsfers and "irregular" executive transfers (i.e. coups)P


20rhe intemationa[ liquidity ratio is measured in percentage terms in the regression Edwards
(1989) uses this thtio in his study of exchange-rate behavior. Following Edwards, we also
experimented with another measure of inrernadonal liquidity, namely the ratio of foreign assets of
the central bank to base money.

21 Although equation (3) suggests that the prices of traded and non-traded goods affect duration,
we have made no attempt to include estimates of these prices separately in the estimationTEquadon
(3) also indicates that the real exchange rate between the United States and the rest of the world
affects duration. A real effective exchange-rate between the US and the ROW is available for the
period after 1974, but it was not a significant determinant

22T}ie data were coded on the basis of information from various issues of Arthur Banks. £QTitiCaI
Handbook of the Wofid and cross-checked against the annual data on executive transfers in Jodiec
anU Taylor, WId Handbook of Social and POlitical Indicators.


                                              13
These variables equal one for a particular observation if there was an execudve transfer in that

 month and p      otherwise.   We also include calendar-year and country-specific dummy variables

 to allow for differences across time and across countries in the cost of realigning.
        The resuits obtained from the basic Iot regression are reported in Table 2. This table
 includes three specifications of the regression that differ in their inclusion of dummy variables (the

coefficicnts on the d-y variables are not presented). Specification (1) does not include any

calendar-year or country-specific d-y variables, specification (2) includes calendar-year
dummy variables and specification (3) includes both the year and country d-y variables. The
esümaces of all three specifications support the implications Of the model developed in the previous

section. Real exchange-rate appreciation significantly increases the probability that a peg will end.

We fmd that this increase in the likelihood of a devaluation occurs at a decreasing rate. In addition,

a deLerioracion in the net foreign asset position of the rnonecaiy sector significantly increases the

monthly hazard. Structure also matters. An increase in openness significantly reduces the

probability of ending a peg. Higher trade concentration increases the probability that a peg will
end, although this effect is not as significant as some of the others. Executive transfers, whether

regular or irregular. significaziLly affect the likelihood of a devaluation. 23 Interestingly, irregular
executive nnsfers enter with a bigger coefficient in each specification than do regular executive
transfers. Furthermore, when calendar-year and country-specific dummy variables are both
included, irregular executive transfers are also more significant than regular transfers?4


23Evidencc of a positive association between executive transfers and the likelihood of ending a peg
is consistent with the finding in Cooper's (1971) study of devaluations in developing countries.
Cooper reported that in nearly 30% of the cases he examined, the government fell within a year of
a devaluation, whereas only 14% of governments fell in a control group where there was no
devaluation in that year. Our results suggest that those responsible for the decision to devalue
believe they are in a stronger position to cany out a devaluation at the beginning of their term.

241n Table 2. individual calendar-year dummies since 1970 are included in specifications (2) and
(3). None of the coefficients on the early years (1971.1981) is significant, suggesting that,
compared to the years before 1971, there were negligible changes in the cost of realigning
surrounding the collapse of the Brettori Woods agreement (1971-73) and the first two oil price
shocks (1973-74.1979-80). Many of the year dummies in the 1982-90 period are positive and
highly significant, however, implying a decrease in the cost of devaluation with the onsec Of the
international debt crisis (1982) and its aftermath, including the third oil shock (1990).


                                               14
                                                                                           1




            TABLE, 2: LOGIT ESTIMATES OVER ENTIRE SAMPLE
 Variabk                                           Coefficient Scification
                                         (1)               (2)
 Real Exchange Rate                     O.I355*          O.l4O2*        -0.1660'
                                       (—2.74)           (—2.48)       (—2.60)

Real Exchange Rate (squared)            0 . 0007'         0.0008*        0.0008
                                       (2.04)             (1.97)        (1.94)

Foreign Assets                          -0.0169'         .th0135*       O.O185*
                                       (-5.31)           (-4.55)       (-4.09)

Foreign' Assets (squared)              -0.00002          -0.00001       O.OOOO2*
                                       (-1.49)          (-1.33)        (-2. 07)



Openness                               -0.059'           .0.0680*       -0.0615'
                                      (—4.30)           (—3.55)        (—2.08)

Trade COnCentratiOn                     0.0272            0.0107         0.0170
                                        (1.87)           (0.72)         (0.78)

Regular executive transfers             1.1202            1.5250*        1.4417
                                       (1.78)            (2.22).        (1.95)

Inegular executive transfers            1.2 844           1.7932'       2.2448k
                                       (1.76)            (2.43)         (2.77)

Constant                                3.3511*           2.9903        4.5348
                                       (1.99)            (1.48)         (1.89)


Log-likelihood                      -226.06           -207.62        —201.74
                                       80.24            117.11        128.88




Specification (1) is with no calendar-year or country dummy variables.
Specificañon (2) is with dummy variables for selected years (see text for details).
Specification (3) is with dummy variables for selected years and for country.
Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *indicates significance at the 5 percent lcvel.




                                              Is
         The effects of different variables on the likelihood of a devaluation may change cv the

 course of the fixed exchange-rate spell. We investigate this possibility in specifications (1) and (2)
 of Table 3. where we analyze separately the probability of leaving a peg in the rt six months of

 the spell and in the subsequent period. The results indicate that the foreign asset ratio is the only

 significant variable for the likelihood of a devaluation at the 5 percent significance level in the early
 months of a peg. The two smiccuni factors, openness and trade concentration, are significant at
the 10 percent level in the first six months of a spell. In the sample restricted to the period after a

 peg has been in place for six months, the real exchange rate, foreign asset position, openness and
 irregular executive transfers are alt significant at the 5 percent level and regular executive transfers

are significant at the 10 percent level.
         Another issue we investigate is whether the determinants of peg duration differ across

historical periods. In particular, the international "rules of the game" changed after the Bretton
Woods era ended. We consider possible differences in the determinants of the likelihood of a

devaluation across time in specifications (3) and (4) of Table 3. The sample in specification (3)
includes pegs that ended before March, 1973, while the sample in specification (4) includes pegs
ending after chat date.

         For spells ending in the post-Bretton Woods era1 oil of the explanatory variables (though

not the quadratic terms) are highly significant. For these spells, rcal exchange-rate appreciation. a
decrease in the proportion of net foreign assets held by the monetary sector, an increase in aLIe
concentration, regular executive transfers and inegular executive transfers are all associated with an

increased likelihood of devaluation. An increase in openness is associated with a smaller
likelihood of devaluation. For pegs ending during the Brcuon Woods pcriod, the variables

identified by the theoretical model have less predictive power. Only the real exchange rate and

openness are significant determinanr.s.25




25lhere is no variation between executive transfers and exits during the Bretcon Woods period.



                                               16
    T A B L E 3: LOGIT ESTIMATES OVER SELECTED SUB-SAMPLES


 Viñabk                                           Coefficient Succification

                                  (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
 Real Exchange Rate            -0.1043         -0.1309'        O.6485*           O.I231*      -0.3269'
                              (-0.94)          (-2.13)        (-258)            (-2.06)      (-3.41)
 Real Exchange Rate            0.0004           0.0007          0.0039'           0.0006       O.0019
   (squared)                   (0.53)          (1.49)          (2.57)            (140)        (3.07)
 ForeignAssets                .0.0191*         -0.0132'        -0.0145           -0.0184'     -0.0281'
                              (-2.72)         (-3.44)         (-155)            (-5.0)       (-5.29)

 Foreign Assets               -0.00002         -0.000009        0.0002          -0.00002       0.0001'
  (squared)                   (-1.49)         (-0.35)          (1.49)          (-1.75)        (2.45)

 Openness                     -0.0570          -0.0587'        O.1494*          -O.0662       -0.0927'
                              (-1.91)         (-3.16)         (-2.59)          (-4.05)       (-3.66)


Tnde Concentration             0.0559           0.0214          0.0020           0.0556,       0.0229
                              (1.80)           (1.27)          (0.07)           (3.18)        (1.17)
Regularexecudve                0.8579           1.3037                           1.7512'      -04501
   nosIer                     (0.45)           (1.93)                           (2.40)       (-0.33)

Irregular executive                             j,5545*                          1.8821        0.4358
                                               (2.08)                           (2.43)        (041)
Constant                       2.3916          3.2624         25.4968*           2.3282      11.5039
                              (0.59)           (1.61)          (2.46)           (1.23)        (3.05)

Log-likelihood               -54.39         -168.87          -56.02           -159.32       -151.74

                             20.76            54.85           21.65            78.48         54.62


Regression (1) uses a sample consisting of the first six months of the spell only.
Regression (2) uses a sample in which the first six months of thç spell are omitted.
Regression (3) includes spells endmg m the Bretton Woods period (before March 1973).
Regression (4) includes spells ending in the post-&cuon Woods period (after March 1973).
Regression (5) includes        that end with the government devaluing and peggihg at a new
       exchange rate (    er than devaluing with a crawling peg or a float),
Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. • indicates significance at the 95% level




                                             [7
        Another irnercsüng issue is whether the detenninants of duration are diffeTent for pegs that

 end in a devaluation to a new peg. For this subsample. the government reveals an a-post

preference for pegging the currency. In specification (5) in Table 3 we consider only those spells

 that end with a devaluation of the currency to a new peg rather than with a switch to a crawling peg
 or a float The coefficients on the real exchange i-ate, foreign asset holdings and openness are

 larger (ii absolute value) for the subsample than for the sample as a whole, suggesting that these

 factors may be somewhat more influential for pegs that end in a devaluation to a new peg.

Executive ansfers are less significant for this subsample.
        Another possible determinant of the Likelihood of devaluation is the length of time already

spent on the peg. To test whether time spent on the peg has an independent effect on the

likelihood of devaluation, we construct a set of monthly time dummy variables. Because our

sample contains so many exits in the first year. we only consider time dummies for months 4-6,
months 7-9 and months 10-12. The base group consists of those spells that have lasted more than
twelve months. The coefficients on the time d-y variables can be rougffly interpreted as the
proportional difference in the likelihood of devaluation between spells in these periods and
otherwise equivalent spells that have lasted at least twelve months.
        As shown iii Table 4, the coefficients on the moiithly time dummies are positive and highly

significant Although the confidence intervals suggest that the coefficients on these monthly
dummies are not significantly different from each other, they are significantly different from the

base. Thus the likelihood of a devaluation is higher for pegs in the first year than for pegs that
have lasted at least twelve months, after controlling for the extent of misalignment and for

structural and political factors. The presence of the monthly time dummies also reduces the

significance of the time-varying real exchange rate variable.
        We cannot impose too much structure on the interpretation of the coefficients on the

monthly dummy variables. These dummy variables may be capturing one of several possible
effects. For example, there could Ix a time-varying change in the political cost of realignment




                                                  18
TABLE 4: LOGIT ESTIMATES WITH MONTHLY TIME DUMMY
                    VARIABLES
 Variable                                         Coefficient

 Red     Exchange Rate                             -0.9892
                                                  (- 1.90)
 Red ExchangeRate                                  0.0004
   (squared)                                      (1.17)
 Foreign    Assets                                 .0.0129*
                                                  (-4.07)
 Foreign    Assets                                -0.000007
    (squared)                                    (-0.72)
 Openness                                          O.O422*
                                                  (-3.09)
 Trade     Concentration                           0.0269
                                                  (1.92)
Regular executive                                  1.2281
 iransfers                                        (1.82)
irregular executive                                1.5522*
  iransf'crs                                      (2.15)
Months 4-6                                         1.0792'
                                                  (2.56)
Months 7-9                                         1.8102'
                                                 —(4.89)

Months     10- 12                                 1.1 142'
                                                  (2.20)

constant                                          1.3440
                                                  (0.743)



Log-likelihood                                    -214.22

                                                  103.91



Regressions run over full sample. Numbers in parentheses    are   t-statistics. *   indicates
significance   at the 5% level.




                                   19
over the first year of a peg. due to. ray. changes in the credibility of the peg. Resenith on

 reputation and cribi1ity suggests that a policy-maker may gain credibility over time while on a

 peg. In this case, the opportunity cost of devaluing in terms of lost credibility would increase with
 time spent on the peg. The expected signs of the coefficients on the time dummies in the early
period of the peg would be positive.26 The monthly time dummies could also be proxying for
 some missing variables that change over time, such as income, that are absent from the logic

regression because of the unavailability of monthly data. An important future task.will be to
understand better the role played by time on the peg in determining the likelihood of devaluation.



4. Conclusion
         Several general conclusions are worm reemphasizing. First, when a government is

concerned about ft country's competitive position. its decision about how long to stay on a peg
wifi tie influenced not only by the degree of real exchange-ram misalignment but also by the

structure of the economy. Structure affects the cost of a given misalignment. Openness and ade

concenntion, which have long been thought to influence the choice of exchange-rate regime,
influence its duration as welL We fmd that greater openness, as measured by the rado of trade to

GDP. reduces the monthly probability of leaving a peg in our sample of Latin American pegs over

the 1957-1990 Period. Increased utJe concentration with the trading partner to whom the country

is pegged (ii our sample, the United States) increases the monthly probability of exiting a peg,
though this result is not robust across all specifications and samples. Political factors are also

relevant The likelihood of a devaluation increases immediately after a regular or irreplar
executive transfer.




26See Rodrik (1993) for a discussion of how growing credibility sunounding an exchange-rate-
based stabilization program might reduce the probability that the peg will be abandoned. See
Drazcn and Masson (1993) for a model where the persistence of unemployment reduces the
credibility of the peg over rime.




                                             20
        Our work also highlights the fact that, at lust in our sample, more attention rieccjs to be

given to what occurs in the early months of a peg in order to undcrs rind better the factoi that

influence its duration. The exit race is high in the early months of the Latin American pegs we

study. One-third of the pegs are over by the seventh month and more than half are over by the end
of the first year. The stucture of the economy. the net foreign asset position of the monetary

sector and the credibility of the peg may be influential factors in the early months of a peg. Real
exchange-rate misalignment becomes increasingly important as time on the peg continues. The

speculative attack literature has focused on the last few months of a peg in its attempt to predict the

probability of leaving a peg. Our analysis indicates that our understanding of peg dundort can be
enhanced by examining the early stages of a peg as well.

        Finally, the logit model is a useful tool for estimating the monthly probability of leaving
an exchange-rate peg, particularly for developing countries. Using a logit model which focuses

on the roles of structure, misalignment and political costs of exchange-rate changes can provide
new insights into the factors that influence the decision to maintain thc peg month by month.




                                             21
                                        REFERENCES
 Blanco, Hemtino and Peter Garber, 1986. "Recurrent Devaluations and Speculative Attacks on the
        Mexican Peso," ehumal of Political Economy, vol. 94. pp. 14E- 166.

 Banks, Arthur, Political Handbook of the World, New York: Harper and Row, various issues.

Cumby, Robert and Sweder van Wijnber en, 1989, "Financial Policy and Speculative Runs with a
    Crawling Peg: Argentina '1979-I g1, thurnal of i,uernarionaj Economics, vol. 27, pp.
    111-27

Drazen, Allan and Paul Masson, "Credibility of Policies versus Credibility of Policy-makers,"
      W.B.ER. working paper no. 4448, September 1993.
Edwards, Sebascian, Real Etchange Rates, Devaluation and Adjustment, MIT Press, Cambridge,
        MA. 989.
Hood, Robert P. and Peter M. Garter "Collapshig Exchange Rate Regimes," Journal of
      Iraernadonai Economics, 1q84, pp. 1-13.
flood, Robert P.. J. Shandari and J. Home, 1989. "Evolution of Exchange Rate Regimes," IMP
       Staff Papers, vol 36, pp. 810-835.
Goldberg, Linda, forthcoming, "Predicting Exchange Rate Crises: Mexico Revisited,' Journal of
      lrtrernadonat Economics.

Heckman, lames and Burton Singer, 1984, "Econometric Duration Analysis," Journal of
     Econometrics, pp. 63- 132.
Heller, Robert, 1978, "Determinants of Exchange Rate Practices," burnal of Money, Girdit and
        Banking1 vol. 10, pp. 308-321.
Holdert. Paul, Merle Holden and Esther Sw. 1979. 'The Determinaxus of Exchange Rate
       Flexibility: An Empirical Investigation," The Review of Economics and S:atiNlics, 61, pp.
       327-333, Augusr
Jodice, D. and C. Taylor, World Handbook of &cial and Political Indicators, New Haven: Yale
        University Press, 1983
Krugman, Paui R., 1979, "A Model of Balance of Payments Cñscs?'Journal of Money, Credit
     and Banking. August.
MeKinnon, Ronald, 1963. "Optimal Currency Areas." American Economic Review, vol. 53, pp.
       717-725,   September.

Melvin, Michael and Hall Edison, 1990. 'The De cerminants and Implications of the Choice of an
       &change Rate System." in William Han! and Thomas Willect, eds., Monetary Policy for a
       Volaci vie Global Economy, AEI Press, Washington, D. C., pp. 1-44.

Mundell, Robert, 1961, "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American Economic Review,
      vol. 51. pp. 657-655, September.
Rodrik, DaM, 1993, "Trade Liberalization in Disinflation," NBER Working Paper no. 4419.

                                           22
Numt!er   Authcxjsl                  iIll                                      Date

4593      John A. Ausink             The Military Pension, Compensation, and   1W3
          David A. Wise              Reifrenient of U.S. Air Force Pilots

4594      Jonathan Gruber            Health Insurance and My Retiremcni        12,93
          Brigitte C. Maddan         Evidence from the Availability of
                                     Continuation Coverage

4595      Wayne E. Ferson            An Exptoralocy InvestigatIon of the
          Campbell R. Harvey         Fundamesflai Dclerminanls of National
                                     Equity Maitn Returns

45%       I)avid S Bates             Jumps and Stochastic Volatility:
                                     Exchange Rate Process Implicit
                                     in PHLX Deutscbernart options

4597      GeAc M. Grossman           The Politics of Free Trade Agreements     1283
          EthaMn Helpmaa

4598      Charles Engel              Tests of CAPM on an International
                                     PotiIolio of Bonds and Stocks

4599      Benjamin     M. Friedman   The Role of Judgment and Disaclion        12e93
                                     in the Conduct of Monetary Policy:
                                     COnsequenCeS of changing Financial


4600      Steven F. Vend             The Wealth of Cohcxts: Retirement         1Z93
          David A. Wise              Saving and the changing Assets of
                                     Older Americans

4Q3       Michael D. 13usd           The Effects of Demographic Trends         12d93
                                     on ConsumpUon, Saving and Government
                                     Expenditures in the U.S.

4602      Shang-Jin Wei              open Don Policy and Chtha's Rapid         12,93
                                     Growtlt Evidence fmm City-level Data

4603      Philippe Aghion            UncoverIng Some Causal Relationships      17.83
          GlUes Saint-Paul           Between Productivity Gmwth and the
                                     Structure of Economic fluctuations:
                                     Atentadvt Survey

4604      Lars E. 0.   Svensson      The Simplest Test of Inflation            12i93
                                     Target credibility
4605      &nneth Wndticks            Determinants of the Timing and            1Z93
          Robert H. Poner            Incidence of Expiaatocy Drillktg
                                     on Offshom Wildcat Tracts

4606      S. tact Brainard           The Political Economy of Declining        12,93
          Thierry Verdict            Indusat: Senescent Industry
                                     Collapse Revisited
Number   Authffl                Title

4Q7      KatMeen McGarry        Transfer Behavior: Measurement and                    1/94
         Robeit F. Schoeni      the Redistribution of Resources
                                Within the Family

         Jeremy Bulow           Auctions vs. Negotiations                             1,94
         Paul Kieruperer

4609     Joscph Trxy            The Best Business Schools A Maftet                    1,94
         Joel Wahltogel         Based Approach

4610     Robeil J. Barro        Quality Impovements in                                1/94
         Xavier S&-i-Martin     Models of Growth

4611     LindaLTes&             Intanatiooal Equity Transactions                     1j94
         thgrid M. Werner       and U.S. Portfolio Choice

4612     Jonathan Eaton         Citi and Growth: Theory and Evide±bce                l94
         Zvi Ecksicin           from Pnncc and Japan

4613     Robin L. Lzimsdaine    Retirement Incentives: The Inicraction               1i94
         James IL Stock         between Employa-Provided Pensions,
         David A. Wise          Social Security, and Retiree Health Benefits

4614     Judith A. Chevalier    Capital Market Impcifections and                     1194
         David s. ScharIstcin   Cinlercydica! J4iLiJpc Thecwy and Evidence
4615     Kala Krishna           flexibility: A Pailial Ordering                      1j94
         Marie Thursby

4616     pj Krugman             fluctuations, lnsiability and Agglomeration          194
4617     David f4euniark        Minimum Wage Effects and Lol-Wage Labor              1194
         William Wascher        Markeis A Disequilibrium Approach

4618     Patrick Rey            The Role of Exclusive Tcrritaies                     1194
         Joseph Stiglitz        in Producers' competition

4619     Gilbert E. Metcalf     Ltccycle y. Annual Perspectives On the               1194
                                Incidence of a Value Added Tax

4620     Robert W. Slaiger      A Theocy of Gradual Trade Liberalization             1194

4621     Campbell It. Harvey    Predictable Risk and Returns in Emerging Markets 1/94

4622     Wayne E. Ferson        Sources of Risk and Expected Returns in               1j94
         Campbell R. Harvey     Global Equity Markets

4623     Campbell K Harvey      Condlijonal 4&.(    Allocation    in Emerging Markets 1/94

4624     Geen Bckaert           The Implications of Fint-Order Risk Aversion          1/94
         Robert I. flodrick     for Asset Market Risk Premiums
         David A. Marshal
Number   Author(il              Bk                                               Date

4625     Daniels. Hamezmesh     New Facts About Factor-Demand Dynamics:          1194
         Wolter H. J. Hassink   Employment, Jobs and Wakers
         Jan C van Ours

4626     Carlo Pen'oni          The New Regionalism: Trade Liberalizaiion        1194
         John Whalley           or insurance?

4627     Peccr Rappopart        The New York Stock Market hi the 1920s and
         Eugene N. White        and t93Os Did Stock Prices Move Togetha
                                Too Much?

4fflJ    Ramon   L Clarele      Evaluating Labour MJUSImCZII Costs from Trade    1/94
         Irene Trela            Shocks: Iliustralions for the U.S. Economy
         John Wha]Iey           Using An Applied General Equilibiium Model
                                                  Costs

4629     Alan L. Guslman        Retirement in a Family Context A Structural      1i94
         Thomas L. Sleinmcier   Model tcr Husbands arid Wives

4630     Andrew K. Rose         CWIgC Kale Volatility. Mon8acy Policy,           1/94
                                and Capital MobiUty Empüical Evidence
                                OQ the Holy Tñnity


4631     Louis Kaptow           Accuracy, Complaity. and the Income Tax          1j94

4632     Olivia s. Mitchell     Public Pension Governance and Perfomiance        1j94
         Ping Lung Usia

4633     Lan E. 0. Svensson     Moaciaiy Policy with flexible Exchange Rites     1j94
                                and Fcrwath Interest Races as Indicators

4634     Gene U Grossman        Economic Growth and the Environment              Z94
         Alan B. Knieger

                 L
         Andrea Kusko           Employee Decisias with Rtspect tci
         lames M. Poteito       401(k) Plans: Evidence Prom
         David w. Wilcox        IndMdual-Level Data

46%      Frederic S. Mishkin    Preventing Financial Crises: An                  2194
                                International Perspective

4637     Albeilo Alesina        The Political Economy of Budget Deficits         2/94
         Robalo Peroth

4638     Robcrt W. Fogel        Economic Growth. Population Theory, and          2j94
                                Physiology: The Beating of Long-Term Processes
                                on thc Making of Economic Policy

4639     Magnus BlomstrOm       Home Country Effects of Foreign Direct           219'$
         An Kokko               Investment: Evidence from Sweden

4641)    Maurice Obstfeld       The Logic of Currency Crises                     Z94
Number            Author(sI

4641              George I Botjas                    Long-Run Convergence      of Ethnic Skill            2i94
                                                     Differentials

4642             Michael 1). Bordo                   France and the Bretion Woods International
                 Dominique Slinard                   Monetary system: 19604968
                 Eugene White

4643              Francis X. Diebold                 Measuring Business Cycles: A Modem                   2/94
                  Glenn D. Rudebusch                 Perspective

4644             Janet Currie                        Saving Babies The Efficacy and Cost of               2/94
                 Jonathan Grubcr                     Recent Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility
                                                     fcr Pregnant Women

4645             René lvi. Stub                      International portfolio choice and asset             2/94
                                                     p-icing: An integrative survey

4646              Samuel Kortum                      A Model ci Research, Patenting, and                  2194
                                                     Productivity Growth

4647             Shane M. Gitenstein                 Did Ccmputer Technology Diffuse Quickly?:
                                                     Best and Avenge ?ratice in Mainframe
                                                     Computers. MS-1983

4648             Edward J. Kane                      The Federal Deposit Insurance Fund That              2/94
                 Robert Hendasboit                   Didn't   Bark in   The Night

4649              John Muflahy                       Health, licome, and Risk Aveniot                     2194
                 bUy 1. Sindelar                     i&cstcsing Some Welfaze Costs of
                                                     Mccbolism and Poor Health

4650             Julio J. Rowxnberg                  is the Business Cycle a NcccssaEy
                 Michael Woodfocd                    Consequence of Stochastic Growth?

4651              Michael w. Kkii                    ExpLaining the Duralion of                           2194
                 Nancy P. Marion                     &changc-Ratc Pegs


          Copies of the above working papers can be obtained by sending $5.00 pe copy (plus $10.03 per order fa
postage and handling for all locations oulside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts
Avenue, Cambridge. MA 021385398. Advancc payment is required on all orders. Payment may be made by check
or credit card. Checks should be made payable io the NEER and must be in doLlars drawn on a U.S. bank. 1 f
padng by credit card, include the cardholder's name, account numbet and expiration dait Pcr all mail orders, please
be Sine to include your return thdress and telephone nuinb&. Working papas may also be ordered by telephone
y(óll-868-3900), 01' by fax (611-868-2742).
                                 National Bureau of Economic Research


                  0C                                              0            000o                     C




                                                                 Doiiwstic                      Fonigu
                                                                      Academic Libraries?                Academic Librariesi
                                                            SIa,idard Faculty Members          Standard Faculty Member:
DFulsubscriptions'                                          $1300              $650            $1625            $975
Partial subscriptions
 UCcqmteFm-ce                                                 300                75              350             110
o Stocks, Bonds, end Foreign Currency                         300                75              350             110
OlntemathnalffinanceandMacrooconomics                         270                135             350             210
o International Trade and Investment                          270                135             350             210
MonetasyEconomics                                              150               75              200             110
O Economic Fluctuations                                       270                135             350             210
0 Long-Run Economic Growth                                     150               75              200             110
DSourcesolProductivilyGmwth                                     70                35              65              50
ci Taxation                                                   270                135             350             210
OLaborSiudies                                                 270                135             350             210
LIEconomics of Heath and Health Care                          150                75              200             110
D Economics of the Elderly                                     70                3.5              85              50
 u Industrial Organizalion                                     70                35               65              50

o Technical Working Papers                       70                              35               65              50
o Historical Development ol the American Economy 70                              35               65              50
* A full subscription includes all topics listed under 'partial subscriptionC except for Technical Working Papers and papers
   on the Historical Development of the American Economy. These must be ordered in addftion lo the full subscription.
  Please inquire about   subscription   prices   for   Attica and Australia.




                                                   PAYMENT OPTIONS
  o   YES! Please begin my subscription to the NBER Working Paper Series. if have indicated above which papers I
  would like to receive.
                                                                        Please mail my papers to this address
  By Phone (617) 868-3900
  By FAX       (617)868-2742
  By Mail:     Publications Department                                  Address
               National Bureau of Economic Reseaith
               1050 Massachusetts Ave.
               Cambridge, MA 02138                                      _____
  CI Payment in the amount of ________enclosed.
  LI Please charge my 0 VISA             [I MasterCard

  Cad Number ______________________
                                                                        Phone:
  Cart! expintion: _______________________
                                                                        FAX:
  Signature:        ____________________________
