                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SOURCES OF REAL EXCHANGE RATE
                          FLUCFIJATIONS: HOW IMPORTANT
                              ARE NOMINAL SHOCKS?




                                     Richard Clarida
                                       Jordi Gall




                                 Working Paper No. 4658




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  February 1994




This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy held at
Carnegie-Mellon University in November 1993. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4658
                                                                              February 1994


                          SOURCES OF REAL EXCHANGE RATE
                           FLUCTUATIONS: HOW IMPORTANT
                               ARE NOMINAL SHOCKS?


                                         ABSTRACT

       This paper investigates empirically and attempts to identify the sources of real exchange
rate fluctuations since the collapse of Bretton Woods. The paper's first two sections survey and
extend earlier, non-structural empirical work on this subject by Campbell and Clarida (1987),
Meese and Rogoff (1988), and Cumby and Huizinga (1990). The paper's main contribution is
to build and estimate a three equation open macro model in the spirit of Dornbusch (1976) and
Obstfeld (1985) and to identify the model's structural shocks - to demand, supply, and money -
using the approach pioneered by Blanchard and Quah (1989). For two of the four countries we
study, Germany and Japan, our structural estimates imply that monetary shocks, to money supply
as well as to the demand for real money balances, explain a substantial amount of the variance
of real exchange rates relative to the dollar. We find that demand shocks, to national saving and
investment, explain the majority of the variance in real exchange rate fluctuations, while supply
shocks explain very little. The model's estimated short run dynamics are strikingly consistent
with the predictions of the simple textbook Mundell-Fleming model.




Richard Clarida                                            Jordi Gall
Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
International Affairs Building                             International Affairs Building
Room 1020                                                  Columbia University
Columbia University                                        New York, NY 10027
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
               SOURCES OF REAL EXCHANGE RATE FLUCTUATIONS:
                    HOW IMPORTANT ARE NOMINAL SHOCKS?

                                    by

                     Richard Clarida and Jordi Gali*
                           Columbia University

                               Introduction

      This paper investigates and attempts to identify the sources of real

exchange rate fluctuations since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system

of fixed exchange rates in the early 1970s.     In an influential paper,

Mussa (1986) argued that sluggish price adjustment must play a central

role in explaining the short run movements in real and nominal exchange

rates. He based this conclusion on the indisputable fact that the

volatility of real exchange rates since the collapse of Bretton Woods has

closely tracked the volatility of nominal exchange rates, and that the

variance of real exchange rates since the collapse of fixed exchange rates

has been 8 to 80 times higher than during Bretton Woods.

      Stockinan (1987) pointed out that, according to the equilibrium

approach to exchange rates developed in his and other papers, the behavior

of real exchange rates since the collapse of Bretton Woods could reflect

not the importance of sluggish price level adjustment, but rather the

influence of real shocks with large permanent components. The empirical

findings that, since the collapse of Bretton Woods, real exchange rates

appear to possess a unit root and that most of the variance of changes in

real exchange rates is attributed to permanent shocks (Huizinga (1987)),

and that little of the variance of real exchange rate changes can be

accounted for by real interest rate differentials (Campbell and Clarida

(1987); Meese and Rogoff (1988)) have, taken together, tended to cast


                                    1
    doubt on the relevance of the basic "sticky price" open macro model

    (Dornbusch (1976)) for explaining real exchange rates. Meese and Rogoff

    (1988) conclude:

            Our evidence provides no support whatsoever for the view that

           a model [that emphasizes the interaction of sticky prices and

           monetary disturbances] can explain the major swings in the

           real exchange rate. The strongest prediction of those models
           -   that   real interest differentials will be highly correlated

           with real exchange rate movements -     simply does   not appear in

           the data. (Meese and Rogoff (1988), p. 940)

           Any model of the real exchange rate that incorporates monetary

neutrality in the long run implies that the level of the real exchange

rate, at least in the long run, is invariant to shocks in money supply and

the demand for real money balances.            It follows that, if money is to have

an influence on real exchange rates, the influence must be felt in the
short run.             Empirically, this means that an upper bound on the
contribution of monetary shocks to the variance of real exchange rate

changes is given by the variance of the change in the transitory component

in real exchange rates. This is an upper bound because real shocks to

national absorption, fiscal shocks, and supply, productivity shocks can

also have transitory effects on the real exchange rate.

           In the next section of this paper, we revisit the real interest rate
-   real    exchange rate connection. We show how the approach introduced by

Campbell and C].arjda (1987) and Meese and Rogoff (1988) and studied

recently by Baxter (1992) can be generalized to allow for a much wider

class of stochastic processes for the real interest differential than is


                                           2
required by these previous papers. Notwithstanding this generalization,

we find, as did Campbell and Clarida (1987) and Meese and Rogoff (1988)

that the transitory component in dollar real exchange rates implied by the

time series on real interest differentials accounts for only a trivial

fraction of the variance in the log change in real exchange rates.

      In the paper's third section we estimate the transitory component in

real exchange rates using a multivariate version of the Beveridge-Nelson

(1981) decomposition. In addition to lagged real exchange rate changes,

the VAR information set used to forecast future real exchange rate changes

includes lagged inflation differentials and lagged changes in US output

relative to foreign output.     We include lagged inflation differentials in

the VAR because, as demonstrated by Cuxnby and Huizinga (1990), lagged

inflation helps to forecast subsequent changes in bilateral real exchange

rates. Lagged inflation differentials are also likely to be correlated

with nominal shocks in the US relative to the foreign country under study.

We include lagged log changes in the ratio of US to foreign output because

the evidence of a unit root in real exchange rates suggests that real

shocks -   to   supply as well as to demand for national outputs such as

fiscal shocks (Meltzer (1993)) - must play a role in understanding the

behavior of real exchange rates since 1973. While the Beveridge-Nelson

decompositions based upon these trivariate VARs are not structural, we

investigate and estimate later in the paper a structural open macro model

that employs these very VARs.

      We find, as did Cuniby and Huizinga (1990) who computed Beveridge -

Nelson decompositions using a smaller system that included only the lagged

inflation differentials, that there is a substantial transitory component


                                      3
 in the dollar-DM and dollar-yen real exchange rates. In particular, we

 show that the variance of the change in the BN transitory component is 70

percent of the variance of the change in the dollar-DM real exchange rate,

and 59 percent of the variance of the change in the dollar-yen real

exchange rate. We also show that lagged inflation differentials Granger

cause real exchange rate changes in these two countries. We contrast the

transitory component in real exchange rates recovered fro uiivariate BN

decomposition with the component recovered from our multivariate system.

       In section four of the paper, we present a three equation open macro

model that can be used to interpret the trivariate VARs estimated in

section three of the paper. This model, which is a stochastic version of

the two country, rational expectations open macro model developed by

Obstfeld (1985), exhibits the standard Nundell-Fleming-Dornbusch results

in the "short run" when prices adjust sluggishly to money, supply, and

demand shocks, but it also embodies the "longer run" properties that

characterize macroeconomic equilibrium in the open economy once prices

adjust fully to all shocks.          Throughout this paper, we shall refer

interchangeably to "nominal" shocks and "monetary" shocks.                 Our

theoretical model, and our empirical strategy, allows for shocks to

relative national money supplies and relative national demands for real

money balances. The combined impact of these disturbances is identified

as a monetary, or nominal, shock by our approach.       We employ the long run

properties of this model -   properties    that are shared with many other open

macro models including the cash-in-advance Arrow-Debreu models developed

by Lucas (1982) and others -    to   obtain restrictions that can be used to

identify three structural shocks that drive the system: shocks to "money",


                                       4
shocks to "demand", and shocks to "supply". Identification is achieved

using the approach pioneered by Blanchard and Quah (1989), employed by

Shapiro and Watson (1988), Gali (1992), Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1992),

and critiqued by Evans and Reichlin (1993).       An important advantage of

the Blanchard-Quah approach to identification is that we do not have to

take a stand on the dynamics or the contemporaneous exclusion of any

structural shock from any particular equation. Rather, we use only the

longer run restrictions implied by our model - and many other open macro

models -   to   identify the structural dynamics from the data.

      Section five presents the paper's key empirical results. For two of

the four countries we investigate, Japan and Germany, our structural VAR

estimates imply that nominal shocks explain a substantial amount of the

variance in dollar-DM and dollar-yen real exchange rates. In particular,

we find that more than 41 percent of the unconditional variance of the

change in the dollar-DM real exchange rate, and more than 35 percent of

the variance of the change in the dollar-yen real exchange rate are

attributed to nominal shocks. For the other two co.intries in our study,

Britain and Canada, there is much less evidence that nominal shocks are

important for real exchange rate fluctuations. We also devote extensive

efforts to determine whether or not the money, demand, and supply shocks

our empirical models recover "look like" such shocks are supposed to look.

We do this by decomposing the "real time" history of each real exchange

rate into the history of the implied monetary, demand, and supply

influences that, according to our estimates, generated the realized path

of the real exchange rate. We also generate impulse response functions to

the three structural shocks and compare those responses with those implied


                                       5
by our versicr of the Mundell-Fleming-Obstfeld model presented in Section

four. One contribution of this paper is to demonstrate that in all four

countries, the short run dynamic responses of relative national outputs,

prices, and the real exchange rate to money and demand shocks are

consistent with the predictions of a stochastic, rational expectations

version of the textbook Mundell-Fleming model.

      Section six of the paper compares our findings with those reported

recently in the literature and provides some concluding remarks.




                                  6
Real Interest Rates and the Transitory Component in Real Exchange Rates

        Over the past decade, a number of papers have exploited the

relationship between real interest differentials and real exchange rates

implied by interest parity to make inferences about the transitory

component embedded in real exchange rates (Frankel (1979;l985), Loopesko

and Shafer (1983), Sachs (1985), Campbell and Clarida (1987), Meese and

Rogoff (1988), Baxter (1992), and Edison and Pauls (1993)). Letting rr

denote the short term ex ante real interest differential in favor of the

home country:


(1)          rrt     (jh - Etlrht+i) -   (i   -
                                                  Eirt+1);

uncovered interest parity implies:


(2)         rr —     Eq+1;

where q — St + p - ph is the log of the real exchange rate and E is the

linear projection operator. Equation (2) can be solved forward to obtain:


  /         qrrt—-trrt+i,
                             j—O


where      is the difference between the current level of q, the real

exchange rate, and       —               the expected long run level of the real

exchange rate;


(4)         qrr —    q   -




Thus when q is negative and the dollar is transitorily overvalued

relative to the level of long run real exchange rate, the magnitude of

this overvaluation is given by the sum of ex ante real interest


                                         7
differcrtia1s in favor of the dollar. The expected sum of ex ante real

interest differentials is unobservable. However, letting

                         r÷1   —   i-h    - '.h            i-f
                                                      ' - '1     -   I
denote the ex post real interest rate differential and using the fact that

rr    —
          Er+1,   we can use the law of iterated expectations to express qr

terms     of ex post real differentials:


(5)               qrr   - E> r+3.


Projecting both sides of (5) on an informationion set x we obtain:


(6)               E(q) -=      - E(E
                                    jo,

                                    j1rt+jxt).
The right hand side of (6) can be obtained by summing the forecasts

derived from an estimated VAR model for x that includes the ex post real

interest rate differential. According to (6), the estimate each period of

the sum of real interest differentials derived in this fashion is, in

population, equal to the projection of the transitory component of the

real exchange rate q on the information set x that would be obtained

under interest parity if q were in fact observable.

          We estimate E(qJx), the transitory divergence between the real

exchange rate and the expected long run real exchange rate implied by

interest parity, using a bivariate VAR in                        r] to forecast each period
the sum    of   real interest differentials. We use non-overlapping data on 3

month ex post real interest differentials and the 3 month log difference

in the real exchange rate for Germany, Japan, Canada, and Britain over the

floating exchange rate period 1973:3-1992:1. Since the interest rate data

for Japan begin in 1975:3, our estimates of q for Japan cover the period


                                                  8
1975:3 - 1992:1.   Both real interest differentials and the change in the

real exchange rate are constructed using CPI indexes of national price

levels. Each VAR contain sa constant and 4 lags of q and r.

      Charts 1 through 4 present the results of this exercise. The center

panel of each chart depicts the time path of qrr implied by the interest

parity relationship (6) and the estimated bivariate VAR. The top panel in

each chart presents, using a solid line, the actual time path of the level

of the real exchange rate q and presents, using a broken line, the time

path of the estimated long run real exchange rate that   is   defined by (4)

and that can be recovered using the estimates of E(qrr{x).

      Chart I presents the results for Germany. As can be seen from the

top panel of Chart 1, the floating rate years have been marked by three

period of substantial, sustained swings in the real value of the dollar

relative to the DM. In the first period, 1977 through 1979, the dollar

depreciated by 20 percent in real terms against the DM in tandem with an

acceleration in US inflation and a loss in confidence in US monetary

policy.   In the second period, 1980 through 1984, the real value of the

dollar appreciated by more than 50 percent against the DM.              This

appreciation occurred in conjunction with shift to a disinflationary US

monetary policy and change in the US fiscal stance that resulted in a

pronounced widening in the US budget deficit and a decline in national

saving. In the third period, 1985 through 1987, the dollar depreciated by

40 percent in real terms against the DM.

      The center panel of Chart 1 presents the estimates of qrr, the

transitory over or under valuation of the dollar relative to its long run

level implied by the time series properties of ex post real interest


                                    9
differentials and interest rate parity. The estimates of -qt implied by

real interest differentials suggests a modest degree of overshooting in

the dollar-DM real exchange rate in each of these three episodes.      In

particular, throughout the 1977 -       1979   period in which the dollar

depreciated by 20 percent against the DM in real terms, expected future

real interest differentials implied a 2 to 3 percent under valuation of

the real dollar-DM exchange rate - and thus the expectation of a 2 to 3

percent appreciation of the dollar. Of course, that expectation was more

than realized between 1980 and 1984 as the real value of the dollar

appreciated by 50 percent or more against the DM.           We note that

consistently throughout 1982, 1983, and 1984, the time series of expected

future real interest differentials implied that the dollar was overvalued

by 3 to 5 percent relative to the DM in real terms during this

appreciation and thus, that the dollar was expected ultimately to

depreciate and "give back" 3 to 5 percent of the huge real appreciation of

the early 1980s. Again, this expectation was more than realized between

1985 and 1987 when the real value of the dollar against the DM did in fact

depreciate, but by 40 percent.          As during the 1977 - 1979    real

depreciation, expected future real interest differentials implied a 3 to

4 percent under valuation of the real dollar-DM exchange rate throughout

1986 and 1987, suggesting some modest amount of overshooting in the real

dollar-DM exchange rate in the years following the Plaza Accord.

      Chart 2 presents the results for Japan. As with Germany, we observe

in retrospect three period of substantial, sustained swings in the real

value of the dollar relative to the yen: a two year period, 1977 through

1978, of sustained dollar depreciation, followed by a six year period,


                                   10
1919 through 1984, in which the real dollar-yen exchange rate appreciated

by 50 percent, followed by a three year interval in the which the exchange

rate depreciated by 50 percent against the yen in real terms.         The

estimates of qrr presented in the center panel of Chart 2 provide some

modest indication of overshooting in the 1977-1978 and 1985-1987 periods

of dollar-yen real depreciation, with the dollar estimated to be some 1 to

2 percent undervalued in 1977-1978 and 1985-1987. There is somewhat more

evidence of overshooting during the years 1981-1984 in which the dollar

was estimated to be 2 to 3 percent overvalued.

      Chart 3 presents the UK results.                       Again, three

intervals of substantial, sustained swings in the real value of the dollar

relative to sterling are evident in the data. However, the estimates of

 qrr presented in the center panel of Chart 3 provide little indication

of overshooting in the 1977-1979 period of dollar-sterling real

depreciation or in the 1980-1984 period of dollar-sterling real

appreciation.   However, the estimates do suggest that the dollar did

overshoot by some 3 to 4 percent in 1986 and 1987.

      Chart 4 presents the results for Canada.                         In

contrast with the other three countries the dollar actually appreciated

against the Canadian dollar in real terms during 1977-1979, and continued

this appreciation throughout most of period 1980-1985. Consistently, the

time series of forecasted real interest differentials indicates that the

dollar was overvalued during this appreciation and was expected to

depreciate in real terms by some 2 to 3 percent. Beginning in 1986, the

dollar did in fact begin a sustained real depreciation, overshooting the

long run real exchange rate by some 3 percent.


                                   11
      The top panel of Table 1 reports the ratio of the sample variance of

qrr to the sample variance of                    for each of the four real exchange

rates relative to the dollar. These results confirm impression conveyed

by Charts 1 to 4: little of the variance of real exchange rate changes can

be accounted for by changes in the expected sum of future real interest

differentials. These findings generalize, but support, the conclusions of

Campbell and Clarida (1987) and Meese and Rogoff (1988) who assumed that

the expected sum of future real interest differentials is proportional to

the current ex ante real interest differential q —                        The center

panel of Table 1 reports Granger causality tests for the bivariate VARs

containing 4 lags of                    r] that are used to estimate                the

transitory component in each real exchange rate relative to the dollar.

As can be seen in the table, ex post real interest differentials are

forecastable.     For all four countries, lagged ex post real interest

differentials help to forecast future real differentials and in two

countries, lagged changes in real exchange rates Grariger cause real

interest differentials. By contrast, Table 1 shows that changes in real

exchange rates are substantially less forecastable conditional on this

information set containing lagged real exchange rate changes and lagged

real interest differentials.             Moreover, in no country do lagged real

interest differentials Granger cause subsequent real exchange rate

changes.

      According to interest parity Er+1 — Et.q+1.             Projecting both sides

on the VAR   information   set xt   —                          .
                                                                   , r3] we   see that:


(7)           E(rt+1xt) — E(Aq÷1x).


                                            12
Thus, the interest parity hypothesis that is used to estimate qt implies

a set of cross-equations on the VAR, namely, that coefficients in each VAR

projection equation be identical. The results obtained from testing these

restrictions for each country are presented in the lower panel of Table 1.

As can be seen from the table, in three of the four cases, these

restrictions on the VAR forecasting equation can be soundly rejected at

the 2 percent significance level. These restrictions cannot be rejected

for the dollar-yen system, but this appears to be due to the fact that the

real dollar-yen exchange rate is unforecastable in this bivariate system

so that imposing the interest parity restrictions does not lead to a

substantial deterioration of the log likelihood.       Of course, there are

scores of papers employing alternative, perhaps more powerful tests that

have investigated and rejected the uncovered interest parity hypothesis

(see Hodrick (1988) for a survey).        The point we wish to make here is

simply that, the interest parity restrictions that are relevant for

estimating the transitory component in real exchange rates from

observations on real interest differentials are apparently also violated

in the data.

      To get a sense of the magnitude of the divergence between E(qJx)

and                x3, we plot in the bottom panel of Charts I - 4 the

latter series based upon the estimated bivariate VAR for each country. To

interpret these plots, we note that if interest parity held -     or   if we

imposed the interest parity cross-equation restrictions when forecasting

real exchange rate changes and real interest differentials from the VARs -

the line that plots -E(qx) in the center panel and the line that plots
               x) in the lower panel of each chart would coincide exactly.


                                     13
As is evident, this is far from the case. We conclude that, from the

perspective of recovering estimates of the transitory component in real

exchange rates, the departures from interest parity are substantial enough

to warrant the consideration of alternative approaches.




                                   14
                Multivariate Beveridge-Nelson Decompositions

      While the results obtained by using forecasts of real interest rates

to make inferences about the behavior of the transitory component in the

real exchange rate are suggestive of some modest, persistent degree of

divergence between current and long run real exchange rates, the dominant

impression one derives from the Charts 1 - 4 is the extent to which the

time path of the long run real exchange rate mimics the time path of the

actual real exchange rate. Over the past 20 years of floating exchange

rates relative to the dollar, a number of authors (Roll (1979); Frenkel

(1981); Adler and Lehman (1983); Cuinby and Obstfeld (1985); Grilli-

Kaminski(1991); Edison and Pauls (1993)) have presented empirical evidence

that indicates that real exchange rates relative to the dollar possess a

unit root. That is, real exchange rates are integrated of order 1, 1(1),

and are driven by permanent shocks.

      A popular and intuitive way to decompose an 1(1) time series into a

permanent and a tuitory component is due to Beveridge and Nelson

(1981). A Beveridge - Nelson decomposition of the real exchange rate q

implies that the transitory departure of the real exchange rate from its

expected long run equilibrium is given by:



(8)               —
                      -E(Eq÷               .   .   .)
                         j3

The BN decomposition defines the permanent, or expected long run, real

exchange rate         as:

(9)         BN        q + EELiq+.

                                      15
Combining (8) and (9) we see that q + BN q. Beveridge and Nelson

(1981) prove that      is a random walk, while q is stationary since q,

is 1(1).

        Kuizinga (1987) employed the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition to

investigate the importance of the permanent component in real exchange

rates relative to the dollar since the 1973 advent of floating. Using the

history of changes in the real exchange rate itself as his information set

to estimate the Beveridge-Nelson transitory component defined by equation

(8), Huizinga found evidence that, while fluctuations in the permanent

component of the real exchange rate account for most of the volatility of

observed changes in real exchange rates, actual real exchange rates

relative to the dollar did appear to overshoot persistently and revert

rather gradually to the to the long run equilibrium real exchange rate

defined by the Beveridge-Nelson permanent component.

             Huizinga's (1987) univariate decomposition of the real

exchange rate followed the lead of Beveridge and Nelson in their original

work.      Recently, several authors have uncovered some interesting

implications of multivariate generalizations of the Beveridge-Nelson

decomposition (Evans (1989), Cochrane (1990), and King, Plosser, Stock,

and Watson (1991), and Evans and Reichlin (1993)).     One finding, due to

Evans and Reichlin (1993), is that, if the inultivariate information set

includes variables that Granger cause subsequent changes in the real

exchange rate, the variance of the transitory component relative to the

Beveridge-Nelson permanent component derived from such a multivariate

system must strictly exceed the ratio of the transitory component to the

permanent component derived from a univariate information set.


                                   16
      In this section, we present the results of trivariate Beveridge-

Nelson decompositions of the log real exchange rate of the dollar relative

to the yen, DM, sterling, and the Canadian dollar based upon VAR forecasts

of the change in the real exchange rate. The information set includes not

only lagged changes in the log real exchange rate, but also lagged

inflation differentials between the US and the foreign country, ,r., and

lagged changes in the log ratio of US to foreign real GDP,          The data

are quarterly and span the floating exchange rate period 1973:3 -   1992:4.'
We include lagged inflation differentials in the information set because,

as demonstrated by Cumby and Huizinga (1990), lagged inflation helps to

forecast subsequent changes in bilateral real exchange rates. Cuinby and

Huizinga (1990) studied a bivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition of the

log real exchange in a system that included lagged inflation
differentials. The results of this section of our paper obviously build

on their work. We go beyond Cuinby and Huizinga (1990) by including a

"real" as well as a "nominal" variable in the information set, by

explicitly comparing the multivariate with the corresponding univariate

decompositions, and by demonstrating the importance of Granger causality

in accounting for the differences between the decompositions.        Lagged

inflation differentials are also likely to be correlated with nominal

shocks in the US relative to the foreign country under study. We include

lagged log changes in US to foreign output because the evidence of a unit

root in real exchange rates, in conjunction with the theoretical model we

derive below, suggests that real shocks -    to   the supply as well as to

demand for national outputs - must play a role in understanding the

behavior of real exchange rates since 1973 (Campbell and Clarida (1987);


                                    17
 Stockman (1987)). While the everidge-Nelson decompositions based upon

 these trivariate VARs are not structural, we investigate and estimate

 later in the paper a structural open macro model that employs these very

 VARs.

         Charts 5 through 8 present the results of these decompositions. The

 bottom panel in each chart depicts, using a solid line, the time path of -

qBN which may be interpreted as magnitude of the over or under valuation

of the real dollar exchange rate relative to                       the     Beveridge-Nelson

permanent component. The bottom panel in each chart also depicts, using

a dashed line, the time path of                  the over or under valuation of the

dollar real exchange rate obtained from a univariate Beveridge-Nelson

decomposition. The top panel in each chart presents, using a solid line,

the actual time path of the level of the real exchange rate q and

presents, using a dashed line, the time path of the estimated long run

real exchange BN derived from the trivariate system.

         As can be seen in the bottom panel of Chart 5, the estimates of qBN

based upon the trivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition reveal sustained

periods of substantial overshooting in the dollar-DM real exchange rate.

In particular, throughout the 1978 -                  1979    period of real dollar

depreciation against the DM, the dollar was undervalued by some 20 to 30

percent relative to the long run real exchange rate defined by .                        By

contrast, throughout the years 1983, 1984, and 1985 of "benign neglect"

during which the dollar surged, the real value of the dollar was

consistently overvalued by 10 to 14 percent, implying the expectation that

10 to 14 percent of the dollar's real appreciation during the early 1980s

would be given back through eventual real depreciation. (CHART 5 HERE)


                                            18
      The contrast between the time series q and q4hJ for the dollar-DM

real exchange rate is striking for two reasons.      First, the transitory

component in the real exchange rate implied by the multivariate

decomposition is substantially larger and more volatile than is transitory

component implied by the univariate decomposition, a fact evident from

Chart 5 that we shall quantify shortly. Second, q is persistently of

the opposite sign to         This means that, regardless of the differences

in magnitude, in periods such 1977 - 1979 when the dollar was depreciating

and in which the trivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition implies that

the dollar was undervalued and expected to appreciate in real terms, the

univariate decomposition implies that the dollar was overvalued and

expected to depreciate further. Moreover, in periods such 1982 - 1985

when the dollar was appreciating and in which the trivariate Beveridge-

Nelson decomposition implies that the dollar was overvalued and expected

to depreciate in real terms, q' implies that the dollar was undervalued

and expected to appreciate further. Evans and Reichlin (1993) document a

similar difference between univariate and multivariate Beveridge-Nelson

decompositions of US real GD?.      They demonstrate that cov(&j,q) — -

                       Thus the sign of the covariance between the change in

the real exchange rate and the level of the Beveridge-Nelson transitory

component depends upon the autocovariance of             Evans and Reichlin

(1993) conclude that the contrast between the univariate and multivariate

estimates of the transitory component depends upon differences in

estimating the autocovariance using a univariate as opposed to a

multivariate information set.




                                      19
      Chart 6 presents the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition results for the

dollar-yen real exchange rate. Again, the estimates of q based upon the

trivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition reveal sustained periods of

substantial overshooting in the dollar-yen real exchange rate, both in

absolute terms and in comparison with the estimates for           We note

that in 1976 and 1977, qBN indicated that the dollar was substantially

overvalued relative to the yen and was expected ultimately to depreciate

by some 30 percent in real terms against the yen. A real depreciation of

this magnitude did in fact occur in 1978 and 1979. Indeed, the Beveridge-

Nelson decomposition indicated that the real value of the dollar

depreciated beyond its expected long run level sometime in early 1979, and

was thereafter undervalued throughout the rest of 1979, 1980 and 1981,

years in which the dollar actually did appreciate in real terms against

the yen.   Overshooting is also evident during the later years, 1982 -

1985, of the dollar's Reagan-Voicker appreciation.

      Charts 7 and 8 present the real exchange rate decomposition results

for the US-UK and the US-Canada.                                    These

decompositions differ both qualitatively and quantitatively from those

just presented for the US and Germany and the US and Japan. As is evident

from Charts 7 and 8, and as will be confirmed shortly, relative to the

dollar, ieal sterling and Canadian dollar exchange rates appear to possess

rather small, and not particularly persistent, transitory components. In

other words, conditional on the trivariate information set studied in this

section, very little of the change in either the dollar-sterling or the

dollar-Canadian dollar real exchange rate is forecastable. Moreover, for

these two real exchange rates relative to the dollar, the behavior of the


                                   20
transitory components derived from the trivariate systems does not differ

substantially from the transitory component implied by the univariate

decompositions.

      The top panel of Table 2 presents sample estimates of the ratio of

the variance of the change in the Beveridge-Nelson transitory component in

the real exchange rate to the variance of the actual change in the real

exchange rate.                        These results confirm the impressions

conveyed by Charts 5 -   8. Based upon the Beveridge-Nelson decompositions
derived from the trivariate systems, the variance of the change in the

transitory component of the dollar-DM and dollar-yen real exchange rates

is estimated to account for a quite substantial fraction of the actual

change in these real exchange rates. Whether or not one views this as a

"substantial" transitory component depends of course on one's priors.

Until the mid 1980s, there was something of a consensus among researchers

that most movements in real exchange rates represented transitory

fluctuations around a slowly changing, if not constant, equilibrium real

exchange rate. Since the papers by Campbell and Clarida (1987), Huizinga

(1987), Stockman (1987), Meese and Rogoff (1988), and Crilli and Kaminski

(1991), the weight of the evidence suggests that most movements in real

exchange rates represent permanent shifts in real exchange rates.

However, Grillj and Kaminski (1991) point out that real exchange rate

"facts" can be quite regime specific, and that post-1973 empirical

regularities, including the importance of permanent shocks, may not

generalize to other floating exchange rate periods.          By contrast,

transitory predictable changes in the real dollar-sterling and Canadian

dollar exchange rates appear, based upon the sample variances, to be much


                                     21
less important in accounting for changes in these real exchange rates.

The top panel of Table 2 also reinforces the point, evident in the Charts,

that the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition of the real exchange rate into

permanent and transitory components depends upon the information set. For

the dollar-DM and the dollar-yen real exchange rates, the ratio of the

variance of the transitory component to the change in the real exchange

rate based upon the trivariate VAR is four times larger than is the ratio

based upon a univariate autoregressive model for real exchange rate

changes. For the dollar-sterling and especially the US-Canadian dollar

real exchange rates, there is much less differences between the variance

ratios calculated from the univariate and multivariate information sets.

      The bottom panel of Table 2 presents some summary statistics for the

estimated trivariate VARs. For the dollar-DM and dollar-yen real exchange

rates, we see that lagged inflation differentials Granger cause subsequent

real exchange rate changes. Cumby and Huizinga (1990) document that lagged

inflation differentials help to forecast real exchange rate changes, but

they do not report on Granger causality. Evans and Lothian (1993) do

document Granger causality from lagged inflation, but not inflation

differentials, to real exchange rate changes. For the dollar-sterling and

Canadian dollar real exchange rates, there is no evidence that lagged

inflation differentials, or for that matter lagged output growth

differentials, have incremental predictive content for subsequent real

exchange rate changes. These findings are relevant for interpreting Chart

5 - 8 and the variance ratios reported in the top panel of Table 2. As


mentioned earlier, if the multivariate information set includes variables

that Granger cause subsequent changes in the real exchange rate, the


                                   22
variance of the Beveridge-Nelson transitory component relative to the

Beveridge-Nelson permanent component derived from such a multivariate

system must strictly exceed the ratio of the Beveridge-Nelson transitory

component to the permanent component derived from a univariate information

set. Thus, the finding of Granger causality for the dollar-DM and dollar-

yen systems, and the absence of Granger causality in the dollar-sterling

and Canadian dollar systems, can account for the differences in variance

ratios reported in Table 2.




                                    23
            A Stochastic Rational Expectations Open Macro Model

       We now present a stochastic version of the two country, rational

expectations open macro model developed by Obstfeld (1985). The model

also draws on papers by Dornbusch (1976), Branson (1979), Flood (1981),

Mussa (1982), Buiter and Miller (1983), McCallum (1988), and Canzoneri and

Henderson (1991).              The model not only exhibits the standard Mundell-

Fleming-Dornbusch results in the "short-run" when prices adjust sluggishly

to demand, money, and supply shocks, but it also embodies the "longer-run"

properties that characterize macroeconomic equilibrium in the open economy

once prices adjust fully to all shocks.2 All variables except interest

rates are in logs and represent home relative to foreign levels. For

example,    y yh                     and i ih -     itt.
IS Equation:

(10)              —
                          d    +            p) -           - E(p+1   -
                                                                         Pt)).
Price Setting Equation:

(11)           Pt —       (1   -
                                   o)E_1pe + &p°.
LN Equation:

(12)                  -                 -
                          Pt
Interest   Parity:

(13)           it —       E(s1 s)   -


       Equation (10) is an open economy IS equation in which the demand for

home output relative to foreign output is increasing in the real exchange

rate and a relative demand shock d and is decreasing in the real interest

differential in favor of the home country.                   We think of d as capturing

shocks to home absorption relative to foreign absorption such as fiscal

shocks. Equation (11) is a version of the price setting equations that


                                               24
have been studied in open macro setting by Flood (1981), Mussa (1982), and

others. According to (11), the price level in period t is an average of

the market clearing price expected in t-l to prevail in t,1pe, and the

price that would actually clear the output market in period t, P°.    When

9      1, prices are fully flexible and output is supply determined. When 9

    0, prices are fixed and predetermined 1 period in advance. Equation

(12) is a standard LM equation, while Equation (13) is a statement of

interest parity. In the sequel we shall let the variable m capture the

influence of shocks to relative national money supplies as well as shocks

to relative national demands for real money balances.

        Before we solve the model, we need first to specify the stochastic

processes that govern the relative supply of output y, the relative

demand shock d, and relative money m. In general, we would expect output

supply, output demand, and money to be driven by both transitory as well

as permanent shocks.      For ease in obtaining an explicit, uncluttered

solution to the stochastic sticky price equilibrium, we shall suppose that

both y and m are simple random walks and thus that shocks to supply and

money are solely permanent. However, it will be useful to allow for both

a transitory as well as a permanent component in the relative demand shock

d. In particular, we suppose that a fraction y of any shock to relative

demand in period t is expected to be reversed in t+1.        Pulling these

assumptions together we have:


              Y5t.
                     — y5-1     + z;
(14)          d      — d_1      + S -
                     — m1       +   v..




                                      25
Solving the Model

          To solve the model, we begin by deriving an expression for the real

exchange rate qe that would prevail in a "flexible price" rational

expectations equilibrium in which output is                       supply determined.

Substituting the laws of motion for yS and d into (10) and solving for

qe, we obtain:

(15)            qe   —    (Y5t. - dt)/r, +        + ci)Y'c1y8t.

The      "flexible price" real exchange rate depreciates in response to a

supply disturbance and appreciates in response to a demand disturbance.

We note that when -y >       0,   the expectation that the demand disturbance will

be partially reversed in the future sets up the expectation of real

depreciation and dampens the magnitude of the appreciation in the present.

          We next derive an expression for the price level P°t that would

prevail in the "flexible price" rational expectations equilibrium. From

(12) and the definition of the real exchange rate, the pe must satisfy

(1   +   A)pe m          Y5t + A(Eq8÷1 -     get) +    )Epe+. Using (14) and (15),
we obtain:

(16)           P°t         - Yst   + )t(1 + A)'(, + ay1-yS
All three shocks influence the time path of the "flexible price" price

level. The "flexible price" relative price level rises in proportion to

the monetary shock, declines in proportion to the supply shock, and rises

in response to the temporary component in the demand shock.                 A solely

permanent relative demand shock pushes up the common world level of real

and nominal interest rates in the flexible price equilibrium.                  Thus,

given output supply and money, a permanent demand shock must drive up home

and foreign prices in proportion, leaving pe unchanged.


                                             26
       Collecting these expressions, we see that the evolution over time of

the flexible price equilibrium can be represented by the following three

equations:


                Yt
                 e        —     5
                               Yt'
(17)            qe            (Y5t
                                         -   d)/ + (( +         o))1a-y6

                pe        —    m     -
                                             Y5t +   A(1 + A)1(7 + uF'i6.


In this flexible price equilibrium, the levels of relative output, y"., the

real exchange rate, q°, and relative national price levels, pe are driven

by three shocks -        to   supply, Zt, demand 8, and money, v. As can be seen

by inspection of (17), the system is triangular in the flexible price

equilibrium. Only supply shocks influence the level of relative national

outputs in the flexible price equilibrium, while both supply and demand

shocks influence the level of the real exchange rate. Finally, all three

shocks -   to   money, supply, and demand -                      influence   the ratio of home to

foreign price levels in the flexible price equilibrium.

       With this characterization of the system's flexible price

equilibrium, we now solve for the actual open macro equilibrium in a world

of sluggish price adjustment. Substituting (16) into the price setting

rule (11), we see that p, the ratio of home to foreign price levels,

evolves according to:


(18)                 —   pe   -
                                  (1     -
                                              9)(v   -
                                                         z    + ai6);

where a      A(1 + AY'(,7 + a)'. In response to a positive money or demand

shock, the price level rises but by less than does the flexible price P't.

In response to a positive supply shock the price level Pt falls but by less


                                                         27
than does the flexible price Pet. The degree of "sluggishness" is indexed

by (1 -   9).    When 9 — 1, prices are fully flexible, and the actual price

Pt coincides with P°t.

       The expression for the real exchange rate q under sluggish price

adjustment can be obtained by substituting (10) and (13) into (12) and

using (18) to represent the difference between actual and market clearing

price levels. We obtain:


(19)            q, —   qe   + v(1 -       -z   + a-y6);


where v      (1 + A)(X + a + p7)1.        We see that when price adjustment is

sluggish, shocks to money influence the real exchange rate, even though

monetary shocks have no influence on the flexible price real exchange

rate. This follows from the renowned Dornbusch (1976) overshooting result

which is a property of our model when price adjustment is sluggish. The

nominal exchange rate is given by s —          "t + (1 - a   -
                                                                 r)(A   + a + r1Y1x(1 -

        - z + cx-y8t).   Overshooting in response to monetary shocks will occur
if (1 - a   -
                 )   > 0.     Interestingly, this condition. implies the nominal

exchange rate will undershoot relative to the flexible price equilibrium

in response to real supply and demand shocks.              We note that sluggish

price adjustment implies that the real exchange rate undershoots relative

to the flexible price real exchange rate in response to real supply or

demand shocks.

       Finally, we can use (19) and the IS equation to solve for the demand

determined level of output in the "short run" when price adjustment is

sluggish. We obtain:

(20)            Yt — Y3t + (, + a)v(1 -   O)(v - z,   + a7&t).


                                          28
Sluggish price adjustment implies that not only supply, but also money and

demand shocks, influence y in the short run. A monetary shock boosts

output in the short run with sluggish price adjustment, while home

relative to foreign output rises in response to the temporary component in

the demand shock.

      In the stochastic open macro equilibrium represented by equations

(18), (19), and (20), all three shocks -     to   money, supply, and demand -

influence contemporaneously the levels of all three of the system's
variables -   output,   the real exchange rate, and prices. However, because

output, the real exchange rate, and prices are expected to converge to

their flexible price equilibrium levels, the system is triangular in the

long run.     Indeed, with the simple price setting rule we employ, the

system is expected to converge to the flexible price equilibrium in a

single period. Only supply shocks are expected to influence the long run

level of relative output.        Supply and demand shocks are expected to

influence the long run level of the real exchange rate. And finally, both

real supply shocks and nominal monetary shocks are expected to influence

the long run level of prices at home and abroad.3 While these restriction

are intuitive and are easily and explicitly derived in our model, they

should also hold in many other specifications of a stochastic open macro

equilibrium, including those that arise in the cash-in-advance Arrow-

Debreu open macro models pioneered by Lucas (1982).         Drawing upon the

approach pioneered by Blanchard and Quah (1989), we will exploit these

quite plausible long run restrictions in an effort to identify the

influence of money, demand, and supply shocks on the behavior of real

exchange rates over the past twenty years.4


                                      29
The Empirical Strategy

       Our theoretical model implies that Yt' q, and Pt are nonstationary

in levels but stationary in first differences.5       Letting Xt [Y
irJ' denote the 3 by 1 vector of the system's 3 variables and              [z,
t. vt]' denote the 3 by 1 vector of the system's 3 structural

disturbances, we think of the data on Yt' qj, and irt as being generated

by the following structural moving average model:

(21)          Ax — C0e + Cef_1 ÷            +

where C0 is the 3 by 3 matrix that defines the contemporaneous structural

relationship among the system's 3 variables. As discussed earlier, if our

simple expository model actually generated the data, the structural moving

average model - and the estimated reduced form - would be a vector MA(l).

In general, we would expect and do find much richer dynamics in the data.

An important advantage of the Blanchard-Quah approach to identification is

that we do not have to take a stand on the dynamics. Rather, we use only

the longer run restrictions implied by our model - and many other open

macro models -   to   identify the structural Cj matrices from the data.

       When we estimate a VAR, we do not directly recover estimates of the

structural moving average model. Rather, we estimate:

(22)          xt —    u   + Riu1 + R2u2 + .

where u is a vector reduced form disturbances. We assume that there

exists a nonsingular matrix S such that u, —    S.   Comparing (21) with (22)

we see that: C0 — S, C1 — R1S, C2 — R2S, i.e. C(L) — R(L)S.     Thus:

(23)         u —
In addition to recovering estimates of the parameters that define the

reduced form moving average representation (22), we also recover an


                                       30
estimate of the symmetric variance-covariance matrix of the of the reduced

form disturbances:


(24)                Euu't.

As is well known, the model (22) is underidentified: it is not possible to

obtain estimates of C0 and thus       without addition restrictions. To see

this suppose, as is common in the literature, that the structural shocks

are mutually orthogonal and that each has unit variance (the latter

requirement is without loss of generality). Then, from (23) and (24), we

see that:


(25)           C0C0' —


This representts a system of 9 equations in only 6 unknowns, the 3
variances and 3 covariances that define E.              Thus, 3 additional

restrictions are needed to identify C0 and to recover the times series of

structural shocks        as well as the structural system dynamics defined by

Cl, C2,    .




Identification    According to Blanchard-Ouah

          It will be recalled that our open macro model is triangular in the

long run.       That is, only supply shocks Zt are expected to influence

relative output levels in the long run, while both supply and demand

shocks d are expected to influence the real exchange rate in the long run.

Shocks to money Vt are expected to have no long run impact on either

relative output levels or the real exchange rate. Using the notation of

our structural moving average model these restrictions are easily


                                       31
  represented. Letting C(l)                        C0 + C1 + C2 +           .,    the   restriction that
  neither money v nor demand d shocks influence relative output levels in

  the long run requires that:

  (26)             C12(l) —        C13(l) — 0.

  Similarly, the the restriction that money shocks v do not influence the

 real exchange rate in the long run requires that:


 (27)             C23(l) —         0.

 We will now show that these 3
                                                          additional "long run" restrictions,
 restrictions that are implied by our model as well as many other
                                                                  open
 macro models including simple real business cycle models, are sufficient

 to identify the structural matrix C0, to recover the structural system

 dynamics defined by C1, C2,               .   .   . as    well as the time series of structural
 shocks      —    [z,       6 vJ' to supply, demand, and money.

          Letting R0          I, R1 — C1C0', R2              C2C01, and so on, the reduced form
 moving average (22) that is estimated can be written:


 (28)            Ax     —
                            Rout   + Riu1 ÷ R2u2 +
We note that R(l) —
                    R0 +                R1 + R2 + . .          — C(l)c0-'        Form the matrix:

(29)             R(1)ER(1)'


This matrix can be
                             computed from the estimates of E and R(].) obtained from
the reduced form (28).
                                    Using (25) to substitute for                  and the definition
of R(l) we see that:


(30)             R(1)ER(1)' —           C(1)C(1)'.
Let H denote the lower
                                   triangular Choleski decomposition of R(l)R(l)':

                                                      32
    (31)           HIf'   —
                              R(1)ER(1)'.

 Now, our long run restrictions imply that C(l) is also lower
                                                                                 triangular.
    Since H is the unique lower triangular decomposition of
                                                                           R(l)ZR(1)', we
 have:



    (32)          C(1)        H.



From the definition R(l)              C(1)C0', (23) implies:


(33)              C0 —    R(ly'H.

Thus, the fact that the long run restrictions given by our model imply

that C(l) is lower triangular can be used to identify C0.                   In practice,

these restrictions are easy to impose: simply estimate the reduced form

model and calculate R(l), compute the unique lower triangular Choleski

matrix H where HH' —            R(1)R(1)',   and set C0 —   R(l)'H.   Given an estimate

of C0, we can recover the structural system dynamics defined
                                                                                by C1, C2,
           as well as the time series of structural shocks
•    •                                                                —   [z,    6, v] to
supply, demand, and money.




                                              33
                             Empirical Results

       In this section we present the empirical results that are at the

 heart of this paper. Using the structural VAR to recover the results and

 using our stochastic version of the Obstfeld (1985) open macro model to

 interpret the results, we seek to answer two questions: what are the

 sources of real exchange rate fluctuations since the collapse of Bretton

 Woods and, in particular, how important are nominal shocks?       To answer
 these questions, we look at three complementary ways to summarize the

 results of a structural VAR: we calculate variance decompositions of the

 real exchange rate, we compute "real time" historical decompositions of

 the level of the real exchange rate, and we plot impulse responses of

 output, the real exchange rate, and inflation to the structural supply,

demand, and nominal shocks to assess whether or not the shocks that our

procedure identifies as supply, demand, and nominal "look like" supply

demand and nominal shocks are supposed to look.    That is, by investigating
the impulse responses, we are checking whether or not our application of

the Planchard-Quah approach identifies structural shocks that "pass the

duck test".6

      We begin by reporting the results of two variance decomposition

exercises for the log real exchange rate.                            In the
first, reported in Table 3, the conditional variance of the level of the

log real exchange rate q at various horizons k is split into the

variance due to unforecastable       structural monetary shocks        vt÷3,

unforecastable structural demand        shocks,        and   unforecastable
structural supply shocks Zt+j, j   — l,...,k.     As can be seen from the
results reported in Table 3, nominal shocks account for a substantial


                                   34
fraction of the conditional variance of the level of the real
                                                                  exchange
rate at short horizons in Germany and Japan. For example in Germany, more

than 50 percent of the variance in forecasting the level of the real

exchange rate at a horizon of 4 quarters is due to monetary shocks. More

precisely, more than 50 percent of the 4 quarter variance in forecasting

the log level of the real exchange rate is attributed to the shock in the

system that has no long run effect on relative national output levels or

the level of the real exchange rate.      In Japan, more than one third,

nearly 35 percent, of the variance in forecasting the level of the dollar-

yen real exchange rate at a horizon of 4 quarters is due to monetary

shocks. According to our structural VAR, nominal shocks do not explain

much of the variance in forecasting the level of the real exchange rate in

Britain and Canada.    For example in Britain, only 1.3 percent of the

variance in forecasting the level of the real exchange rate at a horizon

of 4 quarters is attributed to monetary shocks; in Canada, less than 1

percent of the 4 quarter forecast variance is due to nominal shocks. We

shall discuss how to interpret these rather striking differences between

the importance attributed to nominal shocks in Germany and Japan and the

meager role attributed to nominal shocks in Britain and Canada after

investigating other results yielded by our structural VARs.

      For all four countries, of the remaining variance in forecasting the

log level of the real exchange rate that is not attributed to nominal

shocks, virtually all is attributed to demand shocks, and virtually none

is attributed to supply shocks.    For example in Germany, of the 49.6

percent of the variance in forecasting the level of the real exchange rate

at a horizon of 4 quarters that is not due to monetary shocks, 42.7


                                   35
 percent is attributed to demand shocks and only 6.9 percent is attributed

 to supply shocks. It will be recalled that we identify the demand shock

 as that shock in the system that has no long run effect on relative

 national output levels but that can have an effect on the real exchange

 rate in the long run.

       In forecasting the level of an 1(1) variable such as q, the variance

 of the forecast error goes to infinity with the forecast horizon so that

 the share of this variance attributed to monetary shocks - which
                                                                  by
 assumption can have no long run effects on the level of     q - must go to
 zero with the forecast horizon.                          Table 4 decomposes

 the conditional variance of the change in the log real exchange rate

at various horizons k into fraction of the variance due to unforecastable

structural monetary shocks vt÷j, demand shocks, &+j, and unforecastabie

supply shocks Zt÷j, j —   l,...,k.   As the forecast horizon increases, these

conditional variance shares converge to the shares of the unconditional

variance of the change in each real exchange rate due to supply, demand,

and nominal shocks. As is evident from Table 4, this convergence is quite

rapid -   within   12 to 16 quarters.      We see that 41.1 percent of the
unconditional variance of the change in the dollar-DM real exchange rate

IS attributed to monetary shocks, 48.5 percent is attributed to demand

shocks, and 10.4 percent is attributed to supply shocks. According to our

decomposition, 35.2 percent of the unconditional variance of the change

in the dollar-yen real exchange rate is attributed to monetary shocks,

61.2 percent is attributed to demand shocks, and 3.6 percent is attributed

to supply shocks.




                                      36
       As was the case for the decompositions of the level of the dollar-

 sterling and Canadian dollar real exchange rates reported in Table             3,

 monetary shocks do not explain much of the unconditional variance of the

 change in either of the real exchange rates.                For example, only 2.8
 percent of the unconditional variance of the change in the dollar-sterling

real exchange rate is attributed to monetary shocks, with the bulk of         this

variance, 91.1 percent, being attributed to demand shocks.               Only 2.5
percent of the unconditional variance of the change in the US -Canadian

dollar real exchange rate is attributed to monetary shocks.

      We next present in Charts               9   -   12   historical "real time"
decompositions of the level of each real exchange rate. The purpose of

this exercise is to assess whether or not the supply, demand, and nominal

shocks that our identification scheme recovers can plausibly be held

responsible for the time path followed by dollar real exchange rates since

the collapse of Bretton Woods.           In particular, we are interested in

assessing the extent to which our historical decompositions match up with

the Mundell-Fleming conventional wisdom about the dollar and policy mix

(Sachs (1985); Feldstein (1992)) during the 1970s and 1980s. For example,

it is one thing for our econometric strategy to identify monetary shocks

that account for 41 percent of the variance in the change in the dollar-DM

real exchange rate.      However, these variance decompositions only make
sense -   at   least to us -   if   episodes of "tight money" or "expansionary

demand" correspond to periods of real dollar appreciation, and period of

"loose money" or "contractionary demand" correspond to periods of real

dollar depreciation.




                                         37
        Chart 9 presents the results for the dollar-DM real exchange rate.

 This chart, and the next three, are constructed in the
                                                                following way. In
 each panel, the solid line -   newslogq   -
                                               depicts   the difference between the

 actual log level of the real exchange rate and the level that would have

 been forecasted based upon the history of the system up through 1974:3.

 Thus, newslogq in 1982:3 reflects the cumulative impact of the three

 structural shocks between 1974:4 and 1982:3.              Each panel of Chart 9
 compares the actual path of the real exchange rate with the path that

 would have prevailed if only   one   source of structural shocks had hit the

 system. The top panel of Chart 9 compares the actual path of the dollar-

 DM real exchange rate with the path that would have been followed

 historically if only nominal shocks had hit the system, the center panel

 of the chart compares the actual path of the dollar-DM real exchange rate

with the path that would have been followed
                                                    historically if only demand
 shocks had hit the system, and the lower panel of Chart 9 compares the

actual path of the dollar-DM real exchange rate with the path that would

have been followed historically if only supply shocks had hit the system.

      We find these result most interesting. As can be seen in the top

panel of the chart, virtually all of the dollar's real depreciation

against the DM in the late l970s is attributed to nominal shocks, while

most of the dollar's real appreciation
                                           against the DM in the first half of
the l980s is attributed to demand shocks.
                                                    Note, however, that a not
insubstantial real dollar appreciation against the DH during the early

l980s, one that would unwind the real depreciation of the late 1970s, is

attributed to nominal shocks,           Of the dollar's post-Plaza real
depreciation against the DM, roughly half is attributed to nominal shocks,


                                      38
and half is attributed to demand shocks. Supply shocks are not attributed

a significant role in explaining the dollar-DM real exchange rate since

the collapse of Bretton Woods.

      Chart 10 presents the results for the dollar-yen real exchange rate.

As is the case for the historical decomposition of the dollar-DM real

exchange rate, the dollar's real depreciation against the yen in the late

1970s is attributed to nominal shocks, while most of the dollar's real

appreciation against the Dli in the first half of the l980s is attributed

to demand shocks. Note however that between 1979 and 1982, a real dollar

appreciation against the yen that would be sufficient to unwind the real

depreciation of the late 1970s, is attributed to nominal shocks. Supply

shocks in favor of Japan are also attributed about 10 percentage points of

the dollar's appreciation during the early l980s. Of the dollar's post-

Plaza real depreciation against the yen, virtually all is attributed to

demand shocks.

      Charts 11 and 12 present the results for the dollar-sterling and

dollar-Canadian dollar real exchange rates. (PLACE CHARTS 10 AND 11 HERE)

Perhaps not surprisingly, in light of the variance decomposition results

presented in Tables 3 and 4, monetary shocks are attributed only a trivial

role in accounting for the history of the dollar -   sterling   and dollar-

Canadian dollar real exchange rates. For these currencies, the time path

of the real exchange rate is essentially the time path attributed to

demand shocks. To summarize, dollar-DM and dollar-yen real exchange rates

are driven primarily by both money and demand shocks that produce a quite

plausible history real exchanges, while dollar-sterling and Canadian

dollar real exchange rates are driven almost exclusively by a shock that


                                   39
 is identified to be a demand shock. For no real exchange rate, with the

 possible exception of the dollar-yen rate, are supply shocks identified to

 explain any substantial movement in real exchange rates.

       We now investigate the impulse dynamics of the four estimated open

 macro models in response to the three structural shocks. Our objective to

 assess the extent to which shocks that our identification strategy

 identifies as due to demand, supply, and money generate dynamic and long

 run responses that are consistent with the Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch model

presented in section four. For example, according to that model, a demand

shock in favor of US output should result in a real appreciation of the

dollar, a rise in US prices, and a rise in US output if prices are sticky.

To the extent that the demand shock is permanent, the model predicts that

the real appreciation of the dollar will be permanent as well. A nominal

shock which increases the US money supply or reduces US money demand

relative to the foreign country should result in a nominal depreciation

of the dollar, a rise in US prices, and a rise in US output and a real

depreciation of the dollar if prices are sticky. To the extent that the

shock to money supply or money demand is permanent, the model predicts

that the nominal depreciation of the dollar will be permanent as well.

Finally, a supply shock that boosts US output relative foreign output is

predicted to result in a real depreciation of the dollar, a fall in US

prices, and a rise in US output. To the extent that the demand shock is

permanent, the model predicts that the real depreciation of the dollar

will be permanent as well.




                                   40
       Table 5 presents the impulse response results for the
                                                               US-Germany
 structural VAR.   In response to a one standard deviation nominal shock,

 the structural dynamics fit remarkably closely the predictions of the

Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch model. There is an initial 3.8 percent real

depreciation of the dollar, a nearly 0.5 percent rise in US output

relative to German output, and a 0.3 percent rise in US inflation relative

to German inflation. Chart 13A depicts this dynamic response, and reveals

that the output and real exchange rate effects of a nominal shock die out

after 16 to 20 quarters.                           Chart l3b compares the

impulse response of the nominal dollar-DM exchange rate with the real

dollar-DM exchange rate.                          We see that the nominal

dollar-DM exchange rate overshoots substantially: in the long run the

dollar depreciates by 1.7 percent against the DM, while initially the

nominal dollar-DM exchange rate depreciates by more than 4 percent. We

also note that the nominal dollar-DM exchange rate does not appreciate

monotonically but that, instead, the exchange rate depreciates for several

quarters following the nominal shock. Indeed the maximum depreciation is

not achieved until 4 quarters after the initial nominal shock.       This

phenomenon has been recently uncovered using a completely different

empirical strategy by Eichenbaum and Evans (1993). We shall compare our

findings and approach with the Eichenbaum and Evans paper in section six.

Table 5 also presents the impulse response dynamics to a demand shock.

Again, the structural dynamics fit remarkably closely the predictions of

the Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch model. There is an initial 4 percent real

appreciation of the dollar, a 0.36 percent rise in US output relative to

German output, and a 0.44 percent rise in US inflation relative to German


                                   41
 inflation.       In the long run, the demand shock causes the dollar to

 appreciate by more than percent against the DM in real terms. The table

 also presents the impulse responses to a one standard deviation supply

 shock. Although US prices fall initially in response to the supply shock,

 the dollar appreciates in real terms, in contradiction to the open macro

 model presented above. In the long run, the real dollar-DM exchange rate

 is essentially unchanged, even though the supply shock is forecasted to

have a permanent effect on US relative to German output.

      Table 6 present the results for the US-Japan structural VAR.

                  As can be seen from the table, the impulse responses to a

nominal shock match the predictions of the theoretical model presented

earlier. There is an initial 3.4 percent real depreciation of the dollar,

a 0.56 percent rise in US output relative to Japanese output, and a 0.33

percent rise in US inflation relative to Japanese inflation.

              Chart 14A depicts this dynamic response, and reveals that the

output and real exchange rate effects of a nominal shock die out after 12

to 16 quarters.                           As shown in Chart 14B, the dollar-

yen nominal exchange rate overshoots: in the long run    nominal dollar-yen
exchnage rate depreciates by 1.2 percent, while initially the dollar

depreciates by more than 3.5 percent against the yen. As is the case for

the dollar-DM, the nominal dollar-yen exchange rate does not appreciate

monotonicali.y but, instead, depreciates for two quarters following the

nominal shock.     Table 6 also presents the impulse responses to a one

standard deviation demand shock.     There is an initial 4.4 percent real

appreciation of the dollar-yen exchange rate, a 0.36 percent rise in US

output relative to German output, and a nearly 0.43 percent rise in US


                                     42
inflation relative to German inflation. In the long run, the demand shock

causes the dollar to appreciate by 5.5 percent against the yen in real

terms. Finally, and in contrast to the US-German results, the

real dollar-yen exchange rate depreciates in response to a supply shock

that boosts US output relative Japanese output, just as predicted by the

theoretical presented above.

      Tables 6 and 7 present the impulse response results for Britain and

Canada.                                 For the most part, the results for

these two countries are similar to those we have just discussed in detail

for Germany and Japan.         Nominal shocks lead to short run real

depreciation, a rise in US output, and a jump in US inflation. Demand

shocks lead to short and long run real appreciation, a temporary rise in

US output, and a temporary jump in US inflation. In Canada, supply shocks

boost relative US output, lower temporarily US inflation, and lead to a

short and long run real depreciation of the dollar.       In Britain, the

results are qualitatively close to those reported for Germany: a supply

shock that boosts US output relative to British is forecasted to result in

a real appreciation of the dollar-sterling exchange rate, in contradiction

to the theoretical model.




                                   43
                              Concluding Remarks

      For two of the four countries we have investigated, Japan and

Germany, our structural VAR   estimates   imply that nominal shocks explain a

substantial amount of the variance in dollar-DM and dollar-yen real

exchange rates. In particular, we find that more than 41 percent of the

unconditional variance of the change in the dollar-DM real exchange rate,

and more than 35 percent of the variance of the change in the dollar-yen

real exchange rate are attributed to nominal shocks. Expressed in terms

of conditional forecasts, we find that 45 percent of the 4 -quarter ahead

forecast error variance of the log level of the dollar-DM real exchange

rate is attributed to nominal shocks, and that 34 percent of the 4 -

quarter   forecast variance of the log dollar-yen real exchange rate is

attributed to nominal shocks.

      For the other two countries we study,         Canada and Britain, our

structural VAR estimates imply that nominal shocks explain very little of

the variance in real exchange rates. At one level, the reason for these

contrasting results is easy to understand.         Given the information set

implied by our structural model, very little of the change in either the

dollar-sterling or the dollar-Canadian dollar real exchange rate is

forecastable, a fact documented with our non-structural Beveridge-Nelson

decompositions. It follows that our, or any, structural model that uses

this information set will be unable to attribute much to nominal shocks

which can only have a transitory effect on the real exchange rate. Perhaps

a different, or larger, information set would imply much greater

forecastablility in the dollar-sterling and the dollar-Canadian dollar

real exchange rates.      However, it should be noted that achieving


                                     44
identification with a larger information set might very prove to be a

daunting task. We have not attempted this, and leave this as a topic for

future research.

       Our findings for the dollar-DM and dollar-yen real exchange rates

are quite consistent with those reported recently in an insightful paper

by Eichenbauin and Evans (1992). Eichenbaum and Evans attempt to isolate

the innovations in monetary policy using VARs that include either federal

funds rate or the ratio of non-borrowed to total reserves. Their VARs

also include either a nominal or real exchange rate as well as US and

foreign output and prices.       These authors find that from between 13

percent to 42 percent of the 12 -   quarter   ahead forecast error variance of

the log level of the dollar-DM real exchange rate is attributed to US

monetary policy innovations depending upon how they specify the system,

and they report that from between 13 to 23 percent of the 12 -        quarter
ahead forecast error variance of the log dollar-yen real exchange rate is

attributed to US monetary policy innovations.7 As can be seen from our

Table 3, our structural VAR approach attributes 28 percent of the 12 -

quarter   ahead forecast error variance of the log level of the dollar-DM

real exchange rate to nominal shocks, and it attributes 15 percent of the

12 -   quarter   ahead forecast error variance of the log dollar-yen real

exchange rate to nominal shocks. Thus, our estimates of the contribution

of nominal shocks to explaining the short run variance in forecasting the

log levels of the dollar-DM and dollar-yen real exchange rates are near

the respective midpoints of the estimates presented in Eichenbauni and

Evans (1992).8




                                     45
      A recent paper by Lastrapes (1992) also uses the Blanchard-Quah

identification strategy to estimate the importance of nominal shocks in

explaining the behavior of real exchange rates.          Unlike our paper,

Lastrapes does not claim to, and his approach cannot, identify an open

economy macro model with his structural VAR. He investigates bivariate

VARs containing changes in the log real exchange rate and changes in the

log nominal exchange rate. Thus, his system can only identify two shocks,

a "real" and a "nominal" shock.          In particular, his system cannot

distinguish between supply and demand shocks.             Lastrapes (1992)

acknowledges that if the world is subject to more than a single real

shock, his identification strategy is potentially compromised. Perhaps

for this reason, our estimates of the importance of nominal shocks for the

dollar-DM and dollar-yen real exchange rates substantially exceed those

reported in Lastrapes (1992).      For example, whereas we find that 45

percent (34 percent) of the 4 -   quarter   ahead forecast error variance of

the log level of the dollar-DM (dollar-yen) real exchange rate is

attributed to nominal shocks, Lastrapes only attributes 27 percent (6

percent).

      One contribution of this paper has been to demonstrate that the

short run dynamic responses of relative national outputs, prices, and the

real exchange rate to nominal, demand, and, at least for Japan and Canada,

supply shocks are consistent with the predictions of a stochastic,

rational expectations version of the textbook Mundell-Fleming model.

These findings, along with the variance and historical decompositions

reported above, and the complementary findings reported in Eichenbaum and

Evans (1992), suggest to us that sluggish price adjustment must be


                                    46
incorporated into any effort to explain short run fluctuations in real

exchange rates (Mussa (1986)).     This being said we also note that,

according to our estimates, real shocks to supply and demand account for

more than 50 percent of the variance in forecasting real exchange rates -

except at short horizons for the dollar-DM real exchange rate. Campbell
and Clarida (1987) and Stockman (1987) have emphasized "real" explanations

for real exchange rate volatility. Our findings do not suggest that these

efforts are misplaced. Obviously, real shocks must be present if we are to

believe the many papers that find evidence of a unit root in the real

exchange rate since the collapse of Bretton Woods.




                                   47
                             REFERENCES


 Adler, M. and B. Lehman, "Deviations from Purchasing Power Parity in

 the Long Run," Journal of Finance, (39) 1983, 1471 - 1487.



Baxter, H., "Real Exchange Rates, Real Interest Rates, and

Government Policy: Theory and Evidence," miineo, University of

Rochester, February 1988.



Beveridge, S. and C. Nelson, "A New Approach to the Decomposition of

Economic Time Series Into Permanent and Transitory Components,"

Journal of Monetary Economics, (7) 1981, 151 - 174.



Bayourni, T. and B. Eichengreen, "Macroeconomic Adjustment under Bretton

Woods and the Post Bretton Woods Float," NBER Working paper No. 4169,

September 1992.



Blanchard, 0., and D. Quah, "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand

and Supply Disturbances," American Economic Review, (79) 1989, 655 -

673.



Branson, W., "Exchange Rate Dynamics and Monetary Policy," in

Lindbeck, ed., Inflation and Employment in Open Economies,

Amsterdam: North Holland, 1979, 189 - 224.




                                48
Campbell, J. and R. Clarida, "The Dollar and Real Interest Rates: An

Empirical Investigation," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on

Public Policy, (27) 1987, 103 - 140.



Cochrane, J., "Univariate vs Multivariate Forecasts of CNP Growth

and Stock Returns," NBER Working Paper No. 3427, 1990.



Cwnby, R. and J. Huizinga, "The Predictability of Real Exchange Rate

Changes in the Short Run and the Long Run," NBER Working Paper No.

3468, October 1990.



Cuinby, J. and M. Obstfeld, "International Interest Rate and Price

Level Linkages Under Flexible Exchange Rates," in Bilson and Marston

eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, 1984.



Dornbusch, R., "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of

Political Economy, (84) 1976, 1161 - 1176.



Eichenbaum, M. and C. Evans, "Some Empirical Evidence on the Effects

of Monetary Policy Shocks on Exchange Rates," mimeo, FRB Chicago,

December 1992.



Edison, H. and D. Pauls, "A Re-Assessment of the Relationship

Between Real Exchange Rates and Real Interest Rates," Journal of

Monetary Economics, (29) 1993.


                                 49
Evans, G., "A Measure of the US Output Gap," Economics Letters, 1989

(29), 285 - 289.



Evans, C. and L. Reichlin, "Information, Forecasts, and Measurement

of the Business Cycle," mimeo, Columbia University, May 1993.



Evans, M. and J. Lothian, "The Response of Exchange Rates to

Permanent and Transitory Shocks under Floating Exchange Rates,"

mimeo, Stern School of Business, April 1992.



Feldstein, M., "The Dollar and the Trade Deficit," NBER Working

Paper No. 4325, April 1993.



Frankel, J., "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based

on Real inteicst Differentials," American Economic Review, (69)

1979, 610 - 622.



               ,   "The Dazling Dollar," Brookings Papers on Economic

Activity, I, 1985.



Frenkel, J., "Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices, and the Role of News:

Lessons from the 1970s," Journal of Political Economy ,    (83)   1981,

655 -   705.



Flood, R., "Explanations of Exchange Rate Volatility and other

Empirical Regularities in Some Popular Models of the Foreign


                                     50
Exchange Market," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public

Policy, (15) 1981.



Gali, J., "How Well Does the IS-LM Model Fit Postwar US Data?"

Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 709 - 738.



Grilli, V. and C. Kaminsky, "Nominal Exchange Rate regimes and the

Real Exchange Rate," Journal of Monetary Economics, (27) 1991, 191 -

212.



Hansen, L. and R. Hodrick, "Risk Averse Speculation in the Forward

Foreign Exchange Market: An Econometric Analysis of Linear Models,"

in Frenkel ed., Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics,

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.



Hodrick, R., The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and

Futures Foreign Exchange Markets, London: Harwood Publishers, 1987.



Huizinga, J., "An Empirical Investigation of the Long Run Behavior

of Real Exchange Rates," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on

Public Policy, (27) 1987, 149 - 215.



King, R., C. Plosser, J. Stock, and M. Watson, "Stochastic Trends

and Economic Fluctuations," American Economic Review, (81) 819 -

839.




                                51
Lastrapes, W., "Sources of Fluctuations in Real and Nominal Exchange

Rates," Review of Economics and Statistics, 1992, 530 - 539.



Lippi, M. and L. Reichlin, "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand

and Supply Disturbances: Comment," American Econoimc Review, (83)

1993.




Loopesko, B. and J. Shafer, "Floating Exchange Rates After Ten

Years," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1983, 1 - 86.



Melzter, A., "Real Exchange Rates: some Evidence from the Postwar

Years," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, May 1993, 103 - 117.



Obstfeld, M., "Floating Exchange Rates: Experience and Prospects,"

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1985, 369 - 450.



Meese, R. and K. Rogoff, "Was it Real? The Exchange Rate Interest

Differential Relation Over the Modern Floating Rate Period," Journal

of Finance, (43), 933 - 948.



Mussa, M., "A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political

Economy, (90), 1982, 74 - 104.



Mussa, M., "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real

Exchange Rates: Evidence and Implications," Carnegie-Rochester

Conference Series on Public Policy, (26) 1986.


                                 52
Roll, R., "Violations of Purchasing Power Parity and Their

Implications for Efficient International Commodity Markets," in

Sarnat and Szego, eds., International Finance and Trade, Cambridge:

Ballinger Press, 1979.



Sachs, J., "The Dollar and the Policy Mix," Brookings Papers on

Economic Activity 1, 1985, 117 - 185.



Shapiro, M. and M. Watson, "Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations,"

NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1988.



Stockman, A., "The Equilibrium Approach to Exchange Rates," Federal

Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, 1987.



               ,   "Real   Exchange Rate Variability Under Pegged and

Floating Nominal Exchange Rate Systems: An Equilibrium Theory,"

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, (29) 1988,

259 -   294.




                                      53
</ref_section>
                                     NOTES

*   Clarida,   Department of Economics and School of International and Public

Affairs, Columbia University, and The National Bureau of Economic

Research. Gali, Graduate School of Business, Columbia University, and the

Centre for Economic Policy Research. We would like to thank Lucrezia

Reichlin, Charles Evans, Mike Gavin, Steve Husted, Allan Meltzer, Charles

Plosser, Alan Stockman, and participants at the November 1992 Carnegie -

Rochester Conference on Public Policy for their comments and suggestions.
Parts of this paper were written while Clarida was visiting the

International Monetary Fund, and while Gali was visiting the Universitat

Pompeu Fabra.      The authors would like to thank these institutions for

their hospitality.        The authors would also like to thank seminar

participants at Columbia University, the University of Pittsburgh, the

Paris Macroeconomics Workshop, and CEMFI - Madrid for their comments on

earlier drafts of this paper. Any errors or confusions that remain are

those of the authors.




1. The exception is Japan, for which we investigate the slightly shorter

sample period 1975:3 - 1992:4.       We do this for comparability with the

results presented above for the Japan [q,r] system for which our

Euromarket data only become available in 1975:3. Following Hansen and

Hodrick ((1983) pp. 120-121), we also investigated samples for Germany,

Canada, and Britain that "excluded the transitional early years of the

floating exchange rate era". As Hansen and Hodrick point out, it was not

until November 1975 that the G6 countries "produced an agreement which led

directly to the amendments to the Articles of Agreement of the IMF which
formally ratified the flexible exchange rate system." While none of the

results for Germany, Britain, or Canada reported in this paper are

sensitive to the choice of a starting date of 73:3 vs 75:3, some of the

results for Japan are. Data sources are as follows: CPI data are from the

IFS tape; the spot exchange rates and the Euromarket interest rates are

point sampled from a data base maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of

New York; the real GDP data is from the OECD Main Economic Indicators.



2. For expository convenience, and to parallel the bulk of the literature

on "sticky price" open macro models cited above, we follow Obstfeld (1985)

and do not explicitly incorporate the accumulation of foreign assets

(debts) via current account surpluses (deficits) that may result from the

shocks we study. We also ignore a time varying risk premium. Later we

shall discuss the empirical implications of a risk premium for the

empirical strategy we pursue.




3. The two country Obstfeld (1985) model we study has the property that

the home relative to the foreign market clearing price level is invariant

to a permanent relative demand shock. This is not a general property of

an open-macro equilibrium so we do not use it for identification.



4.   The stochastic version of Obstfeld's (1985) model that we use to

motivate our identification strategy ignores, as does the bulk of the

literature, a time varying risk premium. If the equilibrium risk premium

is a stationary stochastic process that is a function of the three

structural shocks -   to   supply, demand, and money - on which we focus,
identification goes through as in the case, discussed in the text, in

which the risk premium is assumed to be constant. However, the closed-

form solution to the model is a great deal more cumbersome.



5.   See Edison and Pauls (1993) for empirical evidence using quarterly

data since 1974:3 that q is 1(1) and that        -      is 1(0) in the four

countries we study. To test the hypothesis that ylS -   y   is 1(1) in each

country, we ran augmented Dickey-Fuller t-tests and could not reject the

null of a unit root in any of these four countries. Our theoretical model

also implies that there exists no cointegrating relationships among Yt' q.,

and Pt.     Tests for cointegration among [Yt, qt, Pt) were performed using

Johansen's (1991) maximum likelihood procedure. For Germany and Japan, we

could not reject the null of no cointegration among these variables at

even the 20 percent significance level; for Britain, we could not reject

the null of no cointegration at the 10 percent level. For Canada, there

does appear to be evidence of a single cointegrating vector among these

three variables.



6.   If   it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it must be .

7.   Eichenbauni and Evans use monthly data; thus their results are reported

for 36 month horizon.



8. Eichenbaum and Evans do not include Canada in their study. They find

that innovations to US monetary policy account for from between 11 percent

to 26 percent of the variance In forecasting the log level of the dollar-

sterling exchange rate at a horizon of 36 months. From Table 3, we see
that we estimate that less than 1 percent of this variance is due to

nominal shocks.
                                TABLE 1


             Transitory-Actual Variance Ratios
                        var (Aq)/var (tq)
                     Country              Bivariate       System

                     Germany                       0.05
                     Japan                        0.03
                     Britain                      0.10
                     Canada                        0.23

                             [Aq,rtJ VARs

                     Germany                      Japan
                             Exclude        R2              Exclude
Equation                     Aq   r                         Aq r
  Ag          0.06        0.21 0.27         0.00           0.49 0.41
   r          0.26        0.03 0.01         0.28           0.17 0.01


                     Canada                        Britain
                             Exclude                     Exclude
Equation
               R2
                             tq r            R2
                                                            tq r
  Ag          0.06        0.44 0.63         0.13           0.01 0.37

   r          0.15           0.04 0.05      0.10           0.27 0.07



            Tests of Cross-Equation Restrictions

                                x2(8)              Significance
            Germany             19.53                 0.02
            Japan               10.43                 0.23
            Britain             21.43                 0.01
            Canada              18.09                 0.02



The sample is 1974:3 - 1992:1 except Japan which is 1976:3 -
1992:1. R2 is adjusted for degrees of freedom.       "Exclude"
reports the significance level for an F-test that a variable
can be excluded from an equation of the VAR.       The cross-
equation restrictions are those defined by equation (7) in the
text.
                                   TABLE 2


                 Transitory-Actual Variance Ratios

                           var (Aq)/var           (Aq)
       Country         Trivariate    System              Univariate System

       Germany               0.705                           0.235

       Japan                 0.591                           0.233

       Britain               0.385                           0.146

       Canada                0.210                           0.143



                           [Yt.            art]   VARS


                       Germany                                    Japan


Equation
                  R2
                              yq   Exclude                  R2
                                                                       yq Exclude


                 0.02        0.10 0.91 0.40                0.19      0.73 0.13 0.02
  tq             0.14        0.63 0.21 0.02                0.04      0.75 0.74 0.09
                 0.31        0.82 0.19 0.01                0.48      0.91 0.11 0.01

                         Britain                                  Canada

                  R2               Exclude                  R2            Exclude
Equation                      ty      1q          w                    ty    tq     w


                  0.00        0.66 0.63 0.40               0.00      0.89 0.26 0.23

                  0.06        0.18 0.09 0.91               0.00      0.84 0.33 0.66
                  0.24        0.04 0.51 0.01               0.02      0.54 0.50 0.09




       Trivariate VAR        includes        a constant and four
       lagged values of      the change in the log real
       exchange rate,     the change in the log ratio of
       US to foreign real CDP, and       the difference
       between US and foreign inflation. The sample is
       1914:3 - 1992:4 except for Japan which is
       1976:3 - 1992:4.
                            TABLE 3

                 Variance Decomposition -   q
                  Germany                           Japan

            fraction of variance            fraction of variance
                  due to                          due to
Horizon     Supply Demand Money             Supply Demand Money

   1        0.007 0.518 0.474               0.009 0.631 0.359
           (0.076) (0.262) (0.267)          (0.107) (0.233)(0.221)
   2        0.034 0.435 0.531               0.005 0.664 0.331
           (0.099) (0.243) (0.251)          (0.107) (0 .224)(0.217)
   3        0.067 0.408 0.525               0.003 0.650 0.347
           (0.117) (0.232) (0.242)          (0.106) (0.222) (0.218)
   4        0.069 0.427 0.504               0.002 0.650 0.347
           (0.118) (0.229) (0.238)          (0.107) (0 .220) (0 .214)
   8        0.039 0.575 0.386               0.004 0.779 0.216
           (0.113) (0.207) (0.202)          (0.109)(0.199)(0.173)
  12        0.026 0.692 0.282               0.010 0.836 0.153
           (0.117)(0.167) (0.145)           (0.117)(0.179)(0.132)
  16        0.019 0.766 0.214               0.016 0.863 0.121
           (0.121)(0.142) (0.104)           (0.124)(0.166)(0.103)
  20        0.016 0.811 0.172               0.020 0.880 0.100
           (0.125) (0.134) (0.082)          (0 .128) (0.159) (0.085)

                  Britain                           Canada

            fraction of variance            fraction of variance
                  due to                          due to
Horizon     Supply Demand Money             Supply Demand Money

   1        0.005 0.973 0.022                0.022 0.970 0.007
           (0.123)(0.214) (0.177)           (0.112) (0.150) (0.111)
   2        0.003 0.979 0.017                0.013 0.976 0.010
           (0.112) (0.197) (0.152)          (0.118) (0.150) (0.104)
   3        0.013 0.969 0.018                0.011 0.981 0.007
           (0.111) (0.187)(0.138)           (0.121) (0.144) (0.085)
   4        0.034 0.952 0.013               0.023 0.977 0.004
           (0.110) (0.171)(0.121)           (0.127) (0.145) (0.072)
   8        0.039 0.954 0.007                0.036 0.960 0.004
           (0.121)(0.143) (0.079)           (0.141) (0.157) (0.044)
  12        0.041 0.954 0.004                0.046 0.951 0.003
           (0.129)(0.139)(0.055)            (0.162) (0.172) (0.027)
  16        0.042 0.954 0.003                0.051 0.946 0.002
           (0.138) (0.139) (0.039)          (0.177) (0.183)(0.018)
  20        0.044 0.954 0.002                0.054 0.943 0.002
           (0.144)(0.144) (0.031)           (0.187) (0.191)(0.014)

Value in parentheses is empirical standard error computed     from
Monte Carlo simulation.     VAR specification    as reported in
notes to Table 2.
                             TABLE 4

                 Variance Decoriposition -

                   Germany                          Japan

            fraction of variance             fraction of variance
                  due to                           due to
Horizon     Supply Demand Money              Supply Demand Money

   1        0.007 0.518 0.474                0.009 0.631 0.359
           (0.097)(0.285) (0.286)            (0 .134)(0 .231) (0.203)
   2        0.035 0.497 0.468                0.028 0.630 0.341
           (0.102) (0.253) (0.256)           (0.119) (0.216) (0.188)
   3        0.046 0.487 0.467                0.031 0.630 0.338
                    242) (0 248)
           (0 098) (0 .                      (0.114) (0.202) (0.177)
   4        0.046 0.503 0.450                0.034 0.627 0.339
           (0.094) (0.229) (0.234)           (0.116)(0.198)(0.172)
   8        0.096 0.500 0.404                0.035 0.617 0.347
           (0.084) (0.187) (0.191)           (0.113)(0.167) (0.145)
  12        0.103 0.489 0.407                0.036 0.612 0.352
           (0.082) (0.173) (0.179)           (0.114)(0.167)(0.144)
  16        0.104 0.485 0.411                0.036 0.612 0.352
           (0.080) (0.168)(0.174)            (0.117) (0.167)(0.144)
  20        0.104 0.485 0.411                0.036 0.612 0.352
           (0.080) (0.166)(0.172)            (0.119)(0.167)(0.144)

                   Britain                           Canada

            fraction of variance             fraction of variance
                  due to                           due to
Horizon     Supply Demand Money              Supply Demand Money

   1        0.005 0.973 0.022                0.022 0.970 0.007
           (0.096) (0. 167) (0.147)          (0.124)(0.173) (0.125)
   2        0.020 0.959 0.021                0.032 0.959 0.007
           (0.093) (0.159) (0.138)           (0.121)(0.169) (0.125)
   3        0.034 0.946 0.019                0.035 0.952 0.012
           (0.096) (0.158) (0.136)           (0.120)(0.166)(0.118)
   4        0.055 0.919 0.025                0.045 0.943 0.012
           (0 .101)(0.146) (0.121)           (0.124)(0.163)(0.107)
   8        0.061 0.911 0.027                 0.043 0.934 0.023
           (0.098) (0.139) (0.112)           (0.121) (0.163) (0.109)
  12        0.061 0.911 0.028                0.043 0.932 0.025
           (0.099)(0.139)(0.112)             (0.124)(0.164) (0.109)
  16        0.061 0.911 0.028                 0.043 0.932 0.025
           (0.098) (0.138)(0.112)            (0.125) (0.165)(0.109)
  20        0.061 0.911 0.028                 0.043 0.932 0.025
           (0.098) (0.138)(0.112)            (0.126)(0 165)(0.109)

Value in parentheses is empirical standard error computed from
Monte Carlo simulation.      VAR specification as reported in
notes to Table 2.
                                   TABLE 5

-

         US-GERMAN IMPULSE RESPONSES TO MONETARY SHOCK


                Yt                    q,
     1       .462488E-02       •3775O7E-O1           •315902E-O2
    2        .349914E-02       •453675E-O1           •   193356E-02
     3       .247230E-02       • 388801E-O1          •   106539E-O2
    4        .304892E-02       • 429423E-O1          •   118095E-02
     5       .478072E-02       -   430385E-O1        •   234435E-02
    6        .339958E-02       •376681E-O1           •   16O408E-O2
     7       .261366E-02       • 338672E-O1          •   722475E-O3
     8       .279930E-02       • 313912E-O1          •   882155E-O3
    12       .152576E-02       • 145464E-O1          •   380088E-03
    16       .50721OE-03       .409438E-O2           •   697164E-04
    20   -    108420E-18       • 346945E-17      -   .445969E-04

         US-GERMAN IMPULSE RESPONSES TO DEMAND SHOCK

                Yt
     I       .358595E-02   - 395005E-O1              .44117 6E-02
     2       •110734E-02   - .359415E-O1             • 327817E-03
     3       •845930E-O3   - . 320154E-OI        -   . 959306E-O3
     4       •7859O2E-03   -       436595E-O1        • 448387E-03
     5       •217299E-O2   -       570809E-O].       • 181895E-02
     6       •536989E-O3   -       539297E-Ol    -   . 111040E-03
     7       .1300I7E-03   -       524747E-Ol    -   . 846737E-03
     S       •361130E-03   -       595121E-O1        • 25O278E-03
    12       •46325OE-04   -       640373E-O1        .107151E-03
    16   - 342733E-04      -       641007E-O1         58O690E-04
    20       •867362E-18   -       62997OE-O1         485426E-04

         US-GERMAN IMPULSE RESPONSES TO SUPPLY SHOCK

                 Yt
     1       .107366E-O1   - . 469937E-02        - . 302216E-02
                           - 141524E-O1          - 325668E-03
     2       .100153E-Ol
     3       •108198E-O1   - 203115E-O1              •385827E-04
     4       •I18282E-O1   - . 173231E-Ol        -   .325452E-03
     5       .143O74E-O1   - . 491096E-02        -   . 126214E-O2
     6       •142004E-Ol   - . 943O79E-02        -   . 244555E-O4
     7       .147608E-O1   - . 123987E-OI            • 277859E-O3
     8       .153606E-Ol   - . 648407E-O2        -   . 140733E-O3
    12       .164576E-O1   - . 152274E-02            • 377159E-05
    16       •161040E-O1   - . 128286E-O2            • 374282E-04
    20       .166738E-O1   - . 256879E-O2            •2O2379E-04
                                TABLE 6


              US-JAPAN RESPONSES TO MONETARY SHOCK


 1
              Yt
         .565697E-02        •
                                      q
                                335221E-O1           • 336510E-02
 2       .725501E-02        •       376019E-01   -    115308E-02
 3       .617822E-02        •       393904E-01       • 277211E-02
 6       .710464E-02        •       366256E-O1       •115327E-02
 5       .518038E-02        •       262617E-O1       • 255423E-O2
 6       .411260E-02        •226716E-O1          -    129827E-O3
 7       .315616E-02        • 199404E-01             •200962E-02
 8       .261808E-02        • 126687E-O1             •124556E-O6
12       .469491E-03        • 209572E-02         -   .423653E-03
16       .159367E-04    -       639773E-05       -    378485E-03
20   -   582759E-18     -       542101E-18       -    261581E-03

              US-JAPAN RESPONSES TO DEMAND SHOCK


 1
              yt
         .360980E-02    - .444275E-O].
                                      q              •431648E-02
 2        .968059E-03   -       558781E-O1       -    146771E-02
 3   -   663965E-04     -       506337E-O1           •431040E-03
 4       .443203E-04    -       501949E-O1       -   .436735E-03
 5   -   129679E-O2     -       650335E-O1           .720145E-03
 6   -   174177E-O2     -       644940E-O1       -    1O8157E-02
 7   -   144962E-02     -       609554E-O1           •167O99E-O3
 8   -   11434OE-02     -       610114E-O1       - 796735E-03
12   -   464446E-O3     -       573463E-O1       -.466567E-03
16   -    775631E-04    -       551524E-O1       - 229815E-O3
20       .203288E-17    -       546982E-O1       - 130661E-03


              US-JAPAN RESPONSES TO SUPPLY SHOCK

              Yt
 1       .559077E-02    - 537368E-02             - 384005E-02
 2       .741437E-O2        • 266448E-02             • 121580E-02
 3       .902411E-02    -       938463E-03       -    167759E-02
 4       .7708O4E-02        • 207125E-02             .458563E-03
 5       .861570E-02        • 509238E-02         -   .164477E-02
 6       .842508E-02            •477693E-02          • 1004 58E-02
 7       •887824E-02            •   372161E-02   -    136980E-02
 8       •8685O3E-02            •   674140E-O2       •611680E-03
12        949O21E-02            •   102561E-O1       • 568412E-03
16        972002E-02            •   111676E-O1       •418609E-03
20       .976482E-O2            •   112756E-O1       •285706E-03
                               TABLE 7


             US-UK RESPONSES TO MONETARY SHOCK

             Yt                   q             • 997369E-02
 I       .48084OE-02       •770488E-02
 2       .3166O9E-02       •752780E-02          .30089 7E-02
 3       .136282E-O2       • 739711E-02         • 155882E-02
 4       .291676E-O2       .250731E-02          996563E-03
 5       .143993E-02       •153664E-02          • 567977E-02
 6       .11O654E-O2       .419841E-02          • 135606E-02
 7       .535341E-O3       • 325089E-02         • 970166E-03
 8       122O96E-O2        •220912E-02          • 836404E-03
12       .486967E-03       • 927409E-03         .5937 OOE-03
16       .163451E-O3       •   329292E-03        3447 39E-03
20        765718E-18       • 116552E-17         • 188594E-03

             US-UK RESPONSES TO DEMAND SHOCK

             Yt                   q
                       - . 507965E-O1            273261E-O2
 1       .229197E-O2
 2   -
         118378E-02    - . 642504E-01       - . 101441E-02
 3   -   880526E-03    - . 515051E-O1       - . 199O63E-02
4        •37134OE-O3   - . 608221E-O1       - . 732438E-03
 5   - . 309913E-03    - . 676993E-O1            204373E-02
 6   -   352178E-O3    - . 637147E-O1       - . 112332E-02
 7   - .425907E-03     - . 631625E-O1       - . 1O5984E-02
 8       .230455E-03   - . 660344E-O1       - . 192811E-03
12       •615816E-O4   - . 659630E-O1       - .105889E-04
16       .142818E-O4   - . 656586E-O1           .675603E-05
20   -   7115O8E-19    - . 655296E-O1            3914 20E-O6

             US-UK RESPONSES TO SUPPLY SHOCK


 1
             Yt
         .12O754E-O1
                                  q
                           •365298E-02      - . 545602E-O2
 2       .107728E-O1   - . 317862E-02         .116221E-02
 3        1O659OE-O1   - . 100057E-O1           • 327326E-03
 4       .873475E-O2   - 186158E-O1              212230E-O2
 5       •797912E-O2   - . 147364E-O1           •436523E-03
 6       .827197E-02   - . 121161E-O1           •831237E-04
 7       .871312E-02   - . 135824E-O1       -   . 397546E-04
 S       •873188E-O2   - 142033E-01             • 542297E-03
12       .848528E-O2   - . 144911E-O1           • 268959E-03
16       .847O76E-O2   - . 145488E-O1           • 114O85E-03
20       .844958E-02   - . 146026E-O1           •48O23OE-04
                          TABLE


               US-CANADIAN RESPONSES TO MONETARY SHOCK


 I
               Yt
          ./l092E-O2
                              q
                          • 182870E-02         .429534E-02
 2        294203E-02      • 238302E-O2         • 30924 1E-03
 3        .2/2456E-O2     • R76194E-03         • 205816E-02
 '3       .340201E-02     • 285330E-03         • 358478E-O3
 5        .219198E-02     • 226414E-02         -135889E-O2
 6        .167841E-02     • 80922OE-O3         • 519O31E-O3
 1        .130699E-O2     • 115878E-02         • 5349]JE-03
 8        .119915E-02     • 153429E-02         • 379123E-03
12        .25/4091E-03    • 274256E-03         • 846000E-04
16        .331901E-04     • 926S01 F.-O4   - 367252E-05
20    -    12824IE-1i     • 372694E- 18    - 111083E-04

               US-CANADIAN RESPONSES TO DEMAND SHOCK


 I
               Yt
          .L22711E-02
                              q
                         - 210094E-01
                                                   1r
                                             .315369E-02
 2        .226/03E-02    - 199714E-O1      - 103200E-02

 3        •901374E-03    - 223527E-O1        • 605525E-03
 4        .586189E-03    - 281629E-O1      - 714914E-03
 S        .611416E-04    - .233444E-O1       • 241460E-O4
 6    -   468162E-03     - 241551E-O1      - 131530E-03
  /   -   661851E-03     - 251006E-O1      - .287491E-03
 8    -    2I9254E-03    - 233682E-O1      - 168712E-03
12    -    202241E-03    - 245108E-O1      - 589984E-04
16    -   .4/9572E-04    - 242836E-01      - 214394E-04
20    -    296462E-19    - 242327E-01      - 683498E-06
               US-CANADIAN RESPONSES TO SUPPLY SHOCK


  I
               Yt
          •633886E-02
                               q
                          • 320999E-02     - .421137E-O2
 2        .66O256E-02     • 103100E-02     - 926698E-03
 3         103325E-02     • 217623E-O2     - 399465E-O3
 6        .689149E-02     .472165E-02      -       14188OE-O3
  5       •809619E-02     • 511715E-02     - 299848E-O3
 6        .846144E-02     • 555719E-02     - 246906E-O3
  1       .86/695E-02     • 606427E-02         • 119848E-03
 8        .8131/8E-02     • 590716E-02         • 305629E-O4
12        .896411E-O2      650408E-O2          • 646562E-O4
16        .88812/E-02     • 649608E-02         • 317945E-O4
20        .882178E-02     • 645971E-02         • 796 176E-05
                                              CHART 1


                              REAL $/DM DECOMPOSITION
                        Using Fcrcas/edReal fnleresl Role Dittereril ia/s
 -A0
     50
     60
      /0
 • .80 •i
     '(Jo
-I   .00                                                                           LGGQ

'I.I()                                                                             RRLR
     •0         '-- - - ---
                /1      /6      /0      £30      82      84       £36       £38     90

                      REAL $/DM OVER—UNDER VALUATION
                        Using F,-xrcv.cledRea/ in/eresi Role Di1Terprili/s




 .025
                                                                        V         SUN1RR

 .050
                /'1     76       78     80       82      84       86        88       50

                      REAL $/DM OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                         Ifs inq I' (xec0s/ed Chcriges #i Real Exchanoe Role
     100
     (J/L)

     050
     (Jr-)
     .000
      yn
     ¼) L. .J


     .050
     .0/5
                         76      /8      80       82      84      86         88      90
                                       CHART 2


                   REAL $/YEN DECOMPOSITION
                  Us Fo'-ecasledReo/ Inleesl Role Ditterrit,a/s
-488
-1.96
-5.01
-5.12
—5.20
-5.28 H
-5.36
-5.11 -.                                                               L JJO
-5.52 -.                                                               RRLR
-5.60 -
           76      78      80         82     81        86       88     90

                REAL $/YEN OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                  Using Fort'casledReal ln/er'sl Role Ditfcr'n/,a/s
 .036

 .021

 .012

 .000

-.012
- .021
           76      78      80         82      81       86       88      90

                REAL $/YEN OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                   Usri Fc cas/edCxres in Real ExcJicrKJe Role
 .075
 .050
 .025
 000
- .025
           __                              AAAA
- .050
- .075                            V                                   SUMDO
-.100
           76      78      80         92      81       86       88      90
                                                    CHART 3


                        REAL $/STERL INC DECOMPOSITION
                             Using Fci-eaas/ed Real Interest Rate Differil ia/s
.90
.80 H
.70 -

                                                                             /
                                                                                      LUKO

                                                                                      RRLR

              71        76        78       110        82      81       86        88    90

               REAL $/STERL INC OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                             Using Fccas/ed      Real interest Rate Ditterenlials
  100
 .080
 .060 -
 .010 -
  .020 1

-.020
 - .010
 - .060                                                                               RR
                   71        76      78       80        82      84      86       88     90

               REAL $/STERLINQ OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                              Usir-j Fc'cas/ed Cxiges in RealFxchaiae Rate
   l0


  .00
 - .05   H


 -b      -i

 ..I5                                                                                 SUMDQ
 - .20
               71        76         78       80         82      81      86       88     90
                                          CHART 4


                       REAL $/CAN DECOMPOSITION
                                                    DifferEnt/a/s
                          Fcr'castedReal Interest Rate
 .00
- .05
-.10
-.15
- .20
- .25
- .30
- .35
          71      76       /8      80        82       81       86      88    90

                REAL $/CAN OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                   Using Forcas/ed      Real In/erE'sf RateDitferril ibis
  .030
  .020
  .010
  .000
  .010
- .020
- .030
 - .010   —-                                                                      I

           74      76        79     80         82      91      86       98   90

                REAL $/CAN OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                       LJsrj F-xpcastedtYires in RealExcfrxqe Rate
  .030
  .020

  .010

  .000
  .010
 - .020

 -.030
           74      76        79     80         82       81      86      88   90
                                     CHART 5



                  REAL $/DM BN DECOMPOSITION
- 30
                                                                             I,
-.10
- .50                  1

- .60

- .70                                       It
 -80
 -.90
-1.00   H
                                                                      LCGO
-1.10 -                                                               BNLR

-1.20
            71    76       78   80     82        84    86        88   90     92


                 REAL $/DM OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                                vs (Jiivcr#o/e BNDecc,rwsiiicr




            74    76       78   80     82        84    86        88   90      92
                                               CHART 6



                          REAL $/YEN BN DECOMPOSITION
-1.80 - -                                 Tn'voriafc 5ysfcn


-1.90 -l
                                                                                       I
                                                                                           tl
-5.00

-5.10 H
                      V

-5.20 -

-5.30 -
-5.10
                                    'a                                             LJJQ
 5.50       -
                                                                                   BNLR
-5.60                                                              I



                76        78        80      82      81        86            88    90       92


                     REAL $/YEN OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                                Thv,wIe vs th,vria/e SNDecc4'ryJos/Zlcrl _________________
 .36

  30   -1


 .21 -i
       -4
 .18

 .12 -
                                                               p
                                                              I
 .06                                                                   aI
                                                                       I, I , t
 .00                                                                                            I
                                           /
  06
                                                                                   BNT
-.12                                                                               BNTU         - - -•
-.18
                          \\\
                76        78       80      82      8-1        86            88    90       92
                                                   CHART 7


                 REAL $/STERL INC BN DECOMPOSITION
                                              Tnvcr*.'/e Sy5k77
.90 -
                                          /
.80 -
.70

.60

.50 H
                                                                       gt

A0

.30 -                                                        'I
                                                                                    LUKQ
.20
                                                                                    BNLR

.10                                                                    . —,



          7'1        76        78        80         82        84       85     88    90     92


           REAL $/STERL INC OVER—UNDER VALUATION
                               Tnvcr,o/e vs (Anvcria/e SN Decciryos'i KY?
  .075


  .050


  .025


  .000

 - .025


 - .050


 - .075
                71        76        78        80     82           84    86     88   90     92
                                         CHART 8



                    REAL $/CAN BN DECOMPOSITION
                             Trivc/e Syslcvn
 .001-
- .05


-.10 -
               'I                                                            AJ4(
                                                   I'
 .20

- .25
                               Si

                                                                   I'
                                                                        1'
- .30                                                         ii              LCCU —
                                                                              BNLR -.

          71        76    78        80      82          81    86        88    90    92


               REAL $/CAN OVER-UNDER VALUATION
                    Jyvc.rioth vs IMivcr*ile &V
  .036


  .024


  .012


  .000


 -.012


 - .021


 - .036
           71        76    78        80      82          81   86        88     90   92
                             CHART 9




        71   75   70   60      62      01   65   66   90   92
                        Monetonj Shocks

.30
 .20
 .10
 .00
-.10
-20
- .30
- .10
- .50
- .60
        71   76   70   80      82      81   86   88   90   92
                            Demmd Shocks

  30
 .20
 .10
  00
 .10
 .20
- .30
- .10
- .50
  .60
        71   76   78   80      82      81   86   88   90   92
                            Suppig Shocks
                         CHART 10




        76    78   80   82       81      86    88   90   92
                        Monetcx'y Shocks

.10
 .00

-.10
-20
- .30

- .10

-.50
- 60
        76    78   80   82      81        86   88   90   92
                         Demand Shocks

 .10
 .00

-.10
- .20

- .30

- .40

- .50

-.60                                                     92
         76   78   80    82      81       85   88   90
                          SLçpIy Shocks
                                CHART 11


SOURCES $/STERLING REAL EXCHANGE RATE FLUCTUATIONS
   .30
   .20
   .10
   DO
  -.10
   .20
  - 30
  - .10
  -.50
           71   76   78   80      82       81   86   88   90   92
                           hone ionj Shocks

   .10
   .30
   .20
   .10
    00
  -.10
  - .20
  - .30
  - .10
  - .50
           71   76   78   80      82       81   86   88   90   92
                               Demand Shocks

    .30
    .20
    .10
    .00
   - 10
    .20
   -JO
   - .10
   - .50
           71   76   78   80       82      81   86   88   90   92
                               Supply Shocks
                                  CHART 12


SOURCES OF $/CAN REAL EXCHANGE RATE FLUCTUATIONS
  .10
  .05
  .00
 - .05

 -.10
 -.15
 - .20
 -25
          /1    7G    78    80      82       81    86   88    90    92
                             Mooeton,j Shocks

  .10
  .05
  .00

 -.05
 -.10
 -.15
 - .20
   .25
          71    76    79    80       02      81    86   88    90    92
                                 Demand Shocks

   .10
   .05
   .00
  - .05
  -.10
  -.15
  -20
  - .25
           71    76    79   90        82      94   96    98    90   92
                                  Supply Shocks
                                              CHART 13A


          US—GERMAN RESPONSES TO MONETARY SHOCK
 .0050
 .000
 .0030
 .0020
 .0010
 .0000
- .0010
             I           3       5        7      9        11   13   15   17   19
                                     US-Qennan Ouput Ratio

.050

.010

.030

.020

.010

.000
                     3       5        7         9     11       13   15   17   19
                                     $/DH Real Exchange RaIe
 .0035
 .0030
 .0025
  0070
 .0015
 .0010
 .0005
 .0000
-.0005
                 I       3       5     7      9      11     13      15   17   19
                                 US-German Inflation DifferntioI
                                 ChART 13B


        US-GERMAN RESPONSES TO MONETARY SHOCK
.055



.011)


.0-10




.020

.01                    I



                             7     9
                                         lmTVI lb
                                          11     13         17   19
              :3
                           &/DM Spol Exchange Rate


.050



.0-10



.030



.020



.010



 .000
               3   5         7      9        II   13   IS   17   19
                           $/DM Real Exchange Rate
                                         CHART 14A


           US-JAPAN RESPONSES TO MONETARY SHOCK
 .0080
 .0070
 .0060
 .0050
 .0010
 .0030
 .0020
 .0010
 .0000
- .0010
              1       3       5        7     ¶3    11    13        15   17   19
                                     US-Japan 0upu Ratio
 .040
 .035
 .030
 .025
 .020
  015
 .010
 .005
 .000
- 005
                      3       5       7      9     11     13       15   17   19
                                   $/YEN Real Exchange Rate

 .0036
 .0030
 .0074
 .OOIR
 .0012
 .0006
 .0000
 - .0006

 - .0012
                  1       3    5        7      9     11      13    15   17   19
                                  US-Japan InfIaion Differential
                                             CHART 14B


           US-JAPAN RESPONSES TO MONETARY SHOCK
.015

.010 -l

.035

.030 -

.025
       1
.020

.015

.010
            1
                I if
                3       5
                                 I
                                     7
                                         I     I
                                                   9
                                                       I
                                                      13   11
                                                                T1
                                                                     15    17    19
                                $/YEN Spot Exchange Rate


  .010 1
  .0:35

  .030 H



   .020

   .015 -

   .010

   .005-

   .000

  - .005
                    3       5       7      9      11     13           15    17    IS
                                 $/Yen Real Exchcxige Rote
