                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WHAT DETERMINES EXPECTED
                         INTERNATIONAL ASSET RETURNS?




                                   Campbell R. Harvey
                                     Bruno Solnik
                                      Guofu Thou




                                 Working Paper No. 4660




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1994



Part of this paper was written while the first author was visiting the Graduate School of
Business at the University of Chicago. We are grateful for comments received from seminar
participants at Cornell and Rochester as well as the comments of Wayne Ferson. Harvey's
research is supported by the Batterymarch Fellowship. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4660
                                                                              February 1994


                             WHAT DETERMINES EXPECTED
                           INTERNATIONAL ASSET RETURNS?


                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper characterizes the forces that determine time-variation in expected international
asset returns. We offer a number of innovations. By using the latent factor technique, we do
not have to prespecily the sources of risk. We solve for the Latent premiums and characterize
their time-variation. We find evidence that the first factor premium resembles the expected
return on the world market portIolio. However, the inclusion of this premium alone is not
sufficient to explain the conditional variation in the returns. We find evidence of a second factor
premium which is related to foreign exchange risk. Our sample includes new data on both
international industry portfolios and international fixed income portfolios. We find that the two
latent factor model performs better in explaining the conditional variation in asset returns than
a prespecified two factor model. Finally, we show that differences in the risk loadings are
important in accounting for the cross-sectional variation in the international returns.




Campbell R. Harvey                                          Bruno Solnik
The Fuqua School of Business                                HEC School of Management
Duke University                                             78351 Jouy-en-Josas Cedex
Durham, NC 27706                                            FRANCE
and NEER


Guofu Thou
Department of Economics
Washington University
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
1. Introduction
     International asset pricing models of Solnik (1974, 1983), Stulz (1981) and
Adler and Dumas (1983) provide a framework to determine why expected asset
returns differ across countries. Differential expected returns, in these models, are
linked to differences in exposures to global risk factors.
       Given the null hypothesis of world market integration, asset pricing theories
typically start with a representative world investor maximizing expected utility.
First-order conditions imply an Euler equation which says that the conditionally
expected product of the total asset return times the marginal rate of substitution
is equal to a constant. Linearization of the Euler equation shows that expected
returns are linearly related to risk. However, there are many possible choices in
the specification of the risk factors.
     In Stulz (1981), expected returns are linear in a measure of world consump-
tion risk. However, even in countries with the most sophisticated data collection
procedures, consumption data suffers from a number of disadvantages.1 As a
result, it is problematic to estimate consumption risk of asset returns.
    Solnik (1974) develops an international version of the Sharpe (1964) and
Lintner (1965) capital asset pricing model where national investors differ in their
consumption baskets and care about returns measured in their domestic currency.
Adler and Dumas (1983) extend this model by allowing for stochastic national in-
flation. This approach does not suffer from the disadvantages that follow the use
of consumption data, but requires stronger assumptions on consumption tastes. In
these models, the common risk factor is the return on a value-weighted world eq-
uity market portfolio, hedged against currency risk. Unfortunately, the amount of
currency hedging that enters this common factor depends on the individuals' util-

   1     a description of the problems with U.S. consumption data, see Har-
       For
vey (1988), Breeden, Gibbons and Litzenberger (1989) and Ferson and Harvey
(1992). International consumption data is used in Braun, Constantinides and
Ferson (1994). Wheatley (1988) uses the consumption framework to test the in-
tegration international capital markets.
                                -
                                           1
    ity function and relative wealth, and is not directly observable. Given the absence
    of observable market weights for the currencies entering the common risk factor,
    this model is empirically equivalent to a multi-risk factor model with a world eq-
    uity market portfolio factor and currency risk factors. Under very restrictive (and
    unrealistic) assumptions about exchange rate uncertainty, this model reduces to a
    single observable risk factor model. For example, if purchasing power parity holds
    exactly at every instant, Grauer, Litzenberger and Stehle (1976) have shown that
    the world equity market portfolio would be the sole international risk factor.
•

       A third route involves the specification of multivariate linear proxy for
    marginal utility. This representation, follows the work of Merton (1973), Ross
(1976) and Solnik (1983), and suggests that expected returns are determined by
exposures to many sources of risk. One difficulty with this approach is the iden-
tification of the set of factors.
     While the asset pricing theories link average returns to average risk, they can
also be used to study the time-variation in expected returns. Harvey (1991a), Sol-
nik (1993), Campbell and Hamac (1992), Ferson and Harvey (1993) and Bansal,
Hsieh and Viswanathan (1993) document that returns on many international eq-
uity portfolios are predictable. The asset pricing theories are required to explain
both the changing cross-sectional differences in performance through time andthe
time-series predictability of the country equities.
     Issues such as the integration of world capital markets and abnormal per-
formance of any individual country cannot be answered without reference to an
asset pricing theory. Indeed, there are a number of questions related to the as-
set pricing specification. How many factors are necessary to describe the time-
variation in expected returns? What are the sources of risk? Can we characterize
the time-variation in the reward per unit of sensitivity to the risk? Answers to
these questions may help identify the most useful paradigm for international asset
pricing. Identification of the forces that shape expected returns have immediate
implications for dynamic portfolio strategies.
    This paper uses the latent factors method developed by Hansen and Hodrick
(1983) and Gibbons and Ferson (1985) to characterize conditionally expected in-

                                            2
ternational asset returns.2 We apply this method to 18 country index returns as
well as new data on 18 international industry portfolio returns and 8 bond port-
folio returns. We offer important innovations. An advantage of the latent factor
technique is that the researcher is not required to take a stand on the composi-
tion of the set of fundamental factors. In contrast to previous applications, our
idea is to solve for the expected risk premiums from the latent factor estimation,
characterize their time-series variation and try to understand what predetermined
factors account for their movements.
     To recover the latent premiums and risk loadings, it is necessary to assume
that the risk loadings are constant. However, this assumption may not be un-
reasonable given that we study diversified portfolios of stocks rather than single
issues. Our results indicate that the first risk premium resembles the expected
return on a world market portfolio. However, this premium is not sufficient to
characterize the variation in expected returns. A second premium, which is more
complex to characterize, is also important. For our bond sample, this premium
is related to foreign exchange returns. Our results indicate that expected returns
are adequately characterized by two latent factors. Diagnostics and comparisons
reveal that the latent factor model has distinct advantages over a prespecifled two
factor model.
    Finally, we examine the ability of the model to account for the cross-section as
well as the time-series of expected asset returns. Using the two latent factor model
and the 44 international portfolios, differences in risk loadings across portfolios has
some ability to explain the cross-sectional variation in expected returns. These
results suggest that the asset pricing framework provides a useful paradigm to
explain differences in expected returns.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section two provides the econometric
methodology that we use to extract the expected factor premiums from the asset

  2 This technique has been applied to U.S. and Japanese returns by Campbell
and Hamao (1992), to 17 country returns by Harvey (1991a), G-7 equity and
foreign exchange returns by Bekaert and Hodrick (1992) and daily G-7 returns by
Chang, Pinnegar and Ravichandran (1991). Wheatley (1989) provides a critique
of this method with reference to asset pricing tests.

                                          3
returns. The data are described in the third section. The empirical results are
presented in the fourth section. Some concluding remarks are offered in the final
section.



2. Pricing models
2.1 Determinants of expected returns

Consider a general K-factor asset pricing model of the form:


          E(RjtIZt_j) = .Ao(Z_1) + thiAi(Zt_i) + + fliKAK(Zt_l),               (1)

                               i = l,...,N, t =
where
         = the return on asset i between period t — 1 and t,
                = the expected risk premium on the j-th latent factor,
           = the market-wide information available at t, an L x 1 vector,
          • . ,    = the constant conditional betas of asset i,
    N+1 =the number of assets (N>.K), and
    T = the number of periods.
Notice that the above K-factor model allows the conditional risk premiums,
.X(Z_1)s, to vary over time as Z_1 varies. The conditional betas, however,
are assumed to be constant.
    In terms of excess returns, the pricing relation (1) can be written:

                             = b1A1(Z_1) + .. . + bKAK(Zt_l),                  (2)

                               i = 1,...,JV, t =
where     = Rfl   —
                   Ro is the return on the i-th asset in excess of the return on
the O-th asset (the O-th asset is arbitrarily ordered), and   = f3 — flo is the
'excess' conditional beta. To simplify the presentation, we write (2) in matrix
form. Define r as a 2' x N matrix of N excess returns over T periods, Z is a T x L

                                        4
matrix of instrumental variables, A(Z) is a T x K matrix of risk premiums on the
K factors and B is a K x N matrix of excess conditional betas. The matrix form
of the K-factor pricing theory (2) is:

                                   E(rIZ) = A(Z)B.                              (3)

To estimate the parameters, we assume the number of information variables is
greater than the number of factors, i.e., L> K. Furthermore, we suppose through-
out that .X(Z) and B have full column rank K. Otherwise, (3) will be reduced to
a pricing model with the number of factors being less than K.
    As in most studies, we assume that the expected returns are governed by the
multivariate regression model:

         = OiZ_i,i + . . + OLZt_1,L +           I = 1,..., N,   t = 1,... ,T,   (4)

where en's are the disturbances which have zero means conditional on the instru-
ments. Given the model (4), the pricing relationship (3) is valid if and only if the
multivariate regression coefficient matrix e has rank K. In this case, we have:

                                H0:      e=AB,                                  (5)

where A is a L x K matrix of risk premium multipliers. Therefore, a test of (5)
is a test of the factor pricing theory. As shown in section 2.2, both A and B can
be estimated from (4) under the restriction (5) and asset pricing tests can then
be constructed.
     Notice that the K factors (latent variables) are unknown as are the risk
premium multipliers. However, our goal is not just to report tests of the models
restrictions. We also estimate the risk premium multipliers, A, and the excess
conditional betas, B. Neither of the estimates is unique, since given estimates A
and B, any linear transformation of them, AC and C'B gives rise to the same
e  and so the same behavior of the excess asset returns1 where C is any K x K
invertible matrix. However, the estimates of both A and B are determined up
to a linear transformation. Furthermore, the estimation of e under the null is
unique and the rank of 8 is uniquely determined.

                                         5
     To characterize the forces that determine the time-variation in the expected
returns, we recover the risk premiums on the unknown factors, .A(Z). Following
Zhou (1993), consistent moment estimators of A can be analytically obtained,
and hence )(Z) can also be analytically estimated as follows. Given an estimate
of A, A, we obtain from (3) and (4) an estimate of the risk premiums:

                                   A(Z)=ZA.                                    (6)

Because A is consistent, so is A(Z). Hence, we are able to estimate .X(Z) and
characterize the variation in the risk premiums.



2.2. Estimation and tests

     We apply the generalized method of moments (GMM) procedure for the esti-
mation and latent factors tests. The idea of this method is to use sample moment
conditions to replace those of the model. Intuitively, given these moment condi-
tions, the sample moments should be close to zero at the true parameters. As the
GMM estimator is the solution that minimizes the weighted sample moments, it
should be close to the true parameters, Indeed, as shown by Hansen (1982), the
0MM estimator is consistent, i.e., converges to the true parameters with proba-
bility one as sample size gets large. In our case, the model implies the following
moment conditions:
                         E(h)=O,        htut®Zg_i,                            (7)
where ut is the N x 1 vector of model residuals from (3), Zg_1 is the L x 1 vector
of the instruments, 0 is the Kronecker product and h an NL x 1 vector function
of the residuals and instruments. Let g be the sample mean of ht:

                                             NLx1.                            (8)

Hansen's (1982) 0MM estimator is the solution of:

                               minQ gWTgr,                                    (9)
                                        6
where WT is a positive definite NL. x NL weighting matrix.
     However, under the null that the rank of 8 is K, the unknown model parame-
ters enter the quadratic form in a nonlinear way. it is not obvious, in general, how
to analytically solve the 0MM optimization problem (9). Moreover, the numerical
optimization of (9) is a nontrivial task. Fortunately, based on Zhou (1993), we
can solve the estimator analytically for a class of patterned weighting matrices:

               W,W1®W2, W1:NxN, W2:LxL.
The 0MM estimator of 8 is explicitly given by:

                     o=Aa A:LxK, :KxN,                                         (10)

where
               A = (Z'PZ T2)"2E,             P ZW2Z', P : Tx T,
               fl   = (Z'PZ'Z'PR,             Z    zA,   r   : T x K,

and E is the L x K matrix stacked by the 'standardized' eigenvectors1K)
                                                                    (E'E =
corresponding to the K largest eigenvalues of the L x L matrix:

           (Z'PZ T2)"2(Z'PR T2)VV1(Z'PR T2)'(Z'PZ T2)'12.                      (11)

Furthermore, the minimum of Q is given by:

                         = trWi(R'PR T2) —         — — 7K,                     (12)

where m• . ,7K are the K largest eigenvalues of the Lx L matrix given in (11).
    In practice, a consistent estimate of 8 is first analytically obtained as above
by choosing the weighting matrix as the identity matrix. Then, a new weighting
matrix can be computed:


                WT [(fucu) ® @tzt__i)IT'.                                      (13)

and a new 0MM estimator is obtained. Although both of the estimators are
consistent, the latter is expected to be superior because the new weighting matrix
will better capture the underlying model residual distribution.

                                         7
      In latent variables models, as shown in Hansen (1982), a consistent estimator
 of the covariance matrix of the model residuals is given by:


                          Sr = LOitu ®                                        (14)

Recall our discussion in section 2.1 that the parameter estimates of A and B are
unique up to an non-singular linear transformation. To obtain unique estimates,
we follow the usual normalization by assuming the first K x K matrix of B be the
identity matrix, B = (1K, B2). This is equivalent to choosing the first K assets
as the reference assets [see Gibbon and Ferson (1985)J. After this normalization,
thereareq=KL+K(N—K)=K(N—K+L)freeparameters.
     Let D be an NE x q matrix of the first order derivatives of gj' with respect
to the free parameters. Based on (13) and (14), we can construct a GMM test:

                          Hz a T(MTgT)'VT(MTgT),                              (15)

where V is a diagonal matrix, V' = Diag(1/vi,...,1/v,o,... ,O), formed by
v1 > ... > v. > 0, the positive eigenvalues of the following NE x NL semi-definite
matrix:

      a [I — DT(D'TWTDT)'D'TWT] 5r [I —
                                                                              (16)
where MT is an NE x NL matrix, of which the i-th row is the standardized eigen-
vector corresponding to the i-th largest eigenvalue of fl for i = 1,. . . , NE. As
shown in Zhou (1993), Hz is asymptotically x2 distributed with degrees of free-
dom (L — K)(N — K). This is the test of the model's overidentifying restrictions.
The major advantage of using H1 instead of the conventional GMM test is that
Hz is analytically available. In addition, the Hz test delivers the same inference
as the conventional 0MM test, i.e., generating the same p-values.3



     This is numerically verified by Zhou. (1993) in a smaller scale problem where
the conventional 0MM test is easy to compute.

                                        8
2.3 Characterizing the variation in the premiums and diagno3tics
    With a set of prespecified variables, F, which are likely candidates for the
underlying factors in the economy, we can construct prespecified risk premiums by
linearly projecting them on the information variables, Z. We investigate whether
this set of variables is correlated with A(Z), which are risk premiums on the latent
factors. Since the estimation of A is only unique up to linear transformations, so
are the estimated risk premiums .X(Z). We also report the canonical correlation of
the estimated risk premiums and the collection of prespecified factor premiums.
    The estimation of both the model with constant conditional risk and the
model with time-varying risk implies a disturbance or a pricing error matrix:

                                 u=r—A(Z)B.                                    (17)

Disturbances will be affected by the number of factors that we allow in the esti-
mation. The model implies that the conditional mean of the disturbance is zero.
    One way to sllrnmarize the ability of the model to characterize the time
variation in the expected returns is to study variance ratios. Let EM [rJ denote
the model expected returns in (17). Following Ferson and Harvey (1991), we can
compare the unconditional variance of these fitted returns to the unconditional
variance of the fitted returns from the statistical projection model in (4) (denote
as Ez(rJ):
                               VR1 = Var{EM[r]}                                 (18)
                                         Var{EzIrj}
If this ratio is close to one, then the expected returns from the model are closely
mimicking the expected returns from the statistical model. As a result, the model
'explains' the time-variation in the expected returns.
     We can also examine the variance of the part of the return that the model fails
to explain. Let EM (ii] denote the fitted values of projecting the model residuals
in (17) on the instrumental variables. If the variance of these fitted values is
large, then the model is doing a poor job of setting the conditional mean of the
disturbances equal to zero. A second vaxiance ratio measures the ratio of the
variance of these fitted values to the variance of the expected returns from the

                                         9
statistical projection in (4):

                                    - Var{Ez[r]}                                 19

If this ratio is close to zero, then the model pricing errors are not contributing to
the predictable variation in the asset returns. These variance ratios are useful in
determining not just how many premiums we need but the relative contribution
of each additional premium.4
     We also consider an additional diagnostic. The model implies that both the
conditional and unconditional means of the disturbance matrix are zero. The tin-
conditional mean is the average pricing error (APE). A large average pricing error
indicates that the average return is much larger than the expected return implied
by the model. Harvey's (1991a) implementation of the conditional CAPM resulted
in large pricing errors for some international equity portfolios. We examine how
these pricing errors are affected by increasing the number of risk factors.
      Finally, we develop an analytical Wald test to examine whether or not there
is structural change in the latent variables model. Suppose that the change occurs
after T1 periods. Let T2 be the rest of the periods, T1 + T2 = T. Intuitively, we
would like to compare the parameter estimates over the two subperiods. If there
are substantially differences between the parameter estimates, we can reject the
null that there is no structural change. Following Andrews and Fair (1988), a
Wald test can be formed as follows:

                WT = T(81 — 82)'(Vi/lrir + V2/7r2r)'(Ôl — 82),                 (20)

where Ôj and h2 are the analytical GMM estimators in the two subperiods, and
   = Ti/T and lr2T = T2/T. Let

             V = (D'TWTDTY'D'TWTSTWTDT(DIWTDT)',                               (21)
  ' Ferson and Harvey (1993) provide a way to estimate the standard errors of the
variance ratios. However, to get the standard errors, they are only able to consider
one asset at a time. Our formulation requires the simultaneous examination of
many assets. Furthermore, the variance ratios are only meant to be diagnostic
measures.

                                        10
then V1 and V2, the estimators of the asymptotic covariances of h1 and b2, are
V valued at the two subperiods, respectively. In the Wald test, structural change
is assessed by the stability of the parameters over two subperiods.
    An alternative test may be developed that is based on the stability of the
moments conditions over two subperiods. If there is no structural change, the
sample moments in the second period should be close to zero even valued at the
parameter estimator of the first period. This is the "predictive test" developed by
Ghysels and Hall (1990). One advantage of the predictive test over the Wald test
is that it uses only one estimator, making it useful in situations where it is difficult
to obtain (3MM estimators. However, in our case we have analytical solutions, so
it is trivial for us to obtain 9 and 02. The predictive test has a much complex
form when the weighting matrix is not the optimal one, so we will use only the
Wald test to test the structural change in the latent variables model.



3. Data
3.1 Sources

The equity data in this study are drawn from Morgan Stanley Capital Interna-
tional (MSCI). Monthly data on equity indices for 16 OECD countries,5 Hong
Kong and Singapore/Malaysia are available from December 1969 to September
1991. These indices are value weighted and are calculated with dividend reinvest-
rnent. The equity indices are calculated from approximately 1500 stock returns
which represents 83% of the total market value of the world's stock markets [see
Schmidt (1990)]. Morgan Stanley also calculates a value-weighted world equity
index which serves as the market portfolio. Returns are calculated in U.S. dollar
terms.


     The 16 OECD countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzer-
land, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Morgan Stanley also has data
on Finland, Mexico and New Zealand but only from December 1987. These coun-
tries are omitted.

                                           11
     The MSCI international indices are composed of stocks that broadly repre-
sent stock compositionin the different countries. For example, Haney (1991a)
reports a 99.1% correlation between the MSCI U.S. excess return and the New
York Stock Exchange value-weighted return calculated by the Center for Research
in Security Prices (CRSP) at the University of Chicago. There is a 95% corre-
lation between the MSCI Japanese excess return and the Nilckei 225 return. An
important difference between the MSCI indices and other national indices such as
CRSP is the exclusion of investment companies and foreign domiciled companies.
These stocks are excluded to avoid double counting.6
     We introduce global industry indices which are also from Morgan Stanley
Capital International.7 38 portfolios are available ranging from Aerospace and
Military Technology to Wholesale and International Trade. As with the country
portfolios, these indices are value weighted. In contrast to the country portfolios,
the industry returns do not include dividends. However, later in the analysis we
analyze an alternative set of industry portfolios that contain a dividend approxi-
mation based on an identical U.S. industry grouping.
    We form 18 international industry portfolios from these 38 industries. These
industry portfolios, which are documented in figure 1, resemble the SIC groupings
used in the industry portfolios in Breeden, Gibbons and Litzenberger (1989).
The industry portfolios are formed by equally weighting the MSCI subindices in
December 1969. This portfolio is held, without rebalancing, until the end of the
  6
    There are disadvantages associated with the MSCI indices. First, the div-
idends included in the monthly return are 12-month moving averages. Second,
there are no adjustments for cross-corporate ownership [see MacDonald (1989),
  '
Ftench and Poterba (1991) and Fedenia, Hodder and Triantis (1991)]
      Industrial structure and international stock returns is examined in Roll
(1992), Heston, Rouwenhorst, Wessels (1992) and Heston and Rouwenhorst
(1993).
  8
      However, Breeden, Gibbons and Litzenberger (1989) use only 12 portfolios.
We form 18 portfolios by breaking up the Basic Industries category into separate
portfolios for Aerospace and Military Technology Chemicals, Forest Products,
and Metals and Mining. We separate the Finance/REal Estate into two portfolios.
Similarly, we separate Business Service industries from Personal Service industries.
Finally, we add the Communications industry. In addition, we did not use the
MSCI Multi-industry portfolio.

                                        12
sample. Returns are calculated as the capital gain portion of this portfolio return.
This produces a value-weighted return on an initially (December 1969) equally
weighted investment.9
    Our sample also includes bond returns from eight different countries: Canada,
France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United
States. All of the bond indices, except for the U.S. index, are from Lombard Other
& Cie (1992) and are reported on a daily basis in the Wall Street Journal Europe.
These bond indices are based on a small sample of plain-vanilla, actively traded,
long-term government bonds in each country [see Solnik (1993)J. The U.S. bond
index is from Ibbotson Associates. All eight bonds are available from January
1971 through September 1991.
    Since our study focusses on expected returns, it is important to correctly
specify the information environment. The set of predetermined instrumental vari-
ables follows Harvey (1991a) and includes: the world market return calculated in
U.S. dollars (from Morgan Stanley Capital International), a dummy variable for
the month of January, an exchange rate return index, the Standard and Poor's
500 dividend yield (from Standard and Poor's), the yield on a one-month Eurodol-
lar deposit, the yield spread between Moody's Baa and Aaa rated bonds (from
Moody's) and the excess return on a three month bill (from CRSP). The exchange
rate return is based on the trade-weighted 10 countries' foreign exchange returns
for the U.S. dollar investor. The exchange rate return.is determined by the change
in the exchange rate plus a local 30-day Eurocurrency deposit. The variable is
measured in excess of the 30-day Eurodollar rate. All of the instrumental variables
are available through September 1991.
     We use instrumental variables that are common to all assets for a number of
reasons. We are interested in characterizing the common components of expected
returns across all assets. In our framework, this variation is being driven solely by
global risk premiums. In addition, the evidence that local information variables
influence expected returns is weak. Harvey (1991a) finds that 2 of 17 countries
    The value weights in December 1969 where not available to us. This .is the
reason that we initially equal weighted the portfolio. However, this is not very
important since we can arbitrarily select portfolios for asset pricing tests.

                                         13
are influenced by local infonnation. Ferson and Harvey (1993) find that 7 of the
18 countries are influenced by local information. However, the median increase in
explanatory power for these countries is only 3.1 percent. As a result, we focus
on a common set of instrumental variables.


3.2 Summary statistics

Table 1 reports the means, standard deviations and autocorrelations of the asset
returns, and the instrumental variables. Returns are presented in U.S. dollar
terms. The sample contains 247 monthly observations extending from March
1971 through September 1991.
     The first panel of table 1 examines the country equity returns. The average
country equity returns range from 10.4% per annum in Italy to 26.6% per annum
for Hong Kong. However, the highest standard deviation is found for Hong Kong,
43.5% per annum. Significant first-order autocorrelation is detected for five coun-
try returns: Austria, Denmark, Italy, Norway, and Singapore/Malaysia. These
are fairly small portfolios compared to the capitalization of the world index'0 and
may reflect infrequent trading of the stocks in these portfolios.
     The next panel examines the global industry returns. These returns (as
provided by MSCI) only contain the capital appreciation part of the equity return.
The average annualized returns range from 7.3% for the Utilities industry to 13.5%
for the Aerospace and Military Technology grouping. There is a wide range of
volatility from 15.1% for Utilities to 26.7% for Metals and Mining. On a relative
basis, there is less autocorrelation in these index returns than the country indices.
Only 3 of 18 industries exhibit first-order autocorrelation coefficients that are
greater than two standard errors from zero. This could reflect the fact that these
portfolios are diversified over many markets.
     The next panel presents the eight bond returns in U.S. dollar terms. The

 '
annualized returns range from 8.8% (Canada) to 14.1% (Japan). However, these

     The largest equity portfolio of this group, Italy, represents 1.4% of the MSCI
world index as of the first quarter of 1989.

                                        14
returns are greatly affected by the foreign exchange rate conversion. The volatility
extends from 11.2% (Canada) to 17.6% (United Kingdom). No significant first-
order autocorrelations are detected for the bond returns.
     A number of the instrumental variables show a high degree of persistence.
High autocorrelation is expected for the dividend yield variable because it is con-
structed as a 12-term moving summation. The one-month Eurodollar rate and
the Baa-Aaa yield spread also exhibit very high autocorrelation. The mean world
market return over the sample is 12.8% with a standard deviation of 14.9%. In-
terestingly, the average return exceeds the average U.S. equity return and the
standard deviation is less than the U.S. return indicating that the U.S. equity
portfolio is unconditionally dominated by the world portfolio over our sample.
     Table 2 presents the results of linearly projecting the asset returns on the
instrumental variables. The first panel considers the country index portfolios.
The amount of variance explained for returns ranges from 2.1% for Italy to 12.2%
for the United States. These results are consistcnt with those reported in Har-
vey (1991a). The heteroskedasticity-consistent multivariate test of predictability
provides convincing evidence against the null hypothesis of no predictability."
     The amount of predictable variation in the industry portfolios is similar to the
country index returns. Although, these industry portfolios are diversified across
many different countries, each industry portfolio has a large U.S. component.
Given that the instrumental variables are U.S. based, we expect to be able to
predict these industry returns. Indeed, the statistical projection explains more
than s% of the variance in more than half of the industry portfolios. The highest
R2 is found for the Aerospace and Military Technology industry (14.2%) and the
lowest is found for Textiles and ¶ftade (5.6%). The multivariate test suggests that
the null hypothesis of constant expected returns can be rejected at the 0.01% level.
     The next panel examines the predictability of the fixed income returns. The
statistical projection is able to account for on average 5% of the variance of the
S countries' bond returns. The highest R2 is found for the U.S. bond (7.9%) and

 "  This test is based on the Pillai trace statistic. For a description, see Kirby
(1993).

                                         15
the lowest for the U.K. bond (3.1%). Although the predictability of the bond
returns is less than the equity returns, the multivariate test shows that the null
hypothesis of no predictable variation is rejected at the 3.4% level.
     Figure 2 plots the fitted values from the three groups of the regressions.
Overlaid on each plot are the fitted values from regressing the world market return
on the same instrumental variables. It is clear from the figure that the expected
asset returns, to some degree, move together. This is the case for both the equity
and fixed income portfolios. One also learns from the figures that the variation
in the expected returns is related to the variation in the expected world market
return. Both of these findings are important. The common movement in the
expected return suggests that a global asset pricing model has some chance at
identifying the determinants of the expected international returns. The coherence
with the expected world market return suggests that the first factor premium
may resemble the expected world market return — a premium implied by a world
version of the capital asset pricing model.



4. Results
4.1 The number of factors

Table 3 considers the number of factors necessary to characterize the predictable
variation in the equity returns using the latent factor model with constant con-
ditional risk loadings. The returns are measured in excess of the 30-day U.S.
Treasury bill rate. Estimation is separately carried out for the two equity group-
ings, country index returns and international industry returns.
     For the country index returns, the results suggest a marginal rejection for the
one to three factor models. The one factor results are consistent with the results of
Harvey (1991a) who is unable to reject a conditional version of the Sharpe-Lintner
model for 17 international equity portfolios.
    For the industry returns, there is little evidence against the models' restric-
tions. This contrast with the country grouping could be due to the industry data

                                         16
oniy including the capital appreciation. As a result, we provide an alternative
formulation of the industry portfolios which include a dividend approximation.
The approximation is based on the dividend yields on U.S. stocks which fall into
the same industry groupings detailed in figure 1.
     The final part of table 3 examines the 8 fixed income portfolios. The test
of the overidentifying conditions indicates that a one factor model is not rejected
at conventional levels. However, the p-value jumps from 10.7% for the one factor
model to 48.5% for the two factor model suggesting that more than one factor
could be important.



4.2 Additional model diagnostics

While the statistical tests of the overidentifying restrictions were unable to
biguously distinguish between the one and two factor models, a different picture
emerges from the analysis of the pricing errors and variance ratios.
     The first panel of table 4 presents average pricing errors and variance ratios
for the country equity portfolios. Similar to the results in Harvey (1991a), the
pricing errors of the one factor model are very large for some countries, particularly
Hong Kong and Japan. The average pricing error, 0.431% per month, is about
one third of the size of the average return. The average pricing error is reduced
to only 0.181% with the two factor model.
     A similar message is found in the variance ratios. With the one factor model,
VR1 (explained by model) is 0.484 and VR2 (unexplained by model) is 0.589.
This means that with the one factor model, the variance of the expected pricing
errors is more than half of the predictable variance. However, with the two factor
model, VR1 rises to 0.765 and VR2 falls to 0.303. With the three factor model,
the VR1 and VR3 ratios are 0.845 and 0.226 respectively. This suggests that more
than one factor is necessary to capture the country expected returns.
    The second panel of table 4 carries out the same analysis for the 18 inter-
national industry portfolios (without dividends). flrom table 3, we were lead to

                                         17
believe that both the one and two factor models appear to fit these data better
than they do for the country index returns — in that the p-values were higher. This
appears to be confirmed by low relative pricing errors. The average error with
the one factor model is 0.329% per month which compares to an average return
of 0.885% per month. With the two factor model, the average error is reduced
to 0.216% per month. However, the pricing error analysis is complicated by the
lack of dividends in the data. One would expect lower or negative pricing error in
returns which do not include dividends.
     The variance ratio analysis indicates that the one factor model is describes
60% the time-variation in the expected returns. With the two factor model, the
VR1 increases to 0.826. Not much is gained by going to the three factor model.
The amount of variance explained increases by only 4%. The analysis on the
industry returns with the dividend approximation reveals similar results. The one
factor model explains 58% of the variation. When a second factor is introduced,
the model explains 82% of the variation.
     The final panel in table 4 examines how the model explains the variation in
the international bond portfolios. The average pricing errors are small compared
to the analysis of equities. The average bond returns from table 1 is .9% per
month. The average pricing error reported in table 4 is 0.018% per month. The
largest error is found for the Japanese bond. When a second factor is introduced,
the pricing error is slightly reduced. The three factor model eliminates the average
pricing error.
    Similar to the equities, the first factor explains about 65% of the expected
bond returns. When a second factor is introduced the proportion jumps to 83%.
With three factors, 95% of the predictable variation is explained.
     The pricing error and variance ratio analysis indicates that more than one
factor is necessary to characterize the time-varying expected returns for all of the
portfolios. This contrasts with the results reported in table 3 which suggested
that one factor appeared to be enough (statistically) and provides motivation to
explore other diagnostic measures.
    The results of the stability tests reveal evidence against all of the specifications

                                          18
[not reported]. A popular assumption in most conditional asset pricing tests is that
the factor premiums are linear in the instrumental variables and the coefficients
are fixed through time.'2 Our tests suggest that the assumption of constant
coefficients is rejected.
     In our applications, we split the sample at the mid-point and let T1 = 123,
    = 124 and T = 247. Coefficient stability is rejected for the one factor model
for all the portfolios except the bond portfolio. For the two factor model, stability
is rejected for the industry portfolios. The two factor bond model is marginally
rejected. There is no evidence against stability for the country portfolios for the
two factor model.


4.3 Characterizing the factor premiums

Given the assumptions of the econometric model, conditionally expected returns
from the model are being driven by conditional variation in the risk premiums.
There are two interesting questions that need to be addressed. First, do the model
expected returns resemble the expected returns that result from the statistical
projection of the asset returns on the instrumental variables. The variance ratios
in table 4, indicate that the model fitted returns are indeed similar to the statistical
fitted returns. Second, what are the model premiums? Do they have any economic
interpretation?
     The advantage of the technique of latent variables is that the researcher is not
forced to take a stand on the specification of the proper set of factors. The model
is estimated and the minimum number of premiums is extracted to characterize
the time variation in the expected returns. We now investigate the economic
interpretation of the latent premiums from our estimation.
     Most asset pricing theories suggest that there is a role for a 'world' market
portfolio as a factor. This is the international extension of the Sharpe (1964) and
Lintner (1965) capital asset pricing model. The conditional version of this model
suggests that the market premium is the conditionally expected excess return on

  12   For a recent example, see Dumas and Solnik (1993).

                                           19
a world market portfolio.
     There is some theoretical guidance in choosing a second factor. International
asset pricing models suggest that deviations from purchasing power parity could
induce a premium associated with foreign exchange risk. For example in the
model of Adler and Dumas (1983) and Dumas and Solnik (1993), covariances with
different foreign exchange investments are priced. We summarize the exchange risk
factor by the return on a trade weighted FX portfolio in 10 countries. In contrast
to the FX portfolio used in Ferson and Harvey (1993), our portfolio is a return in
that it include both the exchange rate change and the local Eurocurrency deposit
rate. The factor is measured in excess of the 30-day 'fleasury bill rate.
     Three other prespecified factors are identified. These factors are motivated
by Chen, Roll and Ross (1986). They include the change in the price of oil, the
change in OECD industrial production and the OECD inflation rate. In contrast
to the first• two factors, these factors are not excess returns.
    Table 5 presents the results of regressing these prespecifled factors on the
information set. The results indicate the that 13.6% of the variation in the excess
market return can be predicted with this set of instruments. The results in table
5 suggest that 8.5% of the change in the FX index is predictable. The projections
indicate that the three macroecononñc factors are, to some degree, predictable.
While only 3.3% of the variation in the oil price change can be accounted for
with the information set, over 27% of the variation in the OECD inflation rate is
predictable. Industrial production has an R2 of 1.41%.
    In the lower panels of table 5, the coefficients associated with the instrumental
variables representation of the latent premiums, A from (6), are reported for the
two factor specification. The patterns and magnitudes of the coefficients on the
factor 1 premium for the international equity returns resemble the coefficients on
the prespecifled world excess returns regression. Specifically, the coefficients in
the OLS regression on the four most significant variables Dlv, E$30, I3aa-Aaa
and 3-1BILL are 9.8, -5.6, 15.2 and 5.2 and from the latent factor estimation are
15.8, -8.0, 19.9 and 5.6. Similar patterns are found for the international industry
returns and the bond portfolio returns. It is more difficult to characterize the

                                        20
second premium by examining the coefficients.
      Table 6 shows the correlation between the expected values of these prespec-
ifled premiums and the latent premiums. In the two factor estimation, the first
factor premium has 95% correlation with the world market expected return when
the country indices are examined and about 90% correlation when the interna-
tional industries are used in the estimation. For the fixed income portfolios, the
first factor has 83% correlation with the expected excess market return.
     Although the factor premiums are not constrained to be identical across the
asset groups, the correlation of the premiums is very high. The premium from
the country estimation has 95% correlation with the premiums from the industry
estimation. The country risk premium has 80% correlation with the first premium
from the bond return estimation.
     Figure 3 provides plots of the conditionally expected excess world market
return and the first factor premium for the country index returns, the international
industry returns (without dividends) and the bond samples. The graphs provide
three interesting insights.
     First, the expected factor premiums from all the asset sets are similar. This
suggests that the same forces are determining expected returns in both the equity
and bond markets. Second, the closeness of the factor premiums from the latent
variable model and the conditionally expected excess return on the world market
portfolio is striking. Third, there is a distinct business cycle pattern in the ex-
pected values. While Fama and French (1989) and Ferson and Harvey (1991) have
noted the business cycle patterns in U.S. expected returns, no one has documented
any relation for international returns.
     In figure 3, the NBER U.S. business cycle peaks and troughs are overlaid.
Harvey (1991b) shows that there is an 88% correlation between the (3-7 business
cycle and the U.S. business cycle over the 1969—1989 period. Interestingly, the
highest premiums occur around business cycle troughs and the lowest premiums
are found around business cycle peaks. This is found for all the business cycles
in the sample. The intuition follows from investors demanding a high premium
at the trough of the business cycle to give up consumption in order to invest in

                                        21
 equities. While these results are consistent with work on U.S. expected returns,
 the most recent business cycle provides some out-of-sample validation of these
 patterns.
    Consistent with the analysis of the coefficients in table 5, the second factor
premium is more difficult to characterize. For the bond sample, the second factor
premium has a strong foreign exchange component (correlation 81%). However,
the foreign exchange component is less important for the equity returns. For the
country and industry returns, the second factor premium is related to the oil pre-
mium and the inflation premium. In the bond returns sample, the second premium
is related to. the inflation premium as well as the foreign exchange premium.
      The fitted values of the second factor premium and the expected foreign
exchange premium are presented in figure 4. Consistent with the correlation anal-
ysis, there is little relation between the second latent factor and the prespecifled
foreign exchange premium for the equity portfolio. However, the latent premium
closely tracks the variation in the foreign exchange return for the bond returns.13


4.4 A comparison to a prespecifled two factor model

We compare the performance of the two latent factor model to a conditional asset
pricing model with two prespecified factors. Given the analysis in tables 5 and 6,
we choose the excess world market return and the change in the U.S. dollar FX
index as the prespecifled factors.
      Following Ferson (1990) and Harvey (1992), the following model is estimated:

                   (uj e) = (f—Z6j r—Z6j(u%ui)'u.r),                            (22)

where     is a T x 2 matrix of the prespecified factors, is1 is the factor innovation
matrix, r are the asset excess returns, and e are the pricing errors. The model
implies that E[( ft eg ) Zg_jj = 0. This model assumes that the factor pre-
miums are linear in the information variables. In addition, (u'f u,)'u?r is the
 13
      The foreign exchange rate influence on the bond market premium is consistent
with the resuits presented in During and Solnik (1993).

                                         22
conditional beta which is assumed to be constant. This system is estimated with
Hansen's (1982) GMM. With 2 factors, 8 instruments and N assets, there will be
8 x N overidentifying restrictions.
      Table 7 presents the tests of the prespecified model as well as model diagnos-
tics. For the country index portfolios, the model is not rejected at conventional
levels (p-value is 0.120). However, this model does not appear to perform as well
as the two factor latent variables model. Comparing the model diagnostics re-
ported in tables 4 and 7, the average pricing error for the prespecified model is
.240% per month for all the country returns compared to .181% for the latent
factor model.
    The prespecified model fails to explain many important portfolio expected
returns such as Hong Kong which has an average error of 1.012% per month.
More importantly, the VR2 ratio, which tells us the proportion of unexplained
variance to the predictable variance, for the prespecified model is 52.6% for the
country returns which is higher than the 30.3% reported in table 4.
    A similar story emerges for the international industry portfolios (without div-
idends). The average pricing error for the prespecified model is -0.576% compared
with 0.216% for the latent factor model.
    The average pricing error across the 18 portfolios using the prespecifled model
is .123% compared to the .047% reported in table 4 for the latent factor model.
The average pricing error for the Chemicals industry is -0.771% per month which is
much different than the .080% per month with the latent factors model. Consistent
with the country equity returns, the industry variance ratios are worse for the
industry portfolios. The VR2 ratio is 36.7% compared to the 18.6% reported in
table 4. However, the model's restrictions are not rejected at conventional levels
with the prespecified factor model.
     In the bond sample, the pricing errors are much higher with the prespecified
factor model, 0.345% compared to 0.012% with the latent model. In addition,
the variance ratio analysis indicates that little of the variation is explained by
the two prespecified factors. In addition, there is evidence against the model's
restrictions when the bond portfolios are examined. The p-value of the test of the

                                        23
overidentifying restrictions is .032.




4.5 The relative importance of the factor premiums

Another method of diagnosing the importance of the factor premiums is to mea-
sure the relative contribution of each premium to the conditionally expected re-
turns. With the two factor model, the expected returns on asset i are determined
by
                                   = bjAj + b2A2.

The proportions of predictable variance accounted for by. the sources of risk are:

                  Prop1 = bVar(Ait)          Prop2 = b2Var(A2t)
                             Var(BA)                    Var(BAg)
where BA are the expected return generated by the asset pricing model, defined
previously as EM [ri]. The variance ratios will not necessarily sum to unity because
of a nonzero covariance between A and A2.
     Variance decompositions are presented for both the latent factor and prespec-
ified factor models in table 8. The risk loadings are also reported in this table.
For the equity returns, the first source of risk is most important. The first risk
premium accounts for 69% of the model expected returns for the country index
returns. There is very high correlation between the factor premiums with the in-
dustry portfolios. This is evident from the similarity of the A coefficients reported
in table 5. As a result, only the one factor model is presented for the industry
portfolios. In contrast to the equity portfolio, the first factor accounts for only
29% of the variation for the fixed income portfolios.
    The second factor premium, while less overwhelming for the equities, plays
an important role in the latent factor model. The second premium accounts for
28% of the variation in the model expected returns for the country indices and
70% of the variation of the bond portfolios.

     The variance decomposition for the prespecified factor model exhibits some

                                        24
similarities to the latent factor model.'4 For example, with the country returns
the first factor premium accounts for 80% of the expected return variation. The
second factor accounts for 17%. For the industry portfolios, the first premium
accounts for 97% of the variation and the second premium only 3.3%. Finally, in
the analysis of the fixed income portfolios, more than one factor is needed. The
first factor premium explains only 28% of the variation while the second premium
accounts for 85% of the variation.
    Overall, the results suggest a role for a second factor when portfolios are
grouped by countries or with fixed income portfolios. This contrasts with results
presented in Ferson and Harvey (1991) who find that the market premium is
overwhelmingly important in explaining the conditionally expected returns using
U.S. data. Our results are supportive of the recent prespecified factor models
proposed by Dumas and Solnik (1993) and Ferson and Harvey (1993). Both of
these models include a role for exchange risk. Our results suggest that exchange
risk is related to the second latent factor. However, it is also clear that the second
factor is more complex.



4.6 The cross-sectional behavior of asset returns

Most of our analysis has concentrated on explaining the time-variation in the
expected returns for 44 different portfolios. Our results indicate that the two
latent factor model, with constant conditional risk, can account for about 75% of
the conditionally expected returns across these 44 portfolios. In this formulation,
the tine-variation is being driven by the latent premiums.
     Asset pricing theories were originally developed to explain the cross-sectional
behavior of expected returns. The model implies that assets with high risk should
have high expected returns. Recently, Fama and French (1992) show "an absence
of a relation between fi and average returns for 1963—1990" using various U.S.

 '   The variance ratios of the latent factor and prespecified models cannot be di-
rectly compared because EM (rI, the denominator, is different for the two models.

                                         25
equity portfolios and assuming that the a U.S. equity market portfolio is the sole
factor. These findings challenge the usefulness of the present asset pricing models.
     However, as emphasized in Roll (1977), Ross (1977) and Roll and Ross (1993),
the mean-variance inefficiency of the benchmark could lead to the finding of no
significant relation between expected returns and $. Indeed, the results presented
in table 1, suggest that the U.S. market portfolio is unconditionally dominated by
the world market portfolio.
    While our data and approach are not directly comparable with Fama and
French (1992), some insight can be gained by exanhining the latent factor model's
ability to explain the cross-sectional behavior of the average asset returns. Figure
5 plots the risk loadings from the latent two factor model against the average
excess returns over the 1971—1991 period. In contrast to the previous results, the
loadings are based on a latent factor estimation which simultaneously considers
all 44 assets. This estimation is only feasible using the analytical method with
patterned weighting matrices detailed in section 2.2. From this cross-sectional
scatter plot, it is evident that the some of highest expected returns are found with
the portfolios with the highest risk loadings.
     If a regression of average returns on the risk loadings is estimated, the R2 is
35% and the intercept is insignificantly different from zero. These results suggest
that the asset pricing model provides a useful paradigm to explain both the cross-
section and time-series behavior of expected asset returns.



5. Conclusions

     This paper explores the sources of predictability in international bond and
equity returns. While most research on international asset returns has relied upon
either principal components analysis of the a post asset returns or a prespecified
factor approach, we investigate the usefulness of a latent factors technique. The
advantage of this approach is that the factors need not be specified.
    Our goal is not simply to test rank restrictions which determine the number of


                                        26
factors necessary to characterize the expected returns. Our idea is to solve for the
factor premiums and explore their time-series patterns as well as the correlation
with a set of prespecified variables.
     We test our model on using 18 country index returns as well as new data on 18
international industry portfolio returns and 8 fixed income portfolios. Although
the statistical tests cannot reject a one-factor model, our diagnostics indicate that
at least one additional factor is necessary to characterize the expected returns for
the country index returns and the bond returns. With only two factor premiums,
77% of the predictable variation in 18 country index returns can be explained.
Using the 18 international industry portfolios or the 8 bond portfolios, the two
factor model accounts for 83% of the predictable variation.
    Our characterization of the factor premiums suggest that the first premium
has a strong resemblance to the expected excess returns on the world market
portfolio. Consistent with the findings in the U.S. data of Fama. and F1ench
(1989), we find that the world market risk premium is highest at business-cycle
troughs and lowest and business-cycle peaks. We find that the counter-cyclical
behavior of the first risk premium also obtains in the most recent business cycle
episode in 1990—1991.
     The second premium is more difficult to characterize. For the bond returns,
we find a high correlation between this premium and the conditionally expected
change in a world foreign exchange returns index. This supports the role of foreign
exchange risk proposed in Adler and Dumas (1983) and explored empirically in
Ferson and Harvey (1993) and Dumas and Solnik (1993). However, the second
latent factor appears to be characterized by more than a foreign exchange factor.
     We also compare the performance of the latent factor model to a prespecified
conditional factor model. The prespecified model assumes the existence of two
factors: the excess returns on the world equity portfolio and the foreign exchange
returns index. The model diagnostics suggest that the latent factor model has
distinct advantages over the prespecifled factor model in that the average pricing
errors are smaller and the ability of the model to account for the expected returns
is higher.

                                         27
    The relative importance of the risk premiums is also explored. Recent re-
search, such as Ferson and Harvey (1991), suggests that the market factor is
overwhelmingly important in explaining the time-series of expected asset returns.
We find that the first factor premium is, indeed, the most important accounting
for about 80% of the model's predictable variation. However, the second factor
premium, is important for the country returns and very important for the bond
returns.
     Finally, we test the ability of the model to account for the cross-sectional
behavior of expected returns. Recent work by Faina and &encli (1992) on U.S.
equity data concludes that there is no significant relation between risk and return.
Our results, which use international data and an international asset pricing frame-
work, suggest that the cross-section of average returns is significantly related to
the two risk loadings. The latent factor model appears to be a useful paradigm
to help understand both the time-series and cross-sectional characteristics of ex-
pected returns.




                                        28
References

Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio selection and corpo-
     ration finance: A synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925—984.
Andrews, Donald W. and Ray C. Fair, 1988, Inference in econometric models with
     structural change, Review of Economic Studies 55, 615-640.
Bansal, R.avi, David Hsieh and S. Viswanathan, 1993, A new approach to international
     arbitrage pricing theory, .Journal of Finance 48, 1719—1747.
Bekaert, Geert and Robert Hodrick, 1992, Characterizing predictable components in
     excess returns on equity and foreign exchange markets, Journal of Finance 47,
      467—509.
Braun, Philip, George Constantinides and Wayne E. Ferson, 1994, Time nonseparabil-
     ities and aggregate consumption: International evidence, International Economic
     Review forthcoming.
Breeden, Douglas T., Michael R. Gibbons and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1989, Empirical
     tests of the consumption-oriented CAPM, Journal of Finance 44, 231-262.
Campbell, John Y. and Yasushi Hamao, 1992, Predictable bond and stock returns in
     the United States and Japan: A study of long-term capital market integration,
    Journal of Finance 47, 43—70.
Chang, Eric C., J. Michael Pinegar and R. Ravichandran, 1991, Latent variables tests of
     the integration of European equity markets, Working paper, University of Mary-
     land.
Chen, Nai-fu, Richard Roll, and Stephen A. Ross, 1986, Economic forces and the stock
     market, Journal of Business 59, 383—403.
Dumas, Bernard and Bruno Solnik, 1993, The world price of exchange rate risk, Working
     paper, Group HEC.
Fazna, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected re-
     turns on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23—50.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock
     returns, Journal of Finance 47, 427—465.
Fedenia, Mark, James E. Hodder and Alexander J Triantis, 1991, Cross-holding and
     market return measures, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
Ferson, Wayne E., 1990, Are the latent variables in time-varying expected returns com-
     pensation for consumption risk, Journal of Finance 45, 397—430.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell It Uarvey, 1991, The variation of economic risk pre-
     miums, Journal of Political Economy 99, 285—315.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell It. Haney, 1992, Seasonality and consumption-based
     asset pricing, Journal of Finance 47, 511—552.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, The risk and predictability of inter-
     national equity returns, Review of Financial Studies 6, 527—566.
French, Kenneth R. and James Poterba, 1991, Were Japanese stock prices too high?
     Journal of Financial Economics 29, 337-364.

                                            29
Ghysels, Eric and Alastair Hall, 1990, A test for structural stabifity of Euler conditions
    parameters estimated via the generalized method of moments estimator, Iriterna-
      tional Economic Review 31, 355—364.
Gibbons, Michael R. and Wayne E. Ferson, 1985, Tests of asset pricing models with
    changing expectations and an unobservable market portfolio, Journal of Financial
      Economics 14, 217—236.
Grauer, Fredrick L. A., Robert H. Litzenberger and Richard Stehle, 1976, Sharing rules
     and equilibrium in a international capital market under uncertainty, Journal of
      Financial Economics 3, 233-256.
Hansen, Lars P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments
    estimators, Econometrica 50, 1029—1054.
Hansen, Lan P. and Robert J. Hodrick, 1983, Risk averse speculation in forward foreign
    exchange markets: An econometric analysis of linear models, in Jacob A. Frenkel,
     ed.,: Exchange rates and international macroeconomics (University of Chicago
     Press, Chicago, IL).
Harvey, Campbell R., 1988, The real term structure and consumption growth, Journal
     of Financial Economics 22, 305-3M.
Harvey, Campbell It, 1991a, The world price of covariance risk, Journal of Finance 46,
     111—157.
Harvey, Campbell it, 1991b, The term structure and world economic growth, Journal
     of Fixed Income 1, 4—17.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1992, Conditional asset pricing with instrumental variables, Work-
     ing paper, Duke University.
Heston, Steven, and Geert Rouwenhorst, 1993, Does industrial structure explain the
     benefits of international diversification?, working paper, Yale School of Organiza-
     tion and Management.
Heston, Steven, Geert Rouwenhorst and Roberto E. Wessels, 1991, The structure of
     international stock returns, working paper, Yale School of Organization and Man-
     agement, October.
Kirby, Christopher M., 1993 A multivariate analysis of predictability in stock and bond
     returns, Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments
     in stock portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47,
     13—37.
Lombard, Odier & Cie, 1992, Introduction to the Bond Indices of Lombard, Odier El
    Cie, Geneva, Switzerland.
McDonald, Jack, 1989, The Mochiai Effect: Japanese Corporate Cross Holdings, Journal
     of Portfolio Management, 90—94.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica
     41, 867—887.
Roll, Richard, 1977, A critique of the asset pricing theory's tests, Journal of Financial
     Economics 4, 129—176.
Roll, Richath, 1988, The international crash of October 1987, Financial Analysts Jour-
     nal 44, 19—35.

                                             30
Roll, Richard, 1992, Industrial structure and the comparative behavior of international
      stock market indexes, Journal of Finance 47, 3—42.
Roll, Richard and Stephen A. Ross, 1993, On the cross-sectional relation between ex-
      pected returns and betas, Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of Eco-
      nomic Theory 13, 341—360.
Ross, Stephen A., 1977, The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), short sale restric-
     tions and related issues, Journal of Finance 32, 177—183.
Schmidt, Dana, 1990, Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) indices, Morgan
     Stanley, New York, NY.
Sharpe, William, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
     conditions of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425—442.
Solnik, Bruno, 1974, An equilibrium model of the international capital market, Journal
      of Economic Theory 8, 500—524.
Solnik, Bruno, 1983, International arbitrage pricing theory, Journal of Finance 38, 449—
     457.
Solnik, Bruno, 1993, The performance of international asset allocation strategies using
     conditioning information, Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 33—55.
Stulz, René, 1981, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics 9, 383-406.
Wheatley, Simon, 1988, Some tests of international equity integration, Journal of Fi-
     nancial Economics 21, 177—212.
Wheatley, Simon, 1989, A critique of latent variable tests of asset pricing models, Jour-
     nal of Financial Economics 23, 325—338.
Zhou, Guofu, 1993, Analytical 0MM tests: Asset pricing tests with time-varying risk
    premiums, Washington University, St. Louis.




                                             31
                                                          Table I
            Means, standard deviations and autocorrelations of international equity and bond returns
      calculated in U.S. doLlars and based on data Irom March 1971 to September 1991 (247 obs&vasions).


                                                                                         Autocontlasjon
         Variable               Mean          Mean SW. dew.          p'        m          Pa       P        Pa       Pg
                                (anti..)      (gee.)

                                                             lida return.
                    Australia   24360        10156      27.745      -0.014   -0053       4008      0009    -0042     0.041
                      Autda     25907        13.396     23.495       0.167    0040       0.033     0.063   0.025     0026
                     Belgium    16.333       14.106     20.973       0092     0.046      0.036     0.040   0.039     0034
                     Canada     21.320        9.387     19.736      -0013    -0096       0095     -0025    -0056     0.043
                    Deateark    17.734       15.734     19.757      0016      0.132       0.092    0.102   -0.132    0.079
                      Paace     15.968       12.373     25.653      0063      0.003       0.127    0.023   -0.045   0.000
                  Germany       14.773       12.341     21.797      -0001    .0.017       0.106    0062    0.054     0002
                hong Kong       26.593       17.287     43.466      0053     4036        -0009    4.035    4.000    4.017
                        Italy   10.400        6.700     27.140      0.143    0.026        0093     0.074    0036     0.014
                       Japan    21.118       16.377     23.037      0058      0012       0051      0047    0067     4.000
                Netherlands     26,987       15.123     16902       0.033    4034        0.067    -0.100    0.056    0.003
                  Horny         16.319       12.117     20936       0.258    4.001       0.153    4.075     0.031    0.014
        Siocapaa/Mshyda         20093        14123      52938       0.165    -0011       4032      0049     0.045   .0.002
                       Spain    11.717        9.009     23.171      0224     0004        0.043     0080    4.023     0.121
                      Seden     18.480       15.942     22.154      0080     -0028       0.053    4.014     0031     0.003
                Switaerland     13863        11821      96.131      0048     -0063       0046      0.006    0001    4.026
           United Kin$on.       17.545       1.3.950    27.310      0.101    0.093       0.051     0004    4.007     0.059
              UniIgdStaS        11.500       10181      15.980      0.022    -0.047      0015     4_on      0.052   4.027

                                        International iedu.try return. (without dividends)
Acoapac. 4 Miit. 1thnolo        13.522        10.760     23.320       0.105       0.002    4036   4.017     0028     0016
             Capital Good.      10.563        3.763     18440       0.050    4.026       0.048    4.054    0.017     0020
                    aemical.    6919          7836      17.115      0.035    0.058       0.235    4.026     0.037    0.035
           Coemw.ication.       9.297         6.172     14.764      0.101    4.018        0023    4.133    4.003     0017
             Ccnstnjdioo        12.434       10.053     21833       0.005     0.037      4019      0.056    0.064     0.043
        Consume DnnbIa          10.482        8.746     18.400       0097     0.000       0.037    0020     0.022    -0.006
                      Energy    10.832        3.234     23.585       0021     4.039      4014      0.037    0.063    4.009
                    Finance     12.434       10.534     19.702       0.174    4.033       0010    4.028     0.134    4.024
            Food & Tobacco      52.675       11.426     15.545       0.115    4.000       0.092   4.062     0.072    0.012
            Forert Product.     7.569         5.430     20.646       0.036    -0.068      0.020   4.007    -0.039    0.039
                    Leleere     51.190        0.957     20.002       0.177     0.058      0.033   4.067     0.018    4.102
         Metal. and Mining      10024         5.43?     26.703       0038     4.075       0.036    0.099    0.068    0.062
                Real Estate     14.4$?       20.609     27.781       0.097    0.004       0.056    0.004    0.134    0.025
          Services—0u.iuias     9.929         0.375     17.432       0.156    -0.060      0.057   4.018     0.002    0.044
          Services-Per.oo.J     11.190        9.702     17.134       0.030    0.022      .0.037   4.003     0.100    0.006
           Textile 4 Thade      13.540       11.944     23.301       0.048    0040       4.013    4.097     0052      4.037
             Twportatica        10.466        6.655     16.900       0-132    0.016      4.017    4-055     0.083     4.014
                 IJtllitie       7.257        6.130     15-063       0.071    4.075      4.021     0,044    0.015   - 0,015
                                                        Tabk I (continued)


                                                                        -
                                        .                                                AIstocaneIatinn
     -
          Vanable               Mesa        Mean     Sid. tv.         P                  p1                    P12     p3
                               (aML.)       (gin.)               .




                                                     lnleniat.oosl bond l'd.Ini.
                    Canada     8.824         8.177    11.199         0.021     0068     0.010       -0.148     0020    4.012
                     Fhace     11319        10.296    14.037         0.035     0.055    0.099   -
                                                                                                     0.091    -0.003   o.o4
                Germany        12.416       11.316    14.556         0.042     0.063   -0.040       .0.005     0.056   0.032
                   Japan       14.147       12.886    15.575         0.090     0.010    0.054        0.048     0.085   4.080
              Netherlands      12.234       11.220    13.929         0.097     0.023   -0.01!        0,013    .0.009   0.011
              Switsedand       10.873        9.899    13.736         0.093     0.086    0.015        0.080     0033    4.063
         United IGdom          10.551   -    0.000    17296          0.059     0.015   4.189         0.003    4.007    0.019
            United Stats       9.127         0.479    11.254         0.067    4.038    4.139        4.004     .0010    4.060

                                                      Inetminedal vseiabln
             Wdd return      - 22.768       11.606    14.891         0.092    4.047    0.045        4.010      0.060   0.015
    GIG ct_nancy retisa         1.617        1.200     9.464         0.016     0.127   0.066        0.050    . 0.033   0.004
  S&P 800 dividend yield       4.163        4.135      0.267         0.082     0.955   0027         0.000      0.663   0.472
     I month Eurodofla         t061         9.022      0.927         0.946     0.884   0.829        0.772      0.558   0.138
   Moody'. Baa-Ass yield       1.274         1.273     0.527         0.950     0.881   0.831        0.795      0.437   0.079
  3 month-I month 'V. bill     0.900        0.907      0.473         0.277     0018    0002         -0008     0.086    0.031

The Industry porttolios an based on £ .aregMion cC 37Moran Stanley Capital Inten..lional hiduatey lodic
                                                                       Table 2

The predictability at international equity and bond returns calculated in US. dollars. Expected values are obtained by linearly
projecting on the iustrullIeotal variables. The instrumental variables are: a constant, the lagged exc return on the Morgan
Stai.ley Capital International world equity Index, (WIth), the lagged return on the index ol investments in 10 currencies,
(XRG10), the lagged dividend yield on the Standard and Poor's 500 stock index (Dlv), • dummy variable For the mouth ol
Januasy (JAN), the return on a 30-day Eurodollar deposit (E$30), the yield on Moody's Baa rated bonds less the yield on
Moody's Ma rated bonds (Baa-Aaa) and the return for holding a 90-day U.S. 'fteasury bill for one month less the return on
& 30-day hill (90-30TH). Ileteroskedasticity-eoniiateat t-statistia are in brackets. Estimates are based on monthly data from
1971:3—1991:09 (247 observations).


        ronloljo            tnteapt           WRD..1       XRGIO,_j     3A14      D1V1_1     E630,_t     Bn-M_1      00-3OTH1—i       R2/
A- Country Index returns
             Australia

               Austria
                              0.004

                              0.05'
                                                0.266

                                                0.175
                                                            f.:j
                                                            4098
                                                            4.004
                                                                        0023
                                                                       -0026
                                                                                  J3.378

                                                                                  4.464
                                                                                             4.502
                                                                                             (-2.359)
                                                                                              -1.616
                                                                                                           -9.472
                                                                                                          (-0.606)
                                                                                                          -25.133
                                                                                                                       11.56$

                                                                                                                       3.416
                                                                                                                                  -   0,103

                                                                                                                                      0.052
                              (2.720)           ('-"1       14.0211    (-1.706)   (-0.076)   I-'-°"l      (-2.195)     (1.375)        0,024

              Belgium          0.016            4.069       4061        0.014     11.42$     4.651        t061         4.333          0,064
                              (0.8671         (4.695)       (4.345)    (1.125)    p.047)     1-3.6801     (0.355)      t.55I)         0.037
              Canada          -0.006             0.011      -0.121      0010      )I.244     4.829        —4.533
                                                                                                                       p.08;          0.103
                                                            (-1082)    [0.602)               (-2.215)     10384)       r-2951         0.082
                             1-0.3061           (0.986)
                                                            -0089                 -2.625     -3.972                     1.110         0.054
             Deoa.s$           0.033
                              (2.538)
                                               -0.215
                                              (-233S)       t-°-S°l
                                                                        0.013
                                                                       (1.305]    [4313)     (-2.633)     t'-'l
                                                                                                           9.701

                                                                                                          4.610
                                                                                                                       (0.639)        0.027
               mace                                                     5.014                -7226                     0.748          0.054
                              .0006
                             foil?)
                                                OSlO
                                                (0-08?)
                                                            -0,131
                                                            (-0.635)
                                                                                  24.233
                                                                                             (-3-052)
                                                                                              -1.084
                                                                                                          (-0.333)
                                                                                                          0.753
                                                                                                                       (0)            5.027
                                                                                                                                      0.038
                                                003$         .0.127     -0.010                                          2.288
             Germany           0.005
                              (0.344)           (0:293)     (0.650)    (-0.7571   I-°l
                                                                                  12.709
                                                                                             1-2.339)
                                                                                             4.546
                                                                                                          (0.063)      (0.5171        0.007
           Hong Kong           0.043            0.233       4069        0.064     3.209                    5.113        2.710         0.050
                              (0.864)           I'-°'l      (-in.)      p434)     10.2311    (-1037)      (0.398)      (0.432         0.022
                   Il-ely     4.014             0.093        0.117      0.022      11.67%    .1.764       —7.306          0.819       0.02'
                             (.0.643)           (0.837)     (0379)      (1.215)   (1.419j    (-0.623)     (-0466)       (0.159)       -0.007
                Japan           0.027            0.065      0.083       0.003      1.632      4,261       P.46t          -2.115        0.053
                              (1.235)           (0619)      (0.474)     10.25$)   10.350)    1-2.7181     11.7161      (-0.516)        0026
          Netlierlant          -0.004           4.053       4.044       0.021     13.835      4.326       12.415        4.756          0.092
                              (4.3121           (.0.5781    (-0.331)    11.5101   (3.557)    1-3.6321     11.13$)      11.603]         0.065
               Norway           0.035           0.063       4.325       0.042      2.339      .1.413      -25.979       5.774          0.035
                              (1233]            (0.383)     1-0602)     (1211]    (0.339)    (-0.523)     (-1.479)     (2.204)         0.007
                              0.023             0.066       .0.086       0.075      8.104     -5.383        2.715      JI.307          0.100
   Singepore/Malayala                                                                                                                  0.074
                              (0.6591           (0.4251     1-0.4311    (2.726)    (0.414)   (-1364)      (0.260)      12.3581
                   Spain      0.049
                              (2.697)
                                                 0.161
                                                (1.332)
                                                            4015
                                                            (-0.090)
                                                                         0.012
                                                                        (0.726)
                                                                                  -ll.I
                                                                                  (-I.854j
                                                                                               1.915
                                                                                              (0.971)
                                                                                                          -20.030
                                                                                                          (-0.788]
                                                                                                                        1.023
                                                                                                                       (1.779)
                                                                                                                                       0.037
                                                                                                                                       0.009
               Sweden         4.001              0.149      4.072        0.026    4.061       4.096        21.608       2.027          0.048
                                                (I.190(     (-0.173)    (1.625)   (4.142)    (-0.044]      (1.536)     (0.663)         0.020
                              (-0.075)
           Switzerland         0.011            .0.069       -0.154      0.008     13.230      -6.304      -1,032       1.056          0.064
                                                            (4.074]                (3)63)    (.3.400)     (4.083)      (1.833)         0.037
                              (0.5l3(           (.0651]                 [0.5301
      United KIngdom          4.019              4.045       4.057      0.043                  -7.825     I 1.2         6.965          0.095
                                                                                                                                       0.060
                              (-0.801]          [-0.309)    (-0.316)    (1.572)               (-3.246)    (0.735j      (1.981)
         United Slates         -0.019            -0.071      .0.006     0.015      30.551      '-4.299    17.832        6.299          0.122
                                                                                              (.3.357)    (5.853)      12.4071         0.096
                              (-l.363j          (4.805)     (-0.053)    (1.243)    11.9821




Multivaijate tat al predictability

         Portfolio                F-ataaiatic              p-nine

       II countries                  1.5192                0.0001
                                                                     Table 2 (conIia..ed)



              PerUcijo                                    WRD4_1 XR0101_1            JANe      DIV_1
                                           ] Int.rct$                                                    E$aoe_i tnaa.Aaae_IF30TI3l RR2

9. lnI,naLionU industry return. (without dividend.)                  _______
  A.rv.pace it Mihita.y Technology              -0043      -0043       4.102         0.044     33.983     -9.254     4,242     '.290    0,112
                                               (-2.1883   (-0381)     1-0.7061      (2.143]    (4.430)   [4.684)    (0.332]   (0.399)   0.117
                      Capital Goods             -0011      4.033       4000          0.017      7.795     -5.477      8.04$    4.825    0.107
                                               I-eisa]    (0.370]     14.0031       11.4941    [1.380]   (4.882]    12.755)   (2.001)   0.081
                             Chemical.            0.003    -0064       0.029        00'?        5.341    -4.374     33.613     5.443    0.080
                                                (0.1773   (4043)       (0.251)      (1.493)    (1,063)   (-3097]    (1.568)   (2.726)   0.053
                    COmUWOICMIOn.                -0.052    -0045       0.079        0025        6.962    4.348      35.793     6.103    0.094
                                               (-0.028)   (423?)      R715)         (1315]     (1539)    (4.108)    (1.802)   (2613)    0.067
                           Cou.tnictio.z        0.007      0034        0031         4.001       6.956    4.399                 6.258    0.070
                                               (0.367]    (0.266)      (0325)      (-00733     (1.369)   (-3.103)    122?
                                                                                                                    (4.h9     (2.2863   0.043
               Coes..ner Durables               4.054      0.073       4.04!        0006        6.409    4.334      34.86?     3390     0.123
                                               (4.331)    (04371      (-0.3173      (0.5071    (1.316(   1-3.3681   (3.636)   11.6491   0093
                                Eo.igy          0025       0011        -0.032       0.013       3.972    4.615      -8.266    10.413    0064
                                               (1365)     (0083]      14082)       (-3.768)    (0365)    (-i.ssi(   14.848)   (z..oo)   0036
                                r.asaea        -0053       0001        0066         0.058      9.387     4.158      22.109     3003     toss
                                               (-0.738)   (0015)      (0.463)      (1.330)     (1.842)   (4.385)    (2017]    (1.355)   0.058
                    Thod & Thb.cco             -0002      .0311        0006         0007       6.106      4.933     15.553     6.270    0.094
                                               (0.1201    1-1380)     (00763       (0.601)     (1377)    4.13?)     110361    (2471)    0.068
                     Foe      Product.
                                LeS,in
                                               }'1
                                               -0004

                                                001T
                                                          0.073
                                                          (.0.742)
                                                          .0007
                                                                       0051
                                                                      (0.387)
                                                                       4.008
                                                                                    0057
                                                                                   (0017]
                                                                                    0004
                                                                                               3.864
                                                                                               (0.434)
                                                                                                9.206
                                                                                                         4879
                                                                                                         (-2.139)
                                                                                                         .4.696
                                                                                                                    20412
                                                                                                                    11.7241
                                                                                                                               0.370
                                                                                                                              (3.1783
                                                                                                                               6.048
                                                                                                                                        0.099
                                                                                                                                        0.972


               Metal, sad Mlain
                                               (.0.974]
                                                0005
                                                          (.0451)
                                                           0382
                                                                      [0062)
                                                                      -1.266
                                                                                   (02411
                                                                                    0039
                                                                                               (1.301)   f2.)       22.330
                                                                                                                    (1489)    (2.929)
                                                                                                                                        0.097
                                                                                                                                        0071
                                                                                               712Th      -4.222    .1244L     30819    0.057
                                               (0.194)    (0.498)     (.1417)      (0044)      11.4533   (-1.644]   f-0113j   [2.833)   0029
                            RcaJ Estate         0.009      0.209       0014         0025       12.91q    4.274       0.410    0952      0.060
                                               (0.322)    (16364      (0071)       (1.586)     (I.475j   (-2430)    (0027)    (412364
                SeMce-B.Sse                     -0016     4000         .0063        0025       32054     4.929       p7017     6.758    0.137
                                               (.2006)    (0.603)     [0.560)      (1.421)     (3.469)   4.827)     jI.755)   (2.796]   0.112
                Siem-Peneo.h                   .0.007     -0060        0.089        -0.000      7.251    .3.355     32.329     6.694    0080
                                               (-0.498)   [0.545)     (0045)       (-0.045)    (1.329)   (.2320)    (1.132)   (2.1113   0.053
                    IttIla it mdc                0.008     0.001       0066         0005        7.293    4.621      )5.949    3.946     0.058
                                               (0304)     (00163      10.437)      (0.385)     (1.142)   (.3.139)   113621    (3.561)   0.028
                     Tesnportatien              0.003      0.023      -0.000        0.016       8.731    4.383       10.330   4.107     0.075
                                               (0.1803    (03003      (-0.6533     (1.447)     (1.736)   (.3874)    [1.088)   (2016)    0043
                  UtitMe    0.604                         0.121        .3.020       0001        5.110    -4.126     70.161     4.210    8.069
__________________________ [0324)                         (.1.431)    (.0.168]     (0868)     j2S01J     (.3.444)   I.279J    12.173)   0.042




        Portfolio                    F-.tatl.tlc           p-nba

      30 lnd,nt.ia                    1.6389                0.0901
    k    00 ,0 00 00 00 00 00 00


    i    ., C4— 01— •O 'WN 0 fl.•I••'


    I*
    0

                      '.,Wv,c.W —


    7
         —a . c. —a —. 2. "a
I   -
    -

                                            IH
                                             00
                                            ——
                                            I'a. -
    t

                                        ii •ij
                                            £
                                        j
                                             Table 3

Tatsfor the numberof lactors   that determine expected internationalasset returns calculated
in U.S. dollars in excas of the 30-day U.S. Tltasury bill and based on monthly data from
1971:3—1991:09(247 observations).




                  Anal.                  Number .1     Number of        x'             P.njne
                                           A-ct.        Factor.
              Countty index nturna           IS           I            144,09           0.059
                                             IS           2            119.25           0.054
                                             II           3            99.36            0.032


     loterratlosal Industry   nter,s'        IS           I            126.69           0.296
                                             IS           2            100.91           0.345
                                             15           3            72.66            0.555

     Intematlolisi Industry stuns            II           1            119.52           0.469
     (with divideed epproxinietios)          1!           2            91.90            0.599
                                             II           3            70.35            0.639


                      Bond retnnia           6            I            61.56            0.107
                                             6            2            36.69            0.437
                                              U           3            19.69            0.763

 The Industry podolio. are b..ed so sa .wegsiioa of 37 Morgan Stanley Capital lotecasticoal Industry
porfolia.. The MSCI indios do not indud. dividend. RwiIt. n prenented nang an sppmzimation of the
dividend. based on lbs earns Sdust.y grc.apiiupofNYSEand AMEX Moms.
       data as. for Canada, Thac.. Gemany, Japan, The Netherlands, Switserlaod,the United Kingdom
and the United Staa. Th. bead data en horn Loenbasal Odier& Ci..
                                                                         Table 4

                         Vaziance ratios and average errors for factor model specifications aumIug constant risk ioa4ings USiDg
                                                      data from 197I3—199l;09 (24? observatIon.).


                                 On. factor model                                  N    factor model                          Three factor model
    Portfolio           APE            VRI            VR2             APE                 VA1          flU          APE              Val           flU


                                                                Countey Index returns
        Australia       0082          0466            0.545           .0.182             0.595         0.369         0162            1.002         0016
         Austria         0.676         0.006          1.010            0.258             0.724         0.356         0.36*           0.712         0.374
         Belgium         0.387        0.55$           0.537            0.121             0.756         0.256         0.080           0,759         0.262
          Canada        -0.035        0.512           0.461           .0,251             0.682         0.236        -0.095           0.668         0.110
         Denmark         0.61$        0.487           0.678            0.632             0.461         0.691         0.540           0.609         0.580
           Fhnc.         0.356        0.503           0.566            0.132             0.422         0.419         0.065           0,642         0,387
         Gennany         0,331        0.665           0.441            0.144             0.647         0.229         0.132           0.846         0.225
       Hong Kong         1.191        0.370           0.781            0.582             1.039         0.246         0.646           1.009         0.163
                Italy    0.152        0.062           0.980           .0.163             0.665         0.267        4.216            0.72?         0.18?
           Japan         0.823        0.594           0.664            0.515             0.8*9         0.360         0.493           0.850         0.369
      Netherlands        0,363        1.077           0.090            0.235             2.065         0.032         0.235           1.062         0.035
          Norway         0.628        0,147           0.956            0.450             0.38*         0.800         0.617           0.747         0.364
                         0.586        0.626           0.478            0.248             0.875         0.203         0.438           1.022         0.084
Slagapore/Malay.la
           Spun          0.423        0.019           0.960            0.076             0.667         0.354         0.206           0.723         0.307
          Sweden         0.760        0.181           0.933            0.405             0.865         0.326         0.353           0.942         0.240
      Swltaerland        0.172        0.795           0.256            0.111             0.811         0.228         0.158           0.839         0.217
   United Kingdom        0.309        0.860           0.205            0.055             0.952         0.068         0.051           0.957         0.059
     United State       4.052         0.679           0.905           4.097              0.867         0.080        .0.077           0.896         0.076
                        0.439          0.464          0.589            0.161             0.765         0.303         0.232           0.845         0,226
          Average
                                                                 table 4 (continued)



                              One Vector model                                 t.m titter model                    Threefsctot model
    Portfolio         APE          YRI           VR2               APE                 VRl        VR2      APE            VRI          VR2


                                                         ladurry ntitmi (eso divideed.)
        Aereepece     0.549        0.135         0.658             0.408               0.689      0.347    0.132         0.963         0.056
    CapItel Good.     0.302        0.69?         0.29$             0,188               0.891      0.118    0.214         0.899         0.108
        Chemical.     0.162        0.597         0.399             0.0*0               0.129      0.278    0.143         0.765         0.234
  Comniunicetions     0.190        0.015         0.159             0.123               0.980      0.025    0.140         0.985         0.019
    Contnictlots      0.451        0.379         0.614             0.286               0.711      0.240    0.388         0,810         0.192
Connmer Dur.bl        0.223        0.523         0.412             0.140               0.855      0.254    0.112         0.881         0.142
           Energy     0.322        0.615         0.371             0.284               0.635      0.389   0.344          0.672         0.316
          Flnnrce     0.458        0.499         0.492             0.314               0471       0.146   0.324          0.879         0.144
  Food St Tobacco     0.474        0.810         0.118             0.417               0.890      0.120   0.441          0.895         0.104
  Thrnt Product.      0.085        0.691         0.300            .0.014               0.786      0.212   0.503          0,90!         0,007
           LeIsure    0.358        0.681         0.812             0.216               0.933      0.078   0,261          0.959         0017
M.t.le sod Mlalq      0.254        0.833         0.462             0.132               0.733      0.274   0.191          0,747         0.257
       Reel Filets    0.601        0.011         0.926             0.312               0.780      0.255   0.354          0,700         0,255
  Se.wic—flu.Ir,      0.252        0.126         0.269             0.119               0.969      0.037   0.127          0.969         0,03?
 Swvi—Penon.          0.319        0.73?         0.253             0.270               0.854      0.158   0.309          0.066         0.131
 'Textile. & Tfld.    0.513        0.504         0.485             0.427               0.763      0.261   0.434          0.763         0,263
   'fluuport.elon     0.286        0.525         0.469             0.161               0452       0.ISI    0.083         0.854         0.157
          UtIlities   0.059        0.874         0.125            -0.002               0.885      0.554   .0.012         0.891         0.109
          Avers4e     0.329        0,600         0.393             0.216               0.826      0.18S   0.236          0.560         0.14!
                                                                Table 4 (cootla.nd)



                               On. factor model                              Tw. factor    model                       Tb,..   factor model
    Portfolio         APE            YRI          VU              APE                 VU           VU      APE                 VRI            VU


                                                  Ind.at,yretarts (itb dividend spp..stloo)                        -
                      0.302         0.480         0.569           0.168               0.822        0.213   0.020               0.925          0.080
       Aer.epac.
   Capital Good.      0.092         0.656         0.3*?           0014                0.348        0.156   0.092               0.933          0.000
       ChemIcal.      0.145         0.511         0.527           0.00!               0.650        0.319   0.183               0.796          0.246
  Camnrnnlcatlon.     0.255         0.938         0.165           0.208               1.051        0.044   0.239               2.084          0,017
     Con.tn.dIoa      0.51*         0263          0.734           0,414               0.730        0.344   0.539               0.892          0.195
Co.msnterDurable.     0.110          0.459        0.834           0410                0.523        0.150   0.099               0.919          0.101
            Eoer      0.271          0.611        0.454           0.237               0.62?        0.433   0.333               0.743          0.323
           Flnasc.    0.516          0106         0.509            0.415              0.902        0.210   0.486               0.977          0,142
  Ebod It Tabacco      0.396         0.904        0.23?             0.386             0.954        0.168   0.413                1.127         0.114
  Fbrern   Praduct.   .0.088         0.584        0297            .0.133              0.841        0.325   0.025               0.923          0.081
          LeSate       0.118         0.600        0.428             0.029             0.331        0.185   0.149               0.973          0.058
Metals and Mint.6     0.147          0357         0638            0.060               0.624        0.390   0.264               0.727          0.302
      lies! Ernst.    0.674          0.065        0971             0.520              0.777        0.394   0.885               0.805          0.254
 SeMc-Oadn            0012           0.636        0.387           .0.081              0.587        0.090   4.007               0.955          0.044
 S.nic..—Pa.ans       0.195          0.727        0.336            0.144              0.531        0.222   0.216               0.930          0.134
 Textiles It flade    0.453          0.546        0.565            0.373              0600         0205    0.435               0.869          0.214
    Than.ponatlan     0202           0.52?        0.850            0.217              0.867        0.203   0.276               0427           0.149
          UtiltiSa    0.290          0.979        0.149            0.269              1.013        0.112   0.268               1.01!          0114
           Avatage    0.262          0.584        0.477            0.184              0.815        0.239   0.251               0.912          0.149
                                                                                          table 4 (continued)


                                                one rattor model                                        two     factor model                                  three rector model
             Portfolio              APE               YRI                VR2                APE                  VRI            V1I2               APE               VRI                VR2


        .
                                                                                           Rood returns
                 Canada             -0.105             0.580             0.356             -0.106                0.812          0.328              .0.035            0,874              0110
                  FThnc.            0.005              0.656             0.316             4.004                 0.944          0.054              -0.040            0.962              0.016
               Germany              0.078              0.733             0.308              0.069                1.028          0.009              0.050             1.028             0.001
                  Japan             0.189              0.852             0.249              0.188                0.878          0.fll              0.109             0.990             0,0*0
             Nelheulsnd.            0.015              0.818             0.189              0.005                0.984          0.019              .0.013            0.9*4             0.009
             Switaerland            0.027              0.143             0.588              0.014                0.984          0.042              .0.011            0.975             0.025
      UnIted Kingdom               -0.019              0.896             0.293             4.023                 0.765          0.222             .0.057             0.755             0.175
            United State.          -0.046              0.422             0.554             4.045                 0.180          0.525              0.051             0.990             0.023
                 Avenge             0.018              0.654             0.354              0.012                0.828          0.177              0.00?             0.948               0.055
The Industryporfoiloe an ba.ed on an agsngationof 37 Morgan Stanley Capital InternationalIndustry porfotlo.. Returns are measured In     nc      of the 30-day U.S. Tteasury bill. Tb. bond data Sn from
Lombard Cdi., & Cie. APE I. the average pt4clng error (percent per month).       ViiiS the ratio of the nñaaee of the model expected petunia (produced by the model eetimnation) to the vuience of the
expected petuni,generated by a linear regreeeioaof the ejeet petunia on the Instrumental variable.. VR2 I. the ratio of the nuance of the expected model residual, (produced by a linear ragrenion of the
                                                                                                    •
model residuals on the Instrumental variables) to the nriance 0f the expected return, generated by line.: regree.lon of the 'net returns o, the loetrumental variable..
                                                                          Talile 5

A comparision at the nxlIiiieuiti rt,siiltii,g Iniiii ft regri,e1iOhi of the ,rnqneifitl tnaCroeC*nlcellic lartorn oil tlit, lustre ui,ittiJ
vañal,la and of the laLent factors on the instruniental vaziaUos. 'These macroeconomic (actors ale: the cxc rotor,, on the
Morgan Stanley world market iiorfohio (in hiS. dollan), the excom return on foreign exchange invaitmeat ii, 10 eotiiitri,s
(XJWIO), the d,aone in the price of oil, the change in OKCI) industrial production, and the change in OECI) joHnSton.
The inotrumeat.al vnri,thilai are: . constant, the return on the world index (Will)), the anna return on foreign exeliaitge
Investment in 10 countrS (XILGIO), the dividend yield on the Standard and Poor's 500 stock index (Dlv), • dummy varial,l,'
for the month oF January (JAN), the return oil a 30-day Eurodollar deposit (ES3O), the yield on Moody's Baa rated bonds
1008 the yield on Moody's A.. rated bonds (Baa-Aaa) and the retur,i for holding a 90 day U.S. 'llcaat,ry bill for one nio,,th,
h the return on .30 day bill (3-IIIILL). Fstimatos axe based on monthly data Irma 1971:3-3901:09(247 ohservaticms).


          Fctan               Intert*$     WItD1...1       XRGl0_1           IAN,         DIV_j                                                       Rffl2
                                                                                                         E630,_1 I1aaAaa,_, a.nii.t,_,
Pr..p.c18.d: Ohs coefficients and t-.t.tntica
          dd •tc
          market return
                              0.009         -0.027          '0.001
                                                           140911
                                                                            0.015          9.580         -5514          ;5,Io
                                                                                                                        [1.955)
                                                                                                                                        5.238         0.136
                                                                                                                                                      0-Ill
                             [0.6511        1-0.3501                        11.4771       12.3231        1-4.7513                      12.7791
              rabin cc        0.02'         -0.087          -0.008          0.012          2492          .2.288         4.450           2.011         0.085
       E1
         010 ix Inda          12.5231       1-1.843)       10.1011         (-2.07l        I°-I           1-2.862)       1-1.4751       11.6291        0.058
             O,ang.in          0,05-4       0.062            0.028          004'           4.450          4.749         42749          -2.flO         0,033
              S pt'co         It9I          (0.318)         (00721          10.5161       (0.458)        11.5211        E'-1           10.6731        0,005
            In OECD            0.012         0,020          0.057           0.000         -1.300         .0.3fl          '1.877        0.581          0,142
           productloc         15.4061       11.4541        1-2.954)        )0236)         1-1.454)       (-1.803)       (4.130)        (-1.951)       0.115
      Cbaag. In OWD            0.002        0,002           0.002           0002           1.278          0_3m           '2.827        0.128          0,272
                  pea         (2.186)       (0.323)         10.273)         130361        (4.3353        14.090)        (4.443)        (0.0003        0,250


taIt noefficianta nSa — returns
              Fctor I  0,013    I            0.019          0.029           0.004     I   15.548     I    -7.987        19.910     I    5.618     I
                Fitter 2       0009          0,177          0.114           0-°3          -1106      j   '0.346     )   '5-940          1-953             -

Label coefficients nsia international iadu.uy ntun (witbont diuWeod.)
               Factor I I 0.034            0,063    I 0.137 I 0.002                   I   13.519     I    '5.8)0    I   15,420     I    7,125     I       -
               Factor 1      0.021         0.034       -0130      0_eel               j   11-952          4306          '4,059          6,785             -

Latent coefficIent. edaf International Indu.try rejnrn. (with dividend .i.,roxnnation)
               Factor I I -0.033        I 0,092      I 0.177 I 0.005 I 20306                              -7.406    I   16.998     I    5.210     I
               Factor 3 I 0.022            0024           0-153       0.009 I 18.301                      '5.860         14.571         -12
latent coefficient.  og international bond Felon,.
                Factor 1   I  0.003     I 0.049        I     0,049    I      0.007    I    0.995          .1,435    I     3,766    I    4059      I
                Facto, 2      0012         0151              0.042                         6,541     I '19               .1,011         3.225

Il.t.roakedotkity-comaietrnt t-r.tioa a.. in brarhet.. 'flit industry porlola are based on an .wnttiom of 37 Moe1.., Stanley Capital International
i.'dtut.y porfolioa. flood dat. an roe Canada, haste, Ceonany, Japan, The Netberland., Swits.ri.nd. the United Kin5dom and the United Stat'.-
Tb. bond data are train l.o.y,Lard 041cr & Cit.
                                                            ThbIe 6

Characterizing (lie factor premiunis that determine expected international asset returns. Unconditional corre-
lations of the lactor premiums and the fitted expected values of five prespecified macroeconomic factors. These
macroeconomic factors are: the exs return on the Morgan Stanley world market porfolio (in U.S. dollars),
the exc      return on foreign exchange investment in 10 countfles (XRCIO), (lie change in (lie price of oil, (he
change in OECI) industrial production, and the change in OECD inflation. Expected values are obtained
by projecting on the instrumental variables. &timates are based on monthly data from 1971:3—1991:09 (247
observations).


                                 w.s                                               0201)         0201)
                                market          FX utur.            Oil          production     isthilen        Multiple
           timasa              premium          psmwn            Premium          premium       premium        cosTelation



     Factor I premium           0.952
                                                     Caon rndes
                                                   0.289
                                                                    —
                                                                  -0.710           0.567        -4.512           0.9820

     Factor 2 premium           0.307             4.047           -0.253           0.079        0.333            0.4316


                                        lnttuathaal indust.y returus (without dividend.)
     Factor I premium           0.926              0.175          4.746            '0.230       -4.396           0.9832

     Factor 2 premium           0.932             0.205           -OTIS            4.248        4.394            0.9848


                                International hidushy stun. (with dividend app.imaSion)
     factor I premium           0.895             0.138           -0.735           4.304        4.831            0.9916

     Factor 2 preminni          0.950             0,198           4.725            -0.235       4.336            0.9882


                                                   International bond returna
     F.clor I prenian.          0.831             0.428            4.504           -0254        4.450            0.9884

     Factor 2 premium           0.619             0.810        — -0.179            0.019        '0.329           0.9558

the industry porfolios . based on an aegregation of 17 Morgan Stanley Capital lnternatloeal industry porfolioa. Bond data an
for Canada, Etana, Gennany, Japan, the Netherlan& Switsesisad, the United Kingdom and the United Sula The Load data
an (roan Lombard Odi & Ci,.
                                                          Thbte 7

Variance ratios and average errors For a conditional asset pricing model With two prespecified Iacton
      and assuming constant risk loadings osin data From 39713—199109 (247 observations).


                                                    Coejetty Sdea returns

                Portfolio                              APE                        VIII           VR3

                    Australia                          0-tat                     0218            0445
                      Austria                          0.235                     0300            0-693
                     UcIgiwa                           0.166                     0.130           0-291
                     Canada                            0.020                     0.407           0.343
                    Denmark                            0.419                     0.331           0.551
                      Franc.                           0.035                     0.530           0.531
                   Cennany                             0.019                     0.718           0.306
                  Hong Kong                            1012                      0.228           0489
                            Italy                     .0.260                     0.760           0.832
                   Japan                               0529                      0.603           0739
              Netherlands                              0.301                     0.331           0.273
                  Norway                               0.283                     0.494           0.460
        Singapore/M.Jqsia                              0.663                     0.222           0331
                    Spain                             .0.061                     0.447           OS'S
                      Sweden                           0.478                     0.487           0.363
                Switserland                           4.041                      0.522           0.293
           United Kingdom                              0.233                     0.336           0.272
             United State.                             0.106                     0533            0.196
                      Average                          0.240                     0.445           0.520



                               DegTea of              P-value
                                freedom
       164.12                       '14                0-120




                                      Inlernatiotsal industry return. (without dividends)

                     Portfolio                                  APE                      VIII      VRI

       Aerospace & Military Tecbnolo                            0.606                    0.407     0.316
                              Capital Goods                     0-354                    0.915     0.127
                                Chemicals                       0.167                    1.179     0.212
                            Communicasions                      0.625                    0.299     0225
                                Constnsctioq.                   0.320                    0.730     0.503
                      Consumer Durable.                         0.257                    0634      0207
                                       Energy                   0.594                    0.989     0-661
                                      flnaace                   0.500                    1-060     0.172
                            Food it Thbacco                     0-565                    1.028     0.232
                             }'breet Products                   0.559                    0.391     0-331
                                       Leisure                  0.129                    0951      0.176
                                               table? (continued)


                                     International iedut. turn. (coatinued)

         Po.tfoIio                              APE                     VRI            VR2

  Metals sad Mining                            0.057                   0.501           0.317
         Real Estate                           0.232                   0.639           0.494
   Service.—Eu.in.                             0.149                   0.539           0.131
   Sew.ca-Penonal                              0.352                   l,082           0.202
                                                          -
    TexIUa & 1t.de                             9.422                   1.142           0.095
     'flsa.portasion                           0.319                   0.983           0.066
              Utilities                        0.353                   0.636           0.195
              Average                          0.353                   0.647           0.237



                                               p.,.j
                          Ined
152.43                     144                  0.299




                                 Iota,asiaiaj Iadsy ret.n (witS dividend.)
              PestleS                                    APE                    VRI      VR2

Acroapace & Miita2y Thcbnology                          0.323                  0.416    0.355
                       Capital Coeda                    0.698                  1.083    0.24$
                           Onu.ic.l.                    .0.771                 1.452    0.29?
                     Co,nn.ijnicatien.                  .0442                  1.085    0.246
                        Coestnsction                    0.470                  '.089    0.286
               Consumer Durable.                        0.612                  0.801    0.413
                                 Easur                  -0455                  1.179    '064
                              rmas,ce                   .0471                  1.315    0.301
                     Food & 1b.coo                      .0.346                 1.175    0.220
                     Forest Product.                    -0.984                 1.064    0.471
                                 Leure                  .0.695                 1.114    0.364
               Metals sad Mining                        .0.571                 0.752    0.51?
                      Real Estate                       -0.363                 0.922    0.862
                 Sevi—Buins                             4.590                  0.683    0.193
                 Service—Persocal                       4.492                  1.205    0.328
                     textiles & Itade                   4.475                  1.437    0.329
                      Tha.ponatio,                      4.647                  1.253    0.295
                             Utilities                  -0.561                 0.665    0.072
                             Avenge                     -0376                  1.050    0,367



  X'                    Degcees of             P.nlue
                         freedom
163.39                     144                  0.128
                                              ThbIe 7 (continued)




                                           Intetnalional bond returns

               PortFolio                      APS                       YRI                       VR2


                   Cez.ada                    0.106                     0.238                     0.897
                    F.nca                     0.371                     1.913                     1.282
                  Germany                     0.471                     2.257                     1.372
                     Japan                    0.604                     1486                      1.666
               rletherland.                   0.453                     1.762                     1.193
             Switzerland                      0.34'                     1.799                     0.897
         United l(ingdo.n                     0.2*6                     1.511                     1.434
              United Slats                    0.125                     0.206                     1.227
                  Avenge                      0.345                     1.409                     1.244




         X2                   Degreof          P-vaLet
                              freedom
       16.49                    64              0.032
The Ind.ettry porfolios ste beard on sa sggiegatlon dl? Morgan Stanley Capital Intenatioeal lndt*tiy poncho.. The
bend data are Sore Lombasel Other 4 øe. APE I. the a.s endng z (percent per month). '/RS ii the ratio of
the vadeas of the model apected ret   (prodvad by the model e.tlmalion) to the varIance oi the apected retur
generated by a linear rwasion of the and melee on the imei4al n.IabS. VR2 I. the ratio ci the variance of
the aspersed model residuaja (prvdu by • linear regreseioa .1 the snodd ..sidtsaM on the matte mental vanahS) to
the nuance ci the apected stearns gemied by a linear region ci the         4 items en the inatnmental variable.
                                                             Thble 8
The relative importance of tire two sources for risk in the latent factor model as well as the model with two prespecified
sour of risk. The prespecified sources of risk am the ex return on the Morgan Stanley Capital International world
index and the ac return on an index of foreign currency investment in ten countries. The data are from 1971:3-1991:09
(247 observations).

                                                  Latent factor model                               Prpecifiad factor model
                                                             Proçortion Proportion                               Proportion Proportion
                                      Factor 1    Factor 2   of instance of ndance       Factor a    Factor 2   of instance of instance
             Portfolio                  flak        risk       due to       due to         risk         rut       due to       due to
                                      loading     loading     factor I     factor 2      loading      loading    tenor I      factor 2

                                                     Coufl inda —
                          Auraiia      1.000       0.000       1.000       0000           1031        4.156        (.00?
                            A,zia      0.000       1.000       0000        1000          0.309         0.931      0.178       0.761
                           Belgium     0640        0213        0717        006!          0.727         0.731      0.527       0.300
                           Canada      0.716       0.096       0.921       0008           1.023       4.324       0.989       0.047
                          Deamazt      0.402      -0.292       1.212       Ciii          0.526         0.598      0.874       0.33'
                            Rance      0.635       0219        0.797       0.045         0.950         0.735      0.729       0.205
                           Germany     0.520       0.115       0001        0.043         0.656         0261       0.501       0.415
                         Hong Kong     0.657       1.104       0.318       0.388          1.128        0.29?      0.041       0.031
                              Italy    0.108       0.781       0.033       0428          0.759         0.312      0.773       0.167
                          Japan        0.578       0.427       0.894       0.153          1.008        0.508      0.149       0.102
                     Netherlands       0.841      .0.154       1008        0.017         0255          0.369      0279        0.078
                            Norwq'     0.238       0.256       0.461       0253          0.948         0.161      0.968       0013
              Singapore/Mala'sia       0009        0.275       0821        0036           1.199       4.304       0.999       0.030
                          Spain       -0.153       0299        0.071       1.170         0.703         0.359      0.846       0.103
                            Sweden     0.242       0745        0.138       0.817         0.774         0.318      0287        0.071
                     Switsedand        0.730      4.273        1.175       0.078         0413          0.650      0.718       0.217
                United KIngdom         1025        0038        0.979       0001          1.173        0.311       0.940       0.031
                  United States        0.781      4.330        1.189       0.100         1022         -0.528      0.937       0.111
                           Average     0.535       0293        0.685       0.279         0267          0.335      0.797       0.170

                                          Intainalional industay tnsI,a (no dividends)
  Aeronpace & Mililasy TethnoIo        3000             -          1            0        0.891        4.053       0.997       0.001
                  Capital Goods       0985              -          I            0        1.028        .0.041      0.991       0.000
                         Chem.icala   0.731             .          I            0        0.965         0.181      0.997       0.008
                Coa,mtnjcaliona       0.797             .          1            0        0.750        -0.140      ens         0.008
                   Construction       0.751             .          I            0        0.948        0.716       0.898       0.122
              Consumer Durable        0.924             .          1            0        0.929         0.095      '.000       0.003
                           Energy     0.906             .          I            0        1.008        .0.277      0.975       0,017
                          FInance     0.714             -          1            0        1.062        0224        0.957       0.022
                 Food It Thbacco      0.870             .          I            0        0.842        0.116       '.000       0.005
                 Ft Product.          1.031             .          1            0        1068         -0.139      0.992       0.004
                            Lelaure   1.064             .          1            0        1.083        4.228       0.984       0.010
              Metals and Mining       0.905             .          1            0        0.841        0.613       0.905       0.114
                     Real EstaSe      0.370             .          I            0        1.014        0.764       0.899       0.121
               Seruice.-Duaine.a       1.067           -           1          ii         0.655        0.201       0.994       0.013
               Servlcea—Peroonal      0834             -           1           0         0.864        0.040       1.001       0.001
                Textilea & Thde       0.774            -           1           0         1.033        0.345       0.984       0.035
                 Thn.potta*ion        0751             -           1           0         0.965        0.213       0.995       0.011
                         Utilities    0.765            -           I           0         0.587        0.407       0.914       0.104
                           Average    0.853            -           I           0         0.931        0.174       0.973       0.033
                                                             Table 8 (cootinteed)


                                             Latent factor model                                    Preapecified factor model
                                                         Proportion     Proportion                                  Proportion    Proportion
                             Factor I       Eactor 2     of .anance     of vaiwice     Factor I      Factor 2       of variance   of vasiance
        Portfolio              risk           sk            due to        due to         risk           risk          doe to        due to
                             loading        loading        factor I       (actor 2      loading       leading        factor I       factor 2

                                                         International bond returns
            Canada            1.000          0.000         1.000         0.000             0.252          0.159          1.001         0.360
             ñ.nce            0.000          1.000          0.             1.000           0.105          0.971          0013          2.060
                                               1.079          0000         1.029           0.089          1.107          0.007         1.046
           Germany            4,035
                               0.347           0.581          0.272         0.312          0.151          0.994          0.026         1.077
              Japan
        N.th.dsnds             0.337           0.972          0.032         0.747          0.063          2.039          0.007         1.046
         Switmland             4.646           1.273          0.151         1.535          0.044          1.002          0.002         2.026
    United KIngdom              0.437          0.567          0.119         0.525          0.220          0.762          0091          1.105
                                0.352          0.345          0.173         0.435          0.251          0060            1.008        0.060
       United Ltat
                                0.265          0.725          0.219         0.698          0.149                         0.281         0.850
            Avarage
The p.opcetioe .1 variance die. to the factor I. calculated as the unconditional variants 01 the facter beta
                                                                                                             tints the factor premium divided by
U.. uacooditloeal variance of the fitted retinas (roan the model.
7ae one-latent factor moelts ar. reported.
   Nurul..,                 laduatry puflrol.n                           MSCI cou.positioe.

          I        Aerospace & Military Technology                Aero.pace & Military ledinology
       2                     Capetal Good.                     Electronic Components it lnstn.ment,
                                                                      Industrial Component.
                                                                     Madsinery Sc Engineering

       3                      Qiemical.                                     Chemicals

       4                   Communications                                  Broadcasting
                                                                        Telecnmnnsoàcation,

       S                     Coo.tn,ctio,,                       BuM rag Malaid. it 000ponanta
                                                                    Coe.tn.ction & Ho.a.ng
      6                   Consumer Durable.                      Appliance. it IIou.eâold Durable.
                                                                           Automobile.
                                                                      Electrical & Electronics
       7
                                                                   Eaer Equipn.eM & Service.
                                                                          Energy Source.
      a                         Finance

                                                                            I—
                                                                             Banking
                                                                        floancial Service.

      9                    Food it Tobacco                           Benrage it Tobacco
                                                                   Phod & Ho.ahold Product.
     10                    Foist Product.                            Fort Product, Sc Paper
     II                         Leisure                                Leisure Sc Iborism
                                                               Recreation, Other Coaronier Goods

     12                    MetalatMining                                  Gold Mine.
                                                                     Metal, (Non-Fence.)
                                                                        Metal. (Steel)
                                                                 Misc. Materials it Conintcditie.
     13                      Real Estate                                   Real EMMa

     II                   Service.-D.nins                           Busios it Public Service.
                                                                 Data Procening it Reproduction
     IS                   Setyire-Pereonal                           Ilealtu, it Prnonal Car.
     16                   Textile. it 'node                             Methaadiaing
                                                                      Textile. it Apparel
                                                                 Wholcasle & Inleniational 'fade
     II                     Ttaaaportat,on                            'fanaportation—Airline.
                                                                  'fsnaportation—Itoad it Rail
                                                                     fansportation—Shipping
     IS       -
                               Ulilitie.                            Utiliti.,-Electrical it Gas
                        Fig. I. Composition of tb. inlenvational industry porttolioa
Ilased on an aggregation or 37 Morgan Stanley Capital International Industry podolio.. Each of the 37 MSCI
portfolios an value wrighted. The aggregated poqtfohoa repe..ent return to a portfolio that tart, with an
equally-weighted investment in the MSCI rategoris in December 1969.
                A. Country equity retunis
    Ito—



     I—'




     .-

     4-'                              c ccc.;; q;i;;;; i
                 B. International lisdustry returns. (no dividends)


      to-

      'It.
      Ix'
      to-

      4x'
      4 It'
                ccc ;cc; cc;;;! ;;;;;! ;
                   C. International bead return,




       .L
       • ws

        S It'

        o —'




       4
                     rç           ç            cc;              ;     ; 4;;;;;c
                      Fig. 2. flit comovement of expected iaternttiooal asset returns.
The solid lines represent fitted values from regression, of the asset return, on the inatnimental variables.
The clear line represents the fitted value from regressing t lie MSCI world ret Un' on I lie inst mmciii S.
                    A - Country miquity retu ri's



                                                                                               Latent prenhlu Ill
                                                                                         — — Prespeci fled prein 'ISiS'




                       SPIPSNPSUPSNSISSSIISSIPS 55
                      B. International jaduatsy returns (no dividends)




                                   —


                      9       tv
                                              r
                          'S PS IS II   flNN 4' n_—4.w—n4'sI S. Si_Si
                                                    -4.
                     C. International bond returns




                           Fig. 3. Characterizing the first latent risk premium.
The did line re,reseumt the premium aasociated with the hrst latent Inctor 1k a two factor model. Tue dashed
line represents lie fitted values from regressing the time Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) world
iii iii' iii      sift he 30-slav Tarasui-v bill no uhe jnsur,ipncniaJ vaujables.
                     A. Country equity returns



                                                                                         — Latent premium
                                                                                            Prespecified premium




                                                    I Id LkU



                     11 nnflflMflflflflflaflfl—fl
                      B. Intonational Indostiy returns (no dividends)




                     'I   'S flflflflflflnnS..SS.fl nfl
                      C. International bond returns




                                  p. nnnnflflflSS......n •..I.nfl
                            Fig. 4. Characterizing the second latent risk premium.
The solid line represent the premium associased with the second latent factor in a two Factor model. The
dashed line represents site fitted values from regrring the return on a trade weighted currency invesImelll
iii 10 countries in exress oF the 30-day Treasury bill on the instrunlenlal variables.
            A. Risk loadings (or two latent factor model
loan K—tarn tl


            LEO




            1.07




            0.53
                                                                                                          1.22


                                                                                                   0.65
           -0.01                                                                                    Risk 3
             LOX                                                                           0.00
                                 0.43
                                         Risk S       0.24
                                                                           0.14 0.49

                      B. Fitted security market plane
 Pndict.d talus

             3.43                                     Mean acess return = 0.193 + 0.4Ogfl + 0.463j9 R2=35%
                                                                          (0.106) (0.171)  (0.100)




             2.07




            0.72




                                                                                                   0.47
           -0.44
              1.30                                                                                   si.k 2
                                                                                             .07
                                  0.03
                                         u.k 1        0.37
                                                                          —0.10   0-. 50




                            Fig. S. The cross-section of avtrgge returns and risk.
The pillars represent the risk loadings for the first two factors in the two factor Latent estimation. In contrast
to the results presented in the paper, this estimation simultaneous considers all 44 assets. The average returns
are in excess of the 30-day Treasury bill. The security market plane are the fitted values front the regression
of the average returns on the betas.
