                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DO YOUTHS SUBSTITUTE ALCOHOL
                            AND MARIJUANA? SOME
                            ECONOMETRIC EVIDENCE




                                   Frank J. Chaloupka
                                     Adit Laixuthai




                                 Working Paper No. 4662



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1994


Research for this paper was supported by Grants RO1 DAO711I from the National Institute
on Drug Abuse and ROl AA 08359 froth the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors are grateful toPatrick
M. O'Malley and Jerome J. Hiniker of the University of Michigan's Institute for Social
Research for providing restricted data sets from the Monitoring the Future surveys of 1982
and 1989 containing county identifiers. The authors are also indebted to Paul Taubmail for
providing the marijuana price data and to Henry Saffer, Michael Grossman, Gregory Bloss.
Mark Showalter, and session participants at the 1992 Southern Economics Association
meetings in Washington, D.C. and the 1993 Western Economic Association meetings in Lake
Tahoe, NV for comments on earlier drafts. Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and not those of the NIDA, NIAAA, UIC, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Health Economics.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4662
                                                                                February 1994


                            DO YOUThS SUBSTITUTE ALCOHOL
                                 AND MARIJUANA? SOME
                                ECONOMETRIC EVIDENCE


                                           ABSTRACT

        Data from the 1982 and 1989 Monitoring the Future Surveys are used to examine the
substitutability of alcoholic beverages and marijuana among youths. Beer prices and minimum
legal drinking ages are used as measures of the full price of alcohol, while an indicator of
marijuana decriminalization and its money price capture the full price of marijuana. Results
indicate that drinking frequency and heavy drinking episodes are negatively related to beer prices,
but positively related to the full price of marijuana. The implications of this substitution for one
of the consequences of youth substance abuse, driving while intoxicated, is examined using
information on youth non.fatal accidents taken from the surveys and on youth fatal motor vehicle
accidents constructed from the Fatal Accident Reporting System. These results indicate that the
net effect of an increase in the full price of alcoholic beverages on the probability of a youth
traffic crash is negative. However, the opposite is found for marijuana. That is, the results imply
that the reduction in accidents resulting from substitution away from alcoholic beverages and
other intoxicating substances to marijuana as its full price is lower more than offsets the increase
in accidents related to marijuana use.




Frank J. Chaloupka                                   Adit Laixuthai
Department of Economics (MIC 144)                    Health Resources Management (M/C 923)
University of Illinois at Chicago                    School of Public Health East
601 5. Morgan Street, 21st floor                     University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607-7121                               Box 6998
and NBER                                             Chicago, IL 60680
I. Introduction

         Youth drinking and alcohol abuse have been a focus of government policy since

the mid 1970's. When the 26th amendment to the Constitution lowered the voting age

to 1 8 years1 a number of states followed by also lowering their minimum legal drinking

ages. The consequent increase in youth alcohol abuse, particularly in drinking and

driving, led many states to rethink this policy. By 1984, the federal government became

involved in what had traditionally been left up to states to decide by enacting the Federal

Uniform Drinking Age Act. This act pressured states into raising all legal drinking ages

to 21 years or suffer the penalty of losing part of the highway funds they received from

the federal government. By 1988, all states had complied. The higher drinking ages

succeeded in reducing youth alcohol use and abuse (for example: Coate and Grossman,

1988; Saffer and Grossman, 1987). However, drinking, heavy drinking, drunken driving,

and other measures of youth alcohol abuse remain stubbornly high. For example, in

1991, approximately 30 percent of high school seniors report at least one heavy drinking

episode (five or more drinks on a single occasion) at least once in the previous two

weeks.

      Three recent econometric studies suggest that part of the reason for the

persistently high level of youth drinking may be the success of the 'War on Drugs",

particularly with respect to marijuana. In the first of these, John DiNardo and Thomas

Lemieux (1992) use state level tabulations for 43 states of marijuana and alcohol use

taken from the annual Monitoring the Future (MTF) survey of high school seniors over the

years from 1980 through 1989 to look at the effects of increases in legal drinking ages.


                                            1
 They find that the higher legal drinking ages did reduce youth alcohol consumption, as

 expected. However, they find that the lower alcohol consumption was accompanied by

 an almost one-for-one increase in marijuana consumption. They conclude that this

 unintended consequence is attributable to standard substitution effects.

        In two studies, Karyn Model looks at the effects of marijuana decriminalization on

 drug related hospital emergency room episodes, (1993) and violent crime (1991). Based

 on the hospital emergency room data, she concludes that marijuana decriminalization

 leads individuals to substitute away from alcohol and other illegal drugs towards

 marijuana. She finds that emergency episodes related to marijuana use are higher in

 states which have decriminalized, while those related to alcohol and other illegal drug use

 are lower. Similarly she finds that lower violent crime rates, particularly homicide rates,

 are associated with marijuana decriminalization. Since a high percentage of violent

 crimes are alcohol related, she attributes the lower crime rates in states which have

decriminalized to substitution away from alcohol toward marijuana. These findings conflict

somewhat with those of Johnston, O'Malley, and Bachman (1987) based on the 1975

through 1980 Monitoring the Future surveys of high school seniors and their subsequent

followups. They find that marijuana consumption and attitudes towardsmarijuana among

youths and young adults are little changed in the early years after decriminilization in the

seven states which decriminalized marijuana during their sample.

       This paper adds to the limited econometric literature addressing the question of

substitution between marijuana and alcohol. Youth drinking and heavy drinking, taken

from the 1982 and 1989 Monitoring the Future surveys, are estimated as functions of the



                                            2
price of alcohol, legal drinking ages, and the price of marijuana. In addition, the
probability of a youth traffic accident, an outcome related to both alcohol and drug abuse,

is estimated. Finally, state level youth motor vehicle accident rates are examined using

data from the Fatal Accident Reporting System (FARS).



II. Youth fticohol Consumption



       & Analytical Framework

       The model employed in this study is based on Siegel's (1989) hypothesis that

individuals consume drugs and alcohol in an attempt at mood alteration. Thus, an

individual's utility at any given time is assumed to be a function of that person's level of

"intoxication" (I), as well as a composite of other consumption goods (X):



(1)           U = u(l, X),



where u > 0 and u c 0, i=l,X.

       Intoxication is produced by consuming alcohol (A), marijuana (M), and/or other

drugs (0) each of which have positive but diminishing marginal productivity:



(2)           I = l(A, M, D).



       Maximizing utility, subjectto the intoxication production function and an appropriate



                                             3
 budget constraint yields the demands for alcohol, marijuana, and other drugs:



 (3)           A = A(PA, P, P0, P, V, 4



 (4)           M = M(PMP A' DP P. Y Z),

 and:

 (5)          D = D(PQ, P, P, P. Y1 4



where A, M' P0. and P are the prices of aicohol, marijuana, other drugs, and other

goods, respectively, Y represents the youth's income, and Z is a vector which captures

the youth's tastes and productive efficiency.



        B. Data

        Alternative versions of equation (3) are estimated below using data on youth

alcohol consumption taken from the 1982 and 1989 Monitoring the Futuresurveys of high

school seniors. These surveys, described in detail by Johnston, et al., (1987), focus on

the use of illegal drugs, alcohol, and cigarettes, and are conducted in the spring of the

youth's senior year. These data are collected directly from the students. Parents were

not present during the interviews and were not informed about the responses of their

children. As part of a special agreement, variables measuring youth alcohol consumption

were made available as part of a restricted data set which includes identifiers for each




                                           4
 youth's county of residence.1 In addition, a variety of socioeconomic and demographic

 information was provided.

           Three alternative measures of the frequency of youth alcohol consumption were

 constructed from the categorical measures obtained in the surveys.2 The distribution of

 these measures, the construction of which is described below, is presented in Table 1.

           The first consumption frequency measures looks at alcohol consumption during

the previous year and is measured as follows: abstainers are defined as youths with no

drinking occasions in the past year; infrequent drinkers are defined as youths with

between I and 9 drinking occasions in the past year; fairly frequent drinkers are defined

as youths with 10 to 39 drinking occasions in the past year; and frequent drinkers are

defined as youths with 40 or more drinking occasions in the past year. The dependent

variable indicating the frequency of alcohol consumption in the past year is defined as

0, 1, 2, and 3 for abstainers, infrequent drinkers, fairly frequent drinkers, and frequent

drinkers, respectively.

          The second captures drinking in the past 30 days, and is defined as 0 for

abstainers (no drinking occasions in the past 30 days). I for infrequent drinkers (1 to 5

drinking occasions in the past 30 days), 2 for fairly frequent drinkers (6 to 9 drinking

occasions in the past 30 days), and 3 for frequent drinkers (10 or more drinking



    'Unfortunately, individual level data on marijuana and other drug consumption is unavailable in the
restricted versions of the Monitoring the Future data sets provided to the authors by the University of
Michigan's Institute for Social Research.
   2
       More detailed alcohol specific information is collected in five or six additional questionnaires, each of
which is completed by a fraction of the total sample. These data include beverage specific alcohol
consumption, attitudes towards alcohol, and various other measures.

                                                       5
 occasions in the past 30 days).

         The final drinking variable is an indicator of heavy drinking. This variable is defined

 as one if the youth had at least one drinking occasion in the two weeks prior to the

 survey in which he/she consumed five or more drinks, and is defined as zero otherwise.

         The alcoholic beverage prices are taken from the quarterly reports of the American

 Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association (ACCRA). The ACCRA surveys between

 200 and 300 cities quarterly and collects information on the prices of a number of

 consumer goods, including beer, wine, and distilled spirits.3 In addition to prices, the

 ACCRA constructs a city specific cost-of-living index for each of the cities in its quarterly

 reports. The results presented below use the price of beer as the measure of alcoholic

 beverage prices. The beer price is chosen since beer is the most heavily consumed

alcoholic beverage and because beer is the beverage of choice among youths.' The

ACCRA beer price and city specific cost-of-living index are matched to the surveys by

county in each of the first two quarters of 1982 and 1989. Similarly, the quarterly

national Consumer Price Index for the first two quarters of 1982 and 1989 is added to the




     In 1982, prices are obtained for a 750m1 bottle of Seagram's 7-Crown, a 6-pack of Budweiser or Schlitz,
and a 750mJ bottle of Paul Masson Chablis. In 1989, the reports include prices of a 1 liter bottle of J&B
Scotch, a 6-pack of Budweiser of Schlitz, and a 1.5 liter bottle of Paul Masson Chablis. A careful effort was
made to construct a standardized series of prices for beer, wine, and distilled spirits. Detailed information
on the construction of this series is available from the authors.

      All equations presented below were also estimated using a weighted average price of beer, wine, and
spirits, or the beer tax as alternative measures of alcoholic beverage prices. These results, which are similar
to those obtained for beer prices, are available upon request.

    'The price assigned to each youth in each quarter is the price in the ACCRA survey city nearest the
youth's county of residence. All equations presented below were reestimated using subsamples of the MTF
surveys based on the quality of the price match. The results obtained for these subsainpies were consistent
with those obtained in the full samples and are available upon request

                                                      6
survey data. Real beer prices are the constructed by deflating the quarterly prices by

bath the national CPI and the ACCRA cost-of-living index and then taking the simple

average of the resulting real prices for the first and second quarters.

       The average minimum legal drinking age for low alcohol beer is added to the

survey data as an additional measure of the full price of alcoholic beverages.' While

almost all youths surveyed are below 18 years of age, and thus unable to legally

purchase alcoholic beverages in any state, youths residing in states with higher minimum

ages will face greater difficulty in obtaining alcoholic beverages than their counterparts

in states where the legal age is lower.

        In addition to the own-state minimum legal drinking age, a dichotomous indicator

equal to one if the youth resides in a county within 25 miles of a state with a lower legal

age is added to the data. This variable is equal to zero if the youth does not live in a

county within 25 miles of another state or if the drinking age in the youth's state of

residence is as low or lower than that in nearby states. The inclusion of this variable is

an attempt to capture potential border crossing by youths from high age states to nearby

lower age states to obtain alcohol.'

        Two variables are added to the data to capture the full price of marijuana. The first


   'The minimum legal drinking age is the weighted average of the legal ages in place during the first two
quarters of the year in which the youth is surveyed. The construction of this variable accounts for the
grandfather clauses many states adopted when raising their legal ages for all alcoholic beverages to 21 years
to comply with the Federal Uniform Drinking Age Act of 1984. While all states had complied with this law
by 1989, grandfather clauses in some states kept the effective legal age below 21 years in some states until
mid-1989. Similar variables were constructed for high alcohol content beer and for distilled spirits. The
choice of the drinking age variable had little impact on the resulting estimates.
    1
      This variable takes on a value of zero for all youths in 1989 since the grandfather clauses which keep
effective drinking ages in some states below 21 apply to state residents only. Hence, this variable is omitted
from the equations estimated using the 1989 sample only.

                                                     7
  is a dichotomous indicator which is equal to one if marijuana possession is decriminalized

  in the state in which the youth resides and is equal to zero otherwise. Aithough the

  possession and use of marijuana is not fully legal in states which have decriminaiized it,

 the expected penalties are well below those in states where marijuana remains

 criminalized. Thus, marijuana consumption is expected to be higher in stateswhich have

 decriminalized. If marijuana and alcohol are substitutes for one another, then
                                                                                youths
 residing in states which have decriminalized marijuana are expected to drink less than

 youths in states where the penalties for marijuana possession and/or use are much

 higher.

        The second variable is a measure of the money price of marijuana. These data

 come from the Drug Enforcement Agency's System to Retrieve information from Drug

 Evidence (STRIDE) database. Prices for both commercial grade marijuana (the dominant

 strain of mariluana in U.S. markets) and sinsemilla (a more potent strain of marijuana) are

reported at both the wholesale and retail levels. The wholesale prices are reported in

dollars per pound, while the retail prices are reported in dollars per ounce.

       There are several problems with using these marijuana price data in this research.

First, the prices are reported for at most 19major metropolitan areas. To match the price

data with the survey data, the following strategy was employed: if the youth resides in

a county which includes a city in the STRIDE database, then the price in that city is used

for the marijuana price (this is considered a "perfect' match); if there is no "perfect'

match, then the price in the nearest city within the same state from the STRIDE database

to the youth's county of residence is used as the marijuana price (two levels are defined



                                            B
 for the quality of this match - a "border match is one where the STRIDE city is in a

 county which borders on the youth's county of residence, while a "state level" match is

one where the price is for a city within the same state but is not a "perfect' or "border

match); if there is no city in the STRIDE data that is also in the youth's state of residence,

then the price from the STRIDE city nearest the youth's county of residence is used as

the rnarUuana price (the quality of this match is also defined at two levels - a "nearby"

match is defined as one where the price is from a city within 50 miles of the youth's

county of residence), while the "poorest' match is defined for cities which are more than

50 miles from and not in the state as the youth's county of residence. Estimates using

subsamples of the data based on the quality of the price match, as well as estimates for

the full sample, are presented below.8

        A second problem with the marijuana price data is that the data are available only

for the fourth quarter of 1988 and the fourth quarter of 1989. Price data for 1982 were

not obtained in the data graciously made available by Paul Taubman for this research.

Thus, all equations estimated which include marijuana prices use only the 1989 cross-

section (or a subsample of this survey). A simple average of the 1988 and 1989 fourth

quarter prices is used as the price of marijuana for the 1989 sample (surveyed in the

spring of 1989)?


      In addition to the estimates presented below, additional estimates were obtained for more restricted
subsamples. In general, the estimates obtained from the more resiricted, much smaller samples are similar
to, albeit less statistically significant than, the estimates presented here. These estimates are available on
request. Also, due to the problems in assigning appropriate local marijuana prices, these prices are not
deflated by the local cost-of-living index from the ACCRA data.

     All equations were also estimated using the 1988 price or the 1989 price as the price of marijuana.
The results for these variables are comparable to those presented below and are available on request.

                                                     9
            A third problem with the marijuana price data is that they are reported as a range

 of values rather than as a single value. For example, the national average price of

 commercial grade marijuana at the wholesale level in the fourth quarter of 1988 is

 reported as $350-si ,800. While the ranges reported for the city specific prices are

 somewhat narrower, there is still a large range of prices reported for wholesale and retail

 commercial grade and sinsemilla maruana in each city. The results presented in this

 paper use the midpoint of the range reported in the STRIDE data as the price of

 marijuana.

           There is clearly substantial measurement error in the marijuana money price data.

 For example, one would expect that the alternative price measures should be relatively

 highly correlated, since each is likely to be related to drug enforcement efforts and other

factors which would be expected to influence price. It is somewhat comforting to note

that the correlation between the wholesale prices for commercial grade and sinsemilla

maruana is 0.45, while the correlation between the wholesale and retail prices of

commercial grade marijuana is also 0.45. More disturbing is the observation that the

correlation between the retail prices of the two types of marijuana is only 0.15 and that

the correlation between the wholesale and retail prices of sinsemilla is -0.002." This

suggests that the retail price of sinsemilla may be measured with the most error, since
it is neither correlated with its own wholesale price nor with the retail price of commercial


   '° In
           addition to using the midpoint of the range of prices reported,
                                                                     alternative estimates were obtained
using the minirnuni and maximum values for the range of prices. The results obtained using these
alternative measures were generally similar to those presented below and are available upon request.

      These correlation coefficients were obtained based on the prices assigned to the full sample, as
described above. Similar values are obtained in the subsamples as well as in the raw data.

                                                   10
 grade marijuana as would be expected. While the money price of marijuana is measured

 with substantial error, the other measure of the full price of marijuana, the
 decriminalization indicator, is more reliable. Thus, any conclusions made below on the

 substitutability or complementarity of marijuana and alcohol among youths will not be

 based solely on a variable measured with error. Finally, reliable estimates of other illegal

drug prices were unavailable. As a result, a potential omitted variables bias is introduced,

which may be particularly problematic if the prices of other illegal drugs are correlated

with the marijuana prices which are included. This is likely to be the case since the prices

of other illegal drugs will be influenced by the same enforcement and other factors which

affect the price of marijuana. Again, this is less likely to be a problem with the estimates

obtained for the decriminalization indicator, since all other illegal drugs are criminalized

in all states.12

        Several independent variables were constructed from the wealth of socioeconomic

and demographic information collected in the surveys. These include indicators of sex,

race (black, and other), and work status (part-time and fufl-time),as well as the youth's

age. Real weekly income is created by deflating the youth's nominal weekly income data

collected in the survey by the local cost-of-living index and the national CPL In addition,

some of the specifications presented below include indicators of religious participation

(infrequent and frequent attendance at religious services). It is thought that those who

are more committed to their religion (as measured by more frequent attendance) will be



   12 Future research will make use of variables measuring the mandatory minimum penalties associated
with both the possession and manufacture/distribution of all illegal drugs, as well as illegal drug prices
consuucted from the STRIDE data.

                                                  11
  less likely to drink heavily. Finally, in all equations estimated for the combined 1982 and

  1989 sample, a dichotomous indicator equal to 1 for youths surveyed in 1982 is included.



          C. Results

          Ordered probit estimates of the frequency of alcohol consumption in the past year

 and in the past thirty days are presented in columns I and 2, respectively, of Tables 2

 and 3 below. Dichotomous probit estimates for the probability of at least one heavy

 drinking incident in the past two weeks are presented in column 3 of these tables. Panel

 A of Table 2 presents estimates using the combined 1982 and 1989 sample for equations

 which exclude the money price of marijuana. Panel A of Table 3 presents estimates using

the 1 989 sample only of equations which include each of the four alternative marijuana

money prices. In addition, Panel B of Table 4 contains estimates for a subsample of the

1989 sample based on the quality of the marijuana price match.13 Panel B of Table 2,

for comparison purposes, contains estimates of equations excluding the money price of

marijuana for the 1989 sample only. Each table presents the coefficient estimates for

beer prices, the minimum legal drinking age, the dichotomous indicator of a lower border

drinking age (pooled sample only), the dichotomous indicator for marijuana



     " The restricted sample is limited to observations
                                                        where the marijuana price assigned to the youth is
for a city from the STRiDE data which is in the same state in which the youth resides. In most cases, this
city is relatively dose to the youth's county of residence1 implying that theprice in that city should be a
reasonably good measw-e of the price the youth faces for marijuana. Observations where prices are from
a city in the STRIDE data which is not in the youth's state of residence are dropped in the restricted sample.
Even if the youth lives near the city from which the price is taken, the assigned price may not be a good
measure of the price the youth faces if the drug enforcement activities in his/her state are quite different
from those in the state from which the price is taken.

                                                     12
 decriminalization, and, where included, the money price of marijuana.1'

         In nearly every equation estimated, the coefficient of the real beer price is negative

 and statisticaliy significant at the ten percent significance level, with many significant at

 the one percent level. The only exceptions to this are some of the equations using the

 1 989 sample which include the wholesale price of sinsemilla as the price of marijuana.

 In general, these results support the findings of the substantial economics literature

 describing the negative relationship between youth alcohol consumption and the prices

 of alcoholic beverages (for example, see the summary by Grossman, Chaloupka, Saffer,

and Laixuthai, forthcoming).

         Furthermore, these estimates indicate that the effects of price on consumption are

not limited to infrequent drinkers, but that fairly frequent and frequent drinkers as well as

heavy drinking among youths falls as price rises. This is clearly shown by the negative

significant coefficients estimated for the beer price in the probability of heavy drinking

equations. The coefficients obtained from the ordered probit estimation for the frequency

of drinking in the past year and drinking in the past month are somewhat more difficult

to interpret. The negative and significant estimates obtained for price indicate that an

increase in the beer price will lead to a reduction in the number of youths in the most

frequent drinking categories (40 or more drinking occasions in the past year or ten or

more drinking occasion in the past month). Similarly, these estimates imply that the

number of youths who do not drink would rise in response to an increase in beer prices.



       All equations also include an intercept, the indicators of gender, race, work status, and religious
participation, as wetl as the youth's real weekly income and age, as described above. The pooled sample
also includes the dichotomous year indicator for 1982. These results are available upon request.

                                                   13
 However, no clear conclusions for the number of infrequent or fairly frequent drinkers can

 be drawn directly from the estimates (for example, while some fairly frequent drinkers will

 reduce consumption in response to the price increase, some formerly frequent drinkers

 may end up as fairly frequent drinkers, leaving the net effect unclear). The results from

 the policy simulations presented in the next section will shed some light on the impact of

 prices and other variables on these groups.

         Similarly, the impact of higher minimum legal drinking ages on both the frequency

 of alcohol consumption and the probability of heavy drinking is also negative and

 significant in most of the estimated equations. In addition, the indicator for youths who

live near a state with a lower legal age than that in their own state is positive and highly

significant as expected. These estimates imply that increases in the minimum legal

drinking age increase the 'cost" to youths ol obtaining alcohol and, consequently, lead

to reductions in both the frequency of youth alcohol consumption and the probability of

heavy drinking among youths. However, states which increase their own minimum legal

drinking ages above those in nearby states (as happened throughout the late 1970's and

early 1980's) can expect at least some young residents to leave the state to obtain

alcohol. Thus, while overall youth alcohol consumption may be lower as the result of

higher drinking ages, drinking and driving by youths may actually rise when differences
in own and nearby state drinking ages increase. This potential consequence of higher

drinking ages in some states was eliminated when all states raised theirlegal ages to 21

years to comply with the Uniform Drinking Age Act. This possibility will be examined
below.



                                           14
equal to zero otherwise.'6 The independent variables included in the estimation of this

equation are identical to those included in the alcohol demand equations described

above,

       A pooled time-series of state cross-sections for the 48 contiguous states of the

U.S. covering the years from 1975 through 1988 is used to examine the effects of alcohol

and marijuana prices on the probability of a fatal youth motor vehicle accident.

       Motor vehicle accident fatality rates are the most commonly used empirical

measure of intoxicated driving available. While not all motor vehicle fatalities are the

results of drunk and/or "drugged" driving, there is a strong correlation between the two

measures. During this time period, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

(NHTSA) estimates that alcohol was involved in over half of these deaths, and that this

percentage is much higher for people under the age of 25. Owens, et al., (1983), and

Johnson and White (1989) present evidence that marijuana use could also play a role in

at least some motor vehicle accident fatalities.

       Three alternative fatality rates, based on the information contained in the NHTSA's

Fatal Accident Reporting System (FARS) database are constructed for 18 through 20 year

olds, and for 15 through 24 year olds. The first is the total fatality rate for the two age

categories. While this certainly includes non-intoxicated fatalities, it is a useful measure

for examining the overall impacts of policies related to drug and alcohol use. The two

remaining fatality measures are limited to drivers only and are constructed in an attempt



   e The survey includes continuous information on the number of motor vehicle accidents, with an upper
limit of four or more accidents. However, almost no youth report more than one accident, so nonzero
responses are collapsed into a single category indicating at least one accident in the past year.

                                                 23
(1984), for example).15 Instead, this finding implies that high school seniors, many of

whom are likely to have initiated their alcohol and drug use several years earlier, treat

alcohol and marijuana as substitutes for one another.

        This conclusion is generally supported by the coefficients obtained for the

alternative measures of marijuana prices. In both the full and restricted 1989 samples1

positive and highly significant coefficients are obtained for the wholesale price of

marijuana (both commercial grade and sinsemilla). The findings for retail marijuana prices

are mixed. The coefficients for the retail price of commercial grade marijuana are always

positive and generally significant, except in the frequency of drinking in the past year

equations where they are positive but insignificant. Retail sinsemilla prices, however, are

estimated to have a negative and generally significant impact on alcohol consumption in

both the full and restricted sample. The findings for both wholesale prices and for the

retail price of commercial grade marijuana can be viewed as more reliable for two

reasons:      first, the retail price of sinsemilla appears to be subject to the most

measurement error, as discussed above; and, second, sinsemilla is a much higher priced

strain of marijuana which constitutes only a small part of the market making it less likely

to be used by youths.'°




    ' Future research will use some of the longitudinal data collected as part of the Monitoring the Future
project to examine the gateway hypothesis.

     Kleirnan (1992) describes the evolution of the marijuana market over time, noting that most of the
U.S. market was supplied from foreign sources and that most foreign marijuanais commercial grade. I-fe
goes on to note that successful interdiction efforts have led to a much larger domestic supply and that,
combined with improvements in cultivation, this has led to an increase in the potency of marijuana (both
commercial and sinsenjila).

                                                   16
         U. Policy Simulations

         As mentioned above, it is difficult to use the ordered probit coefficients to interpret

 the effects of changes in the variables of interest on the frequency of drinking. While the

 coefficients themselves provide some information, particularly for the top (frequent

 drinkers) and bottom (abstainers) categories, the marginal effect of the variable on each

 category is more useful. Table 4 presents simulation results which use these marginal

effects to evaluate the impact of changes in various policies on the frequency of youth

drinking and the probability of heavy drinking by youths.1' Each of the cells in Table 4

indicates the percentage change in the number of respondents predicted to fall into each

of the categories as a result of the change in policy being simulated (recall that the

original distributions are presented in Table 1). Panel A of Table 4 contains the simulation

results for the pooled 1982 and 1989 sample, while Panel B contains those for the 1989

sample only. Panels B.1, B.2, B.3, B.4, and B.5 present the results for no marijuana price,

the wholesale commercial grade marijuana price, the wholesale sinsemilla price, the retail

commercial grade marijuana price, and the retail sinsemilla price, respectively. All

simulation results presented are based on the coefficients from the models estimated

using the full samples.


    ' "The      underlying model is assumed to be 'r=wx + e, where Y is alcohol consumption, X contains
determinants of consumption, B are coefficients, and e is an error. However, Y is not observed. What is
observed is Y=0, 1, 2, and 3, when Yo,               p1sYspz2, and           respectively. The probabilities
of each outcome are;
        Prob[Y=0] = 1. 'V(B'XJ
        Prob[Y=1J =
        Prob[Y=2] =
        Prob[Y=3] = 1
where C' is the cumulative standard normal distribution (from Greene, 1990). Simulations are conducted
by changing the appropriate independent variable to reflect the policy under consideration and recomputing
the probabilities based on the estimated coefficients.

                                                    17
        Four alternative policy simulations are presented. The first increases the federal

 excise tax on beer to offset the effects of inflation since 1951 (this amounts to a 17.1

 percent increase in the average price of beer in the pooled sample and about an 18

 percent increase in the 1989 sample, assuming that the tax increase is fully passed on

to consumers). The second simulates the impact of recriminahzation of marijuana in every

state while the third considers marijuana decriminalization in all states. Finally, the fourth

examines the impact of a reduction in the price of marijuana comparable to the increase

in the price of beer associated with the tax increase described above (that is, the price

of marijuana is assumed to fall by 18 percent). This is done to provide some comparison

between the relative responsiveness of young drinkers to changes in beer prices and

marijuana prices.

       As the ordered probit coefficients indicated, an increase in the beer tax leads to

significant increases in the number of abstainers while the number of frequent drinkers

or heavy drinkers falls sharply. For example, in the pooled sample, increasing the beer

tax with inflation since 1951 would raise the numbers of abstainers in the past year and

in the past month by 8.42 percent and 4.35 percent. respectively, while reducing the

comparable numbers of frequent drinkers by 7.49 percent and 6.57 percent. The number

of fairly frequent drinkers in either the past year or past month also falls as a result of this

policy. However, the number of infrequent drinkers in the past year rises by 2.15 percent

while the number of infrequent drinkers in the past month falls slightly. Finally, the

probability of a heavy drinking episode falls by 2.28 percent in response to the large price

increase induced by the tax change. This confirms the findings of other studies


                                              18
(Grossman, Coate and Arluck, (1987) and Coate and Grossman (1988), for example)

which find that the impact of increases in alcoholic beverage excise taxes are not limited

to infrequent drinkers, but that frequent drinkers are very responsive to price changes as

well.

        Simulating the effects of uniform criminalization of marijuana versus uniform

decriminalization of marijuana proves quite interesting. As indicated by the estimated

coefficients, there is strong evidence that, at least for high school seniors, marijuana and

alcohol could be considered substitutes. Thus, moving from a situation where marijuana

is criminalized everywhere, implying substantial penalties for possession and/or use, to

one where marijuana is decriminalized everywhere, significantly reducing the expected

costs of marijuana use, leads to substitution away from alcohol. Based on the results

from the pooled sample, for example, this change in policy would increase the number

of abstainers in the past year by nearly 12 percent, while reducing the number of frequent

drinkers in the past year by almost 11 percent. The number of infrequent drinkers would

rise by about three percent, while the number of fairly frequent drinkers would ball by

almost four percent. Likewise, the probability of a heavy drinking episode would fall

sharply, by approximately 11.55 percent, in response to this policy shift.

        Finally, as shown by most of the estimated marijuana price coefficients, a reduction

in the price of marijuana reduces alcohol consumption, again implying that youths are

substituting the two substances. For example, looking at the changes in drinking in the

past month induced by changes in beer prices and in the retail price of commercial grade

marijuana (perhaps most likely to represent the price youths face for marijuana), one finds



                                             19
that an 18 percent increase in the beer price would reduce the number of frequent

drinkers by 6.28 percent while the comparable marijuana price reduction would reduce

the number of frequent drinkers by 2.84 percent. Similarly the number of abstainers in

the past month is predicted to rise by 5.04 percent and 2.24 percent for the changes in

beer prices and marijuana prices, respectively. These estimates suggest that the

responsiveness of youth drinking to a decline in marijuana prices is almost half that

resulting from an increase in beer prices. Other models predict an even larger cross

price effect, providing strong evidence of the substitutability between alcohol and

marijuana among youths. The next section considers the effects of this substitution on

one of these consequences of substance use among youths, driving under the influence

of alcohol and/or drugs.



Ill. DrMng Under the Influence of Drucjs and/or Alcohol



       A. Analytical Framework

       The underlying model which provides the basis for the empirical analysis of youth

driving under the influence consists of several equations. The first is a technical

relationship in which the probability that a youth is involved in an accident (fatal accident),

ii, is positively related to his/her intoxication while driving, as well as to a vector of

additional variables (1-0 reflecting roadway, traffic, and motor vehicle conditions:



(6)           ix = ir(l, 1-0.



                                              20
 As described in equation (2) above, intoxication is produced by consuming alcohol

 marijuana, and/or other drugs. Substituting equation (2) into equation (6) yields a
 production function in which the probability of an accident (fatal accident) depends

 positively on the consumption of alcohol, marijuana, and other drugs:



 (7)          it = rr(A, M, D, H).



Finally, a reduced form probability of an accident (fatal accident) equation is obtained by

substituting the demands for alcohol, marijuana, and other drugs equations (3), (4), and

(5) above1 into equation (7):



(8)           it = ir(P, PM. D' P,. '1, Z H).



       Two versions of equation (8) are estimated. The first uses the Monitoring the

Future data to examine the probability that a youth is involved in a least one traffic

accident in the previous year. In the second, the reduced form equation is aggregated

over youths in each state in each year. The result is an empirically estimable equation

where the probability of a fatal youth motor vehicle accident is measured by the observed

youth motor vehicle accident fatality rate. Both overall and alcohol related youth fatality

rates, constructed from the FARS, are examined.

       It is expected that a reduction in the price of marijuana (as the result of a state

decriminalizing marijuana, for example) will lead to an increase in marijuana consumption,



                                            21
which, holding alcohol consumption constant, wiH lead to more driving while intoxicated,

 and, consequently more youth accidents and fatal accidents. However, based on the

youth alcohol demand equations estimated above, reductions in the price of marijuana

lead to reductions in alcohol consumption as well. The reduced alcohol consumption will

be accompanied by less drinking and driving and, hence, fewer alcohol related accidents

and fatal accidents. Thus, the overafi impact of a drop in marijuana prices on the

probability of an accident (fatal accident) depends not only on the increased marijuana

consumption it induces, but on the substitution away from alcohol which results. Finally,

the net effect will also depend on the relative risks associated with drunk driving

compared to "stoned" driving. For example, Kleiman (1992) suggests that marijuana use

leads to slower, as well as impaired, driving. This would imply that the probability of an

accident might not differ, but that the probability of a fatal accident would be higher when

drunk than when stoned.



       B. Data

       To look at the impact of alcohol and marijuana prices on the probability of a non-

fatal motor vehicle accident among youths, the 1982 and 1989 surveys of high school

seniors described above are used. The dependent variable in these equations is a

dichotomous variable equal to one if the youth reports driving during at least one motor

vehicle accident in the past year (regardless of responsibility for the accident). and is




                                           22
equal to zero otherwise.'6 The independent variables included in the estimation of this

equation are identical to those included in the alcohol demand equations described

above,

       A pooled time-series of state cross-sections for the 48 contiguous states of the

U.S. covering the years from 1975 through 1988 is used to examine the effects of alcohol

and marijuana prices on the probability of a fatal youth motor vehicle accident.

       Motor vehicle accident fatality rates are the most commonly used empirical

measure of intoxicated driving available. While not all motor vehicle fatalities are the

results of drunk and/or "drugged" driving, there is a strong correlation between the two

measures. During this time period, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

(NHTSA) estimates that alcohol was involved in over half of these deaths, and that this

percentage is much higher for people under the age of 25. Owens, et al., (1983), and

Johnson and White (1989) present evidence that marijuana use could also play a role in

at least some motor vehicle accident fatalities.

       Three alternative fatality rates, based on the information contained in the NHTSA's

Fatal Accident Reporting System (FARS) database are constructed for 18 through 20 year

olds, and for 15 through 24 year olds. The first is the total fatality rate for the two age

categories. While this certainly includes non-intoxicated fatalities, it is a useful measure

for examining the overall impacts of policies related to drug and alcohol use. The two

remaining fatality measures are limited to drivers only and are constructed in an attempt



   e The survey includes continuous information on the number of motor vehicle accidents, with an upper
limit of four or more accidents. However, almost no youth report more than one accident, so nonzero
responses are collapsed into a single category indicating at least one accident in the past year.

                                                 23
to focus on intoxicated drivers. The first driver specific fatality rate is limited to deaths

which occur between 12:00 a.m. and 3:59 a.m. and is called the night driver fatality rate.

The NHTSA estimates that 75-90 percent of these drivers had been drinking prior to their

deaths. It is suspected that a large number of these drivers may also have been using

illegal drugs (either with or without alcohol). The final fatality rate is an estimated alóohol

involved driver fatality rate constructed from the blood alcohol concentration information

contained in the FAIRS.1' This fatality rate focuses on alcohol use and allows for a

clearer examination of the potential substitution between alcohol and marijuana.

        Each fatality rate is computed as the relevant number of motor vehicle accident

deaths divided by the relevant state population. The fatality equation is specified as a

logistic equation. The logistic functional form is ideal since it constrains the fatality rate

to lie between zero and one. The logistic specification is obtained by transforming the

fatality rate to ln[F/(1-F)}, where F is the fatality rate and In is the natural logarithm.

Maddala (1 983) shows that weighted least squares should be used with this logistic

transformation. The weight is [nF(1-F)]', where n is the relevant state population.

        Three variables are included as measures of the full price of alcoholic beverages.

The first is the price of alcohol, measured by the excise tax rate on beer. Excise tax data

are the most reliable price data available at the state level during this time period. Beer

tax data were chosen since beer is the most popular alcoholic beverage in the U.S. and

because meaningful wine and distilled spirits taxes are only available for states which


   li See Chaloupka, SaLTer, and Grossman, (1993), for more detailed information on the construction of
the alcohol involved driver fatality rate. SAC data is available since 1977 in the PARS. As a result, the
sample consists of the 48 contiguous states of the U.S. from 1977 through 1988 in all equations estimated
using the alcohol involved driver fatality rate as the dependent variable.

                                                  24
permit the sale of all alcoholic beverages in licensed establishments. The beer tax

variable is defined as the sum of the Federal and state excise tax rates on a case of 24-

12 ounce containers of beer and is deflated by the national CPI (1982-1984 base year).

The Federal tax had been fixed at 64 cents from 1951 until 1991, when it was doubled

as part of a deficit reduction package. If a state raised its tax during the year, the tax is

computed as the weighted average of the rates in effect throughout the year. State

excise tax rates were taken from the U.S. Brewers Association's annual Brewers Almanac.

       The second measure, reflecting availability of alcohol, is the minimum legal drinking

age for low alcohol content beer. The final measure of the full price of alcohol, again

reflecting availability, is the percentage of the state population residing in counties which

prohibit the sale of alcohol, or "dry" counties. These data were obtained from the
Brewers Almanac.

       The full price of marijuana is captured by an indicator for states which have

decriminalized marijuana. Decriminalization of marijuana eliminates possible imprisonment

for most first offense possession violations. Oregon, in 1973, was the first state to

decriminalize marijuana. By 1978, 10 other states had followed, substantially reducing the

penalties associated with marijuana possession. Decriminalization, by lowering the

penalties associated with marijuana use, is expected to significantly increase marijuana

consumption. In addition, if alcohol and marijuana are substitutes, then decriminalization

is expected to reduce alcohol consumption. The net effect of decriminalization on motor

vehicle accident fatalities, however, is unclear.

       Four other alcohol related variables are included in all equations as measures of


                                            25
 unobserved exogenous sentiment towards alcohol. For example, anti-alcohol sentiment

 should be relatively widespread in states in which religious groups opposing alcohol are

 prevalent or in states in which a higher than average fraction of the population reside in

counties prohibiting the sale of alcohol. Thus, variables are defined for the percentages

of the state population who are Mormons, Southern Baptists, other Protestants, and

Catholics. These data were available from the National Council of Churches for 1971 and

1980 only. Estimates for 1975 through 1988 were computed by logarithmic trend.

       Real per capita personal income is also included in all equations. Income should

be positively related to the demand for health, as well as to the quality and condition of

motor vehicles, and may be positively related to the demand for alcohol and marijuana.

Thus, the predicted effect of income on fatality rates is ambiguous.

       Additionally, five variables are used to control for the probability of a fatal motor

vehicle accident. They are the percentage of highway traffic exceeding 65 milesper hour,

the number of vehicle miles traveled in 100,000's of miles per licensed driver, the fraction

of licensed drivers ages 24 years and under, a dichotomous indicator for states requiring

annual safety inspections of all motor vehicles, and a dichotomous indicator of a

mandatory seat belt use law. The first three of these variables were computed using data

from the Federal Highway Administration's Highway Statistics, and unpublished data

provided by the FHA. The safety inspection indicator was taken from the American

Automobile Association's Digest of Motor Laws. Finally, information on mandatory seat

belt use laws was obtained from communications with the NHTSA.

      Vehicle miles per driver reflect motor vehicle use and traffic density and should be



                                            26
 positively related to fatality rates. According to Peltzman (1975), because young drivers

 have a higher demand for risky driving, they are more likely to have an accident than

older drivers. Thus, an increase in the fraction of young drivers should have a positive

effect on fatality rates. Similarly, vehicle speed should also have a positive effect on

fatality rates, with deviation from the average speed also having a positive effect. Thus,

an increase in the percentage of drivers exceeding 65 mph on highways should lead to

higher fatality rates. Likewise, mandatory safety inspections should result in safer vehicles

and, as a result, lower fatal accident rates. Lastly, increased seat belt use resulting from

the mandatory seat belt use laws should reduce the probability of a fatal accident.

       Finally, temporal variation in unmeasured variables and other time trends are

modeled by a set of dichotomous variables for each of the years from 1975 through 1987

(1977 through 1987 for the alcohol involved driver rates).



       C. Results

       Dichotomous probit estimates of the probability of a non-fatal traffic accident, using

the data from the 1982 and 1989 Monitoring the Future surveys are presented in Table

5. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 contain estimates of equations excluding marijuana

money prices for the pooled sample and for the 1989 sample, respectively. Columns 3

through 6 of Table 5 present the estimates for the 1989 sample only from equations

which include alternative measures of the money price of marijuana. Panel A of Table 5

presents the results for the full samples, as defined above, while Panel B contains

estimates for the smaller sample based on more exact marijuana money price matches.



                                            27
Only the coefficients for the beer and marijuana price variables, the legal drinking age

measures, and the decriminalization indicator from equations which exclude the religion

variables are shown. All equations, however, include the same set of other independent

variables described above?0

        Weighted least squares estimates of youth motor vehicle accident fatality rates are

contained in Table 6. Panel A of Table 6 contains the estimates of the beer tax, drinking

age, and decriminalization coefficients for the 15 through 24 year old fatality rates, with

comparable estimates for 18 through 20 year olds presented in Panel B. Estimates for

the 18 through 20 year old sample are presented to highlight the impact of the minimum

legal drinking age which most affects this age group. Column 1 of Table 6 presents the

results for the total youth motor vehicle accident fatality rates, while columns 2 and 3

contain estimates for the night driver and alcohol involved driver rates, respectively.

        Beer prices are found to have a negative and generally significant impact on both

the probability of a non-fatal motor vehicle accident and a fatal motor vehicle accident.

This is true for each of the various samples constructed from the surveys of high school

seniors as well as for each of the alternative age-specific fatality rates constructed from

the FARS data. The finding that youth motor vehicle accident fatality rates are inversely

related to the price of alcoholic beverages is consistent with a number of other studies

which have addressed this issue (see Saffer and Grossman, 1987, and Chaloupka, Saffer,

and Grossman, 1993. for example). However, while expected, this is the first empirical


   20
       This set includes an intercept, dichotomous indicators of gender, race, employment status, and
religious pat-ticipadon, and the youth's reai weekly income and age. The pooled sample also includes a
dichotomous indicator for 1982. Estimates for these variables are available upon request.

                                                 28
 evidence indicating that non-fatal youth motor accidents are also inversely related to

 prices.

           Drinking ages, however, do not appear to have much of an impact on non-fatal

 youth motor vehicle accidents, based on the results presented in Table 5. This was a

 somewhat surprising finding given the extensive literature and confirmed by the results

 shown in Table 6, which finds that higher minimum legal drinking ages lead to lower

 youth motor vehicle accident fatality rates, particularly among 18 through 20 year olds.

 For the samples based on the 1989 survey, this finding may be in part due to the fact

 that almost every state's drinking age was 21 at this time. However, that doesn't explain

the unexpected positive and significant effect estimated for the pooled sample.

       The estimated coefficients on the decriminalization indicator arenegative and highly

significant in every equation, with the exception of those for the probability of a non-fatal

accident which include the retail price of commercial grade marijuana, where they are

negative but insignificant at conventional levels. Similarly, marijuana prices are found to

have a positive and generally significant impact on the probability a non-fatal motor
vehicle accident.



       D. Policy Simulations

       To compare the impact of various alcohol and marijuana related policieson driving

under the influence by youths, policy simulations comparable to those described above

were conducted. The results from these simulations are presented in Tables 7 and 8.

Table 7 contains the predicted changes in the number of youths involved in at least one



                                            29
non-fatal traffic accident in response to the four policy changes. Column 1 of Table 7

presents the policy simulations for the pooled sample, while Column 2 presents those

based on the 1 989 survey only excluding the money price of marijuana. Columns 3-6

contain the results when the four alternative money prices of marijuana are included in

the models for the 1989 sample (the wholesale and retail prices of commercial grade

marijuana (3 and 5 respectively) and sinsemilla (4 and 6 respectively)). All predictions

contained in Table 7 are based on the coefficients estimated for the full samples. Table

8 contains the estimated percentage change in the youth motor vehicle accident fatality

rate associated with the change in policy being simulated as well as the estimate change

in the number of fatalities in each category in the final year of the sample (1988) resulting

from the policy change.

       Large increases in the excise tax on beer will lead to substantial reductions in both

non-fatal and fatal motor vehicle accidents among youths. The approximately 17 percent

increase in the price of beer induced when the federal tax is increased to offset the

effects of inflation since 1951 leads to an almost six percent reduction in the probability

of a non-fatal accident in the pooled sample of high school seniors. Similarly, maintaining

the real value of the beer tax at its 1951 level during the period from 1975 through 1988

would have reduced fatal motor vehicle accidents by over 16 percent among 15 through

24 year olds and nearly 20 percent among 18 to 20 year olds. In 1988, these estimates

imply that 2.288 lives would have been saved in the 15 through 24 year old group.

      A reduction in marijuana prices, which is expected to increase marijuana

consumption but reduce drinking based on the results described above, leads to a


                                            30
 significant drop in the probability of a non-fatal motor vehicle accidentamong high school

 seniors. The estimated reductions in this probability for the 18percent fall in each of the

 four marijuana prices used in this paper range from -2.25 percent up to -7.25 percent.

 This implies that the net effect of the substitution towards marijuana on the probability of

 an accident induced by the drop in the price of marijuana is negative. That is, the

 increase in the probability of a non-fatal accident resulting from greater marijuana use is

 more than offset by the drop in this probability resulting from less drinking and driving

 and, perhaps, less use of other intoxicating substances and
                                                                driving.
        This conclusion is further supported by the estimated effects of marijuana

 decriminalization on the probabilities of both non-fatal and fatal motor vehicle accidents

among youths. Going from a nationwide policy criminalizirig marijuana to one where

marijuana is decriminalized everywhere leads to about a 7.5 percent drop in the

probability of a non-fatal accident in the pooled sample of high school seniors.

Somewhat larger reductions are estimated in most of the specifications for the 1989

sample only. Similarly, this change in policy is predicted to reduced the fatal accident

rate by almost 5.5 percent among 15 through 24 year olds and just over six percent

among 18 to 20 year olds. In 1988, an estimated 224 fewer youth and young adult lives

(ages 15-24) were lost in fatal traffic accidents in the states which had decriminalized

marijuana. Decriminalization in all other states, based on these estimates, would have

saved an additional 549 lives in this age group. Again, this is expected to be the result

of substitution towards marijuana and away from alcohol and other intoxicating

substances in the states where the penalties associated with marijuana use are much



                                           31
lower.



IV. Conclusions

         The findings on youth alcohol use suggest that successful marijuana related efforts

in the 'War on Drugs', which can be expected to reduce the supply of marijuana and,

hence, increase its price will not only lead to less marijuana consumption, but will have

the unintended consequence of raising alcohol consumption (at least among youths).

This is consistent with DiNardo and Lemieux's (1992) finding that increased minimum

legal drinking ages, while reducing alcohol consumption among youths, had the
unintended consequence of leading to an almost one-for-one increase in marVuana use.

         The findings related to youth motor vehicle accidents suggest that reductions in

the full price of marijuana, resulting from either lower money prices and/or reduced legal

sanctions for possession/use, lead youths to substitute away from alcoholic beverages

and other intoxicating substances towards marijuana. Furthermore, the subsequent

reductions in the consequences of drunken driving (non-fatal and fatal accidents) and

driving under the influence of other substances more than offset the increases in the

consequences of driving under the influence of marijuana. Similarly, an increase in the

full price of beer, resulting, for example, from the increased taxation of alcoholic

beverages and/or higher minimum legal drinking ages, lowers beer consumption and

raises marijuana consumption. This would be expected to reduce drunken driving, but

to raise "stoned" driving. The net effect of the beer price increase, however, is to reduce

the probabilities of non-fatal and fatal youth motor vehicle accidents.


                                             32
        Improved traffic outcomes may be the result of more careful and/or slower driving

 on the part of youths driving under the influence of marijuana as compared to those who

 are drinking and driving (as suggested by Kieiman), or it may be that youths are less

 likely to drive after consuming marijuana than they are after drinking or that marijuana

 consumption impairs driving less than alcohol consumption. Whether it's one of these

 or any other reason, the results presented here imply that the combination of higher full

 prices for alcoholic beverages and a lower full price for marijuana will reduce the

probability of youth motor vehicle accidents, both fatal and non-fatal. This is consistent

with Model's (1993 and 1991) findings, based on drug and alcohol related emergency

room admissions as well as violent crime rates, that the substitution away from alcohol

and other drugs towards marijuana resulting from reductions in the full price ofmarijuana

(due to decriminalization) leads to net reductions in some of the consequences of drug

and alcohol abuse.

       The growing body of research in this wea suggest that decriminalization, or even

legalization, of marijuana only, which can be expected to reduce the full price of

marijuana, would almost certainly lead to increased marijuana consumption, but at the

same time reduce several of the consequences associated with all drug use, including

motor vehicle accidents, other medical emergencies, and violent crime. In addition, this

would free up resources for stronger enforcement efforts towards remaining illegal drugs.

The appropriateness of such a policy clearly depends on the harmful consequences of

alcohol, maruana, and other illegal drug use.




                                           33
V. Uterature Cited

Chaloupka, F.J., H. Saffer, and M. Grossman, "Alcohol-Control Policies and Motor-Vehicle
Fatalities," Journal of Legal Studies, 22:1, 1993, 161-186.

Coate, D., and M. Grossman. "The Effect of Alcoholic Beverage Prices and Legal Drinking
Ages on Youth Alcohol Use', Journal of Law and Economics, 31:1, 1988, 145-171.

DiNardo, J., and T. Lemieux, "Alcohol, Marijuana, and Youth: The Unintended
Consequences of Government Regulation," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper Number 4212, 1992.

Greene, W.H., Econometric Analysis, Macmillan Publishing Company, New York, N.Y.,
1990.

Grossman, M., D. Coate, and G.M. Arluck, "Price Sensitivity of Alcoholic Beverages in the
United States: Youth Alcohol Consumption," in Control Issues in Alcohol Abuse
Prevention: Strategies for States and Communities, edited by H.D. Holder.Greenwich,
Connecticut: JAI Press, Inc., 1987.

Grossman, M., F.J. Chaloupka, H. Saffer, and A. Laixuthai, "Effects of Alcohol Price Policy
on Youth: A Summary of Economic Research," Journal of Research on Adolescence,
forthcoming.

Johnson, V., and H.R. White, "An Investigation of Factors Related to Intoxicating Driving
Behaviors among Youth," Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 50:4, 1989, 320-330.

Johnston, L.D., P.M. O'Malley, and J.G. Bachman, National Trends in Drug Use and
Related Factors Among American High School Students and Young Adults, 1975-1986,
National Institute on Drug Abuse, Washington D.C., 1987.

Kandel, D.B., R.C. Kessler, and R.Z. Margulies, "Antecedents of Adolescent Initiation into
Stages of Drug Use: A Developmental Analysis." In Longitudinal Research on Drug Use,
edited by D.B. Kandel. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1978.

KJeiman, M.A., Against Excess: Drug Policy for Results: Alcohol, Cocaine, Heroin,
Mariiuana. Tobacco. New York: Basic Books, 1992.

Maddala, G.S. Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Economics. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press, 1983.

Model, K.E., "Crime, Violence & Drug Control Policy," Working Paper, Department of
Economics, Harvard University, 1991.



                                           34
 Model, K.E., "The Effect of Marijuana Decriminalization on Hospital Emergency Room
 Episodes: 1975-1978," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 88:423, 737-747.

O'Donnell, J.A., and FtC. Clayton. 'The Stepping-Stone Hypothesis-Marijuana, Heroin, and
Causality." Chemical Dependencies: Behavioral and Biomedical Issues, 4, No. 3(1982),
229-241.

Owens, S.M., A.J. McBay, and C.E. Cook, 'The Use of Maruana, Ethanol, and Other
Drugs Among Drivers Killed in Single-Vehicle Crashes," Journal of Forensic Sciences,
28:2, 1983, 372-379.

Peltzman, S.,"The Effects of Automobile Safety Regulations," Journal of Political Economy,
83:5, 1975.

Saffer, H., and M. Grossman, "Beer Taxes, The Legal Drinking Age and Youth Motor
Vehicle Fatalities," Journal of Legal Studies, 16:2, 1987, 351-373.

Siegel, R., Intoxication: Life in Pursuit of Artificial Paradise. New York: Dutton, 1989.

Yamaguchi, K., and D.B. Kandel, "Patterns of Drug Use from Adolescence to Young
Adulthood: Ill. Predictors of Progression." American Journal of Public Health, 74, No. 7
(July 1984), 673-681.




                                          35
                                   Table 1

            Percentage Distributions of Drinking Frequency Measures


Measure                                       1982       1989         Pooled
                                             Sample     Sample        Sample
Drinking in Past Year
    Abstainers                               12.7%       16.9%        14.8%
    Ught Drinkers                            36.4%       42.3%        39.3%
    Moderate Drinkers                        30.1%       26.3%        28.2%
    Heavy Drinkers                           20.8%       14.5%        17.7%

Drinking in Past 30 Days
    Abstainers                               30.1%       39.8%        34.9%
    Light Drinkers                           41.5%       39.5%        40.5%
    Moderate Drinkers                        13O%         9.6%        11.3%
    Heavy Drinkers                           15.4%       11.1%        13.3%
Heavy Drinking in Past 2 Weeks
   No Heavy Drinking Episodes                59.8%       67.1%        63.4%
   At Least 1 Heavy Drinking Episode         40.2%       32.9%        36.6%




                                       36
                                        Table 2

            Ordered and Dichotomous Probit Estimates of Drinking Frequency

               Beer Prices, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization


                                                                           Heavy
                                          Drinking        Drinking       Drinking in
                                         in the Past     in the Past      Past Two
 Variable                                   Year            Month          Weeks
                                                          Panel A:
                                                        Pooled 1982
                                                         and 1989
                                                          Sample
 Beer Price,                             -11.085           -8.832            -4.783
                                          (-5.24)          (-4.06)           (-1.84)
 Minimum Legal Drinking Age               -0.009           -0.018            -0.011
                                          (-1.10)          (-2.24)           (-1.10)
 Lower Border Age                          0.159            0.133             0.108
                                          (6.86)           (5.68)            (3.90)
 Marijuana Decriminalization              -0.071          -0.096             -0.1 11
                                          (-4.59)         (-6.06)            (-5.82)
 Chi-Squared                             3247.41          2643.43            2347.99
                                                         Panel B:
                                                       1989 Sample
 Beer Price                              -10.507          -8.737             -8.444
                                          (-3.78)         (-3.04)            (-2.45)
 Minimum Legal Drinking Age               -0.202          -0.197             -0.174
                                          (-3.05)         (-2.89)            (-2.16)
 Marijuana Decriminalization              -0.073          -0.084             -0.088
                                          (-3.22)         (-3.60)            (-3.16)
 Chi-Squared                             1337.01          1092.02            967.77

n=25,430, 12,597




                                          37
                                      Table 3

           Ordered and Dichotomous Probit Estimates of Drinking Frequency

                            1989 High School Seniors
     Beer and Marijuana Prices, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization


                                                                         Heavy
                                       Drinking        Drinking       Drinking in
                                      in the Past     in the Past      Past Two
Variable                                 Year            Month          Weeks
                                                      Panel A:
                                                     Full Sample
 Beer Price                             -8.281          -6.622          -5.635
                                        (-2.95)         (-2.28)         (-1.62)

 Minimum Legal Drinking Age             -0.152          -0.152          -0.117
                                        (-2.28)         (-2.20)         (-1.43)
 Marijuana Decriminalization            -0.052          -0.065          -0.064
                                        (-2.29)         (-2.74)         (-2.27)
 Wholesale Commercial Grade             0.0003          0.0002          0.0003
 Marijuana Price                         (5.83)         (5.25)           (5.59)

 Chi-Squared                           1371.03         1119.59          999.07
                                                       Panel B;
                                                      Restricted
                                                       Sample
 Beer Price                             -5.307          -7.292          -8.679
                                        (-1.60)         (-2.12)         (-2.12)

 Minimum Legal Drinking Age             -0.064          -0.131           -0.101
                                        (-0.91)         (-1.80)          (-1.16)
 Marijuana Decriminalization            -0.012          -0.091           -0.119
                                        (-0.34)         (-2.51)          (-2.74)
 Wholesale Commercial Grade             0.0002          0.0002          0.0004
 Marijuana Price                        (3.41)           (4.02)         (5.12)
 Chi-Squared                            705.17          586.77           583.54

n=12,597; 6,272


                                         38
                                   Table 3 (continued)

       Beer and Maruana Prices, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization


                                                                         Heavy
                                          Drinking        Drinking     Drinking in
                                         in the Past     in the Past    Past Two
  Variable                                  Year            Month        Weeks
                                                          Panel A:
                                                         Full Sample
  Beer Price                              -5.022           -1.578        1.360
                                          (-1.61)          (.0.49)       (0.35)
  Minimum Legal Drinking Age              -0.203           -0.201        -0.180
                                          (-3.07)          (-2.94)       (-2.22)
  Marijuana decriminalization             -0.095           -0.113       -0.129
                                          (-4.07)          (-4.70)      (-4.47)
  Wholesale Sinsemilla Marijuana         0.0001           0.0001        0.0002
  Price                                   (3.91)           (4.92)       (5.55)
 Chi-Squared                             1352.28          1116.21       998.50
                                                          Panel B:
                                                         Restricted
                                                          Sample
 Beer Price                               0.979           -0.078        1.204
                                          (0.25)          (-0.02)       (0.25)
 Minimum Legal Drinking Age              -0.104           -0.180        -0.172
                                         (-1.48)          (-2.47)       (-1.98)
 Marijuana Decriminalization             -0.051           -0.138        -0.187
                                         (-1.46)          (-3.81)       (-4.29)
 Wholesale Sinsemilla Marijuana          0.0001           0.0001        0.0002
 Price                                    (3.48)          (3.86)        (4.41)
 Chi-Squared                             705.61           585.52        576.75


n=12,597; 6,272




                                           39
                                Table 3 (continued)

      Beer and Marijuana Prices, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization


                                                                         Heavy
                                        Drinking       Drinking       Drinking in
                                       in the Past    in the Past      Past Two
 Variable                                 Year           Month          Weeks
                                                       Panel A:
                                                      Full Sample
 Beer Price                             -10.355          -9.063          -9.221
                                        (-3.70)          (-3.13)         (-2.67)
 Minimum Legal Drinking Age             -0.087           -0.074          -0.013
                                        (-1.24)          (-1.02)        (-0.16)
 Marijuana Decriminalization            0.015            0.014           0.034
                                        (0.54)           (0.47)         (0.97)
 Retail Commercial Grade                0.0001           0.001           0.002
 Marijuana Price                         (0.22)          (2.08)          (3.13)
 Chi-Squared                           1129.35          937.23          838.48
                                                        Panel 8:
                                                       Restricted
                                                        Sample
 Beer Price                             -5.982          -8.082          -9.837
                                        (-1 .80)        (-2.36)         (-2.41)
 Minimum Legal Drinking Age             -0.080          -0.118          -0.055
                                        (-1.03)         (-1.48)         (-0.58)
 Marijuana Decriminalization            -0.022          -0.079          -0.082
                                        (-0.52)         (-1.80)         (-1.55)
 Retail Commercial Grade                0.0003           0.001           0.002
 Marijuana Price                         (0.38)          (1.40)          (2.35)
 Chi-Squared                            693.65          572.53          562.82

n=11,281; 6,272




                                         40
                                      Table 3 (concluded)

       Beer and Marijuana Prices, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization


                                                                            Heavy
                                             Drinking        Drinking     Drinking in
                                            in the Past     in the Past    Past Two
  Variable                                     Year           Month         Weeks
                                                             Panel A:
                                                            Full Sample
  Beer Price                                 -9.544           -8.196        -8.121
                                             (-3.35)          (-2.79)       (-2.32)
  Minimum Legal Drinking Age                 -0.150           -0.150         -0.134
                                             (-2.24)          (-2.16)       (-1.62)
  Maruuana Decriminalization                 -0.042           -0.053       -0.065
                                             (-1.67)          (-2.05)      (-2.09)
  Retail Sinsemilla Marijuana Price          -0.001           -0.001       -0.001
                                             (-3.93)          (-3.69)      (-2.54)
  Chi-Squared                               1120.94          938.22        841.06
                                                             Panel B:
                                                            Restricted
                                                             Sample
 Beer Price                                  -6.387          -8.604        -10.179
                                             (-1.92)         (-2.50)        (-2.48)
 Minimum Legal Drinking Age                  -0.050          -0.119        -0.131
                                             (-0.69)         (-1.57)       (-1.45)
 Marijuana Decriminalization                 0.030           -0.048        -0.128
                                             (0.64)          (-1.00)       (-2.21)
 Retail Sinsemilla Marijuana Price           -0.001          -0.001       -0.0003
                                             (-2.00)         (-2.09)       (-0.66)
 Chi-Squared                                697.50           574.95        557.75

n=11,783; 6,272




                                            41
                                      Table 4

                                 Policy Simulations

              Drinking Frequency and the Probability of Heavy Drinking


                                                                            Heavy
                                       Drinking        Drinking          Drinking in
                                      in the Past     in the Past         Past Two
Policy Simulation                        Year            Month             Weeks
                                                       Panel A:
                                                      Pooled 1982
                                                       and 1989
                                                        Sample
Inflation Tax Policy

 Abstainers                            +8.42%           +4.35%            +1.25%
 Infrequent Drinkers                   +2.15%           -0.65%                --
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers               -2.71%          -3.78%                --
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers              -7.49%          -6.57%             -2.28%
Nationwide Criminalization

 Abstainers                            -3.44%           -3.11%             -1.93%
 Infrequent Drinkers                   -0.97%           + 0.38%               --
                                       + 1.10%          +2.74%                --
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers             +3.35%           +4.45%            +3.53%
Nationwide Decriminalization

 Abstainers                            +8.31%           +7.36%            +4.38%
 Infrequent Drinkers                   +2.13%           -1.17%
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers               -2.67%          -6.37%                --
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers              -7.39%         -10.85%              8.02%
Marijuana Price Reduction

 Abstainers                               —

 Infrequent Drinkers
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers




                                         42
                               Table 4 (continued)

                               Policy Simulations


                                                                      Heavy
                                      Drinking         Drinking     Drinking in
                                     in the Past      in the Past    Past Two
Policy Simulation                       Year             Month        Weeks
                                                      Panel 8.1:
                                                     1989 Sample,
                                                     No Maruana
                                                        Price
Inflation Tax Policy

  Abstainers                         +7.68%            +3.97%        +2.01%
  Infrequent Drinkers                +1.54%            -1.14%           --
  Fairly Frequent Drinkers            -3.20%           -4.27%           --
  Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers           -7.69%           -6.94%        -4.35%
Nationwide Criminajizatiori

 Abstainers                          -3.29%            -2.42%        -1.37%
 Infrequent Drinkers                 -0.74%            +0.64%           --
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers            +1.38%            +2.64%           --
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers           +355%             +4.45%        +2.96%
Nationwide Decriminalization

 Abstainers                          +8.10%            +5.85%       +3.19%
 Infrequent Drinkers                 +1.62%            -1.72%          --
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers            -3.37%            -6.24%          --
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers           -8.09%           -10.03%       -6.89%
Marijuana Price Reduction

 Abstainers
 Infrequent Drinkers
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers




                                     43
                               Table 4 (continued)

                                PoHey Simulations


                                                                       Heavy
                                      Drinking         Drinking     Drinking in
                                     in the Past      in the Past    Past Two
Policy Simulation                       Year             Month        Weeks
                                                       Panel 6.2:
                                                     1989 Sample.
                                                      Wholesale
                                                      Commercial
                                                         Price
Inflation Tax Policy

 Abstainers                           +6.02%           +3.01%        +1.35%
 Infrequent Drinkers                  +1.23%           -0.85%           —

 Fairly Frequent Drinkers             -2.51%           -3.25%           —

 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers            -6.11%           -5.30%         -2.92%
Nationwide Criminalization

 Abstainers                           -2.37%           -1.87%        -1.00%
 Infrequent Drinkers                  -0.53%           +0.50%           --
                                      +0.99%           +2.04%           —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers            +2.54%           +3.42%        +2.16%
Nationwide Decriminalization

 Abstainers                           +5.78%           +4.50%        +2.33%
 Infrequent Drinkers                  +1.19%           -1.30%           --
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers             -2.42%           -4.83%           —

 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers            -5.87%           -7.81%        -5.05%
Marijuana Price Reduction

 Abstainers                           +6.83%           +3.98%        +2.65%
 Infrequent Drinkers                  +1.39%           -1.14%           —

 Fairly Frequent Drinkers             -2.85%           -4.28%           --
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers            -6.89%           -6.95%         5.74%




                                      44
                               Table 4 (continued)

                               Policy Simulations


                                                                      Heavy
                                     Drinking          Drinking     Drinking in
                                    in the Past       in the Past    Past Two
Policy Simulation                      Year              Month        Weeks
                                                      Panel B.3:
                                                     1989 Sample,
                                                      Wholesale
                                                      Sinsemilla
                                                        Price
Inflation Tax Policy

 Abstainers                          +3.59%            +0.71%        -0.33%
 Infrequent Drinkers                 +0.72%            -0.20%
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers            -1.s6%            -0.77%
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers           -3.77%            -1.28%        +0.71%
Nationwide Criminalization

 Abstainers                          -4.22%            -3.27%       -2.01%
 Infrequent Drinkers                 -0.92%            +0.85%          --
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers            +1.85%            +3.57%          --
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers           +4.69%            +6.05%       +4.35%
Nationwide Decriminalization

 Abstainers                         +10.50%            +7.88%       +4.62%
 Infrequent Drinkers                 +1.94%            -2.38%          —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers            -4.54%            -8.42%          —
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers          -10.54%           -13.36%       -10.01%
Marijuana Price Reduction

 Abstainers                         +4.81%            +3.97%        +2.79%
 Infrequent Drinkers                +0.95%            -1.14%           —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers           -2.09%            -4.28%           --
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers           -5.01%           -6.95%        -6.04%




                                     45
                               Table 4 (continued)

                               Policy Simulations


                                                                       Heavy
                                      Drinking         Drinking     Drinking in
                                     in the Past      in the Past    Past Two
Policy Simulation                       Year             Month        Weeks
                                                      Panel B.4:
                                                     1989 Sample,
                                                        Retail
                                                     Commercial
                                                         Price
Inflation Tax Policy

 Abstainers                           +7.72%           +5.04%        +2.29%
 Infrequent Drinkers                  +1.65%           -0.10%            --
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers             -o%              -3.29%            —

 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers            -7.52%           -6.28%         -4.66%
Nationwide Criminalization

 Abstainers                           +0.57%           +0.38%        +0.43%
 Infrequent Drinkers                  +0.13%           -0.00%            --
                                                       -0.25%            —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers             -0.22%
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers            -0.58%           -0.50%         -0.88%
Nationwide Decriminalization

 Abstainers                           -1.81%            -1.23%        -1.40%
                                                       +0.00%            —
 Infrequent Drinkers                  -0.42%
                                                       +0.80%            —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers             +0.72%
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers            +1.88%           +1.59%         +2.64%
Marijuana Price Reduction

 Abstainers                           +0.31%           +2.24%         +1.81%
                                                        -0.03%           —
 Infrequent Drinkers                  +0.07%
                                                        -1.46%           —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers             -0.12%
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers            -0.31%            -2.84%        -3.69%




                                       46
                               Table 4 (concluded)

                               Policy Simulations


                                                                      Heavy
                                      Drinking         Drinking     Drinking in
                                     in the Past      in the Past    Past Two
 Policy Simulation                      Year             Month        Weeks
                                                      Panel B.5:
                                                     1989 Sample,
                                                        Retail
                                                      Sinsemilla
                                                        Price
Inflation Tax Policy

  Abstainers                         +7.02%            + 3.77%       + 1.98%
  Infrequent Drinkers                +1.51%            -0.98%           —
  Fairly Frequent Drinkers           -2.78%            -3.91%           —
  Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers          -6.90%            -6.43%        -4.10%
Nationwide Criminalizatiori

 Abstainers                          -2.07%           -1.68%         -1.11%
 Infrequent Drinkers                 -0.49%           +0.40%           —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers            +0.82%           + 1.76%          —
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers           +2.17%           +2.99%        +2.30%
Nationwide Decriminalization

 Abstainers                          +4.58%           +3.65%        +2.35%
 Infrequent Drinkers                 +1.01%           -0.95%           —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers            -1.82%           -3.79%           —
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers           -4.57%           -6.23%        -4.89%
Marijuana Price Reduction

 Abstainers                          -5.32%           -3.49%        -1 .49%
 Infrequent Drinkers                 -i .30%          +0.78%           —
 Fairly Frequent Drinkers           +2.12%            +3.52%           --
 Frequent (Heavy) Drinkers          +5.71%            +6.03%        +3.10%




                                     47
                                    Table 5

          Probit Estimates of the Probability of a Motor Vehicle Accident
    Beer and Marijuana Prices, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization


                                                                    1989 Sample
                                                                     Wholesale
                                   Pooled 1982     1989 Sample      Commercial
                                    and 1989       No Marijuana      Marijuana
Variable                            Samples           Prices           Prices
                                                      PanelA
Beer Price                            -10.333         -10.394          -8.689
                                       (-3.78)         (-2.95)         (-2.44)
Minimum Legal Drinking Age              0.030          -0.067           -0.034
                                       (2.89)          (-0.79)         (-0.39)
Lower Border Age                        0.001
                                       (0.05)
Marijuana Decriminalization           -0.053           -0.112          -0.098
                                      (-2.66)          (-3.90)         (-3.38)
Maruana Price                          --—-                            0.0002


CM-Squared                            929.80          399.22          408.82
                                                      Panel B
Beer Price                            -9.973           -9.660          -8.076
                                      (-3.64)          (-2.73)         (-2.26)
Minimum Legal Drinking Age             0.031           -0.063          -0.031
                                       (2.94)          (-0.74)         (-0.36)
Lower Border Age                       0.001             -—-
                                       (0.05)           -—
Marijuana Decriminalization           -0.058           -0.117          -0.103
                                      (-2.88)          (-4.05)         (-3.54)
Marijuana Price                         --_-             -----         0.0002
                                                                        (2.97)
Chi-Squared                           938.35          404.99           413.81




                                       48
                               Table 5 (continued)

     Beer and Marijuana Prices, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization


                                    1989 Sample      1989 Sample     1989 Sample
                                     Wholesale          Retail          Retail
                                     Sinsemijia      Commercial       Sinsemilla
 Variable                            Marijuana        Marijuana       Marijuana
                                       Price            Price            Price
                                                       Panel A
Beer Price                             -6.970          -11.611         -8.660
                                       (-1.76)          (-3.28)        (-2.42)
Minimum Legal Drinking Age             -0.068           0.053          -0.116
                                       (-0.80)          (0.59)         (-1.34)
Lower Border Age                        —
Marijuana Decriminalization            -0.126          -0.035          -0.188
                                       (-4.24)         (-0.97)         (-5.84)
Marijuana Price                       o.oooi           0.003           o.ooi
                                       (1.86)          (5.30)          (3.57)
Chi-Squared                           402.69           359.31          333.07
                                                      Panel B
Beer Price                            -6.400          -1 0.981         -7.966
                                      (-1.61)          (-3.09)         (-2.22)
Minimum Legal Drinking Age            -0.065           0.057           -0.112
                                      (-0.76)          (0.64)          (-1.30)
Lower Border Age                       —----            —---


Marijuana Decriminalization           -0.i30          -0.038           -0.192
                                      (-4.37)         (-1.06)          (-5.96)
Marijuana Price                       o.oooi           0.003           0.001
                                      (1.78)           (5.33)          (3.55)
Chi-Squared                           408.17          363.38          337.87




                                      49
                              Table 5 (concluded)

    Beer and Marijuana Prices, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization
                            Restricted 1989 Sample


                       Wholesale        Wholesale        Retail        Retail
                       Commercial       Sinsemilla    Commercial     Sinsemilla
                        Marijuana       Marijuana      Marijuana     Marijuana
Variable                 Price            Price          Price         Price

                                         Panel A
Beer Price                -9.568            -7.978      -9.661         -8.464
                          (-2.28)           (-1.61)     (-Z30)         (-2.07)
Minimum Legal              -0.044           -0.054       0.091         -0.182
Drinking Age              (-0.48)           (-0.60)      (0.90)        (-1.91)

Marijuana                 -0.142            -0.152      -0.037         -0.338
Decriminalization         (.3.19)           (-3.40)     (-0.68)        (-5.65)
Marijuana Price           0.0001         0.00003         0.003         0.002
                           (0.71)           (0.69)       (3.55)        (4.78)

Chi-Squared               209.81            209.78      221.89         232.04
                                         Panel B
Beer Price                -8.948            -7.517      -9.040         -7.907
                          (-2.12)           (-1.52)     (-2.15)        (-1 .87)

Minimum Legal             -0.045            -0.054       0.088         -0.180
Drinking Age              (-0.49)           (-0.59)      (0.88)        (-1.88)
Marijuana                 -0.153            -0.161       -0.048         -0.342
Decriminalization         (-3.40)           (-3.57)      (-0.89)       (-5.73)
Marijuana Price          0.00004         0.00003         0.003         0.002
                           (0.55)           (0.65)       (3.46)        (4.68)
Chi-Squared               215.25            215.31      226.92         236.75




                                       50
                                         Table 6

     Weighted Least Squares Estimates of Youth Motor Vehicle Accident Fatality Rates

               Beer Taxes, Drinking Ages, and Marijuana Decriminalization


                                                                         AJcohol
                                    Total Fatality    Night Driver    Involved Driver
 Variable                               Rate          Fatality Rate    Fatality Rate
                                                       Panel A:
                                                      Ages 15-24
 Beer Tax                              -1 0.513         -1 0.401            -1 2.793
                                       (-6.25)          (-4.92)              (-4.98)
 Minimum Legal Drinking Age            -0.012           -0.031              -0.015
                                       (-1.82)          (-3.94)             (-1.52)
Marijuana Decriminalization            -0.055           -0.125              -0.050
                                       (-3.27)          (-5.99)             (-1.97)
R-Squared                              0.538            0.428               0.649
F                                      29.04             18.98              42.81
n                                       650              650                 565
                                                      Panel B:
                                                     Ages 18-20
Beer Tax                              -13.305          -1 5.360         -1 5.992
                                       (-7.15)          (-5.69)          (-5.76)
Minimum Legal Drinking Age             -0.030           -0.070              -0.041
                                       (-4.12)          (-6.94)             (-3.86)
Marijuana Decriminalization            -0.062           -0.143              -0.064
                                       (-3.31)          (-5.36)             (-2.35)
R-Squared                              0.651            0.561               0.705
F                                      45.77            31.48               54.44
'1                                      650              648                 560




                                          51
                                     Table 7

       Policy Simulations: Probability of a Non-Fatal Motor Vehicle Accident


                                                                     1989 Sample,
                                                    1989 Sample,       Wholesale
                                       Pooled        No Price for     Commercial
Policy Simulation                      Sample         Marijuana          Price


Inflation Tax Policy                   -5.84%          -5.57%           -4.67%
Nationwide Criniinalization            +2.30%          +4.43%           + 3.92%
Nationwide Decriminalization           -5.23%          -10.11%          -8.98%
Marijuana Price Reduction                 —               —             -3.52%


                                    1989 Sample,    1989 Sample, 1989 Sample,
                                     Wholesale         Retail            Retail
                                      Sinsemilla     Commercial       Sinsemilla
                                        Price          Price             Price


Inflation Tax Policy                   -3.71%          -6.27%           -4.50%
Nationwide Criminalization             +4.94%          +1.14%          +7.71%
Nationwide Decriminalization          -11.24%          -3.62%          -15.62%
Marijuana Price Reduction              -2.25%          -7.25%           -4.90%




                                        52
                                      Table 8

          Policy Simulations: Probability of a Fatal Motor Vehicle Accident


                                                                         .AJcohol
                                     Total Fatality   Night Driver       Involved
Policy Simulation                        Rate         Fatality Rate   Driver Fatality
                                                                           Rate
                                                       Panel A:
                                                      Ages 15-24

Inflation Tax Policy                   -16.18%          -16.02%          -19.14%
                                        -2,288            -375             -835
Nationwide Criminalization              + 1.58%         + 3.52%          + 1.40%
                                         +224             +62              +61
Nationwide Decriminalization            -3.88%          -8.62%           -3.53%
                                         -549            -202             -154
                                                       Panel B:
                                                      Ages 18-20

Inflation Tax Policy                   -19.94%          -22.59%         -23.19%
                                        -1,037            -194            -350
Nationwide Criminalization             + 1.77%          +3.99%           + 1.78%
                                         +92              -1-34.              +27
Nationwide Decriminalization            -4.35%          -9.89%           4.510/
                                         -226            -194                 -68




                                        53
