                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DO REPATRIATION TAXES MA1TER?
                        EVIDENCE FROM THE TAX RETURNS
                            OF U.S. MULTINATIONALS




                                    Rosanne Altshuicr
                                    T. Scott Newlon
                                   William C. Randolph




                                 Working Paper No. 4.667




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 1994


Prepared for the 1994 NEER Conference on International Taxation. We are very grateful to
Gordon Wilson for his assistance in using the Treasury tax data. We thank Bill Gentry and
other conference participants for valuable comments. We also thank seminar participants at
the University of Pennsylvania. the University of Toronto, and the 1993 NBER Summer
Institute for helpful comments. Any views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of the U.S. Treasury Department or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Public
Economics.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #4667
                                                                   March 1994
                           DO REPATRIATION TAXES MATFER?
                           EVIDENCE FROM THE TAX RETURNS
                               OF U.S. MULTINATIONALS

                                           ABSTRACT

       An open question in the literature on the taxation of multinational corporations is whether
repathation taxes influence whether the profits of foreign subsidiaries are repatriated or reinvested
abroad. Theoretical models suggest that dividend remittances should not be influenced by
repatriation taxes. The results of recent empirical work indicate that dividend remittances are
sensitive to repathation taxes. This paper investigates whether the empirical evidence can be
reconciled with the theoretical results by recognizing that repatriation taxes on dividends may
vary over time and provide firms with an incentive to time repatriations so that they occur in
years when repatriation tax rates are relatively low. We use information about cross-country
differences in tax rates to separately estimate the influence of permanent tax changes, as would
occur due to changes in statutory tax rates, and transitory tax changes on dividend repatriations.
Our data contains U.S. tax return information for a large sample of U.S. corporations and their
foreign subsidiaries. We fmd that the permanent tax price effect is significantly different from
the transitory price effect and is not significantly different from zero, while the transitory tax
price effect is negative and significant. This suggests that repatriation taxes do affect dividend
repatriation behavior but only to the extent that they vary over time. Previous empirical work
has apparently measured the effect of timing behavior.
Rosanne Altshuler                                    'K Scott Newlon
Department of Economics                               U.S. Department of Treasury
Rutgers University                                    Office of Tax Analysis
New Jersey Hall                                       Main Treasury Building
New Brunswick, NJ 08903                               1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
and NBER                                              Washington, D.C. 20220

William C. Randolph
U.S. Department of Treasury
Office of Tax Analysis
Main Treasury Building
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington. D.C. 20220
       An open question in the literature on the taxation of multinational corporations is whether

taxes due on repatriation of foreign source income influence whether the profits of foreign

subsidiaries are repatriated or reinvested abroad. Theoretical arguments by Hartman (1985)

suggest that dividend payments by foreign subsidiaries should not be influenced by such

repatriation taxes. Under this view, which is analogous to the "new view" of dividend taxation

applied to domestic firms, taxes due upon repatriation are unavoidable costs for "mature" foreign

subsidiaries that finance investment out of retained earnings.' As a result, investment and

dividend payment decisions are unaffected by those taxes. The results of recent empirical work

that used cross-sectional data on U.S. multinationals seem to contradict Hartman's theoretical

result. These studies indicate that dividend remittances are sensitive to repatriation taxes. This

presents a puzzle.



       Hartman's analysis (and the "new view" of dividend taxation) is based on the assumption

that taxes on dividends are constant over time. This paper investigates whether the empirical

evidence can be reconciled with the theoretical results by recognizing that repatriation taxes on

dividends may vary over time. This variability may provide firms with an incentive to repatriate

relatively more profits from a subsidiary when the tax cost of doing so is temporarily relatively

lower than normal, and to retain more profits when the tax cost of repatriation is higher than

normal.2 Such timing behavior could be revealed in cross-sectional data by a relationship

between dividend payout levels and the current level of the tax cost of dividend payments, when

the actual relationship is between dividend payout levels and the current level of the tax cost

relative to its normal level. If timing opportunities are important to dividend payout decisions,

then it becomes difficult to interpret the tax effects estimated in previous papers. In particular,
these estimates will tend to confuse the effects of permanent tax changes, as would occur due

to changes in statutory tax rates, with the effects of tax changes due to transitory changes in the

situation of the taxpayer.



        It is important to distinguish whether cross-sectional differences between subsidiaries in

dividend payout behavior are due to the current level of the tax
                                                               cost of paying dividends or the

difference between the current and the normal, or expected future, tax cost. Making this

distinction will help us evaluate the effects of tax policy on the location of investment, the form

of finance, and tax revenues. More specifically, it has implications for the evaluation of policies

such as the reduction of withholding tax rates in bilateral tax treaties and the repeal of the

deferred taxation that foreign profits generally enjoy in the United States. The policy

implications of this work are discussed in more detail in the final section of the paper.



        Micro data can be used to distinguish the effects of transitory variation in tax costs from

the effects of permanent differences in tax costs. This paper uses a recently created data set

containing U.S. tax return information for a large sample of U.S. corporations and their foreign

subsidiaries. For some of our empirical work, we link the subsidiary-specific data across time

to create a panel data set. To our knowledge, this is the largest panel data set in existence.that

contains tax information on multinationals. It is also the only panel data set that has detailed tax

information on both the parent corporations and their foreign subsidiaries.




                                                2
       We use information about cross-country differences in tax rates to estimate separate

effects for the permanent and transitory components of the tax price of dividend repatriation.

The idea is that variations across countries in average repatriation tax prices or in statutory tax

rates will be correlated with the permanent component of tax price variation, but uncorrelated

with transitory variations. Using these measures to construct instrumental variables for the tax

price allows us to separately identify permanent and transitory tax price effects. Our estimation

strategy is similar to that of Burman and Randolph (1993), who used state tax rates as

instruments to separate permanent from transitory effects of taxes on capital gains realizations.



       To preview our results, we find that the permanent tax price effect is significantly

different from the transitory price effect and is not significantly different from zero, while the

transitory tax price effect is negative and significant. This suggests that previous cross-sectipnal

analysis has measured the effect of timing behavior, either through tax planning that affects both

the tax price and dividend payments or through companies timing their repatriations to take

advantage of exogenous transitory variations in tax prices.



       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I briefly reviews Hartman's

analysis, the related empirical literature, and some more recent theoretical work in this area.

Section U derives the tax price of a dividend repatriation, Section III presents the empirical

model, and Section IV describes the data. Results are presented in Section V, followed by

concluding remarks.




                                                 3
1.      The Hartinan Analysis and Subsequent Studies

        The United States system for taxing the income earned by the foreign subsidiaries of U.S.

corporations defers taxation of foreign income until it is brought back to the United States and

provides a credit for foreign taxes paid.' Under this credit and deferral system, the two main

forms of repatriation tax that a firm incurs on income remitted from a foreign subsidiary are the

residual home country tax liability (if any) not offset by the foreign tax credit, and any

withholding tax imposed by the sourée country. Hartman (1985) argued that, under a credit and

deferral tax system, the repatriation tax on foreign source income is irrelevant to the investment

and dividend payment decisions of foreign subsidiaries that are financed through retained

earnings ('mature" subsidiaries). Hartman's insight was that, since the repatriation tax is

unavoidable, it reduces the opportunity cost of investment and the return to investment by the

same amount. As a result, the tax does not affect a mature subsidiary's choice between

reinvesting its foreign earnings and repatriating funds to its parent.4 His analysis is essentially

an application of the "new view" or "tax capitalization view" of dividend taxation put forward

by King (1977), Auerbach (1979), and Bradford (1981). The "new view" holds that taxes on

dividends (if constant over time) have no distortionary effects on the real decisions of domestic

corporations. Although Hartinan's analysis pertains to the residual U.S. tax on foreign income,

it applies equally well to withholding taxes.



       Several empirical studies using cross-sections of tax return data appear to contradict

Hartman's theoretical result. Mutti (1981) used U.S. tax return data from 1972 to estimate the

effect of tax costs on the choice of income remittance channels. He found significant tax effects



                                                4
in estimates of the parameters of a dividend equation. Goodspeed and Frisch (1989) and Hines

and Hubbard (1990) both used 1984 tax return data of large samples of U.S. corporations and

their foreign subsidiaries to investigate tax effects on foreign income remittances. Goodspeed

and Frisch matched data on parent corporations with country-specific information on their

foreign subsidiaries in an attempt to quantify income repatriation incentives created by the U.S.

tax system. By further disaggregating the 1984 tax return data, Hines and Hubbard were able

to study income repatriation behavior using a data set that matched subsidiary-specific

information to parent corporation data. Both studies found significant evidence of tax effects

on income repatriation. Altshuler and Newlon (1993) used U.S. tax return data from 1986 to

investigate tax effects on dividend remittances from foreign subsidiaries to their U.S. parent

corporations.   This paper improved upon previous work by providing a more accurate
specification of the tax incentives facing firms. Results from estimates of dividend equations

indicated a somewhat larger and more significant tax effect than had been previously estimated.



       Recognizing that Hartman's theoretical analysis did not allow repatriation taxes to vary

over time may help to reconcile it with the empirical results from the above studies. There are

at least two different ways in which the repatriation tax may vary. First, it may vary over time

due to differences between the tax base definitions of the United States and the host country of

the foreign subsidiary. The U.S. foreign tax credit is based on the average foreign tax rate of

the subsidiary, where the avenge is calculated with respect to the U.S. definition of the tax

base. Differences in tax base definitions may vary over time, e.g., if capital cost allowances

differ, causing the average foreign tax rate as defined by the United States to vary. This


                                               5
variation in the avenge foreign tax rate causes the foreign tax credit allowed for a given

dividend payment to vary over time as well. Such variations in the avengeforeign tax rate may

be planned. For example, to the extent that the timing of deductions and credits is discretionary,

a foreign subsidiary may shift them from years in which it is remitting income to years in which

it is not remitting income, thereby maximizing the foreign tax credit. This device is known as

the "rhythm method" in the tax planning jargon.5



       The second cause of variation in the repatriation tax is movement by the parent company

between being in "excess credit," i.e., having more foreign tax credits available than are needed

to offset potential U.S. tax liability on foreign source income, and being in "excess limitation,"

the opposite condition. Since the U.S. foreign tax credit operates, to some extent, on an overall

basis, excess foreign tax credits generated from one source of foreign income can be used to

offset potential U.S. tax on another source of foreign income that generates insufficient foreign

tax credits. If the parent corporation is in excess credit, there is no additional U.S. tax cost to

repatriating foreign income, If the parent is in excess limitation, then the U.S. tax cost of

repatriating income from a subsidiary may be positive or negative, depending on the avenge

foreign tax rate of the subsidiary.



       Several recent theoretical contributions have incorporated a repatriation tax that may vary

over time and that may be endogenous to the investment and financial decisions of subsidiaries

and parent corporations. Hines (1989) shows that U.S. tax payments on foreign source income

are affected by differences in the way the U.S. and host countries determine taxable income.



                                                6
In his model, the repatriation tax is a function of the ratio of U.S. defined income to foreign

defined income. He points out that this ratio may vary over time and may be affected by

investment decisions. As a result, investment incentives may be influenced by the repatriation

tax. Leechor   and   Mintz (1993) make a similar argument. In their model, the repatriation tax

is also endogenous and the Hartman result obtains only when host and home country tax bases,

adjusted for inflation, are proportional to each other.



        Altshuler and Fuighieri (1990) offer a model in which parent corporations may switch

into and out of the excess credit position. This model shows that the Hartman result obtains

only when the excess credit position is stationary. The insight here is that switching between

credit states breaks down the equivalence between the impact of repatriation taxes on the

opportunity cost of capital and on the returns to investment.



       In one sense, none of these recent theoretical contributions has departed from the

Hartman result: the level of the repatriation tax does not by itself affect the incentive to

repatriate income rather than reinvest it. Instead, it is the variation over time in the level of the

repatriation tax that affects the incentive to repatriate income, because this variation provides

parent corporations with the opportunity to time remittances       so   that they occur in years when

repatriation tax rates are relatively low.   If these theoretical predictions are correct, then failure
to distinguish between the effects of permanent and transitory variation in the tax price when

estimating tax effects on repatriation of foreign income could lead         to incorrect results. The




                                                   7
effect of permanent variation in the tax price might be overstated, since the estimates would

confound the effects of permanent and transitory variation in the tax price.




II.       The Tax Price of Dividend Repatriations

          In this section we specify a measure of the tax price of repatriating foreign income in the

form of dividends and we briefly discuss the factors that may cause that tax price to vary over

time.6 To understand how these tax prices are derived, some background information on the

foreign tax credit is useful. The discussion here borrows heavily from Altshuler and Newlon

(1993).



       The foreign tax credit has two components. The first, called the direct credit, is a credit

for foreign taxes paid directly on income as it is received by a U.S. taxpayer. Foreign taxes

eligible for the direct credit include withholding taxes on remittances to the U.S. taxpayer such

as dividends, interest, and royalties, and also income taxes on foreign branch operations. The

second component, called the deemed-paid or indirect credit, is a credit for foreign income taxes

paid on the income out of which a dividend distribution is made to the U.S. taxpayer. The

deemed paid credit is generally a credit for foreign corporate income taxes.



       The deemed paid credit for a dividend remittance from a foreign subsidiaiy is calculated

by grossing up the dividend to reflect the foreign tax deemed paid on that dividend income.7

To illustrate, suppose subsidiary i makes a dividend payment, D, to itsparent corporation. The

grossed up dividend is


                                                  8
                                         D1 4 TjDJ(YrTj)                                          (1)
where T denotes the total. foreign income tax paid by subsidiary i and Y1 denotes the subsidiary's

pre-tax income from the U.S. perspective, which is the subsidiary's book earnings and profits.

Equation (1) can be rewritten as D./(l-rj, where r1 represents the avenge subsidiary tax rate,

TjY, on foreign earnings from the U.S. perspective. The U.S. tax on the dividend before

credits is rDj(1-rj, where r denotes the U.S. rate of tax. The United States considers that

creditable foreign tax was paid on the dividend in the amount of ;D./(1-r). The U.S. tax

liability on the dividend payment after the deemed-paid credit is therefore D,fr-r)/(l-r1).



         The amount of foreign tax credit that can actually be used is limited, however, tg the

amount of U.S. tax payable on foreign income. Therefore, if the foreign tax rate, ;, exceeds

the U.S. tax rate, r, excess credits are created in the amount of D1(rr)/(1-r). If the foreign

tax rate is less than the U.S. tax rate, then a U.S. tax liability of D.,(r-r.JI(l-r) accrues and the

remitted foreign income is said to be creating excess limitation.



         As noted above, the Limitation on the foreign tax credit operates to some extent on an

overall basis. This means that excess credits accruing from one source of foreign income can

often be used to offset U.S. tax (excess limitation) on foreign incomefrom another source. This

is called cross-crediting or averaging of foreign income. The ability to cross-credit means that

the effect of repatriating foreign income from a particular source may be positive, negative or
zero.'




                                                 9
 The Deñvation of Tax Pdces

        We define the tax price of a dividend remittance         as   the additional global tax liability

arising from an incremental dollar's worth of dividend repatriations. To derive the tax price we

must take into account both the incremental U.S. and source country taxes on a dollar of

dividends. The U.S. tax liability generated by dividend payments before the foreign tax credit

equals rDj(l-rJ. The foreign taxes creditable against U.S. tax liability are deemed-paid taxes

plus withholding taxes, or

                                         rDj(l-r) + w1D                                              (2)

where w1 denotes the withholding tax rate in the host country. If the parent is in excess credit,

any U.S. tax liability on a dollar of dividends is offset by the foreign tax credit. If the parent

is in excess limitation, the U.S. tax liability equals

                                       (r-rj)Dj(l-rj -   co,D.                                       (3)



       To compute the global tax price of a dollar of dividends we add the source country effect

to the U.S. tax effect. Under a classical corporate income tax system9 the total source country

tax liability on subsidiary i equals

                                        T1
                                             = ;Y, + D1.                                             (4)

As a result, the only host country tax consequences of a dividend remittance are the associated

withholding taxes. If the parent is in excess credits there is no U.S. tax consequence and

therefore the global tax price is co. If the parent is in excess limitation the global tax price, p,

is

                                         p   = (r-rjI(l-r).                                         (5)




                                                 10
The withholding tax has no net effect on global taxes because the extra withholding tax paid on

the dividend remittance is offset by a reduction of U.S. tax of an equal amount. Due to cross-

crediting, the global tax price may be negative and dividend payments may reduce the firm's

global tax liability.'0



        Expression (5) shows that, if the parent corporation is in excess limitation, then the tax

price of a dividend remittance is inversely related to the subsidiary's avenge tax rate, r. As

noted previously, to the extent that these variations in r are endogenous, e.g. because the timing

of deductions and credits is elective, they can become a part of tax planning strategies for

repatriating foreign source income. Even if a subsidiary's avenge tax rate is relatively constant,

the tax price of remittances will fluctuate significantly when the subsidiary's parent switches

credit position. Consider a subsidiary with an average tax rate above the U.S. corporate rate.

When the parent is in excess limitation, the tax price of a dividend remittance is negative [(r-

ra/(l-rt) < 0]. When the parent is in excess credit, the tax price equals the withholding tax

rate. As a result, tax prices for some subsidiaries can be negative in some years and positive

in others. These changes in tax prices may also be endogenous if parents can control their

foreign tax credit positions through careful structuring of remittances from foreign subsidiaries.

The next section presents an estimation strategy to separate the effect of these transitory

components of tax prices from the effect of changes in the permanent component.




                                                11
m. An Empirical Model of Dividend Repatriations
       Previous work by Hines and Hubbard (1990) and Altshuler and Newlon (1993). has

estimated a simple empirical model of dividend repatriations. For subsidiaries paying a dividend

the model takes the following basic form:

                                    d=a0+a,P+br+XA+€,                                         (6)

where d is the dividend payout, expressed as the ratio of subsidiary dividends to assets, P is the

current tax price of dividend repatriation", r is the after-tax rate of return for the subsidiary,

and X is a vector of characteristics of subsidiary and parent. Equation (6) is not derived

explicitly from the firm's optimization problem, but can be considered a reduced form suitable

for testing the general implications of theoretical models such as Nartman's. It is similar to the

empirical models used to explain dividend payments in a purely domestic context.



       In these previous papers, P was expected to have a negative coefficient since higher tax

prices were expected to reduce the attractiveness of repatriation. The after-tax rate of return,

r, may have an ambiguous effect on the dividend payout. On the one hand, if dividend

payments are a residual, then higher earnings, which would increase the measured rate of return,

could be expected cewris purl/na to increase the dividend payout. On the other hand, a higher

after-tax rate of return would increase desired investment, having the effect of increasing

retained earnings and reducing the dividend payout. Other relevant variables are included in X,

the most important of which is perhaps the age of the subsidiary. Some theoretical literature

(such as Newlon (1987) and Sinn (1990)) suggests that older subsidiaries should have higher

dividend payout ratios. This prediction is a direct consequence of the value of deferral when


                                               12
there isa repatriation tax, i.e., if there is deferral, then dividend payouts will on avenge be an

increasing function of age, other things constant.



       As noted already, by using the current tax price, P, the above model may confound the

potentially different effects of permanent and transitory components of the tax price. It is

beyond the scope of this paper to derive a theoretical model that explicitly incorporates

intertemporal variation in repatriation tax prices. Instead, we use a reduced form empirical

model to test the general implications that could be àxpected from any such model. In

particular, a transitory decrease (increase) in the tax price reduces the current tax price relative

to future tax prices, and thus enables the firm to increase the value of its foreign source income

by accelerating (delaying) dividend repatriations. But a permanent change in the tax price does

not change the relative prices of current and future repatriation. Therefore, one would expect

dividend repatriations to be affected more by transitory than by permanent changes in tax prices.

And Hartman's (1985) work would indicate that permanent changes in tax prices should have

no effect at all on dividend repatriations.



       Based on these considerations, our empirical model generalizes equation (6) to allow for

differences in transitory and permanent tax price effects:

                               d=a0+a1(P-fl+a2V+br+XA+e,                                        (7)

where P. is the permanent component of the tax price and hence (P-PD is the transitory

component. We estimate this in a slightly different form:

                               d=ao+aiP+(arajY+br+XA+€.                                         (8)



                                                13
        One difficulty in estimating equation (8) is that the permanent component of the tax price,

Y, is unobservable. To capture the effect of V we use an instrumental variables approach in

which we instrument the tax price on a variable, F1, that we expect to be correlated with the

permanent component of the tax price but unconelated with its transitory component. This

essentially involves replacing V in equation (8) with its predicted value,



where the coefficients are derived from the regression

                                   P'=b0+b1P'+b2r+XB+E.
We experiment with two alternative instruments for the permanent component of the tax price,

the country average tax price and the country statutory withholding tax rate. These instruments

reflect cross-country variation in taxes that should also be reflected in the permanent component

of the tax price but not in the purely transitory component.



       For estimation of (8), we use a Tobit procedure because dividend payments are censored

at zero. On the surface, this may appear unnecessary since actual dividend payments are, by

definition, non-negative. However, the desired level of dividend payments could be negative.

This result would obtain if, as suggested by the theoretical work in this area, foreign retained

earnings were the preferred source of finance for foreign investment but foreign investment

exceeded foreign earnings. Our use of a Tobit procedure implicitly assumes that we have

modelled desired dividends, but only observe actual dividends.




                                              14
IV.    The Data

       Our data set contains information from three sets of tax and information forms filed by

a large sample of non-financial U.S. multinational corporations. Subsidiary data are obtained

from information returns, called 5471 forms, filed for each foreign subsidiary of a U.S.

taxpayer. The form 5471 includes balance sheet and income statement variables along with

detailed information on remittances to U.S. parent corporations. For the purposes of this study,

we needed to append information on the taxable income and foreign tax credit position of parent

corporations to the subsidiary specific data from the form 547 is. We obtained income data from

corporate income tax returns filed by the U.S. parent corporations. We calculated foreign tax

credit positions using data from the forms filed in support of foreign tax credit claims. Detailed

data from foreign tax credit forms and data from 5471 forms is only compiled in even years and

were available to us only for the years 1980, 1982, 1984, and 1986.



       Calculating subsidiary-specific tax prices for dividend remittances for each sample year

also requires knowledge of the host country withholding tax rates; the appropriate foreign

corporate tax rates, and details of host country tax systems. To develop a list of country specific

withholding tax rates for each sample year, we used the Price Waterhouse guides and tax

treaties. These guides also provided the appropriate statutory tax rates for the countries in our

sample with non-classical (for example, split rate and imputation) corporate tax systems.

Finally, in each year of the sample we used the subsidiary's avenge foreign tax rate to measure

the corporate tax rate r at which dividends are grossed-up and foreign tax credits are calculated.




                                                15
To calculate this rate we divided foreign tax payments by before-tax earnings and profits, both

obtained from the 5471 form data.



       In some situations, calculating avenge tax rates in this manner may lead to an

unsatisfactory approximation of r1.     In particular, problems arise when subsidiaries report

negative earnings and profits, receive tax refunds from host countries, repatriate dividends in

excess of current earnings and profits, and receive dividends from subsidiaries of their own.

Where feasible, adjustments were made in these cases to arrive at a more satisfactory measure

of r.'2 Various screens were also applied to the data to eliminate observations for which the
data were suspect. After these deductions    the   total number of observations in the sample was

22,906.



       Some of the estimation required linking subsidiaries in two consecutive sample years to

form a panel. This was done largely through an algorithm that matched subsidiaries based on

their U.S. parent corporation, company name, date of incorporation and country of residence.

Many subsidiaries could not be matched on this basis and they therefore could not be included

in the panel. The total number of observations in the panel was 7,118.



       Table 1 presents for each country represented in the sample the mean tax price, the

standard deviation of the tax price, the statutory withholding tax rate and the mean dividend asset

ratio for the subsidiaries located in that country for 1984. This table provides information that

may be valuable in evaluating the usefulness of country mean tax prices and statutory


                                               16
withholding tax rates as instruments for the permanent component of the tax price. First note

that there is substantiai variation in country mean tax prices and in statutory withholding tax

rates.   Mean country tax prices range from -0.21 for Germany to 0.38 for Greece. Statutory

withholding tax rates range from zero for a number of tax haven countries to 55 percent for

Mexico. This degree of variation across countries means that these variables may be useful

instruments, since the cross-country variation is presumably correlated with variation in the

permanent component of the tax price.



         Note also that within each country the standard deviation of the tax price is relatively

large, in no case less than 0.14. This demonstrates that there is a substantial portion of variation

in tax prices not explained by differences in country statutory dividend withholding and corporate

income tax rates. Finally, note that no clear relationship between country mean dividend payout

ratios and country mean tax prices or statutory withholding rates emerges from inspection of

Table 1. This presages the results presented in the next section.



V. Results

         Table 2 presents the estimation results. Column 1 of the table presents the results of

estimating the simple dividend model presented in equation (6) that incorporates only the cunent

tax price of repatriation. These estimates use the full sample of 22,906 observations. They are

presented to check that the results with our sample are essentially the same as found by Hines

and Hubbard and Altshuler and Newlon.




                                               17
       The results presented in column (1) are indeed similar to those found in previous work.

The coefficient on the tax price is negative and statistically significant and of similar magnitude

to the estimates in previous papers. To gauge the economic significance of this coefficient, note

that it implies that a reduction in tax price of one standard deviation (0.34) implies an increase

in the overall dividend payout ratio (including those that pay dividends and those that do not)

of about 0.004, which is equal to about 11 percent of the mean dividend payout ratio of 0.036.

Thus, moving the tax price from one standard deviation above the mean to one standard

deviation below the mean implies an increase in the dividend payout ratio equal to about 22

percent of the mean dividend payout ratio.



       The coefficient on the after-tax rate of return is positive, significant and less than one.

This is plausible, since it implies that an increase in earnings increases dividend payments.

Because it is significantly less than 1, the coefficient also suggests that an increase in the after-

tax rate of return increases retained earnings. Also as expected, the coefficient on subsidiary

age is positive and significant.



       Column (2) and the remaining columns of the table present the results of estimating the

model in equation (8) that distinguishes between permanent and transitory tax price effects. To

interpret the tax price coefficient estimates in these columns recall that in equation (8) the effect

of the transitory component of the tax price is captured by the coefficient on the current tax

price, while the coefficient on the permanent tax price equals the difference between the

permanent and transitory tax price effects. Thus, the coefficient estimates in the first row of the


                                                18
table represent transitory tax price effects, the second row coefficient estimates represent the

difference between the permanent and transitory tax price effects, and the coefficient estimates

in the third row, which are sums of the coefficients in the first two rows, represent permanent

tax price effects.



       Column (2) of Table 2 shows estimates, using the full sample, of the basic model in

which the country mean tax price is used as an instrument for the permanent component of the

tax price. The estimated effect of the transitory component of the tax price (in the first row)

is negative and statistically significant. Furthermore, it is larger in absolute magnitude than the

estimated effect from the model excluding the permanent tax price effect.'3 This result implies

that transitory variation in the tax price has a large effect on the incentive to repatriate income.



       The estimated difference between the permanent and transitory tax price effects presented

in the second row of column (2) is positive and statistically significant. This implies that the

permanent component of the tax price is not only significantly different from the transitory tax

price effect, but, since the coefficient is positive, cannot have as large a negative impact on

dividend repatriations. In fact, the estimated permanent tax price effect presented in the third

row is not significantly different from zero. These results provide support for the hypothesis

that the dividend repatriation incentive is affected by transitory but not permanent changes in the

tax price of repatriation, a result that is consistent with Hartman's analysis.




                                                19
       One potential problem with the results from the basic model in column (2) arises because

the tax incentive to retain earnings abroad should depend on the expected foreign after-tax rate

of return, but we use the actual rate for the current year in our estimates. This may bias the

coefficient on the after-tax rate of return toward zero. More importantly, the difference between

the current and expected after-tax rates of return will be part of the error term. Consequently,

the current tax price and the country mean tax price will both be correlated with the error term

because both depend on current foreign taxes and income. This may bias the coefficients on the

current and permanent tax prices.



       To explore whether this is a significant problem we used the two year lead after-tax rate

of return as an instrument for the expected after-tax rate of return. The motivation for this

approach is that, under rational expectations, the difference between the future actual and

expected after-lax rates of return (the forecast error) should be independent of the current after-

tax rate of return, which reflects only current information.



       This approach reduces the sample size in two ways. First, use of the two-year lead

means that only the first three years of the data can be used. Second, only observations for

which matches could be found in the following year of the sample could be used. As mentioned

above, these restrictions reduced the sample size to 7,118.



       There is some risk that the selection of subsidiaries dropped from the sample by these

requirements was not random. For example, current income repatriation might depend on



                                               20
whether there are plans to sell a subsidiary in the future, and subsidiaries sold within two years

would be excluded from the sample. Subsidiaries that are being shut down might also be more

or less likely to pay dividends, and a subsidiary shut down within two years would be excluded

from the sample. If for these or other reasons the selection was significantly non-random,

selection bias might be induced.




        To investigate whether there is any potential selection bias, column (3) of the table

presents the results of estimating the basic model of column (2) using the restricted sample.

Note that a higher percentage of the subsidiaries in the restricted sample pay dividends to their

U.S. parent corporation. This is consistent, for example, with dividend payments being lower

before a subsidiary is sold or shut down. But note that based on Hausman tests on the individual

coefficients of interest the regression results do not differ significantly from those obtained using

the full sample. Thus, there are no signs of selection bias in the restricted sample.



       Column (4) of the table presents the results of the regression using the two-year lead

alter-tax rate of return as an instrument for the expected after-tax rate of return. The coefficient

on the after-tax rate of return increases, and the difference is significant based on a Hausman

test. This coefficient implies that a higher expected after-tax rate of return is associated with

greater retention of earnings, but not by as much as measured in the previous regressions. The

tax price coefficients are not significantly different from those in column (2)." These results

therefore provide no evidence that the permanent tax price coefficients are biased by using the

current instead of the expected future foreign after-tax rate of return.



                                                21
       A second potential problem arises because even after controlling for differences in

country average tax prices and the other regression variables using the instrumental variables
approach the current tax price may still be correlated with the permanent tax price. This is

because the permanent tax price may depend not only on cross-country differences in taxes, but

also on the portfolio of subsidiaries held by the U.S. parent corporation, on the parent's U.S.

operations, and on expectations about the future. This problem also could bias the tax price
coefficients. It would tend to bias the transitory tax price coefficient toward the permanent tax

price coefficient and bias the permanent tax price coefficient (i.e., the estimated difference

between the permanent and transitory tax price effects) toward zero.



       To determine whether this is a serious problem we estimated the model using the change

in tax price between the current year and the two-year lead as an instrument for the transitory

tax price. This approach was adopted because the change in the tax price is likely to be less

correlated than the current tax price with the permanent tax price. The results of this estimation

are presented in column (5) of the table. There is no significant change in any of the

coefficients, they are simply estimated with somewhat less precision. Thus, there is no evidence

that the tax price coefficients are biased from a correlation between the current and permanent

tax prices.



       A third problem may exist because much of the variation in the country mean tax price

comes from variations in effective corporate tax rates across countries, but variations in foreign

effective corporate tax rates may also affect foreign after-tax rates of return. As a result it may



                                                22
be difficult to separately identify the effects of variations in foreign effective tax rates as they

affect repatriation through their effect on the tax price of repatriation and as they affect

repatriation through their effects on the foreign after-tax rate of return. For example, a higher

foreign corporate tax rate will decrease the tax price of repatriation for the subsidiary of a U.S.

corporation that is in excess limitation, but it will also, ceteris paribus, decrease the foreign

after-tax rate of return, thereby decreasing the incentive to defer repatriation of foreign income.

Although the models we estimate attempt to avoid this problem by controlling separately for the

foreign after-tax rate of return, the measure we use is imperfect and hence there is some

possibility of misspecification biasing the tax price results.



       Our first approach to testing whether this is a significant problem is to use the country

statutory dividend withholding tax rate in place of the country mean tax price as an instrument

for the permanent component of the tax price. The statutory withholding tax rate is related to

the tax price, but has no direct relation to the corporate tax rate. Column (6) of the table

presents the results of this estimation, using the full sample again. Note that the permanent tax

price coefficient changes very little from the basic model estimate in column (2). The difference

is not statistically significant based on a Hausman test. This provides some evidence that there

is no serious misspecification problem.



       The approach used to generate the results presented in column (6) may not provide a

conclusive fix for the potential problem, because country statutory withholding tax rates are

correlated with country corporate tax rates. To address this additional possible difficulty we


                                               23
remove the correlation from the withholding rate instrument. To do this we regress the

withholding rate on the country mean average corporate tax rate and the country statutory tax

rate and use the residual from this regression as an instrument for the permanent component of

the tax price. In other words, we use as an instrument the part of the withholding tax rate that

is orthogonal to the country mean tax rate and the statutory corporate tax rate. The results of

this procedure are presented in column (7) of the table. Here again the coefficient on the

permanent component of the tax price is not significantly different, based on a Hausman test,

from the coefficient obtained in the estimates of the basic model presented in column (2).



VI.      Conclusion

         The tax price effects on dividend repatriations found in previous studies using the simple

model of dividend repatriations apparently measure largely the effect of the timing of dividend

repatriations to take advantage of intertemporal variation in tax prices.           These timing

opportunities may arise either endogenously, through tax planning that affects both tax prices

and dividend payments, or through exogenously caused variations in tax prices. Therefore,

although repatriation taxes seem to affect dividend repatriation behavior, this is apparently only

because   tax prices vary ova time. This result is consistent with the prediction of Hartnian's
model.



         The results presented here should not be construed to imply that the permanent' levels

of host and home country taxation do not affect dividend repatriation by foreign subsidiaries.

Host and home country corporate taxation will of course affect the earnings reinvestment


                                                24
decision, and hence the dividend repatriation decision, through their impacts on host and home

country after-tax rates of return. The evidence from our estimates merely implies that host and

home country taxation do not affect repatriation through the permanent component of the

repatriation tax.



         Our results may have policy implications. The most obvious implications relate to

policies on dividend withholding tax rates. For example, many capital-importing countries

consider lowering withholding taxes, either unilaterally or in the context of bilateral tax treaty

negotiations, to try to attract new equity investment. But some countries may be inhibited by

the fear that such a measure would lead to increased flight of the accumulated multinational

equity trapped" by existing high withholding taxes. Our results suggest that, as long as the

reduction in the withholding tax rate is viewed as permanent, such fears are unfounded.

Permanent changes in dividend withholding tax rates appear likely mainly to attract new equity

investment and not to encourage repatriation of equity accumulated from past earnings.'3



       To the extent that these results support the Hartman model, they have implications

regarding the incentive effects of the credit and deferral system that the United States uses to tax

most foreign income of U.S. multinationals. In particular, if the repatriation tax is irrelevant

for the dividend repatriation decision, then, at least as regards retained earnings, the incentives

for foreign investment are the same as they would be under a system that exempts foreign

income from taxation.




                                                25
                                     REFERENCES



Altshuler, Rosanne and Paolo Fulghieri. 1990. 'Incentive Effects of Foreign Tax Credits on

       Multinationals,' Columbia University Working Paper #478.

_______________ and T. Scott Newlon. 1993. 'The Effects of U.S. Tax Policy on the Income

       Repatriation Patterns of U.S. Multinational Corporations," in A. (3iovannini, G.

       Hubbard, and J. Slemrod, Studies in International Taxation. Chicago: University of

       Chicago Press, pp. 77-1 15.

Auerbach, Alan J. 1979. "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Quarterly Journal

      of Economics, 93.

Bradford, David. 1981. 'The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate

       Distributions," Journal of Public Economics, XV.

Burman, Leonard and William Randolph. 1993. "Distinguishing Permanent from Transitory

       Effects of Capital Gains Tax Changes: New Evidence from Micro Data," forthcoming,

      American Economic Review.

Goodspeed, Timothy and Daniel J. Frisch. 1989. "U.S. Tax Policy and the Overseas Activities

      of U.S. Multinational Corporations: A Quantitative Assessment," manuscript, U.S.

      Treasury Office of Tax Analysis.

Hartinan, David. 1985. "Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment," Journal of Public

      Economics, 26.

Hines, James R. 1989.       "Credit and Deferral as International Investment Incentives,"

       manuscript, Princeton University, August.


                                            26
_____________ and    It Glenn Hubbard. 1990. "Coming Rome to America: Dividend

       Repatriations by U.S. Multinationals," in A. Razin and J. Slemrod, eds., Taxation in

       the Global Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 161-198.

King, Mervyn. 1977. Public Policy and the Corporation. London: Chapman and Hall.

Leechor, Chad and Jack Mintz. j993• S()j the Taxation of Multinational Corporate Investment

       when the Deferral Method is used by the Capital Exporting Country,0 Journal of Public

       Economics, 51.

Mutti, John. 1981.      "Tax Incentives and Repatriation Decisions of U.S. Multinational

       Corporations," National Tax Journal, 34.

Newton, T. Scott. 1987. "Tax Policy and the Multinational Firm's Financial Policy and

       Investment Decisions," Ph.D. Dissertation, Princeton University.

Price Waterhouse. 1980, 1982, 1984, and 1986. Corporate Taxes: A Worldwide Summary.

      New York.

Sinn, Hans Werner. 1990. "Taxation and the Birth of Foreign Subsidiaries," NBER Working

      Paper #3519.




                                            27
                                          ENDNOTES


1.      See King (1977), Auerbach (1979) and Bradford (1981).
2.     The term "normal" is used here to imply that there is some permanent, or long-run

average, repatriation tax cost that the multinational faces. By "normal" tax cost we really mean

expected future tax cost.

3.     The Subpart F provisions of the tax code provide for accrual basis taxation on certain

foreign income.
4.     Note that this result does not imply that home and host country taxes have no effect on

the repatriation decision. They do have an impact due to their effect on home and host country

after-tax rates of return, but not through the tax on repatriation.
5.     The rhythm method was a more useful tax planning device for U.S. multinationals prior

to the Tax Reform Act of 1986, when the foreign tax credit was calculated year by year. The

1986 Act switched to a system in which the foreign tax credit is calculated based on the pool of

previously unremitted foreign earnings and uncredited taxes, and, therefore, shifting the year in

which tax credits and deductions are taken has much less effect on the foreign tax rate for U.S.

foreign tax credit purposes.
6.     Although we focus on dividend payments, income may be remitted to parent companies

in the form of interest, rents and royalty payments. Previous work by Altshuler and Newton

(1993) suggests that dividend payments are the most important channel for income remittances,

making up over 60 percent of the total foreign income derived by U.S. parents from their
foreign subsidiaries in 1986.




                                               28
7.     As mentioned above, for tax years beginning in 1987, the amount of foreign tax credit

associated with a dividend payment is based on the accumulated value of earnings and profits.

Although this changes the gross-up formula in the text, it is not relevant for our analysis since

our data is taken from years prior to 1986.

8.     Congress has restricted cross-crediting by creating baskas of different types of foreign

income to each of which a separate foreign tax credit limitation applies. Before the 1986 Act,

the period which our study covers, there were five separate baskets: (1) one for investment

interest income, (2) one for Domestic International Sales Corporation dividend income, (3) one

for the foreign trade income of a Foreign Sales Corporation, (4) another for distributions from

a Foreign Sales Corporation, and (5) one for all other foreign source income, which we will call

general limitation income. The 1986 Act decreased the potential for cross-crediting further by

increasing the number of separate limitation baskets to nine.

9.     For simplicity we focus our discussion in this section on the derivation of the tax price

of a dividend remittance from a foreign subsidiary operating in a country that uses a classical

corporate tax system. In our empirical work we also take details of host country tax systems

into account since our sample includes subsidiaries that operate in countries with split-rate and

imputation systems. The derivation of the tax prices for these types of tax systems are discussed

in detail in Altshuler and Newton (1993).

10.    We neglect here the cases in which the parent corporation has tax losses, since, as in

earlier papers by Hines and Hubbard (1990) and Altshuler and Newlon (1993), we include in

our sample only those U.S. corporations with positive worldwide taxable income. They are

excluded here for simplicity's sake, since the carryover rules for tax losses and foreign tax



                                              29
credits can interact in ways that may complicate the incentives for income repatriation of these

firms.

11.      Altshuler and Newton (1993) also use a measure of the "expected" tax price that attempts

to take into account the fact that excess foreign tax credits can be carried back to several prior

years or forward to several future years to offset taxes in those years.
12.      See Altshuler and Newlon (1993) for a description of the methodology.

13.      A Hausman test shows that this difference is statistically significant.

14.      The coefficient on the current tax price is just barely significantly different (T=2.O), but

the significance is probably overstated since we have not aIjusted the standard errors yet to

account for instrumental variables estimation.

15.      If a reduction in withholding tax rates is perceived by multinational investors as a signal

of more favorable and stable policies towards multinational investment it may in fact increase

reinvestment of earnings.




                                                 30
                 Table 1: Country Averages, 1984
                     Mean,                     Stand.     With—
                    dividends     Mean,        dev.,      holding
Country              I assets     tax price   tax price   tax rate
W. Germany                 3.9%      —oil          038        15%
Japan'                     2.7%      —0.15         0.48          10
Norway'                    1.6%      —0.11         0.19          15
U. Kingdom                 22%       —0.10         0.38           5
Austria                    4.2%        0.02        0.41           6
Sweden                     0.7%        0.03        0.34              5
France                     22%         0.03        0.34              5
Finland                    42%         0.03        0.47              5
Italy                      2.4%        0.07        0.26           6
Denmark                    1.8%        0.07        0.22           6
Luxembourg                 1.0%        0.08        0.49           6
Malaysia                   2.6%        0.08        0.29           0
Peru                       3.4%        0.08        0.79         40
Canada                     3.7%        0.08        0.26           5
Belgium                    2.3%        0.13        0.35          15
Singapore                  5.1%        0.13        029            0
Costa Rica                 4.8%        0.13        0.37          15
Netherlands                2.7%        0.14        020           5
New Zealand                2.3%        0.14        0.22         15
Colombia                   4.9%        0.15        023          20
Australia                  2.2%        0.16        0.24         15
SouthAfrica                3.9%        0.16        0.20         15
Guatemala                  3.9%        0.17        0.27         13
Thailand                   4.7%        0.13        0.13         20
Brazil                     4.0%        0.19        0.51         25
Neth. Antilles             1.0%        0.19        0.23           0
Bahamas                    3.4%        0.19        0.25           0
Ireland                    3.6%        0.20        0.25           0
Portugal                   0.9%        0.20        0.22         25
HongKong                   4.9%        0.21        0.21           0
Philippines                1.7%        0.22        0.14         20
Bermuda                    3.5%        0.23        023           0
Spain                      1.9%        0.23        0.14         18
Venezuela                  2.0%        0.24        0.18         20
Cayman Is.                 2.8%        024         023           0
Me,dco                     2.6%        0.25        0.43         55
Chile                      5.1%        025         0.20         30
Argentina                  2.8%        0.25        0.29         18
Panama                     4.6%        026         0.23         10
Taiwan                     3.4%        0.27        0.35         35
Liberia                    1.2%        0.28        0.15         15
Greece'                    0%          038         028          47
All subsidiaries           2.9%        0.03        0.34         11

 Non—classical countries
                          Table 2: Tobit Model Estimation Results
  (dependent variable: subsidiary dividends over assets; standard errors in parentheses)
                                                      Partial sample matched
 RHS variables,                Full sample              with 2—year leads                Full sample
 estimation details           (1)      (2)
                                       I              (3) I (4) I (5)(6) I (7)
 Current (global)           —0.046 —0.059 —0.066 —0.078 —0.070 —0.047 —0.049
  tax price (tp)            (.0057) (.0062) (.0109) (.0114) (.020) (.0057) (.0058)
 Permanent                       ...        0.087      0.092     0.089        0.080      0.080        0.13
    tax pricea                              (.016)   (.0263)   (.0265)       (.031)     (.076)      (.038)
 Sum of tax price                ...        0.027      0.027      0.010       0.010      0.033       0.078
    coefficient?                            (.015)    (.024)     (.024)      (.024)     (.076)      (.038)
 Subsidiary                    0.58           0.55     0.49        0.80        0.80       0.55        0.53
  earnings / assets          (.016)         (.016)   (.027)      (.055)      (.055)     (.032)      (.021)
 Subsidiary                    0.37           0.38     0.33        0.33       0.33        0.38        0.39
   age/ 100                  (.017)         (.017)   (.028)      (.028)     (.028)      (.022)      (.018)
 Permanent IV
 (1) country mean tp
 (2) withholding rate
                                                x         x           x           x
                                                                                               x           t
 Income IV
 2—year forward                                                       x           x
 Transitory IV
 2—year change in tp                                                              x
 Intercept (1980)            —0.29          —0.29    —0.24      —0.28       —0.28       —0.26       —0.29
                            (.0059) (.0060) (.0093)             (.012)      (.012) (.0051) (.0064)
 1982 Dummy                   0.026          0.026    0.038      0.039       0.039       0.030      0.026
                            (.0051)         (.0071) (.0073) (.0073) (.0054) (.0051)
                                           (.0051)
 1984 Dummy                —0.029 —0.030 —0.0037 0.00075 0.00098 —0.030 —0.031
                           (.0053) (.0053) (.0085) (.0088) (.0088) (.0053) (.0054)
 1986 Dummy                —0.012 —0.012        ...      ...    ... —0.012 —0.013
                           (.0065) (.0065)                           (.0066) (.0066)
 Observations               22,906 22,906             7,118      7,118       7,118     22,906      22,906
 Paying dividends             28%            28%      37%         37%        37%         28%         28%
Notes:

a Measures the difference between effects of changes in permanent and transitory lax prices.
  (transitory tax price current tax price — permanent tax price)
b Measures the effect of permanent lax
                                       price changes, holding the transitory tax price arnstant.
c Uses
         part otwithholding rate orthogonal to the foreign statutory and anantry mean average tax rates.
