NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF OUTBOUND
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT ON
THE DOMESTIC CAPITAL STOCK

Martin Feldstein

Working Paper No. 4668

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1994

This paper was prepared as part of the NBER project on the taxation of multinational
corporations and was presented at the project conference on January 14, 1994. An earlier
version was presented at the 1993 NBER Summer Institute. I am grateful to Joosung Jun for
detailed discussions about measurement issues and data sources and to Todd Sinai for help
with the regression analysis presented in sections 3 and 4. I benefitted also from comments
on an earlier draft by Ken Froot, Jim Hines, Glenn Hubbard, Robert Upsey and Joel Sleinrod.
This paper will be published in the NBER conference volume, The Effects of International
Taxation on Multinational Corporations. This paper is part of NBERs research programs in
International Trade and Investment and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and do not necessarily represent those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #4668
March 1994

THE EFFECTS OF OUTBOUND
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT ON
THE DOMESTIC CAPITAL STOCK

ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the effect of outbound foreign direct investment (PD!) on the
domestic capital stock. The first part of the paper shows that only about 20 percent of the value

of assets owned by U.S. affiliates abroad is financed by cross-border flows of capital from the
United States. An additional 18 per cent represents retained earnings atiributable to U.S.
investors. The rest is financed locally by foreign debt and equity.
The second part of the paper analyzes data for the major industrial countries of the OECD

and finds that each dollar of cross-border flow of foreign direct investment reduces domestic
investment by approximately one dollar.
This dollar for dollar displacement of domestic investment by outbound FDI is consistent
with the Feldstein-Horioka picture of segmented capital markets. It suggests that while portfolio

funds are largely segmented into national capital markets, direct investment can achieve cross-

border capital flows. A dollar outflow of direct investment reduces domestic investment by a

dollar and this is not offset by a change in international portfolio invstment. This ability of
foreign direct investment to circumvent the segmented national capital markets also appears in
the expanded use of foreign debt and equity capital to finance the capital accumulation of foreign

affiliates of U.S. finns.
Taken together, these estimates suggest that each dollar of foreign assets acquired by U.S.

foreign affiliates reduces the U.S. domestic capital stock by between 20 cents and 38 cents.
Equivalently, this implies that each dollar of displaced domestic capital in the United States adds

between $2.60 and $5.00 to the capital stock of U.S. foreign affiliates.
Martin Feldstein
Harvard University and NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138

The Effects ot Outbound Forei2n Direct Investment
on the Domestic Capital Stock

Martin Feldstein

Foreign direct investment plays an important role in the international transfer of both
capital and technology and has a significant impact on the pattern of international trade. The
most recent detailed government survey of U.S. direct investment abroad found that in 1989 the

foreign affiliates of U.S. multinational corporations had assets of more than $1.2 trillion,
approximately 25 percent of U.S. gross domestic product in that year.

Companies make direct investments abroad by acquiring existing business assets of

foreign companies, by starting new businesses with "greenfield" investments in plant and
equipment, and by increasing their investments in foreign businesses that they• already own.
These foreign investments can be either wholly owned by the parent company or owned jointly

with foreign partners.'

'The minimum extent of the parent company's ownership share required to make an
investment qualify as "direct" rather than portfolio investment depends on the particular
definition of foreign direct investment. The common balance of payments definition of foreign

direct investment is based on ownership of at least 10 percent of the equity in the foreign
business. For some purposes, it is more sensible to concentrate on businesses where the parent
has a majority ownership interest.

1

The heterogeneity of foreign direct investment reflects the diversity of motives for
making such investments.2 At one extreme, some foreign direct investment (like the purchase

of commercial real estate) is not fundamentally different from portfolio investment and the
motivation is the standard desire to diversify portfolio assets. A more traditional motivation for

PD! is to take advantage of low cost labor or proximity to raw materials. The primary reason

is probably to maintain or increase foreign sales and market share. Thus, manufacturing
companies that make products for industrial customers invest abroad in order to have closer
working relations with customers, especially when their products must be specifically designed

or modified for their customers. Many service companies must invest abroad if they want to
provide services to those local markets. And some manufacturers acquire foreign firms in order

to gain entry into local markets.

Government policies significantly influence the pattern of foreign direct investment,

sometimes intentionally and sometimes inadvertently.

Some governments require local

investment (to create industrial jobs or achieve technology transfers) as a condition of access to

government procurement or licensing. Other governments use favorable tax and credit policies

to attract foreign investment. In contrast, some governments (e.g., Japan) are notorious for the
regulatory barriers that deter inbound foreign direct investment.

The effects of government policies on PD! are not always intended, but may be the
inadvertent by-products of policies designed to serve other purposes. Tariffs and other trade

2

See

Froot (1993) and Graham and Krugman (1989) and the references cited in those books

for a general discussion of foreign direct investment with particular reference to the United
States.

2

barriers intended to protect domestic producers induce inbound foreign direct investment. The

taxation of multinational companies can encourage or impede both inbound and outbound foreign
direct investment.

There has been a substantial public policy debate about the effects of inbound and
outbound foreign direct investment on the domestic economy.3 Much of the public concern is

stated in terms of the effect of foreign direct investment on employment, with opponents of
outbound FDL arguing that such FDI "takes production abroad" and reduces employment at
home while proponents of outbound FDI counter that such FDI creates markets for U.S. exports

to affiliates and through affiliates to foreign buyers. Economists recognize that this is a
misplaced concern because the American labor market works well in assuring that all who want

jobs at wages that reflect their skills can fmd work within a relatively short period of tune. As
Graham and Krugman emphasize: "The net impact of FDJ on U.S. employment is approximately

zero, and the truth of this assertion has nothing to do with job gains and losses at the industry
level." (Graham and Knigman, 1989, p. 49; their italics). Studies that calculate the numbers

of jobs "lost" because particular firms shift activity abroad (e.g., Bergsten et. al., 1978. and
Hufbauer and Adler, 1968) do not take into account the absorption of those American workers

by other firms and industhes.
A related and more plausible concern is often expressed in terms of the impact of FDI

on the "quality" of jobs. The worry is that although the forces of supply and demand maintain
total employment, the shift of investment to foreign countries causes a substitution in the United

3See, for example, the discussions in Bergsten et. al. (1978), Graham and Knigman (1989)
and Hufbauer and Adler (1968).
3

States of low wage jobs for the higher wage manufacturing jobs that have gone abroad. As a
general proposition, this is again incorrect. In a well-functioning labor market like ours, wages

reflect the skills of the workers and are therefore not affected by the entry or exit of individual
finns. There are some ways, however, in which foreign investment could affect wages. Market

imperfections that permit workers in some industries to be paid substantially more than
individuals with similar skills in other industries (e.g., union power or the monopoly power of
firms that share their monopoly profits with employees) do provide a mechanism by which the

mix of firms can affect the distribution of wages. In addition, even without such market
imperfections, FDI can affect the quality of jobs if it alters the marginal product of labor. This

can happen if FDI changes the domestic capital stock. It can also happen if FDI increases or

decreases the kinds of jobs that are more likely to involve substantial on-the-job training.
Training reflects the mix of industries and may be more important in capital intensive industries
than in other industries.4
This leads naturally to two questions about the effect of FDI on the capital stocks of both

the parent and host countries. First, what impact does an increase in the assets of foreign
affiliates have on the parent country's capital stock? Second, what impact does an inflow of

foreign direct investment have on the host country's capital stock? The answers to these
questions may well depend on the form of the foreign direct investment and on the reason for

4For an extensive discussion of the impact of outbound foreign direct investment on
employment in the United States, see Lipsey (1993). Lipsey concludes that the effect of
increased outbound PD! on the domestic employment by multinational companies is probably
slightly positive (as outbound FDI increases exports) and that the mix of domestic jobs shifts
toward more higher paying technical and managerial positions.

4

the particular inflow or outflow of such investment.5 Although the available data do not permit

such a disaggregated analysis, it is possible to assess the extent to which countries that
experience sustained high rates of inbound or outbound foreign direct investment have higher

or lower levels of domestic investment than would otherwise be expected. The current swdy
focuses on estimating the extent to which outbound foreign direct investment reduces domestic

investment in the parent country.
Previous studies of this question have been microeconomic partial equilibrium analyses

that have asked whether fkn that invest more abroad reduce their investment at home.6

Although these studies can shed interesting light on the behavior of multinational companies,
they do not indicate the net effect on the economy as a whole when individual thns increase
their outbound FDI. When finns increase their overseas investment, the funds that they might
otherwise have used in the United States might instead finance greater domestic investment by

others, leaving both the aggregate capital outflow and the level of domestic investment
unchanged. Alternatively, the process of outbound FDI might increase the aggregate net capital

outflow and therefore reduce total domestic investment. Resolving the policy debate about the
effect of FDI on domestic investment requires resolving this macroeconomic general equilibrium
issue.

This paper presents information on the general equilibrium effect of foreign direct

5Since foreign direct investment is an endogenous variable in the complex system of trade
and capital flows, it would in principle be desirable to estimate a more fully articulated structural
model in which one can assess the extent to which changes in exogenous variables that alter FDI
influence domestic investment through this route. I return to this issue in section 4 below.
6 These studies include Blomstrom et al (1988), Lipsey and Weiss (1984), Severn (1972),
Stevens (1969)

5

investment based on aggregate evidence about investment flows in the OECD countries. The
analysis

focuses on the effect of outbound foreign direct investment and implies that

such

investment does reduce domestic investment but that each dollar of assets in foreign affiliates
reduces the domestic capital stock by substantially less than a dollar. The best summary of the
evidence is that each dollar of assets in foreign affiliates reduces the domestic capital stock by
between 20 cents and 40 cents.
Before looking at the basis for these conclusions, it is useful to begin by considering

several alternative concepts of foreign direct investment and the relevant magnitude of each for

the United States. This is the subject of section one. The second section discusses alternative
theories of how outbound foreign domestic investment could affect the domestic capital stock.

Section 3 and 4 present investment
equations that are estimated using the OECD data. The
implications of this for the displacement question are discussed in the final section. Appendix

A presents the basic data used in sections 3 and 4.

1.

Three Concepts of Foreign Direct Investment
Several alternative concepts of the stock

of foreign direct investment are possible. A

very narrow definition measures the stock of FDI as the accumulated cross-border flow of equity

and debt from the parent company to its foreign subsidiary. The parent company may however
have control over a much larger volume offoreign assets, including those financed by retained
earnings and by borrowing from foreign and other domestic creditors.

-

This section starts with the narrowest definition of outbound FDI and then presents a

series of building blocks that can be used to construct broader measures of foreign direct

6

investment. For each building block, there is an estimate of the value from the point of view
of U.S. parents as of the end of 1989.
To avoid the special problems of comparing bank assets and liabilities with those of other

types of businesses, this analysis is limited to non-bank affiliates of non-bank U.S. corporate

parents. Similarly, in order to focus on foreign investments in which the U.S. parent has an
unambiguous controlling interest, the analysis is limited to majority owned non-bank affiliates

of U.S. non-bank parents.'

These calculations are based on thu from the 1989 Benchmark Survey of U.S.
Investment Abroad (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1992). Although the Benchmark Survey

data report the current dollar values of the debts of foreign affihiat&, the value of assets and
therefore the value of equity is stated only as historic cost values. The value of original equity

investments and of retained earnings must therefore be adjusted for past price changes to
calculate the corresponding current cost values.

In the absence of the necessary detail on annual investment flows, I have done so by

using the historic cost and current cost values for the total equity of all U.S. foreign direct
investment (not just majority owned nonbank affiliates of non-bank parents) that are published

'The restrictions to nonbank firms and to those with majority ownership by the U.S. parent
together reduce the measured stock of U.S. owned FDI (according to the balance of payments
measure) by approximately 18 percent. All U.S. foreign direct investment had a value (according
to the balance of payments measure) in 1989 of $553 billion while the corresponding figure for
majority-owned nonbank affiliates was $452 billion. Both figures are estimates of current (1989
dollar) cost values.
8The foreign debt is translated into U.S. dollars at current exchange rates but is not adjusted
for changes in value due to changed in interest rates since the debt was issued.
7

by the Department of Commerce. At yearend 1989, the total value of all U.S. foreign direct
investment abroad9 was $553 billion at current cost (1989 dollars) and $370 billion at historic
cost (Survey of Current Business.. 1992). Since the debt component of this balance of payments

measure of the stock of foreign direct investment was $24 billion, the corresponding equity

amounts were $529 billion at current cost and $346 billion at historic cost, a ratio of 1.53.
Despite the obvious limitations of using a single ratio for both initial equity investments and
subsequent retained earnings, this ratio will be used to adjust all historic cost equity values in
the 1989 Benchmark Survey to the corresponding current cost estimates.
I turn now to an analysis of the different concepts of the foreign direct investment in the

nonbank affiliates of nonbank U.S. parents. The narrowest definition of foreign direct
investment is the net external finance from the U.S. varent to the forei2n affiliate. This external

finance at yearend 1989 consisted of $202 billion of initial equity investments of U.S. parents
(at current cost)'° and $25 billion of net debt provided by those same parents."
1. Net External finance from U.S. narents

la Equity from U.S. Parents
lb Net Debt from U.S. Parents

$ 227 bfflion
($ 202 billion)

($ 25 billion)

This is the "balance of payments" measure of foreign direct investment. It is the sum of
the initial equity investments of U.S. parents, the subsequent retained earnings and any net debt
from U.S. parents to their foreign affiliates.
'°The historic cost number reported in the 1989 Benchmark Survey (Table III.C. 1) is $132
billion. Multiplying this by the factor 1.53 produces the current cost estimate of $202 billion.

The gross debt from U.S. parents to their foreign affiliates was $84 billion. This was
offset in large part by $59 billion of credit from affiliates to parents, leaving a net debt of
affiliates to parents of $25 billion. The balance of payments measure of foreign direct investment
includes oily the net debt and I follow that procedure in the current analysis.
8

A small amount of additional equity investment and credit is extended to these overseas

affiliates by other U.S. investors and creditors. The equity invested in majority owned
businesses by American companies other than the parent company is very small, only a
cumulative $1 billion. American creditors other than the parent firm provided credit of $22
billion.'2

2. External finance from other U.S. sources

2a Equity from other U.S. investors
2b Debt from other U.S. sources

$ 23 billion
($ 1 billion)
($ 22 billion)

The external finance from U.S. sources is substantially augmented by equity and debt

from foreign sources. Even among these affiliates that are majority owned by their U.S.
parents, foreign sources invested equity of $92 billion at current cost'3 and foreign creditors
provided $567 billio&4.

3. External finance from foreiQn sources

3a Equity from foreign sources
3b Debt from foreign sources

$ 659 billion
($ 92 billion)
($567 billion)

'2The credit from the U.S. parent as well as from other U.S. sources includes trade credit
as well as other forms of credit.
This current dollar figure is based on the historic cost value of $60 billion.

The 1989 Benchmark Survey reports that the total liabilities of the majority-owned
nonbank affiliates of nonbank U.S. parents was $673 billion. This included current liability and
long-term debt of $562 billion and "Other liabilities" (including deferred taxes of the subsidiary)
of $111 billion. Subtracting the $106 billion of gross debt provided by U.S. parents and other
U.S. sources (i.e., the sum of $25 billion of net debt from parents, $59 billion of offsettingdebt
from affiliates to parents that is counted as part of the gross debt of the affiliates, and $22 billion
of debt from other U.S. sources) leaves a balance of $567 billion of debt supplied by foreign
sources.

9

The final source of capital in the foreign affiliates is the Eetaifled earnings that were
reinvested after paying dividends to parents and others. The 1989 current cost estimate for the
accumulated value of these retained earnings was $328 billion. Dividing this aggregate among

the three classes of investors in proportion to their historic cost values of retained earnings
implies:

$ 328 billion

4. Retained earnings

4a Share of U.S. parents
4b Share of other U.S. investors
4c Share of foreign equity investors

($ 225 billion)
($ 1 billion)
($ 102 billion)

With these building blocks, it is possible to define three progressively broader concepts

of outhound foreign direct investment. The first is the Net External Finance from U.S. Sources.
This is the sum of I and 2 above or $250 billion.

The second measure of U.S. foreign direct investment adds the value of the retained
earnings of foreign affiliates attributable to U.S. investors (the sum of 4a and 4b or $226 billion)

to the net external finance from U.S. parents and other U.S. sources. This Net Finance from
U.S. Sources13 had a value of $476 billion.

The third natural definition is the value of the assets in the foreign affiliate, regardless

of who finances those assets and of whether the finance is by debt or equity. This definition.
the Value of Assets of U.S. Foreign Affiliates, is the sum of the four building blocks or $1,237
billion.

The three concepts and the associated magnitudes are shown in Table 1.

"This

exceeds

the Official Balance of Payments definition of the stock of U.S. foreign

investment by including the value of the equity and debt of U.S. investors and creditors who are
not parents of the foreign affiliates.
10

The Displacement Effect of Outbound Direct investment: Partial Ecuilibrium VS. General

2.

EQuilibrium Analysis
1-low does the decision of an American firm to invest abroad in a foreign subsidiary affect

the total amount of investment in the United States? Despite the widespread interest in this
question, there has been no formal analysis or empirical investigation of the general equilibrium

effect of outbound FDI on domestic investment.

The Behavior of Individual Finns

2.1

The common popular discussion of this issue treats it as a partial equilibrium question

of where corporate production will occur. As noted above, opponents of outbound FDI argue
that such investment reduces domestic production by substituting for exports while defenders

of

outbound FDI argue that overseas subsidiaries increase the market for U.S. exports and therefore

increase production in the United States. There are undoubtedly examples of both possibilities
in actual practice. These countervailing effects may explain why the very careful study of
individual multinational firms by Stevens and Lipsey (1988) failed to find any significant effects

of overseas production on domestic exports and

investment.16

An alternative partial equilibrium analysis would start with the corporate financial
decisions and ask whether a firm that invests more abroad will invest less at home. In the
simplest textbook version of the investment decision, the firm can borrow as much as it wants

at a fixed interest rate and therefore invests until the marginal product of capital equals that rate

Similar evidence that outbound FDI is not associated with export displacement is reported
in Blomstrom et. al. (1988) and in Lipsey and Weiss (1981, 1984).
16

•11

Table 1

Alternative Measures of Foreign Direct Investment

Value at Year End 1989

Conceot of Forei2n Direct Investment
1.

Net External Finance from U.S. Sources

$ 250 billion

2.

Net Finance from U.S. Sources

$ 476 billion

(1+2)

(1 + 2 + 4a + 4b)
3.

Value of Assets of U.S. Foreign Affiliates

(1+2+3+4)

All values are adjusted to current cost in 1989 dollars.

12

$ 1237 billion

of interest. In such an economy, borrowing to finance overseas investment does not alter the
firm's funds available for domestic investment.

Actual corporate experience is very far from these textbook models. The following
simplified version of corporate capital budgeting shows how a firm's decision to invest abroad

could reduce its domestic investment. In this view, the company starts with a fixed amount of
after tax profits and a dividend payout that its shareholders expect. 'There is some but very little

room to vary dividends from the expected amount. The combination of the retained earnings

(after this dividend payout) and the company's desired debt to capital ratio determines the
amount that the company can borrow and therefore the firm's total funds available for capital

investments.'7 Since this capital budget calculation is done for the multinational corporation

as a whole rather than for individual subsidiaries, the result is a capital budget for the entire
corporation. Any use of that capital abroad reduces the amount of capital available for domestic

investment within the firm.'8

However, as the analysis of section 1 indicated, much of the capital invested in U.S.
affiliates overseas is raised abroad. it is clear that the share of foreign-source debt and equity
in the U.S foreign affiliates is far greater than the share of such foreign-source debt and equity
in the financing of the domestic U.S. industry. This reflects the fact that most American firms

"The company could of course modify this by new equity issues, share repurchases, and
divestiwres but these should
be seen as unusual events rather than as part of the annual capital budgeting process.
Stevens and Lipsey- (1988) -investigate the financial interdependence between foreign
investment and domestic investment over time in a sample of U.S. multinational firms and find
that overseas investment does reduce domestic investment through this channel. Their formal
model lies between the two extremes described in the current text: finns do not have a fixed
debt-to-capital ratio but the cost of funds is a function of that ratio.
13

are more likely to borrow abroad to fmance overseas assets than to finance domestic assets. The

reason for this is unclear. It may reflect a desire to hedge foreign currency profits with foreign
currency debt, an ability to borrow more cheaply when collateral is available, or other aspects
of the risk and return of tbancthg behavior. This segmentation of borrowing may be a form

of suboptimal behavior similar to the widely observed failure of portfolio managers to diversify
investment.

Similarly, American firms are more likely to seek foreign joint venture partners for

overseas subsidiaries (in order to get market access or other benefits of having a local partner)
than they are to seek such equity investors here in the United States. The foreign equity investor

is also likely to regard such direct investment as a joint venture partner within its own country
as less risky than investing in the United States.
In short, even if outbound FIN substitutes for other investments within the firm's capital
budget, more of the funds to fmance that outbound FDI are likely to come from foreign sources

than would be the case for domestic investment.

2.2

Macroeconomic General Euuilibrium Effects

To assess the net impact of outbound FDI on total investment in the United States it is

important to look beyond the partial equilibrium analysis of individual firms. The net impact
of outbound FDI depends on the extent to which that outbound FIN changes the aggregate net
outflow of capital from the United States, including net portfolio investment as well as net direct
investment.

In a world of perfect capital mobility in which the total pool of world savings moves to

finance those investments with the highest risk-adjusted rates of return, an increase in U.S.

14

direct investment abroad need not have any effect on the U.S. capital stock. Funds would
automatically flow in to finance domestic U.S. investments that earn the required rate of return.
But although the integration of global capital markets appears to be increasing, we are

still a long way from the textbook model of perfect capital market integration. Gross

international capital flows are large, but sustained net flows are relatively small. As Charles
Horioka and I showed nearly 15 years ago (Feldstein and Horioka. 1980), a nation's savings

tend to be
(the

invested

in the country where they originate

The "saving retention coefficient"

fraction of a marginal dollar of saving that is invested domestically) is estimated to be

between 0.8 and 0.9 on average for the OECI) countries. This is dramatically different from
the world of perfect capital mobility in which a nation's rate of investment would not depend
on its saving rate and therefore in which the saving retention coefficient would be zero.
Paradoxically, the extreme no-net-capital-flow case (a saving retention coefficient of 1.0

that is uninfluenced by the volume of outbound or inbound FDI) has the same implication in the

current context as the perfect capital mobility case: an outflow of direct investment does not
change the amount of net domestic investment. Any net outflow of FDI in this case would be
offset by a reduction in outbound portfolio investment or an increase in inbound portfolio

investment. The previous estimates of the Feldstein-Horioka type investment-saving equations
did not explicitly test whether the amount of domestic investment is influenced by the outbound
or inbound F1)I. That is the subject of the next two sections.

19
This fact has since been replicated many times. See Frankel (1992) and Mussa and
Goldstein (1993) for discussions of this literature and comments on the reasons why savings
remain at home even in a world capital market that appears to be quite closely linked and very
active. See also Baxter and Crucini (1993) and Feldstein and Bacchetta (1991).

15

A more likely possibility is that the Feldstein-Horioka relation relates to portfolio
investment rather than to direct investment. In the extreme case, an extra dollar of national
saving would remain in domestic portfolio assets unless it is used by a multinational corporation

to finance a cross-border direct investment. Such an outbound FDI would reduce the funds
available for domestic investment by an equal amount, as the above corporate budget example
suggests. If the portfolio investments were completely segmented into national markets in this
way, the effect of the outbound FDI on domestically available funds would not be offset by any
international flow of portfolio capital and the aggregate domestic investment would be reduced

by the full amount of the direct investment outflow.

The evidence in the next two sections support the idea that foreign direct investment

transfers capital across borders with very little offsetting net portfolio investment. More
specifically, the evidence indicates that each dollar of outbound FDI reduces domestic investment

by approximately one dollar.

3.

Estimates of the Effects of FDI on Domestic Investment

The estimates presented in this section are an extension of earlier work reported in a
number of papers beginning with Feldstein and Horioka (1980)•W The basic Feldstein-Horioka

specification relates the ratio of gross domestic investment to GDP to the ratio of gross national

saving to GDP. Since these ratios are calculated as decade averages, the analysis relates to

sustained differences among countries rather than year to year changes. The specification
assumes that the national differences in saving determine national differences in investment

20

See

Frankel (1992) and Mussa and Goldstein (1993) for summaries of this literature.
16

rather than the reverse. Since these specification issues have been discussed extensively in
previous articles2t, I will not comment on them here.
The innovation in the current study is to add data on inbound and outboundFDI to the

previous bivariate specification. The simplest form of the resulting equation is:
GDIIGDP = a + b (GNS/GDPI + c [(FDI-out)/GDP] + d ((FD[-in)IGDPj + a

where GD! is gross domestic investment, GNS is gross national
saving, GD? is gross domestic product, the two types of PD! are denoted FDI-out and FDI-in,

and u is a stochastic disturbance. The individual variables in the numerator and denominator
of each ratio are flows at annual rates denominated in current dollars in national currencies. The

ratios are decade averages of annual ratios for each country. More general specifications with
additional variables are discussed in section 4.
By definition, GD! includes only the investment done within the geographic boundaries

of the home country. Investment by foreign affiliates of the home country's multinationals are
excluded. Investment within the geographic boundaries of the home country that is done by the
local affiliates of foreign multinationals is included in GD!. The GNS figures include the saving

in the form of retained earnings of foreign affiliates of the home country's multinationals. The
foreign direct investment values are based on the balance of payments definition and refer to all

foreign affiliates, not just majority owned or nonbank affiliates. These data are not ideal but
they are the best data available for this study.

Although the OECD produces consistent data on GD!. GNS and GDP, there are no

2l5 Feldstein (1983) and Feldstein and Bachetta (1991) as well as the references cited in
the previous footnote.
17

yofficial OECD data on Fl)!. The data on FDI come from the International Monetary FunF.
The limited availability of data on P01 restricts the sample to 18 of the 24 OECD countries for
the decade of the 1980s and 15 of those countries for the decade of the 1970s. This section

presents separate results for both samples as well as for a pooled sample of 33 observations.
For all of these countries it is possible to obtain estimates of PD! excluding retained earnings
(RE). It is also possible to obtain the amount of retained earnings of these foreign affiliates for
nine of the countries during the decade of the 1970s and ten of the countries during the decade

of the 1980s. Estimates are also presented for these smaller samples.
The first three equations presented in Table 2 are the standard investment-savings relation

without FDI. The estimated savings retention coefficients for this sample of OECD countries

are 0.87 (s.e. = 0.10) for the 1970s and 0.74 (s.c. = 0.12) for the 1980s, very similar to the
estimates obtained with the larger samples of OECD countries in past research. The savings
retention coefficient for the pooled data is 0.80 (s.e. = 0.07) and lies between the two individual

decade estimates.

In equation 4 of Table 2. the coefficient of the FDI-out variable is -1.73 (s.e. = 0.90)
and the coefficient of the P01-in variable is 0.80 (s.e. = 1.11). Adding these two Fl)! variables

to the traditional saving-investment equation leaves the estimated savings retention coefficient

virtually unchanged at 0.84 (s.e.=0.10).
The coefficient of the FD!-out variable which is of primary interest in the current analysis

is quite stable in the different time periods and specifications. It is always negative, implying

These data are published in the Balance of Payments Yearbook. The current study uses
updated unpublished data. The actual data are presented in the Appendix to this paper.
18

that the aggregate level of domestic investment in a country declines when outbound FDI
increases. Since this effect is conditional on given levels of national saving and inbound FDI,
it implies that other international capital flows (inbound and outbound portfolio investment and

borrowing) do not adjust to offset the direct effect of outbound FDI on domestic investment.

The coefficient of outbound FDI is -1.73 (s.e.= 0.62) in the 1970s and -1.65 (s.e.= 0.69) in

the 1980s when FD! is defmed as a cross-border capital transfer (i.e., excluding retained
earnings of the foreign affiliates). Adding the retained earnings of foreign
affiliates (equation 7) leaves the coefficient for 1970 essentially unchanged (-1.42 with s.c. =
0.40) and increases the absolute size of the 1980 coefficient only slightly (-1.87 with s.e. =0.63).

It would of course be desirable to distinguish the response of domestic investment to

outbound cross-border FDI flows from the response of domestic investment to the retained
earnings of the foreign affiliates. Unfortunately, there are too few observations to make such
an estimate. Attempts to use the samples corresponding to equations 7 through 9 to look at the

retained earnings variable separately (in addition to the other variables already in those
equations) results in almost no residual degrees of freedom and therefore to very unstable
coefficient estimates with very large standard errors. it is not possible to determine statistically

whether a one dollar increase in GNS due to an increase in the RE of foreign affiliates has the

same impact on GD! as a one dollar rise in GNS due to domestic savings.2' Similarly, when

outbound FM is defined to include the retained earnings of foreign affiliates (equations 7
through 9) it is not clear whether the reaction to the cross-border FM flow is the same as the

Recall that gross national saving includes the retained earnings of foreign affiliates.
19

Table 2

Effects of National Saving and FDI on Domestic Investment

Adj. it'

Period RE N

Coast. GNS FDI..Out

1

1970s -

15

0.04 0.87
(0.02) (0.10)

0.85

2

1980s -

18

0.07

0.67

Equat.

WI-In

0.74

(0.03) (0.12)
0.80
(0.02) (0.07)

3

Pooled -

33

0.05

4

1970s No 5

0.05

0.84

0.79

0.80
(1.11)

0.87

0.47
(0.86)

0.74

(0.03) (0.12) (0.69)
0.07 0.77 -1.58
(0.02) (0.07) (0.47)

0.59
(0.62)

0.84

0.06

2.18
(0.63)

0.90

(0.03) (0.12) (0.46)
0.10

2.51

0.67

-1.73

(0.03) (0.10) (0.90)
5

1980s No

18

6

Pooled No

33

7

1970s Yes

9

8

9

1980s Yes

Pooled Yes

10

19

0.08

0.74

0.76

0.59

-1.65

-1.42

-1.87

(0.05) (0.23) (0.63)

(1.09)

0.08

2.38
(0.59)

0.66

-1.71

(0.03) (0.11) (0.37)

0.82

The column marked RE indicates whether the FDI variables include or exclude the retained earnings of

the foreign affiliates.

20

reaction to FDJ-out that is achieved without a cross-border flow by an increase in the retained
earnings of the affiliate.

The reaction of domestic home country investment to a dollar of dividends that is
repatriated by the subsidiary to the parent company is ambiguous a priori as well. Although the
direct effect of the dividend repatriation would be to add to the domestic capital stock, this could

be offset to the extent that the dividend induces a reduction in inbound portfolio investment or
an increase in outbound direct or portfolio investment. Since the econometric evidence cannot

resolve this ambiguity, section 5 examines the implications of the two alternative extreme
assumptions that subsidiary retained earnings reduce domestic (home country) investment dollar-

for-dollar and, alternatively, that they do not affect domestic investment at all.

4.

Additional Variables and Simultaneity Problems

The interpretation of the coefficients in Table 2 is clouded by the fact that the saving rate

and the two FDI ratios are endogenous variables in the overall economic system. In particular,

the levels of inbound and outbound FDI are likely to be correlated with variables that favor
higher domestic rates of investment. A country that offers a Rgood environment" for domestic

investment is also likely to attract more inbound PD! and may also experience less outbound
FDI. This section shows that this problem of missing variables does indeed bias the coefficients

shown in section 3. increasing the absolute size of both the FDI-out and FDI-in coefficients.
The results in this section are thus quite different from the earlier studies of potential bias

in the estimated savings retention coefficient in the simpler Feldstein-Horioka specification.
Since it is certainly possible that some of the same factors that cause a countiy to have a higher

21

saving rate might also cause it to have a higher investment rate, Feldstein and Bacchetta (1991)

also estimated the basic specification by an instnnnental variable estimation procedure using
demographic characteristics and social security variables as instruments for the national saving
rate.

Although the relatively small sample of fewer than two dozen countries limits the

relevance of the consistency property of IV estimation, the similarity of the OLS and IV

estimates provides some reassurance that the potential endogeneity of the savings rate is not a

source of significant bias.

Further support for the assumption that long-term intercountry

differences in saving cause long-term differences in investment (rather than the reverse or a
simultaneous equations relation) is obtained by dividing national saving into private saving and
government saving and noting that both components of national saving have essentially the same

effect on domestic investment in a generalized Feldstein-llorioka specification (Feldstein and
Bacchetta, 1991).

Although it would be desirable to re-estimate the equations in Table 2 using an
instrumental variable approach, I have been unable to find any variables that would be
satisfactory instruments. I decided therefore to pursue a different approach to reducing the
possible bias in the estimated FDI coefficients by expanding the specification of the investment

equation to include additional determinants of investment that might also be correlated with
either or both of the FIN variables. Although some bias might remain even in this specification
because not all possible variables are included, this method is preferable to using an instrumental

variable estimation procedure with a very small sample and very inadequate instruments.

Table 3 summarizes the results of these more general specifications. The evidence
confirms that outbound FDI does reduce domestic investment but the coefficients are now

22

absolutely smaller, indicating that the previously omitted variables were common factors that
affected FDI-out and GD! in similar ways.24

For example, equation 1 of Table 3 (which is estimated for the pooled sample of 33
country-decade observations) includes four variables in addition to the saving rate and FIN
variables: (1) a dummy variable indicating whether the country is in Europe (E); (2) the size of

the country as measured by its avenge population during the decade (SIZE); (3) the avenge

inflation rate during the decade (INF); and (4) the avenge growth rate of GDP during the
decade (GRO). These variables are listed as "Other Variables" in the description of equation
1. Those "other variables" with a t-statistic between 1 and 2 are marked with an asterisk while

those with a t-statistic in excess of two are marked with two asterisks. Thus E, SIZE and INF
have t-statistics greater than 2 while GRO is not statistically significant. In this specification,

the coefficient of FDI-out is -1.17 with a standard error of 0.47.
Equation 2 adds the average short-term interest nte (INT) and deletes the insignificant

growth variable. This specification, which has the highest adjusted R2 of all the variable
combinations that I have examined, also suggests that the coefficient of FDI-out is approximately

minus one, i.e., that each dollar of FDI-out reduces GD! by about one dollar.
The next four equations in Table 3 are for the individual decades. The absolute values

of the coefficient of FIN-out are slightly smaller than one in each of these specifications. The

large standard errors in these equations should be interpreted in the context of the smaller

24'Fhe coefficients of FDI-in change even more substantially and are now insignificant in
every case, indicating that the inflow of FDI does not appear to alter the domestic investment
rate. Presumably the capital inflow in the form of inbound FIN substitutes for inbound portfolio
investment or induces other balancing transactions.
23

samples for individual decades (only 15 observations for the 1970s and 18 observations for the

1980s) which, together with the additional variables, leaves as few as 7 residual degrees of
freedom. But taken together with the pooled data of equations 1 and 2 and the separate decade

estimates for the simpler specifications in Table 2, it seems most appropriate to conclude that
each dollar of cross-border FDI-out reduces domestic investment by approximately one dollar.

The FDI variables reported in equations 1 through 6 of Table 3 all measure FDI
excluding retained earnings. Although eliminating the eight countries that do not provide
information on retained earnings would leave too small a sample of observations for either
decade alone, it is possible to use the pooled sample of 19 observations for the two decades.

The results are shown in equations 7, 8 and 9. The first two of these repeat the two
specifications of equations 1 through 6 while equation 9 is the specification with the highest
adjusted R2 when the FDI variables are defined to include retained earnings.

The coefficients are similar in all three specifications. The estimated effect of FDI-out
is slightly larger in absolute size than in the pooled estimates of equations 1 and 2 but, given the

small sample and large standard errors, is not significantly different from -1.0. The major
difference from the other equations in Table 3 is that the coefficient of the FDI-in variable rises
to approximately 1.0 and becomes nearly twice its standard error. This implies that the retained
earnings of foreign affiliates in a given host country, like other forms of domestic saving in that

country, increases domestic investment in that host country.

24

Table 3

Impact of Additional Variables on the Estimated Effect

of Foreign Direct Investment on Domestic Investment

Equat.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Period
N; RE

GNS FDI-out

WI-in

Other Variables

Pooled
33; No

0.76

0.16
(0.50)

E**, SIZE, INF** 0.90

Pooled
33; No

0.79

-0.04
(0.44)

E*S. SIZE, [NF 0.92

1970s

0.85

(0.17) (0.91)

-0.03
(1.21)

E, SIZE, INF*

15; No
1970s

0.87

(0.11) (1.04)

0.00
(1.16)

E, SlZE*, INFO.
INT

89

15; No
1980s

0.65

0.91

(0.09) (0.55)

-0.19
(0.57)

E, S12E, INF

18; No
1980s

0.65

(0.10) (0.54)

-0.20
(0.54)

E, SIZE. LNF

18; No
Pooled
19; Yes

0.49 -1.59
(0.14) (0.42)

1.41

E, SIZE, 11*

(0.58)

GRO

Pooled
19; Yes

0.62

0.94
(0.54)

E*, SIZE. INF

0.92

Pooled
19; Yes

0.55

0.92
(0.49)

E*. SIZE, INT

0.93

-1.17

(0.07) (0.47)
-1.10

(0.05) (0.40)
-0.92

-0.83

-0.80
-0.81

-1.36

(0.11) (0.38)
-1.37

(0.11) (0.31)

Adj. R1

ORO

INT"

0.89

GRO

GRO

0.91

INT

0.89

INT'

Each equation also contains a constant term. The Fill-in and FDI-out variables exclude retained earnings
in equations 1 through 6 and includes retained earnings in equations 7 through 9. See text for definitions

of "Other Variables.'

25

More generally, the evidence in this section implies that outflows of foreign direct
investment reduce domestic investment on a dollar-for-dollar basis and that this reduction is not

offset by an international shift in portfolio investment. This is consistent with a view that the
Feldstein-Iiorioka segmentation of capital markets applies to portfolio investment and that direct

investment circumvents this barrier to capital mobility. Similarly, foreign direct investment
induces

U.S. firms to use much more foreign debt and equity finance in their majority owned

foreign affiliates than they would use for domestic investments. In that way, the financing of
FDI also makes available the advantages of foreign portfolio financing in a way that would not
occur without the direct investment.

5.

The Effect of Outbound FDI on Foreien Assets and the Domestic Capital Stock

By combining the parameter estimates of sections 3 and 4 with the evidence on the
sources of capital of foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals in section 2 it is possible to answer

the fundamental question of how much the U.S. domestic capital stock declines per dollar of
additional capital in the foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals.
The answer to this question depends on how that foreign affiliate capital is fmanced. The

parameter estimates of sections 3 and 4 imply that on average within the OECD each dollar of
cross-border external finance reduces domestic investment by one dollar.

The data analyzed in section 2 show that approximately 20 cents of each dollar of the existing
U.S. foreign affiliate capital is financed by such a cross-border flow of capital from the United

States. Of the remainder, 1$ cents comes from the U.S. share of retained earnings of the
foreign affiliate and 62 cents comes from foreign debt and equity sources.

26

Before considering the implication of this avenge financing mix, I will consider two
simpler cases:

Pure Parent Finance

Consider first the simplest case in which the incremental foreign affiliate capital is
financed exclusively by the U.S. parent with no foreign equity or debt. If the U.S. general
equilibrium response to cross-border capital outflows is similar to the average OECD response,
each dollar of parent-to-affiliate finance reduces the U.S. domestic capital
stock by one dollar.

In this extreme

case,

each dollar of increased capital in the foreign affiliate reduces the U.S.

domestic capital stock by one dollar.

Levera2ed Retained Earnings Finance

As a second and much more common case, consider the foreign affiliate that uses
retained earnings to finance an incremental investment and that combines those foreign retained

earnings with local debt. The sources of financing per unit of incremental capital in the
subsidiary can be defined as:
s

-

the

retained earnings of the subsidiary attributable to the U.S. parent and other

U.S. equity investors

-

the

retained earnings of the subsidiary attributable to non-U.S. sources

- the debt supplied by non-U.S. creditors
By assumption, in this cases +

s1'

+ b* =1.

The alternative to investing the retained earnings of the subsidiary would be to distribute

27

them as dividends to the U.S. and foreign equity owners. The econometric analysis of sections

3 and 4 was not able to measure the average OECD response to changes in retained earnings or

dividend repatriations. The effect on domestic capital formation in the borne country of the
subsidiary's choice between retaining earnings and repatriating those earnings as dividends
cannot be settled by a orion analysis either. Considertherefore the alternative possibilities. If
a dollar of repatriated dividends would add one dollar to the U.S. gross domestic investment,
an additional dollar of foreign affiliate capital financed with leveraged retained earnings reduces

the U.S. capital stock by s <

1

dollars. To the extent that the repatriation of retained earnings

displaces other financial capital inflows or increase financial capital outflows, the depressing
effect on the U.S. capital stock would be smaller than s.
The analysis of section 1 shows that the retained earnings attributable to U.S. investors

(corresponding to s in the current calculation) were $226 billion in 1989, that the retained
earnings attributable to foreign investors was $102 billion, and that the debt from foreign sources

was $567 billion. If the relative magnitudes of these three financing sources are used to
approximate the financing of the leveraged retained earnings investment, we obtain 5 = 226/895

=

0.25. With these assumptions, an additional dollar of foreign affiliate capital financed with

leveraged retained earnings reduces the U.S. capital stock by 25 cents. This is an upper limit
of the plausible range because it is based on the assumption that any retained earnings that are
not invested by the foreign subsidiary would otherwise add dollar-for-dollar to the U.S. capital
stock.

28

Average Financing
The observed aggregate financing mix described in section 1 reflects both new equity and

debt transfers from parents to affiliates and the subsequent reinvestment of retained
earnings.
Both types of investments are leveraged with foreign debt. While individual investments will
use different financing mixes, the overall financing mix may remain relatively unchanged if the
mix of new investment and reinvestment continues to be about the same.25

To analyze this overall average financing case, the three sources of financing identified

in the "leveraged retained earnings case" must be expanded to include

Now e

e

- the external equity capital provided by the U.S. parent and other U.S. investors

e

-

the external equity capital provided by non-U.S. sources

b

-

the debt supplied by the U.S. parent and other U.S. creditors

e* + b

+ b* + a +

s = 1.

The econometric results of section 3 and 4 imply that each dollar of cross border equity

and debt (e and b in the current notation) reduces domestic investment by one dollar. If we
assume also that each dollar of foreign subsidiary retained earnings that is not invested in the
affiliate would otherwise be repatriated and would add dollar-for-dollar to domestic investment

in the United States, an additional dollar of foreign affiliate capital financed with the observed

average mix of financing sources would reduce the U.S. capital stock by e + b

+s<

1

dollars. Once again this is an upper limit because the repatriation of subsidiary retained earnings

may not increase domestic investment dollar for dollar.

It would be desirable to compare the composition of financing of U.S. foreign affiliates
in the 1989 benchmark survey with the financing composition in earlier studies.

29

The analysis of section 1 showed that of the $1237 billion of total assets, the external

equity finance from U.S. sources was $203 billion, the debt from U.S. parents and other U.S.

creditors was $47 billion, and the share of retained earnings attributable to U.S. parents and

other investors was $226 billion. In this case, e + b = 0.20 and e + b ÷

s

= 0.38. If each

dollar of retained earnings would otherwise be repatriated and add one dollar to domestic
investment, each dollar of foreign affiliate investment financed by this average mix of sources
reduces the U.S. capital stock by 0.38 dollars. At the other extreme, if the inflow of repatriated

earnings would only displace some other portfolio inflow or induce a portfolio outflow, each
dollar of foreign affiliate investment financed by this avenge mix of sources reduces the U.S.
capital stock by only 0.20 dollars.
Although individual investments will use different financing mixes, this overall financing

case is probably the best indication of how the financing of the foreign affiliate capital stock
evolves. If so, it implies that each dollar of displaced domestic capital in the U.S. adds between

$2.60 and $5.00 to the capital stock of U.S. foreign affiliates.
This relation between foregone domestic investment and the increase in the capital stock

of U.S. foreign affiliates is important for assessing the impact of outbound FDI on the national

income of the United States. The effect of outbound U.S. foreign direct investment on U.S.
national income depends on the rate of return earned on such investments, the cost of the foreign

capital, and the amount of taxes paid to the foreign government. Although U.S. firms that
invest abroad presumably select the allocation of capital that maximizes the present value of the

finns' after tax profits, the existence of foreign taxes implies that their decisions will not in
general maximize U.S. national income. The firm may be indifferent between paying taxes to

30

the U.S. government and a foreign government but only the former remains a part of U.S.
national income. An evaluation of whether the outbound U.S. FDI increases or decreases U.S.
national income requires balancing the tax losses to foreign governments against the advantage

of the increased use of foreign source capital that accompanies foreign direct investment. That
analysis is the subject of a separate study (Feldstein, 1994).

Cambridge MA
December 1993
Revised
February 1994

31

References

Baxter, Marianne and Mario Crucini (1993), "Explaining Saving-Investment Correlations,"

American Economic Review 83:3 pp. 416-36
Bergsten, C. Fred, Thomas HorsE, and Theodore H. Moran (1978), American Multinationals
and American Interests, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Blomstrom, Magnus, Robert B. Lipsey, and Ksenia Kulchycky (1988), "U.S. and Swedish
Direct Investment and Exports," in Robert E. Baldwin, Ed., Trade Policy Issues and
Empirical Analysis, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 259-297.
Feldstein, Martin (1983), "Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements in the Long
Run and the Short Run," European Economic Review.
Feldstein, Martin (1994), "Taxes,

Leverage and the National Return on Foreign Direct

1nvestment,' forthcoming.
Feldstein, Martin and Phillipe Bacchetta (1991), "National Saving and International Investment,"

in The Economics of Savings, John Shoven and Douglas Bernheim, (eds.), Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horiolca (1980), "Domestic Savings and International Capital
Flows," The 1970 W.A. Mackintosh Lecture at Queen's University, Economic Journal.

Frankel, Jeffrey (1991), "Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the 1980s." in National

Saving and Economic Performance, D. Bernheim and J. Shoven (eds.): Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

32

Froot, Kenneth (1993), ForeiRn Direct Investment Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Graham, Edward M. and Paul Krugman (1991), Foreign Direct Investment in the United States.

Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics.

J-Iutbauer, Gary C., and F.M. Adler (1968). Overseas Manufacturing Investment and the
Balance of Payments, Tax Policy Research Study No. 1, U.S. Treasury Department,
Washington, D.C.

Lipsey, Robert (1993) "Outward Direct Investment and the U.S. Economy," in The Effects of
International Taxation on Multinational Corporations. M. Feldstein, J. Hines and R.G.
Hubbard (eds.) NBER Conference Volume, forthcoming.

Lipsey. Robert and Merle Yahr Weiss (1981), 'Foreign Production and Exports in
Manufacturing Industries," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. LXIII, No. 4,
November, pp. 488-494.
Lipsey. Robert and Merle Yahr Weiss (1984). "Foreign Production and Exports of Individual

Firms," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 66, No. 2. May, pp. 304-308.
Mussa, Michael and Morris Goldstein (1993), "The Integration of World Capital Markets,' in
Chan2ing Capital Markets: Implications for Monetary Policy, 1993 Annual conference

of the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank. (forthcoming).
Severn, Alan (1972), 'Investment and Financial Behavior of American Direct Investors in

Manufacturing,' in Fritz Machiup, Walter Salant, and Loria Tarshis, Eds., j]ç
International Mobility and Movement of Capital, New York: National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Stevens, Guy and Robert Lipsey (1992) 'Interactions between Domestic and Foreign

33

Investment," Journal of International Money and Finance, 11 pp 40-52.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, Bureau of Economic

Analysis (1992). U. S. Direct Investment Abroad: 1989 Benchmark Survey. Final
Results.

34

Appendix A
Table A.I
Decade

Averages of Investment, Saving and FDI Ratios: 1970-79
Ratios to GD?
Outbound

Country

GDI

GNS

FDI

Inbound

Outbound

FDI

RE

Inbound
RE

Australia

0.250

0.238

0.001

0.007

0.001

0.006

Austria

0.286

0.278

0.001

0.005

NA

NA

Belgium/Luxembourg

0.227

0.232

0.007

0.015

NA

NA

Canada

0.240

0.224

0.008

0.007

NA

NA

Finland

0.285

0.265

0.002

0.002

NA

NA

France

0.255

0.259

0.003

0.004

0.000

0.000

Germany

0.234

0.244

0.005

0.003

0.001

0.001

Italy

0.258

0.260

0.002

0.003

NA

NA

Japan

0.345

0.353

0.003

0.000

NA

NA

Netherlands

0.234

0.246

0.018

0.010

0.006

0.002

New Zealand

0.260

0.217

0.001

0.008

0.001

0.008

Spain

0.266

0.251

0.001

0.006

NA

NA

Sweden

0.216

0.209

0.006

0.001

0.000

0.000

United Kingdom

0.199

0.180

0.010

0.009

0.009

0.005

United States

0.194

0.197

0.003

0.001

0.005

0.001

*
NA

Excludes Retained Earnings

Not Available

Table A.2
Decade Averages or Investment, Saving and FI)1 Ratios: 1980-90

Ratios to GD?
Country

ODI

GNS

Outbound

Inbound

Outbound

Inbound

FDI

FDI

RE

RE

Australia

0.244

0.19$

0.007

0.013

0.003

0.004

Austria

0.245

0.242

0.003

0.003

NA

NA

Belgium/Luxembourg

0.176

0.171

0.014

0.020

NA

NA

Canada

0.215

0.198

0.012

0.003

NA

NA

Denmark

0.181

0.152

0.006

0.003

NA

NA

Finland

0.258

0.237

0.012

0.002

0.000

0.001

France

0.209

0.204

0.0 10

0.006

0.000

0.000

Germany

0.206

0.227

0.009

0.003

0.001

0.000

Italy

0.225

0.2 16

0.004

0.003

NA

NA

Japan

0.300

0.321

0.007

0.000

NA

NA

Netherlands

0.197

0.225

0.027

0.013

0.009

0.005

New Zealand

0.242

0.182

0.005

0.010

0.005

0.006

Norway

0.259

0.267

0.011

0.006

NA

NA

Portugal

0.282

0.237

0.001

0.015

0.000

0.001

Spain

0.221

0.208

0.003

0.015

NA

NA

Sweden

0.188

0.169

0.020

0.004

0.005

0.001

United Kingdom

0.176

0.166

0.015

0.012

0.012

0.006

United States

0.179

0.163

0.000

0.008

0.003

0.000

NA

Excludes Retained Earnings
Not Available

APPENDXA. DOC (WordPerfect)
APPENDXA.WK3 (Lotus)

