NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSEHOLD DEMAND FOR GARBAGE
AND RECYCLING COLLECtiON WITH
THE START OF A PRICE PER BAG

Don Fullerton
Thomas C. Kinnaman

Working Paper No. 4670

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1994

We are grateful for suggestions from Linda Babcock, John Engberg, Phil Heap. Debbie
Nestor, Ed Olsen, Hilary Sigman, Jon Skinner, Steve Stern, Lowell Taylor, Margaret Walls.
and seminar participants at NBER. Virginia, Carnegie-Mellon. Georgia, Vanderbilt, Oregon
and Texas. We are also grateful for funding from NSF grant SES91-22785, and from the
Bankard Fund at the University of Virginia. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent those of the National Science Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #4670
March 1994
HOUSEHOLD DEMAND FOR GARBAGE
AND RECYCLING COLLECTION WITH

THE START OF A PRICE PER BAG

ABSTRACT

This paper estimates household reaction to the implementation of unit-pricing for the

collection of residential garbage. We gather original data on weight and volume of weekly
garbage and recycling of 75 households in Charlottesville, Virginia, both before and after the start

of a program that requires an eighty-cent sticker on each bag of garbage. This data set is the first

of its kind. We estimate household demands for the collection of garbage and recyclable
material, the effect on density of household garbage, and the amount of illegal dumping by
households. We also estimate the probability that a household chooses each method available
to reduce its garbage.
In response to the implementation of this unit-pricing program, we find that households
(I) reduced the weight of their garbage by 14%. (2) reduced the volume of garbage by 37% and
(3) increased the weight of their recyclable materials by 16%. We estimate that additional illegal
-- or at least suspicious -- disposal accounts for 0.42 pounds per person per week, or 28% of the

reduction in garbage observed at the curb.
Don Fullerton
Heinz School of Public Policy and Management
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER

Thomas C. Kinnarnan
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22901

1. Introduction
Rising land prices and new EPA regulations are largely responsible for the tripling

over a six-year period of the avenge Upping fee paid to a landfill for accepting each ton of
garbage from collectors (Steuteville and Goldstein, 1993). Several communities and private
firms have responded to these economic pressures by implementing volume-based pricing

programs that require households to pay for each bag or can of garbage presented for
collection. These towns employ unit-pricing not only to collect additional revenue, but to
reduce their direct costs and external costs from using landfills and incinerators. Households
might recycle more, compost more, and demand less packaging at stores. Unfortunately,
they might also burn garbage or dump it along deserted roads. The attractiveness of unitpricing depends crucially on the extent of each such method of garbage reduction.
In addition, the price-per-bag might induce households to compact their garbage into

fewer bags. This practice was noticed when Seattle started one of the first unit-pricing
programs, so it is known as the "Seattle Stomp." It is not helpful, since collectors compact
the garbage anyway.

This paper employs individual household data to estimate the effect of price and
demographic variables on the weight of garbage, the number of containers, the weight per

can, and the amount of recycling. We also estimate the probability that a household will

choose each method of garbage reduction listed above, The data are based on a natural
experiment that provides a uniqueopportunity to study human behavior in response to a

change in price. In Virginia, on July 1, 1992, the City of Charlottesville implemented a
program to charge $.. 80 per 32-gallon bag of residential garbage collected curbside,

Before and after the implementation of this program, we counted and weighed the

2

bags or cans of garbage and recyclable materials of 75 households. In response to this new
price, the avenge person living in these households:

• reduced the weight of garbage from 10.89 pounds per week to 9.37 pounds per
week (a 14.0 % decrease),
• reduced the volume of garbage from 0.73 containers per week to 0.46 containers
per week (a 37.0 % decrease),

• increased the density of garbage from 14.79 pounds per container to 19.48 pounds
per container (a 31.7% increase), and,

• increased the weight of recyclable material presented for collection from 3.69
pounds per week to 4.27 pounds per week (a 15.7% increase).
Also, we estimate that increased illegal disposal accounts for 0.42 pounds per week per

person in Charlottesville, or 28% of the total reduction in garbage.
Other studies have estimated household demand for the collection of garbage, often

using data for entire communities. Cross-sections of cities are employed by McFarland
(1972), Wertz (1976), Jenkins (1991), and Repetto et a! (1992). Aggregate time series data
collected from one community are used by Efaw and L.anen (1979) and Skumatz and

Breckinridge (1990).' Household surveys have appeared more recently. Hong, Adams, and
Love (1993) use a survey of 2298 households around Portland, Oregon, where 25 collection

firms operate in 19 municipalities using a variety of block-pricing schedules (such as
$12/month for one can per week and $24/month for two cans). They estimate the demand

'Also, Stevens (19Th and Kemper and Quigley (1976) use a cross-section of several
cities to examine the effects on total demand from a change in the level of service for
garbage collection. With a cross-section of neighborhoods, Richardson and Havlicek(1978)
and Rathje and Thompson (1981) consider the effect that the neighborhood's avenge income
has on the demand for the collection of specific categories ofgarbage material. Another
body of literature used telephone interviews with individual households to estimate recycling
attitudes and behavior (see Oskainp et aL, 1991, for example).

3

for cans contracted, correcting for the endogeneity of price, and they estimate the frequency

that each household will recycle. They find small response to changes in price or income.
Finally, Reschovsky and Stone (1994) survey 1422 households around Ithaca, NY, who face

a variety of unit-pricing and recycling rules. They estimate the probability of recycling each
type of material, as a function of these rules and of demographic characteristics, and they
find that curbside pickup alone would increase recycling more than unit-pricing alone.

We build upon these existing studies in several ways. First, by using individual
households instead of a cross-section of cities, we avoid a number of problems. Tonnage
data from entire communities might mix residential garbage with commercial and industrial

garbage,2 and may include amounts from outside the jurisdiction. Second, by collecting our
own data, we avoid potential biases in surveys with self-reported amounts of garbage and

recycling. Third, we measure the garbage itself, rather than the weekly number of cans
contracted (some of which may be partially empty). Fourth, by taking direct measures of
both weight and volume, we can measure the Seattle Stomp, that is, the change in weight per

can. Fifth, our data include the weight of recycling rather than just the frequency of
recycling. Sixth, in our natural experiment, the change in price is truly exogenous to
households. We thus avoid the problem in cross-sections of cities, or of households in
different municipalities, that the price per bag may be jointly determined with garbage
quantities. Finally, our cross-section of individual households contains more variation in
demographic characteristics than does a cross-section of communities, since the latter can

only provide community-wide means. More variation in the independent demographic
variables can improve the estimation of household demand.

2Jenkins (1991) and Cargo (1978) employ such data by estimating separate equations for
commercial waste and mixed waste.

4

Section 2 will describe the steps taken to gather the data from individual households
in Charlottesville. In section 3, we estimate demand for garbage collection and curbside

recycling as functions of price, income, and demographic characteristics. Garbage weight is
inelastic to price or income, but garbage volume does respond to this price per unit volume.
Section 4 estimates whether the observed price-responsiveness itself depends on demographic

characteristics. We employ a probit model in section 5 to estimate the probability that a
household chooses each method available to reduce its garbage. These choices are identified

through responses to a questionnaire. Then section 6 estimates the amount of illegal
dumping conducted by households in Charlottesville following the implementation of the
program. This estimate is based on observed garbage levels from individual households, and

indirectly on responses to the questionnaire. Finally, in section 7, we consider policy issues.
We discuss the pros and cons of collecting revenue from per-unit pricing, we calculate the

effect of introducing a minimum of one bag per week, and we conduct a simple cost-benefit
comparison. Welfare gains from unit-pricing only exceed costs if those costs are less than
10% of unit-pricing revenue.

2. The Data
Charlottesville, Virginia, is a university town located in the foothills of the Blue
Ridge mountains. Its population is 40,341. Residential garbage collection has traditionally
been provided by the city and has been financed by

aty taxes. Prior to November of

1991, the only method of recycling was to haul recyclable materials to one of two drop-off
centers located within the city. These drop-off centers accepted newspaper, three colors of

glass, and aluminum cans. Beginning in November of 1991, Charlottesville implemented a

voluntary curbside recycling program for all of its residents. The city provided each

S

household with a free plastic recycling container in which to place any newspaper, tin, glass,
aluminum, and certain plastics. These containers were collected each week on the same thy

as regular garbage. The city also expanded the list of materials it would accept at the drop-

off locations by including several other grades of paper, cardboard, and other plastics.

In December1991, city council decided to implement a unit-pricing program to
commence on July 1, 1992. This program would require residents to placea sticker, costing

on each unit of garbage for collection. Each sticker could be attached to any

household container (bag or can) with a volume of approximately 32 gallons. The city would
not collect garbage without a sticker on it. Households could also purchase a $.40 sticker
for a 16 gallon bag. Recyclable materials would continue to be collected free of charge, and
participation remained voluntary.
These events provide a natural experiment to study household response to price.

Following the decision of the city council in December 1991, we began to assemble our
sample of households. We first selected a sample of city streets spread throughout the City

of Charlottesville. This sample of streets represents all major neighborhoods and
demographic groups.3 The city directory was then used to select a random sample of
households located on the selected set of streets.4 A total of 400 households received a

3We excluded streets located near the University of Virginia, to avoid sampling
university students who frequently leave town or change living locations. We also avoided
apartments and town-houses which often use dumpsters. With these exclusions, we then
selected streets that appeared to be distributed uniformly across a map of Charlottesville.
Density varies, so the sample is not random.
1This two-part selection process is designed to cluster households more than would a onestep selection of households from the entirety of Charlottesville. This clustering was
necessary to reduce the costs and complications involved with weighing household garbage
each morning. Even though many households in the sample were located on the same street,
they were often located well apart from each other. Usually only one or two studied
households were located on any block.

6
letter requesting their participation in our study. The letter indicated that their garbage and

recyclable materiaJs would be weighed early in the morning over two four-week periods.
The letter aiso indicated that participating households would be expected to complete a

questionnaire and were assured that their answers would be held confidentiaL'
A total of 97 households agreed to participate, while another 68 households responded

that they would not participate. Several of the "no" responses included a note indicating that
the household would be moving during the period of the study. Of the 97 positive responses,
our final sample includes 75 with complete data.6

Each household's garbage and recyclable materials were weighed each week over four
weeks in late May and early June before the implementation of the unit-pricing program, and

again over four weeks in September following its implementation. Garbage was not weighed
during the week following Memorial day, to avoid the extra garbage that can be generated

over the three-day holiday weekend. We skipped July and August in order to avoid vacation

weeks, and to provide a short adjustment period. Care was taken throughout the term of the
study to avoid weighing yardwaste.' This involved some inspection of household garbage,
which was not a difficult task.
We also counted the number of cans of garbage presented by each household each
'The letter informed households that the Charlottesville City Council had been made
aware of this study, and had agreed to all terms. Households were also informed that they
would receive $5.00 for their time spent completing the questionnaire. Each letter included a
stamped postcard which the household could return indicating whether it would be willing to
participate in the study.
6Several households were removed from the sample because the original occupants had
moved during the period of the study or because the building contained more than one family
unit. Some other households refused to complete the questionnaire.

'Residents are not supposed to mix yardwaste with regular garbage. Instead,
Charlottesville conducts special collection of yardwaste several times each year. Some
households still included yardwaste with regular garbage, however, and we took care to
exclude it.

7

week. Measuring volume presents certain difficulties, as households used different-sized

plastic bags or boxes as containers. Counting a small plastic kitchen bag or box as one can
would not be appropriate. Therefore, we approximated a household's garbage by the number
of 32-gallon containers it would have filled. Following the implementation of the pricing
program, we measured volume by counting the number of stickers. Problems still arise with
this procedure, as households were allowed to attach stickers to any container of about 32

gallons in size. Several households used even larger containers. By counting stickers, we
determined only the volume for which they were charged rather than the precise volume of

garbage per se.
We recorded each week separately. However, household garbage and recycling

amounts can vaiy substantially from one week to the next. In act, to save on disposal costs,
several households presented garbage only every other week. Therefore, we average the
four weeks for each household before implementation, and we calculated a separate avenge

for each household over the four weeks following implementation. We are left with two
averaged observations for each household. The first observation represents an average
week's worth of garbage and recycling amounts at a price of zero, and the second
observation provides the same at a price of $.80.
With only a 25% positive response rate to our initial mailing, our sample could suffer

from the presence of a self-selection bias. For example, it could be suggested that only
educated, environmentally-aware households would agree to have their garbage weighed each

week. These households may have already been recycling as much as they could before the
implementation of the unit-pricing program, leaving little opportunity for additional

recycling. Conclusions based on such a sample might under-estimate the increase in
recycling of an average household in Charlottesville.

8
The data do not allow us to conduct a formal test for selection bias. We can make
some general observations, however, by comparing the means of garbage and recycling

weights of households in the sample with those for all households in Charlottesville. Mean
demographic characteristics can be compared as well.

The first column of Table 1 summarizes data gathered from our sample of 75
households, and the second column summarizes data from the entire City of Charlottesville.
Garbage and recycling information for the city was provided by the Rivanna Solid Waste

Authority (RSWA). For comparability with earlier studies, both columns provide amounts
per capita. The avenge individual in our sample presented 10.89 pounds of garbage per
week before unit-pricing began. For all of Charlottesville, RSWA data includes both
residential and commercial waste. Total garbage divided by the total number of individuals

amounts to 37.30 pounds of garbage per person over an average week before unit-pricing.
Following implementation of the program, the avenge individual in our sample decreased the
weight of garbage by 1.52 pounds per week, whereas the avenge person in Charlottesville

reduced the weight of garbage by 2.59 pounds per week.' This change for the city could
include changes in commercial waste. Commercial establishments that do not use dumpsters
are subject to the volume-based pricing program.
The data on recycling indicate that the average person in our sample recycled 3.69

pounds per week before the implementation of the pricing program, 0.95 pounds more than

the avenge person in Charlottesville. The average household in our sample recycled more
than the avenge household in Charlottesville following the implementation of the pricing

last figure is adjusted for seasonal variation. Over a 5-year period prior to unitpncing, 0.88 more pounds of garbage per person per week were collected in June than in
September. The student population and household yardwaste could account for much of the
city's seasonal variation. Since our sample excludes both of these sources, we assume that
no seasonal adjustment is appropriate for our sample.

9

program as well. Surprisingly, it appears that the avenge person in Charlottesville reduced
the weight of recyclable material from 2.74 pounds per week to 2.46 pounds per week
following the implementation of unit-pricing. An inspection of the RSWA data reveals that
this reduction is due to a decrease in the recycling of old newspaper. RSWA officials can

offer no explanation for this decrease in newspaper recycling.9 Perhaps households, over
time, found the cost of storing newspapers to be higher than first expected.

Demographic information for the city is taken from the U.S. Census. However, the
U.S. Census data include both students in university dormitories and persons in multi-family

dwellings, which together comprise 31.1 % of all housing in Charlottesville. Therefore, our
exclusion of neighborhoods with students and apartments likely explains a significant portion

of the differences between our sample and the entire city for demographic variables. Our
households live in single-family dwellings, so they have higher values for income,
homeownership, age, employment, and education.

Measurement error can arise from several sources in our data. First, rain can
increase the weight of garbage and recyclable material. It rained heavily on two mornings
during the period of the study, so we did not use those observations.'0 Second, households
may have learned that the recycling truck does not collect in certain parts of the city until

well into the afternoon. If so, they might wait until the afternoon to present their recyclable

9This result is maintained even with correction for seasonal variation. Households in the
City recycled an average of 181.55 tons from November 1991 to June 1992, before the
implementation of unit-pricing, and recycled an average of 173.89 tons over these same
months after implement3tion. This overall reduction is still attributable to a reduction in the
recycling of old newspaper.
'°We did note whether each household presented any garbage for collection. If so, we
designated the following week's garbage as one week's worth. If not, the following week's
garbage was assumed to represent two week's worth (or the number of weeks since the last
presentation). The same algorithm was followed for recyclable material.

10

materials for collection. Unfortunately, we could only measure amounts put out by 7:00

AM. On one occasion we returned to households that did not recycle in the morning, and no
additional recycling was observed. Finally, as mentioned above, the volume.of garbage
containers used by households could differ. Instead of measuring the volume of each
container, we measured volume the same way the city does — by counting containers.

Following the measurement period, each household was sent a questionnaire with a

self-addressed stamped envelope. Completed questionnaires reported each household's
demographic statistics such as household size, ages, race, income, marital status, education,
and other information that could be expected to influence the generation of garbage or
recyclable materials. Households were also given the opportunity to express their opinions

on several subjects relating to recycling and the unit-pricing program. Some of their
responses are reported in Table 2.
Support for the sticker program runs fairly high, with 77.7% of households favoring

it over an increase in property taxes, and 72.8% favoring it over a mandatory recycling

law)' However, households found it more inconvenient to purchase and place stickers on
their garbage than to recycle. Households had been recycling for more than one year at the
time of completing the questionnaire, and may have become accustomed to it, whereas the

sticker program was relatively new to them. See Oskamp et al. (1991) or Seattle Solid
Waste Utility (1991) for more elaborate survey studies.

3. A Model of Household Demand For Garbage Removal
We assume that individuals maximize a utility function, defined over consumption and

"Among only owner-occupied households, 79% prefer unit-pricing to an increase in
property taxes.

11

several methods of garbage removal, subject to a budget constraint. This maximization
process provides a demand for each method of garbage disposal that is a function of the

prices, of income, and of taste parameters which themselves depend on demographic

characteristics.'2 We observe the quantity of garbage collection and recycling demanded by

each household, and these demands are estimated in this section. The use of other forms of
garbage removal can only be proxied by household responses to a questionnaire, and these
are estimated in a later section.

In previous studies using cross-sections of cities, garbage per capita is a function of
price and the city's mean level of income per capita, percent married, percent homeowners,

percent in each age group, and other demographic variables. To be comparable, we divide
all quantities by the number of persons in each household. These variables are defined in

Table 3.
Four separate equations were independently estimated: for per-capita weight of

garbage, volume of garbage, density of garbage, and weight of recycling.'3 In all these

estimations, we use panel data gathered from N=75 households over T=2 regimes. These
two regimes are the periods of time before and after the implementation of the unit-pricing

program. Let Y1 denote the per-capita weight of garbage (or volume of garbage, or density
of garbage, or weight of recyclable materials, depending on the equation) presented for

collection over an average week by household i during regime t. Initially, we assume that

'2First order conditions from this type of maximization are shown in Fullerton and
Kinnaman (1993), where we proceed to solve for optima] tax and subsidy rates on garbage
and recycling, in the presence of externalities. This simple formulation ignores differences
in the level of service (curbside vs backdoor collection), and time spent on these chores
(Wertz, 1976).

'3flensity is just weight divided by volume, or pounds per can. The four equations could
be estimated together, using seemingly unrelated regressions, but results are unaffected
because all four equations use the same right-hand variables.

12

Yg can be represented as a linear function of the price of garbage collection during regime
(PJ, exogenous income and demographic variables that are constant across regimes for

household i (the lxK vector X1), and a household-specific, time-invariant unobserved factor
(jQ)4 We assume that z1 is distributed independent of X1, the demographic variables. The
demand for the collection of household garbage can then be represented by

(I)

Yg

=a

+ Pfl + X,y + +

where the unknown parameters are a, fi, and the (Xxi) vector .
Because of the appearance of, the error term for a particular household will be
correlated across regimes. Therefore we use the Generalized Least Squares (61.5) estimator
to provide efficient estimates of the unknown parameters.

3.1 Garbage Weight
First, we estimate the effect of the price of garbage and demographic characteristics

on the per-capita weight of garbage presented for collection each week. All of our variables

are defined in Table 3, and GLS estimates of the unknown parameters appear in Table 4. In
the first column, for weight per person, the coefficient on price is negative and significantly

different from zero at the 95 percent confidence level. Using this coefficient, the price

elasticity of demand for the collection of garbage, measured in pounds, at mean levels of
price and weight is equal to -0.075. This estimate is a bit closer to zero than in previous

'4We need p because the Breusch and Pagan Lagrange multiplier test rejected the null

hypothesis that a = 0 for all equations, at the .99 confidence level. We do not want to
estimate p as fixed-effects, however, because then we could not measure coefficients for
demographic variables. Since Xi do not change, first differences would leave àY as a
function only of aP. Fortunately, we can treat Me as random. In a Hausman test, we cannot
reject the null hypothesis that p is independent of Xi.

13

studies.'5

Owner-occupied households presented 4.41 more pounds per person than renters did,
controlling for other differences. Homeowners usually conduct more home repairs and

maintenance than renters do, activities which generate more waste. Households with
individuals who work full-time presented 5.32 fewer pounds of garbage each week, perhaps

because they were away from home more of the time. Households with retired persons
presented less garbage weight on average, than did others.
We include household size in order to capture economies of scale, that is, the

reduction in pounds-per-person from having a larger household. We use the natural log of
household size, however, to allow the change in the pounds-per-person to vary across

household sizes. In this case, an increase in household size from 2 to 3 is found to reduce
weight of garbage by 2.44 pounds per person, while an increase in household size from 5 to
6 is found to reduce garbage weight by only 0.97 pounds per person.

The coefficient on the natural log of income is slightly positive, but the standard error

is large. The income elasticity generated from this coefficient is 0.049, at mean levels of
income and garbage weight. Coincidentally, this estimate exactly matches that of Hong,

Adams, and Love (1993) using individual data. it .s smaller than has been found using uu.s
kinds of data'6

'5We measure an arc-elasticity, since price is only zero or eighty-cents. No other study
employs a cross-section of households around the start of unit-pricing. Using aggregate data,
others have estimated the price elasticity to be -0.12 (Jenkins, 1991), -0.15 (Wertz, 1976), 0.26 and -0.22 (Moths and Byrd, 1990, in two communities), and -0.14 (Skumatz and
Breckinridge, 1990).
'6Although ours is the only estimate based on weight of garbage in a cross-section of
households, other kinds of data have been used to estimate this income elasticity. Richardson
and Havlicek (1978) estimate 0.242, Wertz (1976) estimates 0.279 and 0.242 in two different
samples, Petrovic and Jaffee (1978) estimate 0.2, and Jenkins (1991) estimates 0.41.

14

The coefficient on race is perhaps the most surprising. White households presented

5.93 fewer pounds per person for collection each week than non-white households." As
indicated in Table 1, however, only four of our 75 households were non-white. In addition,
all of these non-white households Eve within the same neighborhood. As a consequence, this
variable could represent just a neighborhood effect.

3.2 Garbage Volume
Second, we estimate how the per-capita volume of garbage is affected by the same set

of independent variables. The OLS estimates of the coefficients of this equation appear in
the second column of Table 4.
The sign of each coefficient in the volume equation is identical to that in the weight

equation for every variable except income. In both equations, however, the coefficient on
income is small and insignificant. We might have expected the volume demanded to increase

with income, but the volume of garbage is not well measured by the number of cans. Highincome households often used larger, sturdier containers with wheels. They are also more
apt to use garbage compactors. Low-income households typically have containers with no

wheels, so they may carry two light cans to the curb instead of one heavy can. In the long
run, with unit-pricing, we could expect everyone to purchase larger containers with wheels in
order to decrease disposal costs.
The price elasticity of demand, measured in volume, at mean levels of price and

volume is -0.227. By comparing this price elasticity to the one for weight given in the
previous section, we see that individuals responded to the volume-based pricing program by
reducing the volume of garbage in greater proportions than they reduced the weight of

"Richardson and Havlicek (1978) consider the effects of race on garbage generation and
find no significant relationship. Richardson and Havlicek (1974) find a positive relationship
between percent-black and garbage-weight.

15

garbage. This result is not surprising since, alter all, the price is charged for the number of
bags of garbage rather than the weight. Unfortunately, however, landfill costs depend on

weight (or really on compacted volume, which is best proxied by weight).
3.3 Garbage Density
The third column of Table 4 shows how the price per can of garbage and various
demographic characteristics affect the density of garbage as defined by weight per can. The

coefficient on price is positive, large, and significantly different from zero at the 95%
confidence level. Controlling for price and other variables, households with infants
presented garbage that weighed 11.55 more pounds per can than did others. (As those who

are parents know, wet disposable diapers are rolled into a tight, dense ball, held with tape,
before disposal.) As the education level of the household increases, the density of its
garbage decreases. Lastly, larger families present denser garbage.

3.4 Weight of Recyclable Materials

The fourth equation considers the demand for the collection of recyclable materials,
measured by weight, with estimates appearing in the fourth column of Table 4. Households
respond to a price for garbage by increasing their recycling. The implied cross-price

elasticity is 0.074 at mean levelsY
Homeowners and households subscribing to additional daily newspapers put greater

amounts of recyclable material into collection containers. The coefficient on NEWS is

significantly different from zero in the recycling equation, whereas it was not significant in
any garbage equation. Less collection of recyclable materials was demanded by large
households and those with retired persons.

'8Using only two observations from each community, U.S. EPA (1990) estimates this
cross-price elasticity for Perkasie, PA (0.49), Illion, NY (0.48), and Seattle (0.06 in 1985-6
and 0.10 in 1986-87).

16

4. VaryIng Parameters in the Demand For Garbage and Recycling
In this section, we consider interaction terms which allow the coefficient on price to

vary over demographic characteristics. This model will allow us to estimate how these
demographic characteristics affect the change in weight or volume of garbage that results

from the start of a price per bag. These estimates would be helpful to a local government
that is considering the implementation of such a program in its community. Specifically, we
modify equation (I) to add interaction terms with P1 times every X, giving us:

(2)

In this case we can take first differences, since the interaction terms remain:

(3)

where 4€ is an error with mean zero, distributed independently of X. For this fixed-effects
model, the OLS estimator is efficient, In other words, since AP is always 0.8, we just
regress AY on a constant, income, and demographic variables.

Again four separate equations were estimated, for garbage in pounds, garbage in

volume, the density of garbage, and recyclable materials in pounds. The OLS estimates are
reported in Table 5.
The first column of Table S reports the estimated coefficients for the garbage weight

equation. This negative price effect (the constant term) is dampened for households that
subscribe to more daily newspapers, for those with infants, and for households with married

couples. Perhaps households with infants, whose garbage contains a large proportion of

17

disposable diapers, are not willing to switch from disposable to cloth diapers. Interestingly,

the reduction in garbage in response to the unit-fee is greater for higher income households
than

for lower income households.
The secondcolumn of Table 5 presents estimated coefficients of the demand for

collection of garbage volume. These coefficients are similar in sign to the coefficients

estimated in the garbage weight equation.
Who stomped on their garbage in response to the implementation of the volume-based

pricing program? In column 3 of Table 5, we estimate how demographic characteristics
affect the change in garbage density. None of the coefficients are significantly different from
zero, but the signs for RETIRE and INCOME are negative. Retirees probably find stomping
difficult, especially when it would require hauling the dense garbage to the curb. Individuals
with high incomes apparently fmd the economic incentive less attractive, given the

opportunity cost of their time. Households with married couples, those with infants, and
large households appear to react by increasing the density of their garbage.
One possible solution to the stomping problem would be to implement a weight-based
instead of a volume-based pricing system. Households would be billed according to the

weight of their garbage. This system would require scales on collection trucks and a more
elaborate billing system.'9

The fourth column of Table 5 presents the estimated coefficients for the recycling
equation. Households with infants and those subscribing to more newspapers responded to
the implementation of the unit-pricing program by recycling more. White households

'9The city of Seattle has been considering the implementation of a weight-based system in
their city later in this decade. A pilot project (Seattle Solid Waste Utility, 1991) revealed
that operation and administrative costs of such a program would not be prohibitive. A
problem, however, is that scales were not sensitive enough to meet federal standards for
weights and measures.

18

responded by recycling less than non-white households.

5. Unobserved Methods of Garbage Removal
As households are made to face a positive marginal cost for garbage collection, they

have several options available to reduce the amount of garbage they present for collection.

Each household was asked to reveal which methods it had used. Each household could

indicate that it (1) did not attempt to reduce its garbage, or that it had (2) recycled more, (3)
composted more, (4) demanded less packaging at stores, or (5) used "other" means to reduce
its garbage. We wanted to know which households disposed of garbage in some illegal
fashion, but we did not ask such a question directly since households would be reluctant to

admit it. Since the first four options would seem to cover all possible legal alternatives,
however, we think the "other" option can only mean illegal disposal such as burning,
littering, or using commercial dumpsters!°
We have gathered data on the weight of each household's garbage and recyclable

material, so we can determine to some extent the accuracy of these responses. Table 6
shows the change in the weight of garbage, the change in the volume of garbage, and the
change in the weight of recyclable material, for households choosing each method of garbage
reduction in the questionnaire.

For households indicating they "did not reduce" their garbage, the actual weight of

garbage fell by only 0.05 pounds per person per week. This amount is substantially lower
than the 1.53 pound average reduction per person observed overall. This subset also reduced
their volume of garbage by 0.25 containers per person per week, so they may have done

20The questionnaire did not include an option for putting more food through an in-sink
garbage disposai, but the change in this behavior must be small.

19

some stomping.

For households indicating they "recycled more," actual recycling increased by 0.70
pounds per person per week. This amount is somewhat greater than the increase of 0.58

pounds observed from all households, but it exceeds more substantially the increase of 0.35
pounds per person

per week observed from the households that did not indicate they

"recycled more." In addition, households may indicate more than one of the four methods of

reducing its garbage. For households indicating they "composted more" the weight of

garbage fell by 2.25 pounds per person per week. Little of this amount reappeared as
additional recycling, so that garbage does seem to have been removed from the waste stream.

For households that indicated they "demanded less packaging at stores," the weight of
garbage and of recycling both increased, by 1.26 pounds and by 0.66 pounds per person per

week, respectively. That they were unable to reduce garbage is not entirely surprising. We
doubt the ability of households to reduce substantially their garbage through this method over

the short time period of our study. We offer no explanation for why garbage and recycling
increased, except measurement error.

Finally, for households indicating they used "other" means, actual garbage fell by

5.10 pounds per person per week. This figure is more than twice the amount associated with
any other answer to the question about which methods were used to reduce household
garbage. The weight of recyclable material decreased for these households as well. In fact,
several of these households presented no garbage at all following the implementation of unit-

pricing.2' We return to the issue of illegal dumping in the next section.

We now turn to an econometric model of household choice for each of four methods

21Several households presented recyclable material and g garbage for the entire fourweek observation period following implementation. We deleted households that were on
vacation, as revealed in the questionnaire.

20
available to reduce garbage in response to the implementation of unit-pricing. For this

model, we have only one observation per household. Let Y be the value to household i of
choosing a method to reduce garbage. Furthermore, assume that

(4)

where X represent demographic variables. We do not observe

(5)

Yj

r,

but we do observe

1 if Y>0
= 0 otherwise

In other words, we observe the choice made by each household. We assume jZj is

distributed Normal (o, 2), so we employ the basic probit model. Maximum likelihood
estimates of y are reported in Table 7.

The first column of Table 7 reports the estimated coefficients of variables expected to
influence the probability of a household choosing to recycle morC following the

implementation of unit-pricing. Although the small sample precludes high t-statistics,
recycling seems more likely for households subscribing to more newspapers, owner-occupied

households, and better educated households. Households subscribing to more newspapers
may

have selected this choice because newsprint is relatively easy for a household to recycle.

Households with infants and with high income levels were less likely to choose recycling as a
method of reducing garbage. The opportunity cost of recycling may be high for households

with higher incomes.

The second column of Table 7 reports the estimated coefficients of variables expected

21

to influence the probability of a household choosing to compost. Owner-occupied households
and better educated households are more likely to compost. Owner-occupied households
could have more yard space and could perform more yardwork themselves, circumstances
that are conducive to composting.

The fourth column of Table 7 provides estimates for the "other" equation. Other
methods are less likely to be chosen by households with an in-sink garbage disposal and by

those with children. Several "other" methods of garbage reduction could have been chosen
by the household, including illegal methods discussed in the next section.

6. Illegal Dumping Behavior
The possibility of increases in illegal forms of garbage disposal have wonied

policymakers who have considered unit-pricing in their communities. We offer a method of
estimating the amount of illegal dumping that took place in Charlottesville during the period

of our experiment.22 We use two criteria. We suspect illegal dumping only if (a) the
household indicated that "other" means were used to reduce garbage, 4 (b) the amount of
garbage presented for collection fell to zero for the entire four-week measurement period

following implementation of unit-pricing. If the number of bags presented for collection
decreased from 3 in May to 2 in September, then we are willing to believe that the household
found a legal form of "other" disposal such as the use of an in-sink garbage disposal.

However, if the number of bags fell from 3 to 0, then we suspect more strongly that illegal
dumping has occurred. If a person goes to the trouble of transporting trash to a commercial

Blume (1991) attempts to explain illegal dumping by conducting interviews with
officials from 14 communities with unit-pricing programs. Of these, 4 reported significant
problems, 4 reported minor problems, and 6 reported no significant problems. Blume was
unable to explain what causes these differences across communities, even having considered
the price of garbage collection.

22
dumpster, he or she will probably take the entire week's store of trash rather than one bag.
Based on the above criteria, we find that 5.33% of households disposed of garbage in
some illegal fashion." To estimate the amount, we take their garbage before unit-pricing,

minus the increase in their recycling, minus an estimate of additional composting? We
find that these households dumped an avenge of 13.38 pounds per person per week. Given
the sample size, the implication is that unit-pricing induced an additional 0.42 pounds per

person per week of illegal dumping in Charlottesville. Furthermore, this estimate constitutes
28% of the total reduction in garbage at the curb. For comparison, additional recycling
constitutes 38%

of the total reduction in garbage. Thus households may have increased

dumping by almost as much as they increased recycling! The remaining 34% of the total
reduction in garbage could be explained by additional composting, less packaging demanded

at stores, additional recycling at drop-off locations, or even additional illegal dumping.

The social costs can vary over methods of illegal dumping. For example, if a person
takes the weekly garbage to a commercial dumpster where he is employed, and has

permission from his employer, the social costs could be quite low. However, if this
individual throws his garbage along a rural route or bums it in his back yard, the social cost

could be quite large. Unfortunately, we have no means to idenflty what kind of "othe?
methods were used by households in our study.

23These results should be viewed with caution. First, the sample size is small. Only 4
households in our sample met our dual criteria for dumping. Second, our sample includes a
disproportionate number of high income, well educated, single family households. Third,
households who dump could have selected themselves out of our sample either by refusing to
participate in the study or by refusing to return the questionnaire.

Some households indicated more composting as well as 'other methods. We regress
the change in garbage on the same demographic variables and a dummy variable for
composting. The coefficient on this dummy gives us an estimate of the per capita change in
garbage attributable to composting.

23
Recent stories in newspapers tell of increased dumping." The recycling coordinator

of the University of Virginia is aware of "many, many" private reports of individuals
dumping in UVA dumpsters. The Albemarle school system has also observed quantities of
unidentified garbage in their dumpsters. One person who was warned to stop dumping his
garbage in a commercial dumpster was subsequently convicted for continuing the practice.

Major department stores around Charlottesville have placed locks on their dumpsters to

prevent residents from dumping their garbage. Over 40% of households in our sample stated
that they had observed more littering since the implementation of the stickerprogram (see

Table 2). Of those observing "a lot" of littering, 75.0% lived in densely-populated areas of
the city near downtown.

To get a handle on JhI might do such dumping, we estimate another probit model.
We wonder which demographic characteristics influence the probability of a household

choosing to dump their garbage in this fashion. These results are reported in the first
column of Table 8.
The equation estimating the probability of dumping may not be well specified, as no

coefficient is different from zero at the 95% confidence level. Perhaps dumping behavior is
difficult to predict without unobserved characteristics such as the degree of risk aversion,
community awareness, or accessibility to commercial dumpsters. Also, perhaps households

were not dumping illegally, even when their garbage fell to zero. On the other hand, the
model easily passes the test for joint significance of all these variables together.

A few other households presented no garbage following the price hike, were not on

vacation, and did not indicate that "other methods were employed to reduce garbage. These

"The Charlottesville Daily Proness, Thesday October 26, 1993, "Illegal Dumping has
County, Landowners Sifting for Answers", tells of increased dumping at more than 30 illegal
dumpsites scattered around the county.

24
households may have reduced their garbage to zero through recycling, composting, and by

demanding less packaging, or they could have used illegal methods without acknowledging it.
The second column of Table 8 reports the coefficients on variables expected to influence the

probability of a household reducing its garbage to zero, whether or not it indicated that

"other" methods were used. Individually the variables are not significant, again, but jointly
the variables are significant.26

7. Discussion of Policy Issues

7.1 Revenue To The Municipal Government
A community may be interested in the amount of revenue it could earn with a unit
pricing program. These revenues could be used to finance recycling collection programs and
to pay. tipping fees. Based on our results, at mean values for Charlottesville, the additional

revenue would be $0.86 per single-family household per week.
Several economic arguments favor unit-charges for garbage as a source of revenue.
First, such charges can help reduce the city's garbage and thus its expenditures on disposal.
Second, garbage collection and disposal is not a "public good". Each bag incurs additional

cost (rival), and collection can be limited to those with paid stickers (excludable). Third, the
"benefit principle" suggests that such charges are "fair", since each household pays only

according to its use of this service. Fourth, we find that the demand for garbage is inelastic.
Established optimal tax theories suggest that the total dead-weight loss to an economy can be

reduced by taxing goods with inelastic demand
Other arguments can be made against this type of taxation. First, administrative and

261f we assume these additional households dumped or burned garbage illegally, then we
find that 9.33% of households in our sample dumped an average of 11.26 pounds of garbage
per person per week, representing 43.0% of the total reduction in garbage at the curb.

25

enforcement costs may be higher than for other sources of revenue. Second, the social cost
of non-compliance can be large. Illegal dumping could require costly cleanups of backwoods

dump sites. Third, our results suggest the tax on garbage is regressive. With unit-pricing,
the volume of garbage varies from 0.55 containers per person for the lowest income group to
0.46 containers per person for the highest income group. Thus high-income households

would pay a lower fraction of their income in garbage fees. Fourth, communities that use
property taxes to pay for garbage collection enable their residents to deduct those local taxes
against their federal income tax. Depending on the number who itemize, and their marginal
tax rates, this deduction can pass to the federal government up to 30% of the cost of this
local public service. Jf the community switches to unit-pricing, it loses a substantial federal
subsidy on this portion of revenue.

7.2 A One-Bag Minimum
Some other communities with unit-pricing have tried to reduce illegal dumping by

requiring households to purchase a minimum of one bag each week. Households pay for this
first bag either through an annual flat fee or through property taxes, and they must purchase

stickers only for additional bags they place at the curb. The advantage of a one-bag
minimum is that households who would otherwise dump their garbage might be expected to

present at least one bag for collection each week. The disadvantage is that no households
have any economic incentive to reduce garbage below one bag per week.
We can calculate the effects of such a policy in Charlottesville, if we assume (a) that
households dumping all of their garbage would now only dump garbage in excess of one bag,

(b) that their regular garbage would increase by the amount not dumped, and (c) that other
households presenting up to one bag of garbage per week are unaffected by unit-pricing.
With these assumptions, and a one-bag minimum, the amount of illegal dumping would

26
decrease from 0.42 to 0.07 pounds per person per week— an 83% reduction. These

households might even stop dumping entirely since the savings from doing so decreases by
the price of one bag. Unit-pricing becomes less effective at reducing garbage, however,
because the amount not dumped becomes extra garbage and because behavior is unaffected

for the 32.6% of households in our sample that produced one or fewer bags of garbage over

an average week before the implementation of the price-per-bag. With unit-pricing and a
one-bag minimum, the avenge person in our sample would:
• reduce the weight of garbage by 1.04 pounds per week (compared to 1.52 pounds
per week in the absence of a one-bag minimum)

• reduce the volume of garbage by 0.21 containers per week (compared to 0.27
containers per week in the absence of a one-bag minimum)

• increase the weight of recyclable material presented for collection by 0.50 pounds
per week (compared to 0.58 pounds per week in the absence of a one-bag minimum)

• increase the density of garbage by 4.44 pounds per container (compared to 4.69
pounds per container in the absence of a one-bag minimum).

The one-bag minimum would decrease dumping substantially, but it would also reduce
some of the desirable changes in garbage and recycling.

7.3 A Simple Cost-Benefit Analysis
What are the social benefits of a unit-pricing program? Repetto et a! (1992) use a

diagram like our Figure IA, where the demand for garbage collection is the marginal benefit

(MB). They also find that the social marginal cost (SMC) for a town like Charlottesville is
$1.03 per bag. Thus a price of zero generates too much garbage, and a price of $1 .03/bag

results in a welfare gain shown by the shaded triangle in Figure lÀ.
We follow Repetto a a] (1992) by assuming that the social marginal cost of garbage

27
collection and disposal is $1.03 per bag. Charlottesville charges only $0.80 per bag of
garbage. Therefore the benefit to Charlottesville from charging $0.80 is represented by the

shaded trapezoid in Figure lB. This gain is $3.14 per person per year.2'
Unit-pricing also imposes several types of costs, mostly administrative and

enforcement costs. The municipality must (I) pay to print and distribute the stickers to area
merchants, (2) pay to enforce laws against illegal dumpers, (3) pay to clean up illegal dump
sites, and (4) pay to promote the program. Additional costs to the household arise from
(5)

traveling to outlets that sell the garbage stickers, (6) spending time and effort to compact

more garbage into each container, and (7) spending time and effort to dump their garbage.
Further costs to private business include (8) locking dumpsters and (9) paying to remove

garbage that has been dumped on their property. These costs are difficult to quantify, so we
consider three cases. We assume that the sum of these administrative and enforcement costs

amounts to 5%, 10%, or 15% of the price of a garbage sticker. Then the cost of a per-bag
pricing program can be represented by the shaded rectangle in Figure lB.
Table 9 summarizes these estimated benefits and costs of a unit-pricing program. In

the first row of the table, where we ignore illegal dumping, the estimated benefits of unitpricing exceed costs that are 5% or 10% of the sticker price, but not costs that are 15% of
the sticker price.

The next two rows allow for our two measures of illegal dumping. To be
conservative, we ignore the cost of cleaning up backwoods dump sites. Instead, suppose
illegal dumpers just use commercial dumpsters. In this case the "true" reduction in garbage

at the landfill would be less than the reduction in garbage observed at the curb. The "true"

2'We ignore the benefits of additional recycling and composting. The price of
recyclables is near zero or less than zero for most types of material. See Baumol (1977) for
a good discussion of the possible costs and benefits to recycling.

28

demand curve in Figure lB is steeper, so the welfare gain trapezoid is smaller gj4 the cost

rectangle is larger. Benefits in the second and third row of the table exceed costs that are
5%

of the sticker price, but not costs that are 10% or 15% of the sticker price.
As mentioned above, household behavior is affected if per-bag pricing is accompanied

by a one-bag minimum. Dumping is less, but so is the reduction in garbage. The last three
rows of Table 9 provide estimated benefits and costs with this modified policy. Jn this case,

dumping is less relevant. In all three rows, we1tre gains are more than offset by
administrative costs that are only 10% of sticker revenue.

8. Conclusion
This paper has used original data gathered from individual households to estimate
household response to the implementation of a volume-based pricing program for the

collection of garbage. We find that households responded by reducing the weight and
volume of their garbage and by increasing the weight of their recyclable materiais. We also
find that households increased the density of their garbage as they engaged in stomping to

reduce their garbage bill. The favorite method to reduce garbage by households in our
sample was through additional recycling. Households also engaged in composting, less
packaging, and perhaps illegal dumping.
Many communities across the nation have implemented unit-pricing programs to

finance garbage collection, especially since 1987. Supporters of these programs emphasize
the reduction in garbage and the increase in recycling that can be expected to follow

implementation. Critics of these programs worry about excessive amounts of illegal dumping
as well as the administrative difficulties that may arise.

In general, we find the reduction in garbage weight and increase in recycling to be

29

rather small. In fact, after accounting for illegal dumping, we estimate that total garbage

decreased by only 1.10 pounds per person per week. Many in Charlottesville were already
participating in the voluntaiy recycling program before unit-pricing began.

TABLE 1

A Comparison of Our Sample to All of Charlottesville
SAMPLE
(Excludes
students and

ENTIRE

CIT

apartments)

208
75
2.77

40,341
16,009
2.52

10.89 pounds

37.30 poundsb

9.37 pounds

33.83 poundsb

-1.52 pounds

-2.59 poundsc

0.73 containers

NA

0.46 containers

0.34 containers

-0.27 containers

NA

Avenge weight of recyclables per week per individual
before

3.69 pounds

2.74 pounds

Average weight of recyclables per week per individual
after
Avenge change in weight of recyclables
% of households that set out any recycling before
% of households that set out any recycling after

4.27 pounds

2.46 pounds

0.58 pounds

-0.28 pounds

73.3

65.0

69.6

65.4

$46,267

$33,729

85.3
65.3

42.4
51.4
76.1

Number of individuals
Number of households
Individuals per household

Avenge weight of garbage per week per individual
before
Avenge weight of garbage per week per individual
after
Avenge change in weight of garbage
Average volume of garbage per week per individual
before
Average volume of garbage per week per individual
after
Average change in volume of garbage

Mean household income
% of households owner-occupied
% of households married
% of households white

% of individuals under 3 years
% of individuals 18 to 26 years
% of individuals 26 to 64 years
% of individuals over 65

94.7
3.9

9.6
54.3
13.5

3.8
23.4
46.4
12.2

% of individuals work full-time
28.4
44.2
% of individuals over 25 with high school degree
92.2
75.5
% of individuals over 25 with bachelors degree
34.1
62.4
Garbage and recycling data for the entire city were provided by the Itivanna Solid Waste Authority.
NA means not available.
b Total
city garbage includes commercial waste. Any increase of household trash put in commercial
dumpsters would be included in this figure.
This figure is adjusted for seasonal variation. Over the pervious 5 year period, 0.88 more pounds
of garbage per person per week were disposed of in June than in September. The student population
and household yardwaste account for much of the seasonal variation. Since our sample excludes both
of these sources, we assume that no seasonal adjustment is required to our sample data.

TABLE 2
Household Responses to Selected Questions In Our Survey
Assuming that the city must face higher costs for the collection and disposal of your
garbage, would you rather have your property taxes increase or participate in a sticker
program such as the one Charlottesville currently has implemented to pay for the higher
costs?
Sticker 77.7%

Property Tax 22.3%

Other cities across the United States have passed laws requiring households to recycle
certain material each week or they must pay a fine. Would you rather have such a law
instead of the sticker program?

Yes 27.8%

No 72.8%

How inconvenient is it for you to purchase and place stickers on your garbage?

Not Very 46.7%

Somewhat 36.4%

Very 11.7%

Extremely 5.2%

How inconvenient is it for you to place your newspaper, plastic, aluminum and tin in the
green recycling container?

Not Very 75.3%

Somewhat 14.3%

Very 5.2%

Extremely 5.2%

Do you think the city of Charlottesville should collect a larger variety of recyclable
material from households each week?

Yes 86.9%

No 13.1%

Have you observed a greater incidence of litter in Charlottesville since the sticker program
began in July?

Yes, A Lot 15.6% Yes, A Little 24.7%

No 59.7%

Have you experienced any problems with people stealing garbage stickers?

Yes 3.9%

No 96.1%

TABLE 3
Description ot Variables Used in Demand Equations
DEPENDENT
VARIABLES

MEAN (S.D.)
DESCRIPTION

WEIGHT

10.14 (6.48)

Avenge weekly pounds of garbage per person in the household

VOLUME

0.60(0.32)

The average weekly number of cans of garbage per person

RECYCLE

3.97 (3.38)

The average weekly pounds of recyclable material per person

INDEPENDENT
VARIABLES

MEAN (S.D.)
DESCRIPTION

PRICE

0.40 (0.40)

The price paid by households for one can or bag of garbage

NEWS

0.47 (0.42)

The number of daily delivered newspapers per person

OWN

0.85(0.36)

1 - The occupants own the house

WORK

0.47 (0.36)

The fraction of those in the household who work full-time

INFANT

0.03 (0.10)

The fraction of those in the household less than the age of 3

CHILD

0.16 (0.23)

The fraction of those in the household less than the age of 18

RETIRE

0.20 (0.35)

The fraction of those in the household over the age of 65

COLLEGE

0.75 (0.44)

1 - At least one person with some college lives in the household

0- The occupants are renting the house

0- No individual with some college

INC

4.63 (2.66)

The household annual income level is.
1 - Less than 520,000
6 - Between $40,000 and $80,000
9- Greater than $80,000
3- Between $20,000 and $40,000

LINC

0.59 (0.48)

Natural log of INC divided by the number of persons in the
household

MARRY

0.65 (0.51)

1 - An adult married couple lives in the household

0- No married couple
WHITE

0.95 (0.28)

1 - A white household
0- A non-white household

HHSIZE

0.90 (0.51)

The number of individuals in the household (LHHSIZE = log of
}LHSIZE)

DISP

PET

0.37 (0.49)
0.36 (0.45)

1 - The household has an in-sink garbage disposal

0 - The household does not have an in-sink garbage disposal
The number of pets (cats or dogs) per person in the household

TABLE 4
GLS Estimates of Coefficients in Demand Equations
Dependent Variable
WEIGHT

VOLUME

DENSITY

RECYCLE

Independent
Variables

Estimate

t-stat

Estimate

t-stat

Estimate

t-stat

Estimate

I-stat

CONSTANT

22.04

6.10

1.36

9.03

12.06

2.79

2.13

1.23

PRICE

-1.91

-2.22

-0.34

-7.17

5.87

3.85

0.73

1.84

NEWS

2.65

1.29

0.12

1.39

1.98

0.81

4.88

5.00

OWN

4.41

1.99

0.20

2.16

4.15

1.57

1.46

1.38

WORK

-5.32

-2.22

-0.15

-1.46

-4.40

-1.54

-0.57

-0.50

INFANT

-2.54

-0.39

-0.32

-1.19

11.55

1.50

-1.68

-0.55

RETIRE

-4.71

-1.79

-0.14

-1.32

-5.08

-1.62

-1.99

-1.58

COLLEGE

-3.03

-1.91

-0.02

-0.32

-5.12

-2.71

-0.03

-0.04

UNC

0.86

0.19

-0.29

-1.50

7.67

1.40

0.39

0.18

MARRY

-0.93

-0.65

-0.10

-1.70

0.59

0.34

-0.53

-0.77

WHITE

-5.93

-2.62

-0.27

-2.86

-1.23

-0.46

0.00

0.008

LHT{SIZE

-4.87

-2.53

-0.38

-4.72

4.11

1.79

-1.11

-1.21

s
sIc

17.42

0.019

9.49

4.13

17.77

0.053

55.62

3.73

Number of observations = 150. All variables are defined in Table 3. Descriptive statistics at the bottom
of the table show the goodness of fit. sIit is the estimated variance of the individual-specific effects
and 526 is the estimated variance of the remaining error term.

TABLE 5
OLS Estimates of Coefficients In Varying-Parameter Demand Equations
Dependent Variable is the Change in:

WEIGHT

VOLUME

DENSITY

RECYCLE

Independent
Variables

Estimate

t-stat

Estimate

t-stat

Estimate

t-stat

Estimate

1-stat

CONSTANT

-1.35

-0.27

-0.58

-2.02

4.76

0.52

1.02

0.43

NEWS

4.58

1.60

0.21

1.31

4.69

0.90

2.97

2.21

OWN

-2.91

-0.94

-0.01

-0.05

-2.45

-0.43

-0.85

-0.58

WORK

-0.28

-0.08

-0.00

-0.02

-2.68

-0.44

1.88

1.19

INFANT

14.62

1.62

0.68

1.32

15.40

0.94

6.72

1.58

RETIRE

-0.33

-0.09

-0.10

-0.45

-5.88

-0.87

0.91

0.52

COLLEGE

1.59

0.72

0.07

0.58

-2.17

-0.54

0.43

0.41

LINC

-5.34

-1.91

-0.13

-0.79

-3.15

-0.62

-1.17

-0.89

MARRY

3.45

1.71

0.12

1.01

4.95

1.35

0.64

0.67

WRITE

-0.23

-0.07

0.04

0.23

0.75

0.13

-2.17

-1.45

LRHSIZE

-0.54

-0.20

0.07

0.45

2.86

0.58

-0.22

-0.17

R2

0.195

0.116

0.148

0.149

F(l0.64)

1.555

0.836

1.113

1.125

Number of observations=75. All variables are defined in Table 3. Descriptive statistics at the
bottom of the table show the goodness of fit.

Total Weight
0.36

0.41

-0.25

-1.06

0.70

-0.25

-1.76

Recycled
More
(65.3%)

-2.18

0.07

-0.26

-2.25

Composted
More
(30.6%)

1.92

0.66

-0.12

1.26

(17.3%)

Demanded
Less Package

HOUSEHOLDS INDICATING:

-5.90

-0.80

-0.35

-5.10

Other
(10.7%)

This table shows weights and volumes per person. Households were allowed to indicate more than one method of
reduction, in
response to the question: "Since the sticker program was implementedon July 1, 1992, which of the following means have
you
used to reduce the amount of garbage you have collected each week."

(Pounds)

-0.95

0.58

Change in Recycling Weight

(Pounds)

-0.27

Change in Garbage Volume
(Cans)

(25.3%)

(100%)
-0.05

Reduce

-1.53

Did Not

All
Households

Change in Garbage Weight
(Pounds)

Change in

6

Change In Per-CapitaGarbage and Recycling (or households That Indicated Each Method of Reduction'

TABLE

92.46
72.71

1.32
-0.81

1.82

-1.57
1.25
1.24

-0.07
0.12
1.43

-1.62
-0.44

0.42

-0.37
0.24
1.12

-0.39
-0.94
0,37
0.89
-0.02
0.05
0.70
-0.17
-0.09
96.80
74.14

DISP

PET

OWN

WORK

INFANT

CHILD

WHITE

RETIRE

MARRY

COLLEGE

INC

HHSIZE

-2[L(0)-L)]

-2(L(c)-L($)3

0.23

-0.08

0.60

-0.23

0.11

0.48

0.29

-0.52

-0.38

0.78

-0.14

1.02

-0.76

1.25

-0.55

0.30

0.68

0.98

-1.23

-1.39

1.28

-0.77

-2.10

0.01

-1.54

t-stat

60.33

69.17

0.11

-0.01

0,42

-0.50

0.17

0.66

0.30

-0.46

-0.00

-0.16

0.12

-0.03

0.41

-2.49

Coefficient

0.45

-0.15

0.73

-1.04

0.41

0.67

1.00

-0.90

-0.01

-0.24

0.64

.0.06

1.12

-1.86

t-stat

LESSPACK

31.26

50.92

0.42

0.68

-1.48

-0.80

1.24

-1.35

-1.01

-0.00

-0,18

0.84

-2.66

0.38

-3.94

Coefficient

OTHER

1.09

1.86

-1.18

-1.00

1.91

-1.04

-1.43

-0.01

-0.13

1.80

-1.84

0.74

-1.84

t-stat

Number of observations =75. All variables are defined in terms of households, not in terms of individuals as in Table 3. Descriptive
statistics at the bottom of the table show the goodness of fit.

-1.77

1.31

-0.97

0.00

-1.54

NEWS

-1.04

-1.00

Coefficient

CONSTANT

t-stat

Coefficient

COMPOST

Variable Name

RECYCLE MORE

Estimation Results for Probit Choice Model

TABLE 7

TABLE 8

Further Estimation Results for Probit Choice Model
DUMP!

DUMP2b

Variable

Coefficient

t-stat

Coefficient

t-stat

CONSTANT

-7.27

-1.18

-3.79

-1.30

NEWS

0.96

1.12

0.67

1.00

PET

1.01

1.83

0.68

1.93

DISP

-2.23

-1.57

-1.46

-1.53

-1.03

-0.94

OWN

SIZE

0.04

0.09

-0.59

-1.28

CHILD

-0.16

-0.26

0.61

1.16

RETIRE

1.03

1.36

0.67

0.62

MARRY

-1.62

-1.41

-1.59

-1.93

WORK

-0.18

-0.36

0.29

0.62

WHITE

1.59

0.32

1.79

0.69

0.20

0.67

0.24

1.31

COLLEGE

INC

0.54

-2[L(0)-L(ft)]

31.23

46.53

-2[L(c)-L(J3)]

19.69

32.22

1.63

Number of observatjons=75. All variables are defined in terms of households, not in terms of
individuals as defined in Table 3. Descriptive statistics at the bottom of the table show the
goodness of fit.
'The household indicated it used bother" methods to reduce gaibage, and the household set no
garbage out for collection following the implementation of volume-based pricing.
bThe household may or may not indicate that other" methods were used, but the household set
no garbage out for collection following implementation.

TABLE 9

A Simple Comparison of Benefits and Costs per Person per Year
Administrative and Enforcement Cost?
Benefits

5%

10%

15%

No Dumping

$3.14

$1.32

$2.64

$3.96

DUMPP

$2.19

$1.38

$2.76

$4.14

DIJMP2'

$1.74

$1.41

$2.82

$4.23

No Dumping

$2.49

$1.36

$2.72

$4.08

DIJMP1b

$2.33

$1.37

$2.74

$4.11

DUMP?

$1.90

$1.40

$2.80

$4.20

Assumption

1 Bag Minimum

As a percentage of the price of the garbage sticker.
bWe include the missing garbage of households that indicated it used othert methods to reduce
garbage and set no garbage out for collection following the implementation of unit-pricing.
cWe include the missing garbage of households that may or may not have indicated that "other
methods were used, but set no garbage out for collection following implementation.

Figure IA
Marginal Benefit (MB) and Social Marginal Cost (SMC)
of Garbage Collection and Disposal

SMC

Number of Bags

Figure 16
Benefit and Cost of Unit-Pricing in Charlottesville

$0.80

____SMC
4

'Nj
Number of Bags

References
Journal of
Baugnol, William J., "On Recycling as a Moot Environmental Issue,"
Environmental Economics and Manazement 4(19Th: 83-87.
Blume, Daniel R., "Under What Conditions Should Cities Adopt Volume-Based Pricing for
Residential Solid Waste Collectiont rnimeo, The Office of Management and Budget, Office
of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Natural Resources Branch (May 1991).
Cargo, Douglas B., SpUd Wastes: Factors Influencin! Generations Rates, Chicago: The
University of Chicago (1978).

Efaw, Fritz and Lanen, William N., "Impact of User Charges on Management of Household
Solid Waste," Cincinnata Municipal Environmental Research Lab, prepared by Mathtech,
Inc., Princeton, N.J. (August 1979).

Fullerton, Don and Kinnaman, Thomas, "Garbage, Recycling, and Illicit Burning or
Dumping," mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University (July 1993).

Hong, Seonghoon, Adams, Richard M. and Love, H. Alan, "An Economic Analysis of
Household Recycling of Solid Wastes: The Case of Portland, Oregon," Journal of
Environmental Economics and Mana2ement 25 (September 1993): 136-46.
Jenkins, Robin, "Municipal Demand for Solid Waste Disposal Services: The Impact of User

Fees," mimeo, University of Maryland (1991).
Kernper, Peter and Quigley, John M., The Economics of Refuse Collection, Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger Publishing Co. (1976).

McFarland, I. M., et. aL, "Comprehensive Studies of Solid Waste Management," Report for
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Berkeley: The University of California (May
1972).

Moths Glenn E. and Byrd, Denise, "The Effects of Weight or Volume-Based Pricing on
Solid Waste Management," prepared for the U.S. EPA (January 1990).
Oskamp, Stuart, Harrington, Mania J., Edwards, Todd C., SherWOOd, DebOrah L., Okuda,
Shawn M., and Swanson, Deborah C., "Factors Influencing Household Recycling Behavior,"
Environment and Behavior 23 (July 1991): 494-519.

Petrovic, William M., and Jaffee, Bruce L., "Measuring the Generation and Collection of
Solid Waste in Cities," Urban Affairs Ouarterly 14 (December 1978): 229-44.
Rathje, William L. and Thompson, Barry, "The Milwaukee Gaztage Project," Report for the
Solid Waste Council of the Paper Industry, Prepared by I.e Projet du Garbage, University of
Arizona, Tucson (March 1981).

Repetto, Robert, Dower, Roger C., Jenkins, Robin, and Geoghegan, Jacqueline, Green Fees:
How a Ta Shift Can Work for the Environment and the Economy, Washington DC: World
Resource Institute (1992).
Reschovsky, James D. and Stone, Sarah E., "Market Incentives to Encourage Household
Waste Recycling: Paying for What you Throw Away," Journal of Policy Analysis and
Mana2ement 13, No. I (Winter 1994): 120-139.

Richardson, Robert A. and Havlicek, Joseph, Jr., "An Analysis of Seasonal Household
Waste Generation," Southern Journal of Aericultural Economics (December 1974): 143-155.
Richardson, Robert A., and Havlicek, Joseph, Jr., "Economic Analysis of the Composition
of Household Solid Wastes," Journal of Environmental Economics and Manaeement 5
(1978): 103-111.
Seattle Solid Waste Utility, Garba2e by the Pound: Pilot Project Summaty, Draft report
completed for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1991).

Skumatz, Lisa and Breckinridge, Cabell, "Variable Rates In Solid Waste," in Handbook for
Solid Waste Officials. Volume 2, EPA 530-SW-90-084B, Washington DC (June 1990).

Steuteville, Robert and Goldstein, Non, "State of Garbage in America, 1993 Nationwide
Survey," Biocycle 34, No. 5 (May 1993): 42-50.
Stevens, Barbara, "Pricing Schemes for Refuse Collection Services: The Impact on Refuse
Generation," Research Paper #154, New York: Graduate School of Business, Columbia
University (1977).

U. S. Congressional Budget Office, Federal Ontions For Reducin2 Waste Disnosal, Congress
of the United States, Washington DC (October 1991).
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Charging Households for Waste Collection and
Disoosals, EPA 530-SW-90-047, Washington DC (September 1990).

Wertz, Kenneth L., "Economic Factors Influencing Households' Production of Refuse,"
Journal of Environmental Economics and Manapement 2 (1976): 263-272.

