NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEVELOPMENTS IN COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING IN CONSTRUCTION
IN THE 1980s AND 1990s

Steven 0. Allen

Working Paper No. 4674

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1994

Research support was provided by North Carolina State University. I am especially indebted
to Barry Hirsch and David Macpherson for providing CPS estimates for 1983-1992. Herbert
Northrup graciously provided access to his forthcoming work, along with helpful suggestions.
I received helpful comments on earlier drafts from Quinn Mills, Bob Georgine, Larry Cohen,
and William Wakefield. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4674
March 1994
DEVELOPMENTS IN COLLECTIVE
BARGA]NING IN CONSflUC'FION
IN THE 1980s AND 1990s

ABSTRACT

ills paper summarizes important developments in collective bargaining in the
construction industry in the 1980s and 1990s. Workers in the industry have experienced high
unemployment and a 17 percent drop in real wages. Union density has declined from 33 percent
in 1981 to 22 percent in 1992, despite a sizable drop in the union-nonunion differential in wages

and a tremendous reduction in the number of strikes. The main reasons for the decline in union

strength are the adoption of strategies by contractors and owners to control labor costs and

changes in the interpretation of labor laws that have given contractors more flexibility in
determining their collective bargaining status.

Steven G. Allen
Departments of Economics and Business Management
Box 7229
North Carolina State University
Raleigh. NC 27695-7229
and NBER

Firms in the construction industry build and renovate structures. The
industry has four major sectorsi residential, commercial (mostly retail and
office space), industrial, and heavy and

highway.

Most Construction is done

by independent contractors who must continuously compete for new projects.
Some

are

general contractors who bid for an entire project. Some

contractors

general
hire all employees directly, but the more common practice is to

subcontract most of the work to specialty trade contractors. This means that
the mix of firms and employees working on a project is constantly changing
from the initial stage of ground—clearing until the final touch—up of the
interior.

work has a number of unique characteristics that are
reflected in its industrial and work organization. Construction jobs on
Construction

particular

exacerbated

outside,

site are of relatively short

a

duration. .Job instability is

by technological and financial forces. Host of the work is done

so work schedules are often interrupted by the weather. A large

share of construction projects is financed with borrowed money, making the
industry extremely sensitive to interest rates and

credit

availability.

Construction work calls for a wide range of skills. Some

tasks

done by

laborers require absolutely no training or previous work experience, whereas

of the work done by electricians requires years of training. Because
most jobs are short term, employers have no incentives to provide training
unless the costs can be shifted to another party. Most construction skills
much

also

are marketable outside

the industry.

I.

INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENTS

Value added from the construction industry directly accounted for S
percent of the nation's output and employment throughout the l980s. The value
of construction projects put in place accounts for 9 percent of national
output. This larger figure reflects the fact that output and employment in
many other industries —— most notably lumber, cement, stone products, metal

2

products, and machinery —— is

The industry has gone

Inflation

soared

directly used as an input in construction.

through

to double—digit

a bust—boom—bust cycle since 1979.

levels in that year, partly because of

increased oil prices. Lenders required higher interest rates to offset the

greater losS in purchasing power. The
to 13 percent in 1979

prime

rate rose from 9 percent in 1978

and 15 percent in 1980. To reduce inflation, the

Reserve Board pushed interest rates up even further. The prime rate
peaked at 19 percent in 1981 and declined only modestly to 15 percent in 1982
(modest because inflation had dropped to 4 percent in that year). Other
Federal

interest

rates, including home mortgages, followed a similar pattern.

consequences of high interest rates for the construction industry
were disastrous. Real QNP in construction dropped by 8.4 percent in 1980,
followed by further declines of 2.0 and 6.2 percent in 1981—82. Employment
fell by 2.6 percent in 1980, 3.7 percent in 1981, and 7.0 percent in 1982.
The

Unemployment for construction workers is always higher than in other sectors
because of time needed to search for new work in between jobs. It increased
from 10.1 percent in 1979 (compared to 5.8 percent for all experienced
workers) to 14.4 percent in 1980 and 20.1 percent in 1982 ——

the

highest rate

in any majQr sector of the economy since World War II.

The industry recovered, along with the rest of the economy, in the next

four years. Output grew by 3.7 percent in 1983 and 9.1 percent in 1984. Host
of the boost in 1984 came from two sectors: residential and commercial. Later
in the 1980s, state and local construction also picked up. Federal
construction stayed level throughout the decade and industrial construction
activity etayed below its 1982 level for most of the decade.

By 1985

construction employment had risen above its 1979 peak and continued growing
through 1989.
Construction activity fell in both 1990 and 1991 and, at the time this

3

was written, output remains below the 1989 level.' Value put in place
declined from an annual rate of $464.4 billion in March 1990 to $394.3 billion
in

and

June

1991. Employment dropped by 1.0 percent in 1990, 9.0 percent in 1991,

1.8 percent in 1992. The unemployment rate for construction workers

jumped upward

in 1991 and 1992 to 15.4 and 17.1 percent.

The biggest decline in construction activity took place in the

commercial sector. This was a consequence of overbuilding that took place in
the l980s, fueled by favorable changes in the tax

treatment

1981 (later reversed by the tax reform bill in 1986) and

of structures in

speculative

lending

by savings—and—loans. Square footage put in place in commercial and
industrial construction combined was lower in 1991 than in any

year

since

19611 almost all of this decline took place in the commercial sector. There
also was a sharp drop in residential construction in 1990 and

1991.

The most notable trend in the composition of the industry is the ricing

share of commercial construction in the 1980g. this sector, which represented
about 10 percent of all activity before the l980s, grew to 17 percent in the

latter part of that decade. Industrial construction has declined in
importance. There also has been a slow but steady drop in the share of public

from 30 percent in the late 1960s to 20 percent for much of the
1980s. Most of this drop comes from construction by state and local
governments. The federal government's direct share tell by one percentage
point in the 1980s. The change in its indirect share is impossible to gauge
because there is no breakdown in the state and local construction series by
whether the projects axe fully or partially funded by the federal government.
construction

What implications do these developments in the construction industry
have for industrial relations? The most significant fact is that despite the
growth in output a1d

'At

employment that took place between 1983 and 1989,

the time of this writing, the Commerce Department has suspended

publication of its real output by industry series since 1989. To document the
industry's situation in the early 1990., I use instead the data on value and
square footage put in place, published on a monthly basis by the Commerce
Department.

4

conditions largely have checked the pressure for wage increases.
Unemployment in the industry never got below 10 percent in the 1980., in
contrast to 1966-69 when it got down to 6 percent. The peak year for
economic

commercial

and industrial construction was 1985, but square footage put

place

year was below the previous peak

that

in 1979 and

comparable to

in

the

level observed at the 1973 peak. This indicate, that even in the healthiest
sector of the industry, there was less pressure on wages than in previous
expansions.
Second, the declining share of public sector construction implies that a
smaller share of construction jobs are being covered by prevailing wage laws.'
These laws still frequently require union wage scales to be paid to all
workers, thereby discouraging nonunion contractors from bidding for this type

of work. With fewer jobs being covered by these laws, the competitiveness of
the open shop increased.

Third, even though increased commercial construction normally would mean
more jobs
union workers, this may not have been the case in the 1980g.

for

Much of the new off ice and retail space was put in place in new suburbs and

almost all of this work was done by the open shop.

II. THE WORKERS

Changes in worker characteristics in the construction industry are
reported in Table 1. Construction workers became
younger, with the average

age declining from 37.0 to 35.7 between 1977—78 and 1989. The trend in the
overall labor force runs in the opposite direction because of the aging of the

baby—boomer.. Construction is

'Prevailing

an

exception because of a large drop—off

in the

wage laws set minimum wage rates that are usually well, above

the federal minimum wage for governmen—fnd activities. The Davie—Eacon
Act sets minimum
wages for construction projects that are federally funded.
Most states also have their own prevailing wage laws in construction, For
discussions of the provisions of these laws and their economic impact, see
Allen (1983) and Thieblot (1986).

S

percentage

of workers 45 and over (from 31.1 to 23.7 percent of the labor

force).
The racial mix of employment is an especially sensitiv, issue in
construction. Even after the passage of the Civil

union

Rights

Act of 1964, many

locals continued to engage in overt discrimination by race. A number of

policies were implemented to deal with thi. issue, including increased

of blacks in apprenticeship programs, regulations setting minimal
ratios for minority employment in publicly funded projects, set—aside programs
for minority contractors, and, of course, litigation.
enrollment

Despite these efforts, there was very little change in the racial

composition of the construction labor force in the 1980s. The percentage of
black employees did not change between 1977—78 and 1989. The union sector of
construction has made very fiodest progress in hiring minorities, but there has

been absolutely no progress in the open—shop. Tabulations from the public use

of the current Population Survey show that the percentage of union
employees who were white dropped modestly from 90.6 to 89.0 percent, whereas
the percentage of nonunion employees who were white stayed at 91 percent in
both periods.'
tapes

Schooling and occupation are signals of the skill level of the
workforce. Schooling levels for workers in the industry rose in the 1980s.
In 1977—78, 35.4 percent of the workers had not completed high school; this
figure had dropped to 24.4 percent in 1989. A smaller share of workers is
employed as managers and laborers, whereas a larger share is employed in
skilled crafts.1 Because of changes in the occupational code used by the

3lronically, underutilization of minorities in union construction
cited as ar argument for repealing prevailing wage laws.

is

usually

'rhe occupational code was changed between the 1971—78 and 1989 CPS. To
make the codes comparable, the 1977—78 data were converted into the more
recent coding scheme using: a Census Bureau concordance mapping three—digit
occupations under the old code to one—digit occupations under the new code.

6

Census Bureau, it is possible to make exact comparisons for a limited set.3
Carpenters dropped from 16,7 to 13.3 percent of the labor force and painters
dropped from 5.6 to 4.0 percent, whereas electricians increased from 4.1 to
5.5 percent of the labor force. More importantly, the combined share in the
traditional skilled occupations categories dropped from 36.8 to 32.6 percent.
Although

a larger share of construction workers were employed in skilled

production jobs, a smaller share was employed in the traditional building

trades. This is indicative of a transformation in the nature of work across
traditional occupational lines. Further evidence in support of such a trend
is the increase in the share of workers in a skilled trade but no specific

occupation

from 0.2 to 2.1 percent.

III. LABOR

INSTITUTIONS IN CONSTRUCTION

Historical background. The birth of today's union movement in the
building trades can be traced to Peter HcGuire's launching of the United
Brotherhood

of Carpenters and Joiners in 1881. Most other international

in the building trades were organized by the end of the 19th century.
Union growth depended on organizing efforts and employer resistance. The
unions

building trades offered workers improved wagss, hours, and working conditions,
often along with benefits in case of illness or death, in return for an
initiation fee, union dues, and loyalty.

Union growth

in

this era hinged not

only

on overcoming employer

resistance, but also on ability to compete with other unions. This was an
especially touchy issue in the building tradse because of the jurisdictional

issues that arose from their craft structure. Disputes over which union had
jurisdiction over which types of construction work were the main reason that

Srhe mismatch rate in the concordance between the 1970 and 1980 codes for
these occupations is 1 percent or less of the count of persons in those
occupations. In terms of occupational shares, thi. amounts to an error rate
that is well below 0.1 psrcdnt of all workers.

7

the American Federation of Labor created its Building and Construction Trade.
Department (BCTD) in 1908.

there are numerous historical account, of the origins of the
building trades union., moat of the focus is on personalities, strategies, and
ideologies within the union movement itself; relatively little is written from
the standpoint of the employer. Most shops were very small and many employers
had been union member, themselves. In area. where most workers in a trade
were organized, employers had little choice but to deal with the union and its
Although

business

agent. Agents were quick to size up the opportunities in a situation

of such asymmetric bargaining power ——

union

racketeering became a serious

problem in a number of cities.' Secondary boycott. wore frequently used when
the building trades needed additional leverage. Segal (1970, p. 53) argues
that the relationship was beneficial in some ways for the employer. The

lobbying support on issues such a. building Codes and
helped limit competition by setting uniform wage rates and

plumbers' union provided
licensing;

it aleo

limiting labor supply. Employer associations gradually wore formed on a craft
basis in most major urban areas and these became bargaining units.
Well before the Wagner Act, the prehire agreement was the principal
instrument to commit contractors to use union labor. Under such an agreement,
a contractor or an association of contractors would agree to hire union
members at given wage rates and work rules over

practice

a specific tine horizon. This

continued to prevail even after passage of the Wagner Act because of

the logistical difficulties of using elections to gauge employee preferences

for union representation in the constEuction industry. Righ turnover

the stable attachment between a group of workers and an individual
contractor that is necessary for an lItRE election; most construction jobs
precludes

would

be over long before the lItRE ever got around to counting the ballot..

Technically speaking, prehire agreements violated the Wagner Act because
recognition was given to the union without the consent of the precise set of

4See Christie <(1956) for an account of union corruption at the turn of
the century.

8

individuals who would be the contractor', actual employees. This issue was
ignored from 1935 to 1947. In 1948, the ULRB carried out a

pilot

program of

construction elections and found, to no one's surprise, that the costs ware

staggering. Eventually prehire agreement. were legally authorized when Title
VII of the Landrum—Griff in Act of 1959 added section 8(f) to the lanA.

The

unions. Almost all, unionized

worker,

in the

industry
represented by one of the 15 national union, in the BaD.' Since the time
of the last IRRA—sponsored survey o industrial relations in the construction
industry by Mills (1980), there have been two mergers within the Building
Trades. On August 16, 1979, the International Union of Wood, Wire and Natal
construction

are

Lathers merged with the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of
America.

On November 10, 1988, the Tile, Marble, Terrazzo, Finishers,

and Granite Cutters International. Union merged with the
Carpenters and Joiqçrs. A former member of the building trades —— the
Shopworkers,

Teamsters —— rejoined the fold in 1987, when the Teamsters reaffiliated with
the AFL—CIO. The building trades are listed in Table 2, along with their
membership

in 1979 and 1989 as reported by the unions to the AFL—CIO.

Excluding the Teamsters, membership in the Building Trade. unions
dropped by 320,000 in the 1980s, a 9.9 percent decline. In absolute terms,
the unions suffering the largest drop. in membership were the

worker.

electrical

the laborers (69,000). (Many
unions took place in manufacturing.) In

(81,000), the boilermakers (54,000) and

of the losses of the first two

proportional

terms, the unions losing the most members were the boilermaker.

(42 percent), bricklayers (21), iron workers (24), painter. (20), and
plasterers (22).
There

are some notable exceptions, to this overall pattern of declining
membership. Two unions actually became larger in the l9BOsi the elevator
'The only other major union that bargains for workers in the industry i.

the United Steelworkers of America, which absorbed the United Mine Workers'
District 50 in a 1973 merger. The union repre.ent. 8,450 construction

workers, most of whom do heavy—and—highway work in Pennsylvania, West

Virginia,

Xsntucky, and New Jersey (Zt!B, April 26, 1990, p. 40). The
worker, from all crafts, which, it claims, leads to greater
efficiency by eliminating jurisdictional di.putes.

contains

union

9

constructors (6,000 increase) and the operating engineer. (17,000). Two very
large unions -— the carpenters and the plumber. — saw their membership
decline only slightly.

Management orcanizatione. Most contractors are

own

labor relations staff. If they join their local

too small to

have their

general or specialty

association, they get representation in contract negotiations and
assistance with the resolution of grievance.. Local contractor association.
also help administer apprenticeship program. and provide services outside the
labor relations arena, such as lobbying, public relations, and legal advice.
There are about 65 national associations that represent general or
specialty contractors.' The most visible associations include the Associated
Builders and Contractors, an open-shop organization of mostly specialty
contractors; the Associated General Contractors, a group that is mostly union;
and the National Association of Rome Builders, the largest organization that
is mostly open-shop. In addition to a.sisting their local chapters, these
national organizations provide public relations, research and lobbying
services.
The interests of the owners of construction projects were first
contractor

represented in 1969 with the formation of the Construction Users •

Pnti—

Inflation Roundtable, consisting of 200 of the nations leading chief
executive officers. This group mergsd in 1972 into the Business Roundtable, a
broader organization that maintains a Construction Coat Effectiveness Task
Force. The Business Roundtable has encouraged any and all steps that it feels
would lower construction costs, including opening up bidding to open—shop
contractors and bargaining to make adjustments in union contracts.
Bargaining structure. The unionized portion of the industry is
concentrated in the commercial, industrial, and heavy and

highway sectors. In

most cases, especially in commercial construction, bargaining takes place at
the local level between an association of contractors and

either

a local union

'The January/February 1991 issue of Construction Review, published by the
Commerce, includes a directory of contractor organizations.

U.S. Department of

10

or a district council of locals. Usually local negotiations are

single

to a

trade. When contracts for the various crafts. expire at different times

of the year, there is a heightened risk of a strike

other

limited

or lockout relative to

industries. A number of institutional mechanisms have evolved to deal

with this risk, including formal

negotiations involving several trades at once
and contracts that expire at the same time across different trades. In the
late l960s and early. 1970s, the staggered structure of

construction

was blamed for unusually high

bargaining

in

wage settlements. Many

locals

followed a practice called "leapfrogging, where the negotiated settlement in
one trade creates pressure for even larger settlements in
negotiations for
other trades in that area and in nearby areas.

Although local agreements are the most common practice, they are not

universal. Often there is a statewide agreement for heavy and highway
construction. The bargaining unit is national in pipeline and elevator
construction, as well as some industrial construction projects.
Even when wages are negotiated locally, most unions have a national
contract that applies to traveling contractors. These contracts tend to be
short statements that the contractor will use union labor both directly and
through all subcontracts and will pay union scale, either as specified in the
local agreement or, if no such agreement exists, the national agreement. This
arrangement protects the contractor from holdup problems with the local unions
and it relieves the local unions from the risk of being unable to organize the
project. Local unions and contractor associations have been known to
complain, however, if during a strike or lockout an outside contractor
continues working under the national agreement.
A practice that has become increaeingly more common in the building
trades is the project agreement. These agreements usually cover very large
projects such as industrial or power plants construction where work goes on

for many years. Typically these contracts are designed to make union labor
more competitive by including a no—strike pledge, with specific procedures to
settle any disputes, along with concessions on work rules. aetween 1979 and

11.

1981 there were 92 project agreements granted

or pending, covering

83,344

employees. By 1986 there were 265 such agreements covering 117,185

employe•
Human resource Dractices. Must worker, complete an apprenticeship to
enter a union in the building trades? Do unionized employers have to hire
everyone through the hiring hall? Researchers who interview contractor, find
widespread misconceptions about which human resourc. practices actually are

followed,

not to mention their effectivenees.

1. Training. Virtually all skills in the building trades are
marketable across a wide range of employers. In this situation, according to
Becker's model of investment in training, the employer has no economic
incentive to train unless (1) the costs of training can be passed to the

via lower wages and benefits or (2) no trained labor is available in
the market, in which case the training cost is a substitute for a general wage
increase. One unique aspect of apprenticeship programs is that they encourage
investments in training by shifting some of the costs of training from the
worker

worker

percent of journeyman scale,
with increases as they move through the program. Pay tends to be below
to other parties. Apprentices start at 50

productivity in the first year or two of the program, but above productivity
near the end, so that the employer and the trainee share the costs. In
addition, administrative costs are paid for by taxpayers and by all union
workers, who are assessed a fee for each hour worked to fund apprenticeships.
Apprenticeship programs traditionally have produced well—rounded, highly

skilled workers. Most programs run from three to five years and involve a
combination of on—the—job and classroom training. A substantial majority of
the programs in the building trades are affiliated with the unionized sector.
The unions recognize that their members must be very skilled to command the

'National Construction Employers council and the Building and
Construction Trades Department, AFL—CIO (1986), p. 11.
1°The most thorough and recent such study is Bourdon and Levitt (1980).
The discussion below also draws from Mills (1972), Foster (1973), Northrup and
Foster (1975), Marshall
j. (1975), Allen (1984), and Northrup (1984).

12

wages specified in the contract. If the skills of newly hired workers tall
relative to those of experienced workers, the counon wage scale cannot be
maintained.

At the same time, unions recognize that the apprenticeship

program's size must be controlled. The size of today's program determines the
supply of skilled labor in the future. In addition, unions have been wary
that employers will use apprenticeship programs as a cheaper substitute for
experienced labor.
Repeated studies have shown that most union members have not completed
union apprenticeship programs. Apprenticeships are the main source of entry

for bricklayers, plumbers, sheet metal workers, and electricians but not for
carpenters and ironworkers. In the most carefully done quantitative study of
this issue, Marshall fl
(1975) found that the two most important
alternative sources of training were working as laborers or helpers on union
Job sites or informal on—the-job training in the open shop.

j.

Union apprenticeship programs remain the most important source of
training in the industry today, but this does not exempt then from criticism.
Northrup (1984) argues that relatively few Jobs require the multi—faceted

skills

taught in the programs. The Business Roundta.ble (198Th) study of

apprenticeship programs criticized the practice of advancing through the
programs based on time in the program rather than on skills mastered. It also
criticized federal and

state

regulation of apprenticeship programs for setting
standards that often limit government support to union programs.
Traditionally most

workers

in the open shop have received their training

on the job. Business Roundtable (1982c) found that although the open shop had
60 percent of the construction market, it accounted for merely 10 percent of
the expenditures on training.

Associated
Contractors

Apprenticeship programs are administered by the

General Contractors (AQC)

and the Associated Builders and

(ABC) Formal, but these remain relatively small. Large open—shop

contractors such as BE&Ex, Brown & Root, and

Flour Daniel have conducted their

own

task—oriented programs for some time. similar approaches have been
developed by many ABC chapters via the Wheels of Learning program in the

1980s

13

and the current programs being operated by the Merit
Shop Foundation.

2.

Hiring. Most hiring by union contractors is done through informal

mechanisms, such as applications at the gate and contact, made through
friends and relatives • Contracts often call for all hiring to be done through
the

hiring hall, but in practice the hiring ball is most likely to be used

when informal mechanisms fail to yield enough applicants. Hiring halls
usually are capable of providing adequate numbers of workers who meet minimum
competency standards,
union contractors.

thereby reducing recruiting and screening cost, for

The Business Roundtable (1982a) criticised certain aspects of hiring

locals impose restrictions
or use the hiring ball to put pressure on
contractors by limiting the quantity or quality of referrals. The National
procedures in the union sector, arguing that some

on the selection of supervisors

Employers Council and the Building and Construction Trades
Department of the AFL—CIo (1985) addrs.sed the foreman issue in its Market
Recovery Program Handbook, which encouraged locals to give contractors
Construction

responsibility

for decisions involving foremen. Their 1986 study found that

between 1980 and 1985 the share of local agreements that allowed management to
choose foremen increased from 82 to 92 percent1 whereas the share of contracts

no specified ratio of foremen to journeymen rose from 50 to 61 percent.
obviously, employers in the open shop face no restrictions on their
choices of recruiting methods or their selection of employees. Open shop
contractor organizations have experimented with hiring halls, but most hiring
with

is done through informal methods in smaller firms and through state—of—the—art
screening methods in the largest ones.
3.

principle

Work organisation. Work at union jobsites is organised around the
of craft jurisdiction. Under this work system, each task is

allocated to one of the building trades, in effect giving that trade property

rights over a range of work assignments. The only benefit to employers from
this

system is that as long as the local maintains its skill and training

standards for membership, it provide, some protection against shoddy

14

workmanship,

This

e. g., if a worker falsely claims he has a particular skill.

benefit is rather meager relative to the costs. Jurisdictional rules

frequently dictate that skilled journeymen do work that could have been done
by semiskilled and unskilled, labor. In addition, they restrict flexibility in

close substitutes.
contracts sometimes specify minimum crew sizes, forbid supervisors

work assignments when two different trades are

Union

to

pick up tools, or

restrict the ratios of helpers and apprentices to

Journeymen. When enforced, these provisions can increase construction costs
considerably. The case study evidence on this issue indicates that these
provisions often are

costs only on small

ignored

and, even when they are

enforced,

tend to

affect

projects. The Business Roundtable (l982a) estimated that

crew size restriction, raise costs by $42 million par year. Econometric
evidence in Allen (1986c) shows that restrictions on substitution between
different types of labor increase costs by 2 percent.

In a few areas, the building trades have restricted management from

using the best available technology. In the early l970s, only 12 percent of
union contracts

equipment.

contained limits

on prefabricated, components or on tools and

However, over 70 percent of the contracts with plumbers and sheet—

metal workers had restrictions on prefabrication and over 80 percent of
painters' contracts had limits on tools

and equipment at that time. Ten

years

later, Business Roundtable (1982a) reported, "While a minor percentage of all
contracts sampled contain prefabrication limits, these restrictive clauses

were found in one-half of the pipefitter/plumber contracts." They estimated
that across all types of construction these restrictions raised costs by $30
million.

In the open shop contractors have complete flexibility in assigning
tasks to workers and selecting materials, tools, and
jurisdictions, workers are trained to learn skills

equipment.

Without craft

that cut aàross a number

of

trades. Without ratios specified in the contract, the employer is free to use
any mix

of

laborers, semiskilled, and skilled labor. This is always cited as

the main competitive advantage of the open shop.

-.

15
XV.

UNION DENSITY

The Current Population Survey has contained a question about union
membership in the Øay survey in 1970 and from 1973 to 1981; a question on
contract coverage was added in 1978. Since 1983, these question, have been
part of the monthly survey. The same union membership question appeared in
1966 in the Survey of Economic Opportunity. This information was used to

calculate an internally consistent series in Table 3 of the percentage of all
employees in the construction industry who are union members or who are
covered by collective bargaining agreements.
Between 1970 and 1992, union density (the percentage of employees who
report

themselves

almost by

to be union members)

in the construction industry has fallen

half. In 1970, 42 percent of the employees in the construction

industry were union members; in 1992, only 22 percent were. The downward
trend in union density has been steady ——

half

throughout

the 1970. and

of the 1980s, it dropped by an average of one percentage point

Particularly large declines were observed between May

the first
per

year.

1977 and 1978 (4

percent) and May 1981 and 1983 (5 percent). Thi. decline •topped after 1987;
since then, union density has stayed at 22 percent. The pattern for coverage
by collective bargaining agreements is quite similar.
Union density follows a concave pattern with respect to age,
growing rapidly for workers in their 20s and

early

30. but then peaking out

and remaining flat for workers in their 40. and 50.. This pattern reflects
the fact that it takes three to four years to become

become

sufficiently

trained to

a union journeyman. Also, many young workers spend some time working

in construction, especially as unskilled workers on open shop residential
projects, but do not make a career of it.
Union density dropped across all age groups during the 1980s,• with the
largest declines taking place among younger and middle—aged workers. There
are two aspect. to this decline that are important. to understand. (1) union
membership still increases with age, but at a much slower rate, and (2) union

16
membership

rates actually declined for most cohorts. Figure 1 breaks down the

difference

between union density in 1977—78 and 1989 for private wage and

salary workers in blue—collar occupations into two componentet (1) a within—•

cohort change, indicated by the distance between the line labelled l989

actual and that labelled l989, no change within cohortr and tl)

an across—

cohort change, indicated by. the spread between the latter line and that
labelled "1977—78.

consider the drop in union density for workar aged 35 to 39 frost 49

percent in 1977—78 to 26 percent in 1989. In 1977—78, 36 percent of all
workers aged 25 to 29 were union members, so the within—cohort drop in union

density is 10 percentage points. If the 1977—78 patterns for union density by
age had held up, however, the union density rate for this age group would have

been 49 percent. Thus, the failure of union density to increase with age for
this cohort accounts for another 13 point, of the decline.

Figure 1 shows that for workers between 40 and 54 in 1989, the within—
cohort change accounted for most of the drop in unionization, whereas for

workers under 40 the across—cohort effects dominated. This indicates that the
decline in union density in the building trades is being driven by two very

different forces. Thu odds that middle—aged and older construction workers

would

be union members are lower than they were for the •ame

cohort 10 to 15

years ago. Although it is possible that this results from mobility of workers
from other industries who were never organized, the more plausible explanation
is that many of the nonunion workers who are 40 and over are former union

members. The other force at work is that workers in the new generation of
construction workers have not been organized. Because many of them are now in
their 30s, it is unlikely that they will ever get the type of training that

will qualify them for union journeyman status. The building trades have
probably lost this generation

of workers.

Other oersonal characteristics. The decline in union density was
inversely related to education level.. Among worker. who did not complete
high school, union density dropped by 20 percentage point., in contrast to a

17
15 percentage point drop for
percentage point

for

thos,

drop among those

with high school degrees and an

with some

whites and nonwhites were more

or

college.

less the same

11

Union membership rate.

in both

1977—78 and 1989.

A higher percentage of men belongs to unions than women in both years, but the
proportional declipe in union density was about the

same for men (38

percent)

and women (36 percent).

Occupation. In both the 1977—78 and 1989 samples, union density is much

higher

for skilled occupations than for handlers, helpers, and laborers.

There are six craft occupations that (a) were defined in nearly the same way
in

both the 1977—78

both

and 1989 CPS and

(b) had sample cites of 100 or mars in

years. The drop in union density i. much larger for painters (30 to 11

percent) and roofers (36 to 11) than for brickmasons and stonemasons (44

to

32), carpenters (31 to 17), electricians (58 to 40), and plumbers and

pipefitters
the

pattern in Table 1 where
roofers unions were

(56 to 41). This is consistent with the

declines in membership of the painters and

proportionally larger than the decline across all building trades. Painting
and roofing are generally considered to be less skill—intensive than masonry,

carpentry, plumbing and electrical work. Unless there are offsetting wage
differentials, this would create a greater incentive for building owners and
contractors to find nonunion substitutes in the less skilled occupations.

V.

EXPLAINING THE DECLINE IN UNION DENSITY

are most likely to sign and abide by collective bargaining
agreements when three conditions hold. First, unions must have a near—
monopoly on the supply of skilled labor, which is most likely in areas with
active union apprenticeship programs. second, the union must have enough
solidarity to make strike threats credible and costly to employers. Because
of workers' ability to work for a wide range of employers, including those
outside construction, and the high costs of delays to builders, union strike
Employers

18

are quite powerful in a tight labor market. Third, union labor must
be batter trained and more experienced so that the employer gets higher
productivity in return for higher wages. It this last condition does not
hold, the employer has an incentive to renege on his relationship with the
threats

union.

The discussion here will examine four plausible explanations for the
decline in union density; (1) wages and benefits have increased more for union
than for nonunion workers; (2) the productivity advantage of union labor has
eroded; (3) contractors and owners have adopted strategies to control labor
costs; and (4) the labor laws have been re—interpreted to give contractors
more flexibility in choosing their collective bargaining status.3'
Wages and benefits. Table 4 updates the estimates of union—nonunion
wage gaps from Allen (1988a). The first column reports the estimates from
that study for 1967, 1970, and May 1973—1983. The second column reports
estimates

for May 1973—1981 and the full year 1983—1986 from Linneman

(1990). The third column reports estimates for the full—year 1983—1992 that
were generously provided by Professor Barry Hirsch of Florida State
university, using a data base he developed with his colleague Professor David
Macpherson. Even though the results are all obtained from the same data set
(CPS), my estimates are somewhat larger than the others. Thi. happens because
of modest differences in control variables and model specification.'1
The union—nonunion wage gap widened by a considerable margin in the late
1960s and the early l970a. In 1967, union wages were 38 percent
higher than

"Another possible factor, changes in worker and employer characteristics,
was examined
in Allen (1988a) and found to be unimportant. This conclusion
did not change when I updated the analysis.

"tinneman
al. (1990) estimated a model across workers from all
industries with different intercepts for union and nonunion workers in
construction, whereas I estimate a model over workers in the construction
industry only. In effect I have complete interactions between industry and
all coefficients in the model, whereas they have an industry—intercept
interaction. The other difference is that include controls for overtime hours

and a set of regional labor market characteristics in their model, whereas I
do not. Hirsch restricts his sample to construction workers, but uses a
different set of control variables. Us includes part—time status and veteran
status, but does not include occupation.

19

nonunion wages, whereas by 1973 the gap had widened to 54 percent. Such &

tremendous

change in relative cost. coupled with the weak attachment. between

workers and individual employers

in the industry surely helped precipitate the
decline in union density in the 197Cc. In 1979 both sets of estimates drop by
over ten percentage points, but they increase in the early 1980. so that by
1983 both are higher than in 1979 although well below what they were in 1973—
78.

The Hirsch resãlts show that the union—nonunion wage differential dropped

by nine percentage points from 1986 to 1992.

differential between union and nonunion labor is much lower
today than it was in the middle of the 1970. and is comparable to the wage
differential in 1967. If wage differential. were the only factor driving the
decline in union density, then the unionized sector would have started
The wage

recovering market chars in the 1980e instead of continuing to drop. Although
a widening wage gap was no doubt a key
union density, we must look elsewhere

continued

factor behind the initial decline in
for an explanation of why that decline

in the 1980s.

There are no data on benefit costs in construction broken down by union

status. The most expensive voluntary benefits are

retirement

health insurance and

plans. The CPS supplements on benefit coverage for May

1979 and

1988 were used to calculate the proportion of union and nonunion workers in
construction who work for employers that provide these benefits. There has
been no change in pension coverage or participation rates for either union or

nonunion contractors. Pensions are provided by the employer of 90 percent of
union members

and 33 percent of nonunion workers in both years. Health

insurance- coverage is down from 89 to 80 percent among

union

members. The

has gone up from
one—half to two-third..
The critical element that is missing from these data
is the generosity of the pension and health plans. A large increase in
pension and health care costs per covered worker in union contracts relative
to the open shop would offset the narrowing of the gap in health care
chars of nonunion contractots that provide health insurance

coverage.

-.

20

Ptoductiyity, The competitiveness of union labor depends not just on
the wage differential with the open shop, but also on the productivity

differential. In an economy—wide study using data from the Census of
Construction Industries, I found in Allen (1984) that in 1972 labor
productivity is much higher in the unionized sector of the industry than in
the open shop and that the estimated productivity difference between union and

nonunion labor is about the same as the wage difference. This finding was
further supported in my studies (Allen (l986a, 1986b, 1988b)) of

coumiercial

office buildings, private hbspitals, and retail space. However, in public
construction, my studies of schools and

hospitals

(Allen (l986a, 1986b)) find

no productivity difference between union and nonunion contractors, which I
attribute to prevailing wage laws that shelter union contractors from the

shop and insensitivity of the owners of

open

these structures to their cost.

All of these studies use data that were collected between 1973 and 1917.
I reexamined the situation with economy—wide data for 1982 in Allen (1988a)
and found evidence that the union productivity advantage had eroded. The best
available

data set for revisiting the question

of how union and nonunion

compare is the 1981 Census of Construction Industries. In
previous studies using the 1971 and 1982 Census data, I was able to construct
productivity

a

data set in which each state would have three observations; one for each
two-digit industry. The Current Population Survey no longer identifies two—
digit industry for construction employees and this information is often
suppressed in smaller states in the Census reports. As a consequence, the
sample used here consists of 51 observations, one for each state.

To

facilitate compariong between 1982 and 1987, 1 re—estimated the model for
that

year using the same aggregation scheme.

The point estimate, of the union productivity advantage in both 1982 and
1987 are implausibly large —— 101 percent in 1982 and 76 percent in 1987,
both figures are well above the range of the union—nonunion differential in
wages.

This indicates that the use of data aggregated by state is somehow

producing a serious upward bias in the union coefficient. If this bias is the

21

same in the 1987 and the aggregated 1982 data, the change in the union

coefficient

will still indicate the direction in which the union—nonunion

productivity difference is moving, admittedly a big if. The productivity

union over nonunion contractors has
63 to 139 percent in 1982 and one of

advantage of

a 95

percent

confidence

52 to 100 percent in 1987.
These results indicate that the odd. of a decrease in the union productivity
advantage are greater than the odds of an increase, but offer little insight
interval of

into the magnitude'of whatever change has taken place.
Management action. Partially in response to the high strike rates and
rapid wage inflation of the late 1960. and early 1970s, the owners of
construction projects and the contractors that they employ have taken a much

more active role in controlling labor costs, steps that often involve
switching from union to open—shop contractors. The Construction Users' Anti—
Inflation Roundtable, which later evolved into the Business Roundtable, was

established as a mechanism to help give large industrial firms better control
over their construction costs.
The Roundtable has done two major studies highlighting problem. in cost

effectiveness in the industry. The 1974 study dealt exclusively with problem.
in

the unionized sector of the construction industry: jurisdictional problems,

hiring halls, scheduled overtime, and

restoration

of the role of management.

The 1983 study was more wide—ranging. Although it dealt with collective

also examined project management issues relevant to union and
open—shop construction, as well as construction technology and government
bargaining, it

regulation.

The Roundtable also has acted in a lobbying capacity to deal with legal
and regulatory issues related to construction costs. Although the Roundtable
has not explicitly called for project owners to switch to the open shop, it
has engaged in a number of activities that increase the likelihood of such
switches. These include sharing information about union activities and
educating managers about strategies to deal with union issues. The impact of
the Roundtable on union density cannot be quantified, but that does not mean

22

is negligible.
Many of the firms that decide to use union labor on a particular
construction project do so to maintain good relations in their own collective
it

bargaining arrangements. The overall declin, in union density in the private
sector has made it loss likely that firms will unilaterally decide to use

offices and plants. This has happened in part
of simple shift—share factors and in part because the firms that still

union labor when they build new
because

have

workforces are less likely to have company policies that
automatically call for union contractors when construction needs arise.
unionized

Labor

laws and their Snterpretatjon. The premise at the time

prehire agreements were legally recognired by Landrum—Grif fin

was

that

that if

employees decided to change their repreBentative or to become open shop, they
would follow the same procedure as in other industries, namely to file a

petition and have an election." This introduced an asymmetry
with which some

employers

were never comfortable.

into

the

law

They were free to enter

into a prehire agreement, but they had to go through an NLRB

election

to get

out of one.

In R.J. Smith Construction Co., 191 NLRB 693 (1971), the Board decided
that either party could unilaterally pull out of a prehire agreement unless

the

union had proven that it represented a majority of a contractor's

employees. The timing of this decision reflects two factors: (1) Republicans
returned to the White House in 1969 and, with a lag, were able to influence
the composition of the NLRB and (2) rising union wage rates and an
unprecedented number of strikes in the late 1960s had created more pressure

for a shift in bargaining power toward employers. This doctrine was amended
in John Deklewa an4 Sons. Inc., 281 NLRB 184 (1987) to prevent unilateral
repudiation during the period when the agreement was

"In writing this section

of

in

effect. However, upon

the paper, I have drawn heavily from Northrup

(1989) and the testimony in U.S. Senate, Coittee on Labor and Human

Resources, construction Industry Labor Law Amendments of 1987, Senate Hearing
100—220 (Washington, D.C.; U.S. Government Printing Of fice, 1987), especially
the prepared statements of Arthur F. Rosenfeld, special assistant to the
solicitor, U.S. Department of Labor, and Robert A. Georgine, president of the
Building and construction Trades Department, AFL-CIO.

23

expiration, contractor. were not obligated to bargain for a new agreement,"
The union, received another serious blow in Peter fletqjt

and

Sons, Inc.,

206 NLRB 562 (1973). Kiewit had an agreement with the

Operating Engineer, for
highway construction in Oklahoma for years. In 1972, they brought in a
subsidiary called South Prairie Construction Company, which •tarted bidding

for the same work in the same state on a nonunion basis. The subsidiary
started getting contract, as Kiewit became increasingly reluctant to submit
bids. The ruling in 1973 held that Kiewit had not violated the NLItA. The
case then went to the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court, which sent the
case back to the NLRB.
The final NLRB decision (231 NLRB 76 (1977))

up two tests to
determine whether the practice of setting up a nonunion subsidiary, now called
"double—breasting," was legally permissible, first, when a contractor ha.
union and nonunion subsidiaries, it mint be determined whether a "single
employer exists. This i. a purely qualitative test that depends on the
interrelation of operations, common management, and centralized control of
labor relations. Second, there is the question of whether the worker, in the
subsidiaries have a sufficient comnunity of interests" to be in the same
bargaining unit. In making this decision, the Board is to consider "the
bargaining history, the financial integration of operations, the differences
in the types of work and skills of employees, the extent of centralisation of
management and supervision, particularly in regard to labor relations, hiring,
discipline, and control of day—to—day operations, and the extent of
set

interchange and contact between groups of employees. (Kiewit 1977)"

Another interpretation of the act that is used in some cases is known as
the "alter ego doctrine." Suppose a company transfers its assets and business
to a nonunion affiliate. Even though the original company has disappeared in
a legal sense, all that essentially has changed i. the name of the firm and,

of course, it, collective bargaining status. It has the

same equipment,

ownership, management, and customers and sometime, the same employees. Under

"See Poltz (1990) for a more detailed discussion of Dekiewa.

24

doctrine, the successor company is the alter ego of the original company
and cannot escape its collective bargaining obligation., regardless of whether
this

there is a coatunity of interest, for the employees.
At the time of Kiewit, the practice of doublebreasting was relatively
rare in the industry. Northrup and Foster (1975) mentioned the appearance of
the practice in a number of areas and predicted that it would become
widespread. Their gift for prophecy I. documented in Northrup'. (1984)
follow—up book. By 1983, 43 of the 50 largest contractors in the United
States

were unionized; of these 43, 22 had doubiebreasted affiliate..

The Smith, Dekiewa, and Kiewit decisions reduced the cost of terminating

a collective bargaining relationship. In their aftermath, a new market
developed under which contractors could buy legal and strategic advice on how
to switch to the open shop.'1 The timing of these decisions coincides exactly

with the beginning of the decline in union density. Except for the rather
modest revisions to the Smith doctrine under Dekiewa, the force of these

decisions has not been diluted in subsequent years. They are clearly

the

part of

explanation of declining union density because (1) they gave employers

mor. flexibility in selecting their union status and (2) even employers who
had no ob:jectionE to unions on either economic Or ideological grounds found

themselves

faced with rising competition from the open shop, no small part of

which came from double—breasted contractors.

Allen (1993) presents econometric

evidence that the impact of the

Kiewit

may be especially crucial. Before this case was finally resolved,
the year-to—year variation in percentage union in the industry could be
explained very well in terms of a single variable — the unit cost difference
between union and nonunion labor. After the Kiewit decision, union density
decision

drops

and, more critically, the correlation between relative unit cost and

union density vanishes.

Despite theseUegal shocks, two other factors should not be overlooked.

'3Yor

Esq.

a good example of such advice, see the appendix by A. Samuel Cook,

in Northrup (1984).

25

The construction industry has gonethrough two very depres.ed periods over the
last 15 years and unemployment has been persistently high. In tighter labor
markets, contractors who broke prehire agreements or went doublebreasted would
have faced damaging strikes. In the 1980. the threat to withhold labor was
not a credible one.
The public image of the building trades is another

factor that certainly

has not helped in their fight against the open-shop. Many baby boomers formed

highly unfavorable image when hardhat, disrupted demonstration, against the
Vietnam War. The reputation of discrimination against blacks and women
a

remains despite data showing that the underutilization problem ii slightly
more severe in the open-shop. A few locals have resorted to violence to try
to intimidate owners, contractor., and project owners. Finally, in New York
city and other areas, the locals remain corrupted by organized crime."
The Building Trade, have pushed repeatedly for labor law reforms to
restore the long—term recognition of prehire agreements and to eliminate
doublebreasting. These bills were approved by the U.S. House of
Representatives in the 99th and 100th Congress but never made it through the
Senate.'7

1980s also saw a number of legislative battles over prevailing wage
laws. Under Senate Bill 1171, introduced in 1983, the dollar threshold for
The

coverage by Davis—Bacon would have been increased from $2,000 to $100,000 and
the definition of prevailing wage would have been changed to greatly reduce
the

odds that it would be set at union scale." This legislation inst the

fate

same

as the bills on doublebreasting and prehire agreement..

There ha. been more prevailing wage action at the state level. Until
'See Northrup (1984, pp. 351—371) for a discussion of union violence and

Ichniow,ki

and Preston (1989) for an examination of union corruption and
racketeering in New York City.
17Hearings were held for H.R. 281 in 1985 and 1987 and

for

S. 492 in 1987.

'For a complete discussion of these amendment., see u.s. congress, Senate
committee on Labor and Human Resource., Davis—Bacon Act Amendments. 1983,
Senate hearing 98—337 (Washington, D.C.i U.S. Govirnment Printing Office,
1983).

26

1979, 42 of the states had their own prevailing wage laws covering public

outside

jurisdiction of Davis—Bacon. Since 1979,
nine states have repealed their prevailing wage laws Alabama, Arizona,
Colorado, Florida, Idaho, Kansas, Louisiana, New Hampshire, and Utah.3'
Construction labor relations got some attention in the 1992 presidential
campaign. In October 1992, President Bush issued two executive order.
transparently designed to woo support from nonunion contractors. One
construction that tell

the

suspended the Davis-Bacon Act in three states that suffered damage from
Hurricane Andrew;

the

other barred contractors who enter into project

agreements with union. from bidding on federal contracts. The lifting

of both

orders was one of President Clinton's first acts of of fice.m

VI •

COLLECTIVE BJUtGAINING OUTCOMES

Wage developments in the industry since 1973 are exhibited in Figure 2.
The percentage increase in average hourly earnings for the entire industry
wavered mostly between 5 and 7 percent through 1962, well below the inflation

rate during that period. After 1982, wage growth was much slower, sticking
between 1 and 3 percent, again somewhat below inflation. Between 1980 and
1992, average hourly earnings increased from $9.92 to $14.05, a 42 percent

increase. At the same time the CPI—U increased by 70 percent, leading to a
drop in real wages by 17 percent.

Benefits accounted for 29 percent of compensation in construction in

1991, costing $5.23 per hour. Legally required benefits cost construction
employers $2.36 an hour, much more than the $1.40 average across all

industries. Legally required benefits cost much more in construction mainly

tFor details, see Thieblot (1966) and Northrup (1989).

r.aU5h lets cotractors in three states hire at below—union rates, lifl
Journal, Oct. 15, 1992, p. A4 (Western edition); Clinton cancels Bush
orders about unions, Wall Street Journal, February 2, 1993, p. Al (Eastern

Street

edition).

21

because

of the greater cost of workers compensation in such a high risk

industry with relatively many small
compensation per

worker

-—

employers.

Between 1980 and

1991, total

including

payroll taxes and benefits —- grew by 58
percent, still below the rate of inflation.

adjustments in collective bargaining agreements covering 1000
workers or more in the construction industry were greater than the growth in
wages for the industry as a whole through 1981, often much greater. In 1974
bargaining agreements called for increases above 10 percent, whereas average
wages grew 6 percent. A similar pattern is observed in 1980—81. Since 1982
it has been a completely different ballgasie. Union wage adjustments have
Wage

tracked very closely with industry—wide wage growth for the last 10 years.tm
These raw data are unadjusted for changes in worker or locational
characteristics. Table 4 showed that the union—nonunion wage gap has declined
substantially in the 1980s, implying larger increases in wages for open—shop

for

than

union workers.

steps have been taken in the 1980s to remove contract
that make union labor noncompetitive. Construction Labor Research

Important

provisions

Council (1992) found that the excess costs associated with constraints in
collective bargaining agreements had been reduced by 40 percent from 1980 to
1992.

The main improvements have come from reducing wage premiums for

overtime and Saturday work and dropping provisions that call for pay when not
working.

Relationships between unionized contractors and the building trades seem
to have improved in the 1980s and 1990s. As Section VII describes in some
detail, there have been a number of cooperative efforts between labor and

'Ths source of this information is U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Statistics, Emvlpvment Cost Indexes and Levels. 1975—91, BLS Bulletin
(Washington, D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office, 1991).

Labor
2389

rhis

information comes from BLS Bulletin 2389 and the October 1992 issue
of Monthly Labor Review.
DThe source of this information is various March issues of
Develonuents.

and Working Conditions, formerly Current Wace

Comoensation

28

management at the national level, including establishment of cøeimjttees and
elimination of burdensome work rules. There is indirect evidence at the local
level in the form of a sharp reduction in work
stoppages. Historically, the
strike rate in construction has been higher than in most other industries.
From 1968 through 1975, construction became much more strike—prone —— 1
percent of estimated working time in construction was lost to strikes in

contrast to 0.2 percent for all industries. Thi, no doubt

ted many

project

owners and builders to seek alternatives in the open shop.

Since that time strikes have become low
States

probability

events in the United

and this is especially true in construction. Strike activity has

fallen along all major dimensions ——

of strikes, worker, involved, days
idle, and percentage of working time lost. The percentage of working time
lost to strikes fell to 0.3 percent between 1976 and 1981. Changes in the
format used by the Labor Department to report strike statistics preclude
precise comparisons for the industry before and after 1982. Through 1983, the
strike rate remained higher, usually much higher, in construction than in all
number

industries. Since 1984 this no longer has been true ——
lower in construction than for the economy as a whole.

the

strike rate is now

Given, the severe

decline in the aggregate strike rate in the 1980s, this is a remarkable

turnaround.

VII. STRATEGIES FOR UNION BEcOVER

To recover market share, unions are following three strategies.'4

their tactics for dealing with the open shop have become much more
competitive. Thomas Owens, director of organizing for the building trades,
has developed a data base to track all major construction project, nationwide.
This lets unions know about work that is to be contracted in their area and
First,

'4some of the following discussion is drawn from "Toning up union
fl, April 26, 1990, pp. 36—40 and Business Roundtabje (1993).

muscles,"

29

provides feedback about progress in competing against the open chop.
Another approach is

of

to charge different wage rates for different types

work. In many parts of the country there has been a longstanding practice
of charging lower rates for residential construction. This has been extended
to more types of work, including asbestos abatement.

Some unions have used a controversial, tactic known as job
targeting.
Under this approach, the union gives a

contractor

a rebate covering part or

all of the difference between union and open—shop rates so the contractor can
land a particular project that otherwise would have gone to ths open shop.
This approach has proven popular in some locals because all members pay into
the fund, thereby spreading the cost of the concession beyond those working at
a particular job site.
In economic terms this practice is equivalent to price discrimination.
It allows a seller with market power (in this case the labor union) to produce
more than it would if a single price were charged to all customers,

making

thereby

both parties better off. Even though price discrimination is a

standard

practice 11r businesses, job targeting has been challenged in court

by the Associated Builders and Contractors, a mostly nonunion trade group, on
the grounds that it
nothing more than a clever reincarnation of the

is

kickback schemes used by corrupt business agents since the turn of the

century. Metzgar (1988) points out that the subsidy "must be offered to
whichever contractor wins the bid, whether union or nonunion; the union cannot

pick and choose a specific contractor." Also those union members who will be

affected by the subsidy must approve the practice. In 1989 the Wage and Hour
Division of the Department of Labor ruled that job targeting violated the

Davis—Bacon Act and cannot be used to obtain federally funded projects. The
ABC has filed an

antitrust

case challenging the legality of job targeting for

private sector work.

When Toyota started to build its plant in Georgetown, Kentucky, in 1986
and refused to sign a project agreement, the unions launched a corporate

campaign, described in Erlich (1968). The BCTD ordered all locals to refuse

30

to work on the site, creating labor shortage in some

crafts.

The Kentucky

Building Trades brought cases guestioning the legality of the tax
that secured the

cities.

plant.

After six

concessions

There were also mass demonstrations in a number

months,

of

Toyota signed a project agreement, recognizing the

of fighting the campaign. The same tactics are being followed to
organize the BMW plant being built in Spartanburg, South Carolina.r
costs

Some locals have "salted" the workforces of open—shop contractors with
union

A recent practice
has been for union members to declare on job applications that they are union
members to either organize the project or disrupt it.

organizers, so that if they are not hired they can file unfair labor practice
charges with the NLR3. The company rune the risk of expensive back—pay
assessments and penalties requiring preferential hiring on future projects if

it does not have defensible hiring procedures and criteria.
second strategy is labor—management cooperation. The unions have
recognized that they need to work with contractors toward the coanon goal of
building back market share. One step toward this was accomplished when the
National construction Employers Council signed an agreement with the BD to
set up a "Market Recovery Program for Union Construction," One objective of
this program was to develop "the collective bargaining program which ... will
The

assist in recapturing and maintaining the work for union construction, a
This involves developing guidelines at the national level for how local
contract provisions should be adjusted to make unions more competitive with
the open—shop. These include the standardization of work conditions across
different trades (especially those involving work scheduling), elimination of
inefficient work practices generated by either unions or management, reduction
of down time, and special agreements for small coonercial and industrial work.
A second objective of the program is to develop local labor—management

Zunions start BMW plant drive," , April 12, 1993, pp. 6—1.
See Northrup (forthcoming) for a thorough discussion of this practice.
37Building and Construction Trades Department, ML—CXO, and National

Construction Employers Council (1984), p. 1.

31

Host

cormaittees.

of

the face—to—f ace interaction between unions and

management traditionally
grievances

get

has taken place in confrontational situations, mainly

and bargaining. A key purpose of the local connittees would be to

the groups together to focus

on common goals. The committees would

monitor the size and growth of the open—shop in their area, identity
inefficient work practices, work to improve the collective bargaining process

itself

(e.g., contract duration, scope of bargaining UnitB), and engage in

public relations activities to win back project owners. The PRIDE program in
St. Louis, which was set up in 1972, has been cited repeatedly as being

successful

in preventing erosion of market

share.

However, there is no

systematic evidence on how these local efforts have worked out.

important step toward co—operation took place in 1987, when the
National Constructors Association and the 8CTD entered into the National
Construction Stabilization Agreement. The agreement established a benchmark
set of provisions to be used in project agreements. These provisions called
for greater flexibility in work scheduling and assignmentsand a no—strike
policy with financial penalties.S
The final strategy for dealing with the open shop challenge is
political. With Democrats controlling the White House and Congress, the odds
Another

that there will

be labor law reforms favorable to the building trades have

Increased spending on infrastructure should lead to a greater share of
jobs going to union members, thanks to prevailing wage laws. The unions
risen.

received

an extra advantage in securing contracts for public sector work when

Supreme Court ruled in 1993 that state and local authorities were free to
enter into union—only project agreements for publicly funded construction?
the

The case involved the $6.1 billion cleanup of Boston Harbor.

construction Industry Group, Labor Set Pact to Stem Job Losses to
Nonunion Crews," Wall Street Journal, February 1B, 1987.
Building and Construction Trades Council of the Metropolitan District v.
Aseocipted Builders and Contractors of Massachusetts/Rhode Island. Inc.. et
iL, 61 (J.S.L.W. 4221 (March 8, 1993}g unions Win Case Before Supreme Court
For Control of Public Building projects," Wall Street Journal, March 9, 1993.

32

Two counties and three

cities

in the San Francisco

bay area passed

prevailing wage laws governing Drivate construction within those
Under these

of

laws, prevailing

rates are

localities.

to be set by the California Department

Industrial Relations. These laws have been challenged in state and federal

in 1991, ruling that they were
interference in the collective bargaining process' under the

courts. A federal judge struck them down
".impermissible

NLRA

and also violated the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.m
According to the Business Roundtable (1993), some local unions have been

using the regulatory process to gain an edge on the open—shop. For instance,
union members can threaten to pack public permit hearings and voice (sometimes
less—than—sincere) environmental concerns that are likely to delay a project
as a tactic to win a union—only project agreement. They also can solicit
inspections of open—shop job sites by OSRA or the state board for craft
licensing. Given the very high rate of unionization among the public sector
workers who administer the regulatory apparatus, it is easy to understand
management's apprehension about these tactics.
Despite these competitive, cooperative, and political efforts, union

density is never likely to return to its 1970 level. The firms that have gone
open—shop or double—breasted are unlikely to return, even under the most

optimistic legislative scenarios, If there is to be a union comeback without
radical revisions in the nation's labor laws, the building trades must
capitalize on their stronget asset —— training. This is especially critical
now, given the lack of success the unions had organizing and training younger
workers in the 1980s. Because of technological change, the demand for skilled
labor is rising throughout the economy. This would give well—trained union
labor a competitive advantage as long as there is no return to the huge wage

increases and high strike rates of the late 1960s and 1970..

The sources of this information are L. Gordon Crovitz stretching the
Are Set Back," Wall Street Journal, June 26, 1991, p. 35 (Eastern edition).

Davis—Bacon,' Barren's, April 15, 1991, p. 14, and Private—Project Wage Laws

33

REFERENCES

Critical

Allen, Steven

C., "Much Ado About Davis—Bacon. A
Review and New
Evidence," Journal of Law and Economics, October 1983, pp. 707—736.

"Unionized Construction Workers Are More Productive, • Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 1964, pp. 251—274.
______ "Unionization and Productivity in Office Building and School
Construction," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 1986, pp.
_______

187—201 (a).

______ "The Effect of Unionism on Productivity in Privately and Publicly
Owned Hospitals and Nursing Homes," Journal of Labor Research, Winter

1986,

pp. 59—68 (b).

_____ "Union

Work Rules and Efficiency in the Building Trades," Journal of
Labor Economics, April 1986, pp. 212—242. (C)
ueclining Unionization in Constructioni The Pacts and the Reasons,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 1988, pp. 343—359 (a).

______ "Further

Evidence on Union Efficiency in Construction," Industrial
Relations, Spring 1988, pp. 232—240 (b).

_____ "Unit

Costs, Legal Shocks, and
mimeographed, April 1993.

Bourdon, clinton C.

and

Levitt, Raymond

Unionization

E.,

in construction,"

Union and Oven—Shot Construction

(Lexington, .Mass.z Heath, 1980)..

Business Roundtable, Coming to Grits With Some Major Problems in the
Construction Industry (New York. Business Roundtable, 1974).

_____ "constraints Imposed by Collective Bargaining. Agreements,"
Construction Industry Cost Effectiveness Project Report C—4, September
1982. (a)
______ "Government Limitations on Training Innovations, • Construction
Industry Cost Effectivenees Project Report D—2, MArch 1982. (b)
Training érobleme in Open Shop Construction," Construction
Industry Cost Effectiveness Project Report D—4, September 1982. (c)

______ More Construction for the Money, Suary Report of the Construction

Industry Cost Effectiveness Project, January 1983.

"The Growing Threat to Competitivenessi Union Pressure Tactics Target
U.S. Construction Owners," January 1993.

______

Christie, Robert a., Empire in Wood

(Ithaca,

N.Y.i Cornell, 1956).

Labor Research Council, "Cost Reducing Modifications to
Construction Collective Bargaining Agreements," August 1992.
Erlich, Mark, "Who Will Build the Future?" Labor Research Review, Fall 1988,
Construction

pp. 1—19.

Foster, Howard C., "The Labor Market in Nonunion Construction," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, July 1973, pp. 1071—1085.
Gif ford, Courtney D., Directory of U.S. Labor Oroanizations, 1990—91 edition

34

(Washington, D.C.; Bureau of NAtional Affairs, 1990).

Hirsch, Barry T., and MacPherson, David A., Union Membership and Coverage
Files from the Current Population Surveys: A Note," Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, April 1993, pp. 574—578.
Ichniowaki, Casey, and Preston, Anne, "The Persistence of organised Crime
New York Cit'j Construction: An Economic Perspective," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, July 1989, pp. 549—565.

Peter D.; Wachter, Michael L.; and Carter,

in

"Evaluating
the Evidence on Union Employment and Wages," Industrial H.,
and Labor
Relations Review, October 1990, pp. 34—53.

Linnoman,

William

Marshall, Ray; Glover, Robert Ii.; and Franklin, William S., Training and Entry
Into Union Construction, U.S. Department of Labor, Manpower
Administration, Manpoier R&D Monograph 39 (Washington: Government
Printing office, 1975).
Metagar, Jack, "Buying the job," Labor Research Review, 7.11 1988, pp. 51—57.
Mills, Daniel Quinn, Industrial Relation, and Nannower in Construction
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1972).
"Construction," in Gerald C. Somers (ed.), Collective Bargaining:
Contemporary American Experience (Madison, Wisc.; Industrial Relations
Research Association: 1980).

National Construction Employers Council and the Building and Construction
Trades Department, AFL-CIO, Market Recovery Proaran Handbook, 1984.

______

Market Recovery Guidebook, 1985.

______

"Construction Industry Collective Bargaining in the 1980's," 1986.

Northrup, Herbert R., Ocen Shop Construction Revisited (Philadelphia:
Wharton School Industrial Research Unit, 1984).
______ "Construction Doublebreasted Operations and Pre-liire Agreements:
Assessing the Issues," Journal of Labor Research, Spring 1989, pp. 215—
238.

"Salting the Contractors' Labor Force: Construction Unions Organizing
Journal of Labor Research, forthcoming.
______ and Foster, Howard 9., Oven Shoo Construction (Philadelphia:
Wharton
with NLRB Assistance,"

School Industrial Research Unit, 1975).

Judith T., "Bargaining Obligations in the Construction Industry: an

Polt:,

Outline of Recent Developeents," Labor Law Journal, September 1990, pp.
649—658.

Segal,

Martin, The
1970).

Rise of the United Association (Cambridge, MA.s.: Harvard,

Thieblot, Jr., Armand 3., Prevailing Wace Legislation! The Davis—Bacon Act.
State "Little Davis—Bacon" Acts, the Walsh—Healey Act, and the
Service Contract Act (Philadelphia: Wharton School Industrial Research

Unit, 1986).

table 1.

Percentage distribution of construction industry employees by age,
gender race, schooling, and occupation

May
1977—78

1989

6.7
16.6
14.4
12.0
19.2
17.8
11.1

5.2
13.8

agfi

Under 20
20—24
25—29
30—34
35—44
45—54
55—64
65 and over
Gender
Male
Female
White
Black
Other

Years of schooling
Under 12
12
13—15
16 or more
Malor occupations
Executive, administrative,
and managerial
Professional specialty
Technicians and related support
Sales
Administrative support
Service and other
Precision production, craft,
and repair
Machine operators, assemblers,
and inspectors
Transportation and material moving
Handlers, equipment cleaners, helpers
and laborers

Selected crafts
Brickmaeons and stonemasons
Carpenters
Drywall installers
Electricians
Painters, construction and maintenance
Plumbers and pipefitters
Roofers

93.0
7.0

90.4
9.6

91.4
6.6
1.9

90.5
6.5
2.9

35.4
43.5
14.7
6.4

24.4
50.5
17.0
8.0

11.6

8.0

1.8
0.7
0.4
6.4
0.8
52.0

2.5
1.1
0.9
55.1

1.7

1.7

9.4
15.1

9.3
14.1

2.5

1.7

2.2
13.3
1.6
5.5
4.0
4.1
1.9

36.6

32.6

16.7
1.5

4.1
5.6

4.6

total, selected crafts

Source: CPS public use tapes.

2.2

18.4
16.7
22.2
14.1
8.4
1.2

-

6.5

0.8

Table 2. Membership of unions in the Duilding and Construction
AFL—CIO

Union

1979

Asbestos workers
Boilermakers

Bricklayers
Carpenters
Electrical workers (IBEW)
Elevator constructors
Engineers, operating
Iron workers
Laborers
Painters
Plasterers
Plumbers
Roofers
Sheet metal workers
Teamsters
Tile, marble, terazzo

Sum, excluding

Teamsters

13
129

tos
619
825
16
313

146
475

160
50

228
28
120

*

7

3235

Trades

Dept.,

Meabership (1000.)
1989
12
75
04
613
744
22

Change
—1

—54
—6

—81

6

330

111

—35

406
128
39
220
23
lOB
1161

—69

U

U

2915

—320

—32

—11
—8
—5
—12

teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousew.en, and Helper, of America affiliated on

November 1, 1987.

**Tile,

Marble, Terrazzo, Finishers, Shopworkers, and Granite Cutter.
Union merged with United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of
America on November 10, 1988.

International

Source: Gifford (1990)

Table 3. Percentage union members and percentage covered by collectIve
bargaining in construction, 1966—1991

Year

1966
1970
1973

1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1983
1964
1985

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992

Percentage
union members

41.4
41.9
39.4
37.2
37.0
35.7
35.7
31.9
31.6
30.8
32.8
27.7
24.8
23.5
23.0
22.0
21.6
22.0
22.5
22.5
22.0

by

Percentage covered
collective bargaining

37.5
36.9
34.8
38.9
30.1
26.4
25.2

24.6
23.7
23.0
23.3
24.0
24.1
23.5

Sources: 1966—1981, Allen (1988); 1983—1992, Hirsch and Macpherson (1993).

Table 4. Estimates of the union—nonunion wage gap, 1967—1992

Year

Allen

1967

37.7

1973
1974 1975
1976
1977

52.8
51.4
54.8
54.8
55.3
55.0
41.5
47.2
38.8

1978
1979
1980
1981

1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992

Wachter,
& Carter

Hirsch

51.2

36.2

44.3
42.5
41.6
40.4

39.6
41.0
38.8
38.3
34.3
31.8
33.4
28.8
30.2
29.0

Sources: Allen (1988a), Table 5, columns 2 and 3; Linneman, Wachter, and Carter
(1990), Table 4, row 2; Barry Hirsch, personal correspondence.

o 1977—78

a 1909, no Change within cohorts

a 1989 actual
60 -

U,

L

na,E
a,

S

40 -

C

0
C

a,
a,
4-,

C
a,
U
C0,

20 -

0
020

40

60

80

Age

Figure 1. Percentage of construction workers in the private sector who are union
members, by age group, May 1977-78 and 1989.

o CPI.—U

o Union: Life of Contract

a Industry

15 -

10 -

5-

01973 1975

ibo

Year

19h5

1go

Figure 2. Percentage change in prices and construction wages, 1973-1991.

