NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A STICKY-PRICE MANIFESTO

Laurence Ball
N. thegory Manldw

Working Paper No. 4677

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambiidge, MA 02138
March 1994

We are grateful to John Leahy, Robert Lucas, Allan Meltzer, David Romer, and Julio
Rotemberg for comments on an earlier draft This paper is pail of NBER's research programs
in Economic Fluctuations and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4677
March 1994

A STICKY-PRICE MANIFESTO

ABSTRACT

Macroeconomists are divided on the best way to explain short-run economic fluctuations.

This paper presents the case for traditional theories based on short-run price stickiness. It

discussesthe fundamental basis for believing in this class of macroeconomic models. It also
discusses recent research on the inicroeconomic foundations of sticky prices.

Laurence Ball

N. Gregoiy Mankiw

Depamnent of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER

Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

Introduction

There are two kinds of macroeconomists. One kind believes that price stickiness plays

a central role in short-mn economic fluctuations. The other kind doesn't.
Those who believe in sticky prices are part of a long tradition in macroeconomics. This

tradition includes prominent twentieth-century economists such as John Maynard Keynes,
Milton Friedman, Franco Modigliani. and James Tobin. and it dates back at least to David

Hume. The assumption of sticky prices is an essential underpinning of the IS-LM model,
which is taught almost universally to undergraduates as the theory of short-run fluctuations.
Traditionalists believe that this model contains a large element of truth.

By contrast, those who deny the importance of sticky prices depart radically from
traditional macroeconomics. These heretics hold disparate views: some argue that fluctuations

arise from technological shocks to competitive economies, while others emphasize nonWairasian phenomena such as increasing returns and sunspot equilibria. Nonetheless, heretics
are united by their rejection of propositions that were considered well-established a generation

or more ago. They believe that we mislead our undergraduates when we teach them models
with sticky prices and monetary non-neutrality.

A macroeconornist faces no greater decision than whether to be a traditionalist or a
heretic. This paper explains why we choose to be traditionalists. We discuss the reasons, both
theoretical and empirical, that we believe in models with sticky prices. And we survey recent
research in this paradigm, highlighting both the new discoveries and the questions that remain

open for future work. Recent research both strengthens the foundations of traditional models

1

and extends the range of phenomena that these models can explain.
Our dictionary defines TMmanifesto" as 'a public declantion of principles or intentions"

This word describes perfectly what we try to do in this paper. Rather than present new
theoretical or empirical results, we attempt to set out what we believe and why we believe it.

Of course, our goal is to persuade others. We realize that what follows will not convert a
confirmed heretic. But we hope that it will persuade readers who have not yet made up their
minds.

Why We Believe What We Believe

We are ted to be traditionalists by three convictions. First, we believe that shifts in

monetary policy often have important effects on real economic activity. Second, based on
microeconornjc evidence, we believe that sluggish price adjustment is the best explanation for

monetary non-neunaiity. Finally, we give weight to the long tradition in macroeconomics in
which monetary non-neutrality and price stickiness have central roles.
Recent research on sticky prices, which we discuss below, has reinforced our belief in

traditional macroeconomics. Yet our most basic traditionalist convictions predate this work.

Indeed, these convictions have been the motivation for us and others to pursue research on
sticky prices. We therefore begin by discussing each of these convictions in turn.

Money Matters

We believe that monetary policy affects real economic activity. The main reason for

our belief is the evidence of history, especially the numerous episodes in which monetary

2

contractions appear to cause recessions.

In his course on monetary economics given over a decade ago, Stanley Fischer posed

the question, "How do we know that money matters? His answer was, "Friedman and
Schwartz, and Paul Volcker." Friedman and Schwartz's 1963 treatise, A Monetary History of

the United States. identified a number of episodes in which the money supply contracted
sharply. Economic activity declined after each of these shocks, and so it is natural to conclude

that money has real effects.
Paul Volcker's disinflation, coming almost two decades after Friedman and Schwartz's

treatise, is another episode of this sort. Monetary policy tightened in 1979 because Voicker
was more committed to the goal of low inflation than was his predecessor, William Miller.
it is easy to explain the deep recession that accompanied the disinflation of the early 1980s if
one believes that monetary policy affects output.

Today we can add "Romer and Romer" to Fischet's list of reasons to believe in
monetary non-neutrality. In important and controversial studies (1989, 1992), Christina Romer

and David Romer have extended the work of Friedman and Schwazt The Romers read
through the minutes of the meetings of the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee and
identified seven dates since World War II when the Fed shifted its policy towards reducing the

rate of inflation. They show that shortly after each of these dates, the economy experienced

a decline in output and employment Indeed, the seven policy tightenings account for most
postwar recessions. The Romers' results suggest not just that money is non-neutral, but that
monetary contractions axe a major source of U.S. business cycles.

If monetary contractions are followed systematically by contractions in the real

3

economy, how can heretics maintain that mone is neutral? A common argument is that
causality runs from output to money, rather than the other way around. We agree that it is
difficult to establish the direction of causation. Indeed, the identification problem leads us to
put little weight on the many smdies that test for monetary non-neutrality through statistical
correlations, such as tests of Granger causality. Changes in monetary policy, whether measured

by the money stock or interest rates, are most often endogenous: policymakers are responding

to past or expected changes in the economy. Thus money-output correlations cannot establish
true causality.

The crucial advantage of the "narrative approach' used by Friedman and Schwartz and
by Romer and Romer is that a careful reading of history can yield evidence about the direction

of causality. In many of the tight-money episodes that these authors identify, it appears that

policy is shifting in ways not determined by events in the real economy. For example, the
Fed's unusually passive stance as the money supply and the economy collapsed in the early

1930s is often attributed to Benjamin Strong's death in October 1928. Similarly, policy
changed in 1979 because William Miller chose to resign in that year and his replacement had

a more fervent distaste for inflation. This historical fact makes it plausible to interpret the
Volcker disinflation as an exogenous event that caused the 1981-82 recession. It seems less

likely that causality ran in the other direction -- that Voicker looked ahead to the upcoming
recession (over which he had no control) and decided, for some reason, that it was a good time

to pursue contractionary policy.

Historical analysis is, of course, intrinsically open to dispute. Different historians can

tell different stories about what happened in a given episode. Yet it is noteworthy that there

4

is no treatise entitled A Technology-shock History of the United States. The leading
interpretation of U.S. macroeconomic history remains monetary.

There is another kind of historical episode that provides evidence of monetary nonneutrality: changes in exchange-rate regimes. One can unambiguously identify episodes of

sharp shifts between fixed and floating exchange rates, such as the breakdown of Bretton
Woods and the entry of various countries into the EMS. If money were neutral, such shifts
in policy towards nominal exchange rates would not affect the behavior of j exchange rates.
In practice, as Mussa (1986) documents, real exchange rates become vastly more volatile when

there is a shift from fixed to floating rates, and vastly less volatile when policy shifts in the
other direction. Eichengreen shows (1993) that these changes are too large and too sudden to
attribute to changes in the economic environment that might have triggered the shifts in policy.

Krugman (1993) summarizes the evidence this way: 1 personally think that the effort to
explain away the apparent real effects of nominal shocks is silly, even if one restricts oneself
to domestic evidence. Once one confronts international evidence, however, it becomes an act
of almost pathological denial."

We have focussed on the effects of money because they provide a clean test for the
existence of nominal imperfections. Nominal variables such as the money stock have no role

in the standard theory of general equilibrium, where the unit of account is indeterminate and

irrelevant The evidence that money matters implies that the economy contains an important
nominal imperfection, and (as we argue below) sticky prices are the most realistic candidate
for such an imperfection.

Once one assumes sticky prices, however, the implications go well beyond the effects

5

of money. In traditional macroeconomics, this assumption generates an upward-sloping
aegaxe supply curve, and thus explains the output effects of any shift in aggregate demand.
Our traditionalist beliefs are reinforced not only by the recession that accompanied the Voicker

disinflation, but also by the boom that accompanied high government spending during the
Viemam War. As we discuss below, sticky prices can also play a central role in explaining
the effects of aggregate-supply shocks, such as large changes in oil prices. Purely real models

can in principle explain the effects of government spending or oil shocks, but they cannot
match the unified theory of real and monetary shocks that follows from sticky prices.

Microeconomic Evidence on Sticky Prices

We believe that price stickiness is the best explanation for monetary non-neutrality. It

is natural to consider the macroeconomic effects of sticky prices, because we observe many

prices that change infrequently. Both of us go to barbers who keep haircut prices fixed for
several years.

There are now many microeconomJc studies of the behavior of prices, and the finding
of substantial stickiness is universal. In an early study, Stephen Cecchetti (1986) examined the

newsstand prices of magazines. He found that the typical magazine allows inflation to erode
its real price by about 25 percent before it raises its nominal price. When inflation is 4percent

per year, the typical magazine changes its price about every six years.
Dennis Carlton (1986) examined a very different data set: the Stigler-Kindahl data on
transactions prices among firms buying from other firms. He concludes: "The degree of price

rigidity in many industries is significant. It is not unusual in some industries for prices to

6

individual buyers to remain unchanged for several years."

The most comprehensive study is the recent one by Alan Blinder (1991), who has
interviewed managers in a large, representative sample of U.S. firms. One of his questions is
how often the firms change their prices. He finds that 37.7 percent of firms change theft prices

once a year, and another 17.4 percent change their prices less than once a year. The median
firm in the economy changes its prices about once a year.

It is of course true that many prices in the economy are quite flexible. Blinder finds
that 10.1 percent of prices are adjusted more than once a month. The most extreme cases are
the prices of cornniodities traded on organized exchanges, which change every few minutes.

We live in a world in which some prices are sticky, and some are flexible. Such a hybrid
world, however, is more Likely to be described accurately by a fixed-price model than by a
flexible-price model. Both empiricai evidence and theories of "real rigiditiesTM suggest that

firms' desired relative prices are not very sensitive to economic fluctuations (Blanchard and

Fischer, 1989, Ch. 10). Since flexible-price firms desire fairly constant relative prices, they
do not adjust their nominal prices substantially when others do not adjust. Thus flexible-price

firms inherit sluggish adjustment from fixed-price firms (Haltiwanger and Waldinan, 1989;
Bonomo, 1992).

In addition, for the purpose of explaining monetary non-neutrality, not all prices are
equally important. According to traditional theory, money has real effects because the price

level does not adjust to equilibrate the supply and demand for money. For this theory, the
most important prices are for those goods bought with money, since the prices of goods bought

with credit do not directly affect the demand for money. Goods bought with money tend to

7

be small retail items, such as newspapers and haircuts. Experience suggests that these are the

goods for which prices are most sticky.

The LonQ Tradition

The view that monetary policy has potent effects is not questioned by the general
population. Policymakers and the press clearly believe that policy can speed up or slow down

real economic activity. The chairman of the Federal Reserve is sometimes called the second
most powerful person in the United States. In 1987 a book made the best sellefs list with the
title, "Secrets of the Temple: How the Federal Reserve Runs the County." The heretical belief

in short-run monetary neutrality has never been taken seriously outside of the ivory tower.

Moreover, it is only recently that academics have taken this view seriously. Heretics

often go under the label "new classical," suggesting that their views harken back to a more
enlightened era before the Keynesian revolution. Yet the term is a misnomer. The classical
economists themselves never suggested that money was neutrai in the short run. Here is what

David Hume said in his 1752 essay "Of Money":

In my opinion, it is only in the interval or intermediate situation, between the
acquisition of money and the rise in prices, that the increasing quantity of gold or silver
is favourable to industry.... The farmer or gardener, finding that their commodities are

taken off, apply themselves with alacrity to the raising of more.... It iseasy to trace the

money in its progress through the whole comxnonweajth where we shall find that it

must first quicken the diligence of every individual, before it increases the price of
labour.

S

A key insight of the classical economists, which today we take for granted, is that money is
neutral in the long run. In claiming that money is also neutral in the short run, today's heretics

take classical economics more seriously than did the classical economists themselves.
In the 1960s, economists engaged in heated debate over the best way to view economic

fluctuations. See, for example, the exchanges in Milton Friedman's Monetary Framework: A

Debate with His Critics (1974). Yet no one in these debates questioned that money affects
output because prices adjust gradually. Indeed, it is ironic that Milton Friedman is sometimes
viewed as the intellectual grandfather of today's heretics. In fact, he was the economist who
argued most forcefully that monetary policy is a frequent cause of economic fluctuations, and

he never doubted that wages and prices adjust gradually. Although traditionalists are often

called "new Keynesians," this label is also a misnomer They could just as easily be called
"new monetarists." (We regret our contributions to this terminological confusion.)
Why does it matter that monetary non-neutrality and price stickiness are part of a long
tradition in economics? Scientific truths, unlike legal decisions, are not determined by appeals

to authority. There was once a long tradition asserting that the sun revolves around the earth,

but that tradition did not stop the heliocentric solar system from becoming the reigning
paradigm.

The answer, we believe; is Occam's razor. Occam's razor is the philosophical premise

that if several competing theories are consistent with the facts, the simplest one is probably
right. The heretics would have us believe that the Fed is an institution with little power. Yet,
somehow, the entire economics profession before 1980, and the world outside the ivory tower
still today, have been misled into thinking the Fed is a powerful force controlling the economy.

9

Occam's razor suggests that such a contorted theory should be viewed with skepticism.

It is noteworthy that Occam's razor is sometimes used implicitly to argue in favor of

heretical theories, such as real business cycle theory. Real business cycle theory takes a
standard model of economic growth--the Ramsey model—and applies it to study economic
fluctuations. Indeed, the primary appeal of early real business cycle theory was its parsimony.

Yet, over time, real business cycle theory has found itself deviating more and more from
standard growth models. Real business cycle theorists now emphasize non-convexities and

home production, for example. As more epicycles are added, the theory loses the virtue of
parsimony.

In our view, Occam's razor dictates that one should not dismiss a long tradition of
thought without compelling reasons. Certainly, it is possible that the tradition Is wrong, and
that the heretical view of monetary neutrality and price flexibility will turn out to be true. But,

just as certainly, Occam' s razor gives the heretics the burden of proof.

Challen&es to Our Basic Convictions

In the previous section we described our most fundamental beliefs about
macroeconomics. We recognize that recent work has challenged some of these beliefs. Here
we evaluate three of the most important challenges.

The Cyclical Behavior of Prices

Traditional macroeconomists believe that shifts in aggregate demand generate
procyclical movements in prices. That is, booms tend to raise prices, and recessions tend to

lower them. Several recent empirical studies call this prediction into question (Kydland and

Prescott, 1990; Cooley and Ohanian, 1991). These studies argue that the price level is
countercyclical in the postwar United States. They reach this conclusion by detrending the

price level and real output using the Hodrick-Prescott filter, and then showing that the
correlation between the detrended series is negative. Economists such as Barro (1993) interpret

these results as evidence against traditional models and in favor of real business cycle models,

in which productivity shocks generate countercyclical price movements.

We are not persuaded by this evidence for two reasons. First, even traditional
macroeconomists believe that supply shocks, such as the oil shocks of the 1970s, are important

in some historical periods and can move prices and output in opposite directions. Second, we
believe that the statistical methodology in recent studies is misleading. This point is made by

Chadha and Prasad (1993), who perform stochastic simulations of a traditional model. The
shocks in the model are shifts in aggregate demand, and they affect output because nominal
prices adjust slowly. Nonetheless, when the simulated data are detrended, the model yields a

negative conelation between the price level and output. Thus recent empirical results are
consistent with traditional models.

To gain some intuition for these issues, consider an economy in which inflation falls

from ten percent per year to zero because of a large, sudden change in monetary policy. In

this economy, the price level rises quickly until the new policy is implemented and then
remains constant. A fitted trend smooths out the kink in the price level, and therefore lies

below the price level at the tune of stabilintioo the detrended price level is highest at this
point. According to traditional theories, the disinflation will temporarily decrease output. Thus

1:1

the detrended price level will appear countercyclicaL ThJs reasoning explains the finding that

the HP-filtered price level rises during recessions that are accompanied by disinflation, such
as the Volcker episode (Barro, 1993).

We are more persuaded by other approaches to examining the comovement of output

and prices. Jo Anna Gray and David Spencer (1990) estimate a structural aggregate supply

equation, carefully controlling for supply shocks and changes in the natural rate of
unemployment. They find that unexpected changes in the price level are positively associated

with output
Ball (I 994b) follows another approach, which imposes less theoretical structure. He

identifies 28 episodes in OECD counthes in which an economy experienced a large, sustained

reduction in inflation. In 27 of the 28 cases, output fell below trend during the disinflation.
Traditional macroeconomics predicts exactly this pattern: the tight monetary policy needed to

reduce inflation reduces output as well.

Other Explanations of Monetary Non-neutrality

We believe that sticky prices provide the most natural explanation of monetary non-

neutrality since so many prices are, in fact, sticky. Other economists, however, accept
monetary non-neutrality but resist the assumption of sticky prices. They have been led to
develop models of non-neutrality with flexible prices.
As a matter of logic, any model of monetary non-neutrality must include some nominal
imperfection. The developers of flexible-price models replace nominal price rigidity with some

other nominal imperfectioD. In our view, these alternative imperfections are less plausible

12

empirically than sticky prices.

The most famous alternative to sticky-price models is the Lucas model (1972, 1973).
In Lucas's framework, the nominal imperfection is informational: agents do not know the price

level and thus cannot distinguish movements rn nominal and relative prices. We have mixed
feelings about this model. As many authors point out, the assumption of an unobservable price
level appears implausible, at least for economies such as the United States where reliable price
data are released monthly. Thus the Lucas model is not a convincing substitute for sticky-price

models. On the other hand, Lucas's broad theme - that imperfections in information help
explain monetary non-neutrality — is appealing. As we discuss below, incomplete information

can explain why finns set prices for fixed intervals of time, as often assumed in traditional
models. Interpreted broadly, Lucas's approach is complenientaiy with theories of monetary
non-neutrality based on sticky prices.

A popular current alternative to sticky-price models for explaining non-neutrality is
models of "liquidity effects" developed by Lucas (1990), Fuerst (1992), and Christiano and
Eichenbaum (1991, 1992). In these models, the key imperfection is that some agents set their
nominal money holdings in advance and cannot adjust immediately if the price level changes.

By itself, such an assumption is reasonable: empirical studies of money demand fmd that
nominal balances adjust slowly towards the optimal level. We do not believe, however, that
the assumption provides a convincing explanation for the effects of money.

Most macroeconomic models with flexible prices dichotomize. Real output and the real
interest rate are determined by the goods market and the supply side of the economy, and the

money market determines only the price level. Thus, under flexible prices, imperfections in

13

the money market are irrelevant to the behavior of output To break this classical dichotomy,

liquidity-effect models introduce a channel through which money directly affects aggregate
spending: a cash-in-advance conswaint that sets consumption equal to real balances. With this

consüaint, slow adjustment of money holdings to a change in prices implies a change in reai
balanôes and hence a change in consumption. In IS-LM terms, a monetary shock influences
output because money enters the IS curve.
We doubt that this channel of monetary transmission is empirically important. In reality,

consumers do not face a period-by-period cash-in-advance constraint: the ratio of money
balances to consumption need not be constant. If a person's real balances are low because of
sticky nominal balances, he can adjust by increasing the velocity of money — by visiting the

bank more often -- rather than reducing his consumption. We suspect that this is the more
relevant margin of adjustment Certainly most empirical researchers on consumption do not

rake seriously the idea that a person's money holdings are an important determinant of his
consumption, given his overall levels of income and wealth.

Credit Policy vs. Monetary Polkv
At this point we admit a nagging doubt about our basic convictions. In our discussion
of monetary non-neutrality, we assumed that monetaiy authorities directly control only nominal

'variables. In reality, the Federal Reserve engages in activities in addition to controlling the

sock of money. As emphasized by Plosser (1991) and Rmer and Rnmer (1993). the Fed
sometimes intervenes in credit markets by changing bank regulations, applying informal
Pressure for reduced lending, or restricting consumer credit There is evidence that such credit

14

actions influence output; for example, the 1980 credit controls appear to have contributed to

the recession of that year.

By itself, such evidence does not cast doubt on traditional models. A restriction in
credit is likely to cause a shift in aggregate demand. Thus, one can explain the effects of credit

actions through traditrnnal channels involving sticky prices.

Yet the existence of these credit actions casts doubt on some of the evidence of
monetary non-neutrality. Credit actions often coincide with shifts in conventional monetary

policy as the Fed uses various approaches to shift aggregate demand. And, by disrupting
financial intermediation, credit actions can reduce aggregate supply as well as aggregate
demand. In our view, the best case for monetary neutrality centers on the supply-side effects
of credit actions. It is logically possible that real disruptions of intermediation account for the

output losses in episodes of "tight policy," giving the illusion of monetary non-neutrality.
We are skeptical that direct credit actions can explain the apparent effects of money in

all episodes. At this point, however, there is little hard evidence on the relative importance
of credit actions and traditional monetary policy, or on whether credit actions mainly affect
aggregate demand or aggregate supply. We hope that future research will fill these gaps.

New Theories of Sticky Prices
Despite the merits of the traditional approach to economic fluctuations, it went through

a rough period during the 1970s and l9SOs. Everyone knows the story of the "new classical"

revolution, in which Robert Lucas and his followers convinced economists that there were

irreparable flaws in traditional macroeconomics. The most compelling argument was that

15

traditional models were incompatible with microeconomics.

Traditional models simply

assumed the crucial feature of nominal rigidity, even though agents could gain by eliminating

it. For example, the models of Fischer (1977) and Taylor (1980) assumed that firms and

workers sign long-term nominal contracts even though both sides would benefit from
indexation. Similarly, Brunner, Cukierman, and Meltzer's (1983) model of persistence in
output fluctuations assumed that prices are fixed in advance, even though firms could raise
profits by adjusting to current shocks. In Lucas's famous quip, traditional models assumed that

people left $500 bills on the sidewalk.

The new classical attack convinced many researchers that they should abandon
traditional macroeconomics and start the field afresh. But die-hard traditionalists such as
ourselves were not convinced. The incompatibility of traditional models Mth optimizing
behavior was a serious problem, but not a fatal one. Over the past decade, many economists

have sought to support this view by developing sticky-price models based on firm
microeconomic foundations. Often this research goes under the label "new Keynesian" Here
we summarize the outcome of this effort. (For more detailed surveys, see Ball, Mankiw, and
Romer [1988], Rotemberg [19871. and Romer [1993]).

Static Models of Nominal Ri2idities

The first step was to build simple, static models to explain nominal rigidity. In our

view, this work is largely complete. The explanation for nominal rigidity rests on three
foundations: imperfect competition, small 'menu" costs of nominal price adjustment, and "real

rigiditiet"

16

In retrospect. it is obvious that imperfect competition must be part of any coherent
theory of price stickiness. Under perfect competition, finns are price takers, not price setters.
Only under imperfect competition can we ask whether a firm will choose to keep its price fixed

or to set a new price in response to a shock.

It is also essential to posit a menu cost or some similar friction in nominal price
adjustment. As discussed below, many kinds of price rigidities arising from efficiency wages,

customer markets, implicit contracts, and so. on can help explain economic fluctuations. But

these are not enough, because they are rigidities in

wages and prices: absent irrational

money illusion, workers and customers care only about real variables. Adjustment to a

monetary shock requires changes in nominal variables but not in real variables, and so real

rigidities do not imply monetary non-neutrality. As a matter of logic, nominal stickiness
requires a cost of nominal adjustment.
Recent research on sticky prices began with an insight of Mankiw (1985) and Akerlof
and Yellen (1985): imperfect competition and menu costs are not only separate ingredients of

a sticky-price model, but are highly complementary. Critics of sticky-price models point out

that menu costs in the real world are small: it costs something for firms to print menus and
replace price tags, but not very much. How then can menu costs generate price rigidity that
in turn generates recessions with large social costs? The answer is that imperfect competition

creates a wedge between the social and private gains from price adjustment If a firm fails to
reduce its nominal price when the money stock falls, its loss of profits may be small — too
small to warrant paying the menu cost. Nonetheless, with imperfect competition, the social
costs of rigidity may be large.

17

More concretely, the social costs of price rigidity are likely to exceed the private costs

because imperfect competition creates aggregate demand externalities. This point is formted

by Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987) and Ball and Rower (1989), who use the Dixit-Stiglitz
model of monopolistic competition. If the money stock falls and prices do not adjust then,
in these models, the Lower real money stock reduces total spending in the economy. When
aggregate spending falls, the demand curve facing each firm shifts inward - a firm sells less

at any given price. Consequently, the firm's profits fall.
In this setting, the private and social gains from price adjustment are very different. If

a single firm adjusts its price, it does not change the position of its demand curve; it simply

moves to a new point on the curve. This adjustment raises profits, but the gain is second
order. In contast, ifjj firms adjusted to the monetary shock, the aggregate price level would
fall, real balances would return to their original level, and each firm's demand curve would

shift back out The gains in profits would be large: a firm gains more from an outward shift
of its demand curve than from a movement along the curve. Unfortunately, an individual firm

does not take this effect into account because, as a small part of the economy, it takes
aggregate spending and hence the position of its demand curve as given. Thus firms may not
bother to make price adjustments that, taken together, would end a recession.

Blanchard and Kiyotaki and Ball and Rower show that, because of aggregate demand

externalities, costly economic fluctuations can in principle arise from arbitarily small menu

costs. In their models, however, this resuit arises only for exteme parameter values — in
particular, both labor demand and labor supply curves must be very fiat. With plausible

amounts of curvature in production and utility functions, small menu costs cannot generate

18

substantial nominal rigidity. The reason is that the private costs of rigidity, although smaller
than the social costs, are large for non-negligible changes in money. Firms and their workers

would gain substantially from adjusting prices and thereby dampening fluctuations in
employment and output, even if other firms' prices are rigid. Thus small menu costs do not
deter them from adjusting.

These results establish the need for the third foundation of sticky-price models: real
rigidities.

There are many plausible theories of why relative prices and real wages are

insensitive to shifts in demand. (Our favorites include efficiency wage models, Okun's (1982)

customer-market theory, and Woglom' s (1982) model of kinked product demand based on
imperfect informatiort) As discussed above, real rigidities alone do not yield nominll rigidity.

But, Ball and Romer (1990) show, real rigidities magnify the nominal rigidities arising from

menu costs. The reason is that real rigidities reduce the private cost of nominal rigidity. If
a firm wishes to maintain a stable relative price, and if other nominal prices are rigid, then the
firm desires at most a small nominal adjustment when the money supply falls. The private cost
of forgoing this small adjustment is likely to be smaller than a modest menu cost.. Thus adding
real rigidities to imperfect competition and menu costs helps to explain why firms fail to make

the price adjustments that would neutralize a monetary shock.

A final feature of recent models is important for answering a common heretical
criticism. The argument is that sticky prices are irrelevant in practice because there is little
correspondence between the sectors of the economy with sticky prices and those that are most
sensitive to monetary shocks. Ahmed (1987), fbr example, demonstrates the lack of correlation

across industries between nominal wage rigidity (measured by the extent of indexation) and

19

employment variability. Car prices may be more flexible than haircut prices because they are

set by bargaining; yet the auto industry is more cyclically sensitive than the haircutting

industry. These facts are, however, consistent with current sticky-price models because

stickiness affects the economy through aggregate demand externalities. The effects of
monetary shocks on aggregate spending, and hence on demand in a given sector, depend on

aggregate nominal rigidity, not rigidity in that sector. It may be the barbers' fault that the
aggregate price level adjusts sluggishly, but this does not help the car salesmen when demand

drops in a recession. Differences in the cycicality of industries arise from other factors; for
example, autos are hit hard by tight money because spending on them is sensitive to interest

rates, whereas spending on haircuts is not

Makin2 the Models Dynamic
In our view, the ideas discussed above add up to a complete theory of nominal rigidities

in a static setting.

Yet real economies are not static. A basic tenet of traditional

macroeconomics is that money is non-neutral 'at the short mn--a period of a few years—but
neutral in the long run. Can dynamic models with costly price adjustment generate the time-

series responses of prices and output to monetary shocks that we observe in actual economies?

In contrast to static theory, there is considerable disagreement among sticky-price researchers

about the right approach to dynamics.
Before discussing the difficulties in this area, we should emphasize a basic insight about

dynamics: the role of staggered price adjustment in generating price-level inertia. Sticky-price

models, like all macro models, face the challenge of expltining

20

the

persistence of output

fluctuation& When Paul Volcker tightened monetary policy in October 1979, why was output

depressed until 1984? The particular problem for sticky-price models is that the period for
which downturns last exceeds the period for which most individual prices are sticky. If most

prices are adjusted within a year, as Blinder finds, why doesn't the long-run of monetary
neutrality arrive within a year? The answer, first presented by Taylor (1979) and Blanchard
(1983), is that different firms adjust prices at different times. With synchronized adjustment,
all firms would adjust fully to a monetary shock as soon as their next adjustment date arrived.
With staggering, however, some group of firms must go first in adjusting prices, which means

accepting a tower relative price. With sUong real rigidity, no firm is willing to accept a large

relative cut. instead, different firms take turns m2king small adjustments, and it takes many

rounds of adjustment for the aggregate price level to adjust fully. Thus, full adjustment to a
monetary shock can take much longer than the period for which each price is fixed.
Beyond this qualitative insight, can we solve dynamic models of price adjustment? The

answer depends on what simplifying assumptions we make. The crucial modelling choice is

between "time-contingent' and "state-contingent" adjustment

Under time-contingent

adjustment, a firm adjusts prices at intervals of a fixed length (which can be chosen optimally

given the cost of adjustment). Under state-contingent adjustment, a finn adjusts whenever the
state

of the economy warrants it usually, it is optimal to follow an "Ss" rule in which the

firm's relative price is adjusted to a base level whenever it hits some bounds.
The behavior of economies with time-contingent adjustment is now well-understood.

Taylor and Blanchard use time-contingent models to formalize the result that staggering

produces inertia More generally, researchers have derived the dynamic response of the

21

economy to a monetary shock under reasonable conditions.

Typically, an innovation in

nominal money produces smooth adjustment of the aggregate price level over time, with the
speed depending inversely on the degree of real rigidity. The effect on real output is greatest
when the innovation occurs, declines over time, and dies out asymptotically.

There is no simple summary of results for state-contingent models, because they have

proven much more difficult to solve.

Starting with Caplin and Spulber (1985), impressive

progress has been made in analyzing state-contingent models; current state-of-the-art models

include Caballero and Engel (1992) and Caplin and Leahy (1991a). Unfortunately, strong
restrictions are still needed for tractability. in most models, for example, real rigidity is ruled
out: a firm's desired price depends entirely on the money stock rather than on other firms'

prices. (Caplin and Leahy (1991b) is an exception.) Thus the models do not include the key
source of price inertia under staggered adjustment.

In any case, the bottom line of state-contingent models is similar to that of timecontingent models: the price level does not adjust immediately to a monetary shock (except in

very special cases), and so money is not neutral. State-contingent models go beyond time-

contingent models in generating subtle non-linearities. In Caplin and Leahy (199 Ia), for
example, a positive monetary shock is less likely to raise output if it is preceded by other
positive shocks. The empirical relevance of such non-linearities is unclear.
State-contingent models have recently been more popular than time-contingent models.

The apparent reason is that state-contingent adjustment is optimal for a price setter who faces

a fixed adjustment cost. In this setting, it is arbitrary to assume that the firm adjusts at fixed

intervals, regardless of whether adjustment is warranted by changed circumstances. In our

22

view, however, the emphasis on exclusively state-contingent models is misplaced. As
Caballero (1989) shows, time-contingent adjustment is optimal if the main cost of adjustment

is gathering information about the state rather than making the actual adjustment. Statecontingent models assume that firms continuously monitor the environment to determine when

to adjust. Yet it may be less expensive to gather information at fixed intervals. If so, and if
the pure adjustment cost is small, firms naturally adjust prices at these fixed intervals.

As an empirical matter, time-contingent adjustment is common. Nearly all wages are
adjusted on a fixed time schedule. The same is tue for many output prices; for example, many

finns issue catalogs on a regular schedule. The use of time-contingent rules also explains the

fact that firms often make small price changes (Kashyap, 1987). A small change can be
optimal when the time for adjustment arrives, whereas small changes never happen with state-

contingent adjustment
In addition, even if many firms make state-contingent adjustments, the behavior of the

aggregate price level can be close to the pure time-contingent case as long as there is some
time-contingent adjustment. This point is made by Bonomo (1992), who studies an economy
with both kinds of adjustment The result follows from the idea, discussed above, that flexible

parts of the economy inherit rigidities from the rigid part of the economy when firms care
about relative prices. In this case, the relevant rigidity is the fixed timing of price adjustment
The fact that time-contingent firms cannot adjust immediately to a large shock means that state-

contingent firms do not want to adjust either.
Research on dynamic price adjustment is far from complete. In particular, the literature

has produced some surprising results that warrant further investigation. Caplin and Spulber

23

show that monetary neutrality can arise even with sticky prices if firms follow one-sided Ss

rules. Ball (1994a) shows that if finns follow time-contingent rules, then a fully credible
slowdown in money growth can cause an output boom. These theoretical results are important,

even though they have little direct empirical relevance. The Caplin-Spuiber result shows that

explanations for non-neutrality must go beyond the simplest stale-contingent models, for
example by introducing idiosyncratic shocks that cause prices to fall as well as rise. The Ball

result suggests that theories must include credibility problems as well as frictions in price
adjustment Research on these issues is continuing.

What Are Menu Costs?
The new work on sticky prices has established that menu costs—the underlying nominal

friction producing non-neutrality--can be of trivial size relative to the macroeconomic effects

of non-neutrality. To be sure, they must be strictly positive: there must be some cost to
adjusting prices. The resistance to sticky-price models in some quarters appears to arise from
an unwillingness to allow any cost of nominal adjustment. Is the idea of menu costs plausible?

Certainly "menu cost? should be interpreted more broadly than the physical costs of
changing price tags. In this sense, the term may be unfortunate. "Menu costs" are a metaphor

like "shoe leather cost?. Some critics have suggested testing menu-cost models by seeing
whether rigidities arise in circumstances of higher technological costs of price changes—for
example, when price tags must be replaced by hand rather than electronically. This is a bit like

testing whether consumers dislike inflation more in countries with less durable footwear.
We suspect that the most important costs of price adjustment are the time and attention

24

required of managers to gather the relevant information and make and implement decisions.

The fact that many wages and prices are adjusted ax faxed intervals of time suggests that
information-gathering costs are important. At a common-sense level, it seems obvious that it

is more convenient for busy managers to decide on new prices once a year rather than once
a day. This fact leads to infrequent adjustment if (as suggested by recent research) the private
costs of non-adjustment are small.

In any case, a literal account of menu costs is not necessary for studying most issues
in maaocconomics. Menu costs should be viewed as a parable—a convenient formalization

that captures the facts that prices are not adjusted continuously, and that they tend to adjust
more quickly to large than to small shocks In resting our theories on a parable, we have an
irreproachable precedent: price theory under perfect competition, which rests on the parable of

the Wairasian auctioneer. Wairas observed that prices move to equilibrate supply and demand,

and he captured this tendency with the parable of an auctioneer. Sirnil2rly, macroeconomists

have noted that many prices are sticky in the short run, and they capture this fact with the
parable of menu costs. It is no more appropriate to insist on an exact identification of menu
costs than it is to demand the social security number of the Walrasian auctioneer.

Of course, it is still interesting to go beyond the parable to better understand the
foundations of nominal frictions. Future research could examine information gathering and

processing costs in actual firms, for example. The analogue in competitive economics is
research that examines the foundations of the auctioneer story, such as the literature on the

convergence of Nash games to perfect competition. Note that microeconomists are rarely
reproached for studying competitive models despite the incompleteness of this research on

25

foundations. Similarly, macroeconomists can use menu-cost models without a complete, literal

account of menu costs.

A New View of Aggregate SuoDlv

The previous section describes recent progress in developing models of sticky prices,

and the challenges that remain. We now ask what the payoff is to all this work One
accomplishment is to put the assumption of price rigidity on firmer foundations. We can now

write down models with sticky prices and teach them to undergraduates without the guilty
feeling that we are doing violence to microeconomics. But beyond providing microeconomic
foundations, have we learned anything about macroeconomics?
Early menu-cost models were sometimes criticized for failing to generate new empirical
predictions, or to explain previously mysterious phenomena (e.g. Summers, 1988). The models

were designed to produce monetary non-neutrality, and that is all they dicL In our view, the

last five years of research have made this criticism obsolete: an important new branch of
macroeconomics has grown out of models with costly price adjusunent. In particular, the
models lead to a new theory of the supply side of the economy in the short run, a theory with
several novel (and apparently correct) empirical predictions. The simplest way to summarize

the new theory is in terms of the undergraduate model of aggregate demand and aggregate
supply. Sticky-price models provide new answers to several old questions about the short-run
aggregate supply curve:

26

Why does the age2ate supply curve slone UP?

Equivalently, why do shifts in monetary policy or other determinants of aggregate

demand affect real output, rather than prices alone? This question provided the original

motivation for research on sticky prices. As described above, the answer rests on a
combination of imperfect competition, menu costs, and real rigidities.

Why does the slope of the aR2re2ate suønlv curve differ across countries and time oeriods?

One benefit of deriving rather than assuming nominal price rigidity is that one can

discuss why the degree of rigidity might vary. The new research has shown that a key
determinant of the degree of rigidity—and thus the slope of the aggregate supply curve—is the
level of trend inflation (Ball, Mankiw, and Romer 1988). High inflation leads to more frequent

price changes for given adjustment costs, and more frequent adjustment increases the
responsiveness of prices to monetary shocks: the aggregate supply curve becomes steeper.
Ball, Maniciw, and Romer report strong empirical support for this prediction: average inflation

explains much of the variation in the slope of the aggregate supply curve across countries and
over different eras in a given country. In addition, DeFina (1991) reports evidence of a higher-

frequency time-series relation between trend inflation and the slope of aggregate supply. The
effects of trend inflation are quantitatively important: the Ball-Manldw-Rorner estimates imply

that reducing inflation from ten to five percent more than doubles the output effect of a
monetary shock Thus for example, the output-inflation tradeoff facing U.S. policymakers is
considerably less favorable today than at the outset of the Volcker Ikinflation. And attempts

to achieve zero inflation, as in Canada today, are likely to be very costly.

27

Why does the a22re2ate sunolv curve shift?

Traditional macroeconomics fell into disfavor in the 1970s in part because of its
inability to explain the stagf]ation arising from supply shocks. These shocks were apparent

movements in the aggregate supply curve, rather than movements along it resulting from
changes in aggregate demand. At one level, this problem was solved when researchers added
"supply shifters" such as world oil prices to empirical Phillips curves. At a deeper level, shifts

in aggregate supply have remained punling. A shift in aggregate supply means a change in
the aggregate price level corresponding to given output As a theoretical matter, it is not clear

why the aggregate price level should be influenced by changes in relative prices, such as an

increase in oil prices arising from OPEC collusion. Indeed, classical theory draws a sharp
dichotomy between relative prices, which depend on real microeconomic factors, and the
overall price level, which depends on the supply and demand for money.

A new explanation for shifts in aggregate supply, consistent with traditional
macroeconomics, is developed by Ball and Maniciw (1992). The classical argument that

relative prices are unrelated to the aggregate price level implicitly assumes flexibility of
nominal prices. By contrast, we assume that it is costly to adjust prices. The key implication
is that finns adjust prices in response to large shocks, but that it is not worth adjusting to small

shocks. Consequently, large shocks have disproportionately large effects on actual price
adjustment.

In this setting, the overall price level depends on the distribution of shocks to desired
relative prices. To see this point, consider an example in which the frictionless .relative price

of oil rises by 50%. By the definition of "relative," other relative prices must go down to

28

balance this increase. Yet it is not usual for some other sector to experience a 50% relative

decrease when oil prices rise. Instead, the relative decreases are spread across the non-oil
economy, s%ith many equilibrium prices falling by small amounts. Thus the distribution

of

desired price changes is asymmetric. With full price flexibility, the increases in the oil sector

and decreases in other sectors average to zero.

But with menu costs, and hence

disproportionate adjustment to large shocks, the asymmetry in shocks has aggregate effects.

The actual increases in oil prices are larger than the decreases in other sectors, and the
aggregate price level rises. Thus the model can explain an increase in the price level for given
aggregate demand.

Ball and Mankiw show that this idea has wide applicability. Empirically, we measure

the relative incidence of large positive and large negative shocks with the skewness of the
distribution of price changes.

If the distribution is skewed

to the right, for example, there are

large positive shocks, which tend to raise the price level. We find that movements in the
skewness of price changes explain a large fraction of U.S. supply shocks, or shifts in the shortrun Phillips curve, both in the OPEC era since the 1970s and in earlier periods. Indeed, our
measures

of skewness outperform traditional supply shifters such as food and energy: they fit

better in sample, display greater subsample stability, and better explain various historical
episodes.

Why might the aggreQate suoolv curve be non-linear?
One theme in traditional thinking is that the slope of aggregate supply is likely to be

different for increasesand decreases in aggregate demand. Tobin (1972) and others argue that

29

decreases in demand have large output effects, whereas increases in demand trigger larger price

responses and therefore have smaller output effects. Typically, traditionalists obtain this result

simply by assuming that prices are more sticky downwards than upwards.
Recently, sticky-price theorists have shown that an asymmetric aggregate supply curve
arises endogenously under natural conditions. Different versions of the argument appear in

Tsiddon (1991), BalI and Mankiw (1994), and Caballero and Engel (1992). In all cases, the
crucial assumption is positive trend inflation. In an environment with trend inflation, finns'

relative prices fall automatically between nominal adjustments. In this setting, a firm does not

need to make a special adjustment if a negative shock reduces its desired relative price:
inflation automatically does the work. In contrast, a positive shock means that the firm's
desired relative price is rising while its actual price is falling, creating a large gap between
desired and actual prices. Thus a positive shock triggers quick nominal adjustment, whereas
prices are sticky in response to substantial negative shocks - exactly the asymmetry that Tobin
and others assume.

A number of empirical studies present evidence that monetary shocks indeed have

asymmetric effects on real output. See Cover (1992), DeLong and Summers (1988), and
Morgan (1993). This finding is yet another empirical result that is explained by new research
on sticky prices.

Conclusion

A scientific theory should be judged not only by the intrinsic appeal of its assumptions,

but also by its ability to explain observed facts—especially ones that it was not explicitly

30

designed to explain. Menu-cost models were intoduced to explain the first feature of the
aggregate supply curve—its upward slope—but Mankiw and Akerlof-Yellen were not thinking

of asyininethes or cross-county differences in aggregate supply, and certainly not the relation

between inflation and the sketmess of price changes. As menu-cost models have developed,
they have yielded a unified explanation for many of the empirical features of aggregate supply.

31

REFERENCES

Ahmed, S.

(1987)

Wage Stickiness and the Non-neutrality of Money: A Cross-Industry Analysis.
Journal of Monetary Economics. 20: 25-50.

Akeriof, 0. A., and Yellen, J. L.
A Near-Rational Model of the Business Cycle, with Wage and Price Inertia,
(1985)
Ouarterly Journal ofEconornics. 100 (Supplement): 823-38.
Ball, L.
(1994a) Credible Disinflation with Staggered Price Setting. American Economic Review.
84.

(1994b)

What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?, Monetary Policy Ed. N. 0. Mankiw.
University of Chicago Press.

Bali, L., and Mankiw, N. 0.
(1992)
Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate Supply Shocks NBER Working Paper
#4168.

(1994)

Asymmetric Price Adjusnnent and Economic Fluctuations. Economic JournaL
104

Ball, L., Mankiw, N. 0., and Romer, D.
The New Keynesian Economics and the Output-Inflation Trade-off. Brookin2s
(1988)
Payers on Economic Activity. 1: 1-65.

Ball, L., and Romer, 0.
Are Prices Too Sticky? Ouarterly Journal of Economics. 104: 507-24.
(1989)
(1990)

Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of Money. Review of Economic Studies.
57: 183-203.

Barro, It J.
(1993)

Macroeconomics. 4th Edition. John Wiley and Sons.

Blanchard, 0. J.
Price Asynchronization and Price Level Inertia in Inflation. Debt, and
(1983)
Indexation. Edt It. Dombuseb and M. H. Simonsen. MIT Press.

32

Blanchard, O.J., and Fischer, S.
Lectures on Macroeconomics. MIT Press.
(1989)
Blanchard, O.J., and Kiyotaki, N.
Monopolistic Competition and the Effects of Aggregate Demand. American
(1987)
Economic Review. 77: 647-66.

Blinder, A. S.
Why Are Prices Sticky? Prelirninnry Results from an Interview Study. American
(1991)
Economic Review. 81: 89-96.
Bonomo, M.
Time-Dependent and State-Dependent Pricing Rules: Interaction Reinforces Non(1992)
neutrality. Chapter I in Dynamic Pricing Models. Princeton University
dissertation.
Brunner, K., Cukierman, A., and Melizer, A. H.
Money and Economic Activity, Inventories and Business Cycles. Journal of
(1983)
Monetary Economics. 11: 281-319.
Caballero,

it

(1989)

Time-Dependent Rules, Aggregate Stickiness, and Information Externalities.
Columbia University Discussion Paper #428.

Caballero, it, and Engel, E. M. It A.
(1992)

Price Rigidities, Asymmetries, and Output Fluctuations. NBER Working Paper
#4091.

Caplin, A. S., and Leahy, J.
State-Dependent Pricing and the Dynamics of Money and Output, Ouarterlv
(1991 a)
Journal of Economici 106: 683-708.

(1991b)

Aggregation and Optimization with State-Dependent Pricing. Columbia
University and Harvard University.

Caplin, A. S., and Spulber, D. F.
Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money. Ouarterlv Journal of Economics. 102:
(1987)
703-25.

Canton, D.
(1986)

The Rigidity of Prices. American Economic Review. 76: 255-74.

33

Cecchetti, S. 0.
The Frequency of Price Adjustment: A Study of the Newsstand Prices of
(1986)
Magañnes. Journal of Econometrics. 31: 255-74.
B., and Prasad, E.
Interpreting the Cyclical Behavior of Prices. IMF Staff Paners. 40: 266-98.
(1993)

Chadha,

Christiano, L. 1, and Eichenbaum, M.
Liquidity Effects, Monetary Policy, and the Business Cycle. Northwestern
(1991)
University.
__________ and __________
(1992)

Liquidity Effects and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism.

American

Economic Review. 82: 346-53.
Cooley, T.. and Oh2ni2n, L.
The Cyclical Behavior of Prices. Journal of Monetary Economics. 28: 25-60.
(1991)

Cover, J. P.
(1992)

Asymmetric Effects of Positive and Negative Money-Supply Shocks. Ouarterly
Journal of Economics. 107: 1261-1282.

DeFina, It H.
International Evidence on a New Keynesian Theory of the Output-Inflation
(199!)
Trade-off. Journal of Money. Credit and Bankin2. 23 (Part 1): 410-fl.
DeLong, J. B., and Summers, L. H.
(1988)

I-low Does Macroeconomic Policy Affect Output? Brookins Payers on
Economic Activity, 2: 433-80.

Eichengreen, B.
The Endogeneity of Exchange-Rate Regimes in Understandin2 Interdependence:
(1994)

The Macroeconomics of the ODen Economy. Ed. P. B. Kenen. Princeton
University Press.

Friedman, M., and Schwartz, A. J.
A Monetary History of the United States. 1867-1960. Princeton University
(1963)
Press.

Fuerst, T. S.
Liquidity, Loanable Funds, and Real Activity. Journal of MonetarY Economics.
(1992)
29: 3-24.

34

Gray, J., and Spencer, D. E.
Price Prediction Errors and Real Activity: A Reassessment Economic Incuiry.
(1990)
28: 658-81.

Haltiwanger, L, and Waidman, M.
Limited Rationality and Strategic Complements: The Implications for
(1989)
Maaoeconomics. Ouarterlv Journal of Economics.104: 463-84.
Huine, D.
(1752)

Of Money.

Kashyap, A. K..
Sticky Prices: New Evidence front Retail Catalogs. MIT.
(1987)
Krugman, P.
What Do We Need to Know About the International Monetary System?
(1993)
Princeton Essays in International Finance. #190.
Kydland, F. E., and Prescott, E. C.
Business Cycles: Real Facts and a Monetary Myth. Federal Reserve Bank of
(1990)
Minneapolis Ouarterlv Review (Spring) 3-18.

Lucas, It E., Jr.
(1972)

Expectations and the Neutrality of Money. Journal of Economic Theory. 4: 10324.

(1973)

Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs.

(1990)

Liquidity and Interest Rates. Journal of Economic Theory. 50: 237-64.

American

Economic Review. 63: 326-34.

Mankiw, N. G.
Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model of
(1985)
Monopoly. Ouarterlv Journal of Economics. 100: 529-37.
Morgan, D.
Asymmetric Effects of Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
(1993)
Economic Review (2nd Quarter): 21-34.

Okun, A. M.
Prices and Ouantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis. The Brookings Institution
(1982)

35

Plosser, C. I.
Money and Business Cycles: A Real Business Cycle Interpretation in Monetary
(1991)

Policy on the 75th Anniversary of the Federal Reserve System. Ed. M. T.
Belongia. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Romer, D.
The New Keynesian Synthesis. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 7: 5-22.
(1993)
Romer, C. D., and Romer, D.
Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit of Friedman and
(1989)

Schwar. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4: 121-70.

__________ and __________
Monetary Policy Matters. University of California, Berkeley.
(1992)

Romer, C.D., and Romer, D.
(1993) Credit Channel or Credit Actions? An Interpretation of the Postwar Transmission
Mechanism. University of California, Berkeley.
Rotemberg, J.
The New Keynesian Microfoundations. NBER Macroeconomics Annual. 2.
(1987)

Summers, L. H.
Should Keynesian Economics Dispense with the Phillips Curve? in
(1988)
Unemployment. Hysteresis, and the Natural Rate Hypothesis. Ed. It Cross.
Basil Blackwell.
Taylor, J. B.
Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model. American Economic Review. 69:
(1979)
108-13.

Tsiddon, D.
(1991)
Tobin, J.
(1972)

The (Mis)behavior of the Aggregate Price Level. Hebrew University, Review
of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Inflation and Unemployment American Economic Review. 62: 1-18.

Woglom, G.
Underemployment Equilibrium with Rational Expectations. Ouarterlv Journal
(1982)
of Economics. 97: 89-107.

36

