                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN MALE
                        WAGE INEQUALITY: INSTITUTIONS
                            VERSUS MARKET FORCES




                                     Francine D. Blau
                                    Lawrence M. Kahn




                                 Working Paper No. 4678




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 1994


We are grateful to David Blanchflower, Per-Anders Edin and Andrea Ichino for their help in
acquiring data. Portions of this work were completed while the authors were visiting fellows
at the Ausiralian National University, Canberra. We have benefitted from the helpful
comments of participants at the University of illinois and Cornell University Labor
Economics Workshops. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinioiis expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                                      NBER Working Paper #4678
                                                                                   March 1994


                         INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN MALE
                           WAGE INEQUALITY: INSTITUTIONS
                               VERSUS MARKET FORCES


                                           ABSTRACT


       While changes in the demand for skilled labor appear to have led to a widening of the

wage structures in many countries during the 1980s, considerable differences in the level of wage

inequality remain. In this paper, we examine the sources of these differences, focusing primarily

on explaining the considerably higher level of wage inequality in the U.S. We fmd that the

greater overall dispersion of the U.S. wage distribution reflects considerably more compression

at the bottom of the disthbution in the other countries, but relatively little difference in the degree

of wage inequality at the top. While differences in the distribution of measured characteristics

help to explain some aspects of the international differences, U.S. labor market prices--that is,

higher rewards to labor market skills--arc an important factor. Labor market institutions, chiefly

the relatively decentralized wage-setting mechanisms in the U.S. compared to other countries,

appear to provide the most persuasive explanation for these international differences in prices.

In contrast, the pattern of cross-country differences in relative supplies of and demands for skills

does not appear to be consistent with the pattern of observed differences in wage inequality.



Francine D. Blau                                       Lawrence M. Kahn
Institute of Labor & Industrial Relations              Institute of Labor & Industrial Relations
University of illinois                                 University of Illinois
504 E. Armory Avenue                                   504 E. Armory Avenue
Champaign, IL 61820                                    Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
I. Introduction
       The level of wage inequality generated by a country's labor market is of fundamental
importance for those interested in understanding poverty, social stratification and economic
incentives facing workers. Labor earnings are by far the most important component of income
for individuals who are employed; hence, in the absence of any compensatory government
policies, low living standards in market economies will be associated with low labor incomes.1

More generally, labor market inequality isa major determinant of disparities in living
standards. The level of labor market inequality may also influence the solidarity that
individuals feel with one another. Workers with similar earnings most likely feel more in
common with each other than those with vastly different economic rewards and status.

       To the extent that labor market inequality reflects economic returns to skills (as
opposed to heterogeneity in skill levels across individuals), international differences in
inequality imply differences in economic incentives. Countries with high rewards to skills

have a wage structure that encourages skill acquisition by their workers, while the compression
of wage premia for skills may dampen workers' incentives to acquire appropriate training.
Moreover, centralized wage-setting mechanisms which reduce wage variation tend to limit

firms' flexibility in responding to differences in market conditions across industries or
geographical areas.2 Also of concern is that relatively high wages for low skill groups may
reduce their relative employment.3 On the other hand, a down-side of high rewards to labor


   An example of the importance of labor market inequality is provided by the U.S. experience
in the l9SOs when rising wage inequality was sufficient to counteract the effects of economic
expansion in reducing poverty (Blank, 1991; Cutler and Katz, 1991).
2 Employers have voiced both these complaints about Sweden's usolidarityw wage policy, and
that country's generous student stipends and subsidized loans for higher education may be
viewed in part as a means of offsetting the distortions caused by wage compression (Edin and
Hoirnlund, forthcoming).
   For example, Katz, Loveman and Blanchflower (forthcoming) report that in France, where
 the minimum wage increased from 45.7 to 53.3 percent of median earnings from 1967 to
 1987, the problem of youth unemployment has been more severe and the duration of
 unemployment has tended to be longer than in other OECD countries.
                                                  -2-


  market skills is that they penalize demographic groups with below average levels of skills,
  even in the absence of explicit discrimination against them. For example, the rising rewards to
  skills in the U.S. in the 198CM have been found to reduce the relative wages of black workers

  (Juhn, Murphy and Pierce, 1991) and immigrants (LaLonde and Topel, 1992); and Blau and
 Kahn (1992 and forthcoming) found that the higher rewards to skills in the U.S. compared to

 other industrialized countries contributed to a higher gender pay gap in the U.S.
          Considerable attention has lately been focused on the trend toward rising wage
 inequality that has been occurring in most of the industrialized countries.4 Evidence that
 inequality increased in different countries with different institutional structures suggests that
 similar forces have been at work. For example, it has been suggested that technology and
 international trade have raised the relative demand for skilled workers among industrialized
 nations (Katz, Loveman and Blanchflower, forthcoming).

          While changes in the demand for skilled labor appear to have led to a widening of the
 wage structures in many countries during the 198CM, considerable differences in the level of
 wage inequality remain. Of particular interest to us, the United States has a far greater
 dispersion of wages than other industrialized countries (Blanchflower and Freeman, 1992; BIau
and Kahn, 1992 and forthcoming). Previous international comparative work on wage
inequality has focused on recent changes in wage dispersion. In this paper, we are concerned
with understanding the fundamental causes of the higher level ofwage inequality in the U.S.

compared to other industrialized countries in the 1980s. We concentrate on males in order to
focus on a relatively homogeneous sample of workers for each country.5




   For evidence of rising inequality in several countries, see Katz, Lovenian and Blanchflower
(forthcoming), Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993), Katz and Murphy (1992), Bound and Johnson
(1992), Erickson and Ichino (forthcoming), Edin and Holmiund (forthcoming), Davis (1992).
and Gottschalk and Joyce (1991).

  In Blau and Kahn (1992 and forthcoming), we consider the consequences of differences in
wage inequality across countries for international differences in the gender gap.


INTWAGn.DOC 2122/94 3:26 PM
                                                 -3-


       The basic pattern of international differences in wage inequality that we seek to explain
is illustrated in Figure 1.' As expected based on previous work, the U.S. has a considerably

higher level of wage inequality than the other industrial countries in our sample. Panels (a)

and (b) of Figure 1 indicate that both the standard deviation of log wages and the 90-10

percentile log wage differential are considerably greater in the U.S. than in the other countries.

Interestingly, however, this higher level of inequality reflects considerably more compression
at the bottom of the distribution in the other countries relative to the U.S.,but relatively little

difference in the degree of wage inequality at the top of the distribution. Thus, while the 50-

10 percentile wage differential is much larger in the U.S. than elsewhere (panel c), the U.S.

90-50 differential is quite similar to that in the other countries (panel d). This pattern of

greater compression at the bottom is important from a policy perspective in that it implies that

the labor market reward structure in other countries generates less poverty and relatively

higher incomes for less skilled groups than in the U.S.' Of course, as suggested above, there

are potential costs of wage compression which would have to be compared to these benefits in

deciding whether this is a desirable approach.

       In the empirical work below, we focus on three possible explanations for these

international differences in patterns of wage inequality. We first examine the role of

differences across countries in the distribution of measured characteristics. We conclude that

while measured characteristics help to explain some aspects of the international differences,

U.S. labor market prices—that is, higher rewards to labor market skills and higher rents
received for employment in favored sectors—are an important factor contributing to the

observed differences in inequality between the U.S. and other countries.


• Details of the data sources and the method of calculating hours-corrected earnings are given
below.

  The claim about poverty holds if we are domparing countries with similar average real wage
levels, as is the case here. For example, in 1988, hourly compensation in manufacturing in
the OECD countries other than the U.S. averaged 98% of the U.S. level, adjusting for
exchange rates (U. S. Department of Commerce, 1992, p. 841).



n(lwAoa _   2t20d94 %34 PM
                                                    -4-


            Second, we assess the contribution of labor market institutions to
                                                                                 explaining the
   differences in wage inequality. The United States has a largely nonunion labor market with
  very decentralized wage-setting even in the union sector. The other countries have
  considerably higher rates of unionization, and most of them have much more centralized wage-
  setting processes than those of the U.S. union sector. Further, in several countries, the terms
  of collective bargaining agreements are routinely extended to cover nonunion
                                                                                    workers, and
  their larger union sectors may induce greater emulation of the union wage structure by the
  nonunion sector. Finally, in some of the countries, the government or the union movement
  has   followed explicit policies to raise the relative pay of the lowest-paid workers.
           Consideration of labor market institutions thus suggests less labor market inequality in
 these other countries than in the U.S.; and may also imply greater compression at the bottom
 of the distribution than at the top. This is, of course, consistent with the
                                                                              pattern of inequality
 which we identify empirically. Moreover, we present information on the nature of union and
 nonunion patterns of inequaiity which reveals interesting features of the
                                                                              differences between
 the U.S. and other countries in the impact of labor market institutions.
                                                                              Specifically, our
 results imply that union pay policies which bring up the bottom of the union wage distribution
 are common to all countries, including the U.S. However, unions in other
                                                                          countries appear to
 be more successful than U.S. unions both in reducing inequality in the union sector
                                                                                     and in
 extending such policies to the nonunion sector.
          Third, we examine international differences in the supply of and demand for labor
market skills as an alternative explanation for the observed differences in inequality between
the U.S. and other countries. We find that market forces, as
                                                             best as we can measure them, do
not appear to be a viable explanation for the international differences,
                                                                           further increasing our
confidence that institutions are important. Finally,
                                                   examining the impact of centralization
across the countries in our sample more generally, we find that the degree of wage
centralization, as commoniy measured by comparative industrial relations researchers, is



INTWAOE3.DOC 2/70/94 934 PM
                                                -5-


negatively associated with wage dispersion, the 50-10 differential in the log of wages, and the
pay gap between middle and low skill workers.


IL Determinants of Wage Inequality: Skills and InstitutIons
       Wage inequality as measured by overall wage variation or by the wage gap between
workers at different parts of the distribution (e.g. the 10th vs. the 50th percentile) is affected
by the distribution of skills, both measured and unmeasured, and the prices determined for
those skills in the labor market. This price structure may include rents received by individuals
employed in certain favored sectors. Prices, in turn, are influenced by both market and
institutional forces.
        Market forces determine skill prices through the interaction of the supply and demand
for skills. Suppose that workers of different skill levels (e.g. high school or college educated
workers) are imperfect substitutes in production. Then differences in the relative supply of or
demand for skills will produce differences in relative lages across countries.8 The effects of
demand can be felt both within and between industries. Final demand for output in one

country may favor industries that (world-wide) disproportionately employ highly skilled
workers, relative to final demand in other countries, If such is the case, then the relative
demand for skilled workers in the former country will be higher than in the latter; and, all else
equal, we would expect skilled workers to do relatively well even in industries not directly
affected by the high demand level. It is also possible that the relative demand for highly
skilled labor is greater in each industry in one country than another, if different technologies

are employed.
        Institutional factors include the extent of collective bargaining coverage, the scope of
collective bargaining where it occurs, union pay policies, and government policy toward the


8 This assumes barriers to the mobility of capital, labor, and/or goods across national
boundaries so that skill prices are not equalized.


DITWAO.DOC 2/22/94 3:27 PM
                                                   -6-


    labor market. From each of these perspectives, we expect the U.S. to have a more unequal
    wage structure than other countries. The following decomposition of a country's overall level
    of wage inequality is useful in understanding the role of unions in producing differences in
    inequality across countries:



    (1)           Vj =    cqV + (1-aDvnj + ixj(waiwi)2 +


 where for country i, v is the overall variance of log wages; a is the fraction of workers
 unionized; Va and v are the variance of log union and nonunion wages; Wa and Wn are
 average log union and nonunion wages; and w* is the country's avenge log wage level.'
          By the accounting scheme in equation (1), there are several routes through which the
 industrial relations system can affect overall wage inequality. First, unions typically raise their
 members' relative wages. This effect alone could increase or decrease overall wage
 dispersion, depending on where union workers would have been in the wage distribution in the
absence of unionism. However, as suggested by the final two terms in equation (1), in an
accounting sense, it is the union-nonunion wage gap (not controlling for other wage-

influencing factors) itself that is important in 'explaining" the overall variance. All else equal,
the larger this gap, however it is achieved, the larger the country's overall wage variance will
be. And our data show that this gap is much higher for the U.S. than other countries.'0
          Second, unions typically negotiate contracts that allow for less variation in pay than
occurs in the nonunion sector (Freeman, 1982; Blanchflower and Freeman, 1992). Unions are


!    Freeman (1980) uses such a decomposition to assess the role of unionism on U.S. wage
inequality. See also Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993) who employ a similar approach to
measunng the impact of industry on wage inequality.
10 Much of this higher U.S. union-nonunion wage differential is due to a higher ceteris
paflba, U.S. union-nonunion wage gap rather than to differences in the personal
characteristics of union and nonunion workers (Blanchflower and Freeman, 1992). Thus, a
strong causal role for the industrial relations system is suggested.


INTWAOfl 21201949,34 PM
                                               -7-


much less prevalent in the U.S. than elsewhere; thus the lower union variance in pay would
get a smaller weight in equation (1) in the U.S. Hence, we would expect a higher overall
variance in wages in the U.S. even if the variance of wages within the union and nonunion

sectors were identical across countries. However, there are strong reasons for expecting both
of these within sector variances to be higher in the U.S. than elsewhere. These higher within
sector variances constitute a third route by which the U.S. industrial relations system raises
wage inequality relative to other countries.

        With respect to the union sector, collective bargaining in the U.S. is relatively
decentralized, with an emphasis on single-firm agreements which, in most cases, are not firm-
wide (Hendricks and Kahn, 1982). In contrast, as discussed below, in most of the other
countries in our sample, bargaining is conducted on an industry-wide or even an economy-
wide level. Thus, there appears to be more scope for interfirm and interindustxy wage
differentials in the U.S. than in other countries; and a substantial portion of the wage
inequality we observe in the U.S. is associated with such firm or industry wage effects (Blau,

1977; Groshen, 1991; Davis and Haltiwanger, 1991; Krueger and Summers, 1988).
        While a lower variance in the union sector of other countries could be achieved either

by raising the bottom, restraining the top, or both, centralized bargains often emphasize the

setting of wage minima across diverse units. For example in Austria, Germany, Italy, Sweden
and Switzerland (as well as in several European countries outside our sample), collective
bargainirgagreements, generally at the industry level, set minimum rates for the lowest pay
group in a collective agreement (EIRR, Oct. 1992). Such minima, to the extent they are
binding, will tend to disproportionately bring up the floor among workers covered by the
contract. In the limiting case, a contract that covered all workers in the economy mightbe
expected to compress the bottom of the distribution, just as would a high national minimum

wage. Thus, we expect to find greater narrowing at the bottom than at the top in the union
sector in most countries compared to the U.S., but regard this as to some extent an empirical

question.

n4TWAG.DOC 2122/94 3:21 PM
                                                  -8—



            Several factors also lead us to expect more dispersion of nonunion wages in the U.S.

   than elsewhere. These include the practice in many other countries of extending the terms of

  collective bargaining agreements to. nonunion workers. Such. contract extensions blur the
  distinction between union and nonunion wage-setting in these countries. To the extent that
  unions in all countries tend to compress wages at the bottom in the union sector, contract
  extension will not only reduce wage variation in the nonunion sector, but compress wages at
  the bottom as well. In addition, the higher degree of union organization outside the U.S.
  should produce more "voluntary imitation of union pay structures by nonunion firms than in
  the U.SY Finally, the impact of these factors has been further strengthened by explicit union
 and government policies in some countries to bring up the bottom of the wage distribution.


 ilL Overview of International Differences in Labor Market Institutions
          In this section, we provide a brief review of the institutional arrangements governing
 wage determination in the countries in our sample which suggests thatwage-setting is indeed
 more decentralized in both the union and nonunion sectors in the U.S. Looking first at the
 union sector, Sweden and Norway exempli& the highest degree of centralization of wage-

 setting in these countries. There, the major union federation (LO) signs an agreement with the

 employer association (SAP) covering a major portion of the labor force (Leion, 1985;
Thorsrud, 1985). Austrian collective bargaining is also very centralized, with agreements in
most cases covering an entire industry or group of industries throughout the country (Tomandl
and Fuerboeck, 1986). In Germany, contracts usually cover all employers in an industry in a
state, providing a higher degree of centnlirnion than in the U.S. butprobably less than in
Scandinavia or Austria (Kennedy, 1982). And in Italy, master industry-wide agreements


" This will be the case if union "threat' effects dominate any negative 'crowding" effects in
the nonunion sector caused by the adverse employment effects of unionism. Kaim and Curme
(1987) found for the U.S. that, other things equal, nonunion wage dispersion was lower in
highly unionized than in less unionized industries.


D(TWAGfl DOC 2/20.94 934 PM
                                                -9-


negotiated at the national level between unions and employer associations have traditionally

been the norm (Katz, 1993). Collective bargaining in Australia has also been characterized by

considerable centralization, as the system heavily relies on government tribunals and

compulsory arbitration in setting wages (Katz, 1993). It has been estimated that about 90

percent of the Australian labor force has its pay set by these tribunals (Killingsworth, 1990).

Hungary was surveyed during the period of Communist party rule. While most workers were
in unions, wages were controlled by the state, providing another example of centralized wage
determination (Rezler, 1972-3; U.S. Department of Labor, 1992). For each of these
countries, we would expect less dispersion of union wages than in the U.S.

         Collective bargaining in Switzerland and Britain is less centralized than in Scandinavia,
Austria and Germany, but likely more centralized than in the U.S. While Britain, like the

U.S., had a mixture of single-firm and multiemployer agreements, in the 1970s, the latest
period for which quantitative data are available, bargaining appeared to be more centralized in

Britain. In the U.K. for 1977-78, 25 percent of manufacturing contracts covered more than
one   finn (Deaton and Beaumont, 1980), while for the U.S. the figure in 1975 was only 13

percent (Hendricks and Kahn, 1982). Switzerland appears to have a mix of centralization and

decentralization. On the one hand, many agreements exclude the subject ofpay, leaving it to

individual determination. On the other hand, there are no antitrust laws, and parties are

encouraged to form associations, leaving open the possibility of defacto centralization

(Wrong, 1987). Further, it has been estimated that about halfof the Swiss private sector work
force is covered by industry collective bargaining agreements (EIRR, Oct. 1992).
         Events in the 1980s and 1990s have led to the decentralization ofbargaining invirtually
every industrialized country.'2 In Scandinavia, the influence of the central SAF-LO

agreement was reduced starting in the 1980s. In Australia, tribunal decisions have allowed



12 This discussion of recent trends is based on Katz (1993) and Edin and Holmlund
(forthcoming).


INTWAG.DOC 2f20194 9:34 fll
                                                  -to-

    more interfirm variation 'in wage settlements. In Germany and Italy, bargaining has shifted in
    some cases from the industry to the plant level in the late 1980s. In Britain and the United

  States, multiemployer units continued to crumble in the 1980s and 1990s.

           We have no way of knowing whether decentralization has proceeded faster outside the
  U.S. than inside. Nonetheless, one's impression is that, with the possible exception of Britain,
  systems of collective bargaining remain more centralized in the other countries than in the
 United States. The U.S. does not have the centralizing institutions that are still in place in
 these other countries. Md deunionization proceeded much more rapidly in the U.S. than in

 other countries (including Britain), providing an extreme form of decentralization
 (Blanchflower and Freeman, 1992; Katz, 1993).
           The structure of collective bargaining thus leads us toexpect more dispersion of union
 wages in the U.S. than elsewhere. A review of labor market institutions in other countries
 leads us to expect more dispersion of nonunion wages in the U.S. as well. In Australia, wage
 tribunals set minimum pay rates across both the union and nonunion sectors, while in then
 Communist Hungary, wages in both sectors were controlled
                                                          by the state. In Germany,
 Austria, Italy, and Switzerland, the government routinely extends the terms of collective

 bargaining agreements to nonunion workers.'3 It has been estimated that as of 1992, legally

binding industry or sectorai level agreements covered 90 percent of workers in Germany, 98
percent in Austria, the vast majority" in Italy, and "nearly all"
                                                                  workplaces in Sweden (EIRR,
Oct. 1992). In Switzerland, in 1992, roughly 10
                                                   percent of all workers (or about 20 percent
of nonunion workers) were nonunion employees whose wages had been set through contract
extensions (EIRR, Oct. 1992). These figures for 1992 suggest that whatever trends there have

'    See
        Kennedy (1982), Toznandl and Fuerboeck (1986), Treu (1990), and EIRR (Oct. 1992).
A sizable proportion of Italian workers are self-employed or work in an underground or
informal sector in which government-mandated benefits are not paid. The self-employed are
not included in our analysis due to our interest in the wage determination process for wage and
salary workers. Further, it is likely that since informal sector employment is illegal, it is
underreported by the respondents in our survey-based data. Thus, we may understate wage
inequality in Italy.


DrrwAon.ooc 2/20194 934 PM
                                              —''-


been toward decentralization in the 1980s and 1990s, wage setting remains considerably more

centralized in Western Europe than in the U.S.

       Finally, in Sweden, Italy, and West Germany, explicit union and government policies
have been followed that would be expected to lead to strong compression at the bottom of the

distribution. From 1968 to 1974, the LU in Sweden made a conscious effort to raise the

relative wages of lower-paid workers, leading to a sharp fall in inequality (Edin and

Holmlund, 1992). In Italy, the wage indexationsystem, the scala mobile, in place from 1975
to 1992, gave across-the-board tin increases in wages in response to inflation. The system

was designed to reduce skilled-nonskilled pay differentials (EIRR, Aug. 1992; Treu, 1990).
By 1990, Italian employers claimed that accumulated indexation payments accounted for 40

percent of labor costs (EIRR, Jan. 1990). While other aspects of the pay package to some

degree counteracted the leveling effects of indexation, Erickson and Ichino (forthcoming)

found that the system still had some independent effect in reducing inequality. Finally, in

recent years in Germany, some unions have succeeded in getting above sectoral levels of wage

increases for low paid workers, in an attempt to raise the floor (EIRR, Nov. 1992).



IV. Results
       A. Data Sources and the Definition of Hours-Corrected Earnings
       We compiled micro-data from several sources to examine international differences in
male wage inequality. First, we used the International Social Survey Programme (155?) for

the following countries and time periods: Austria (1985-87 and 1989), West Germany (1985-

88), Hungary (1986-88), Switzerland (1987), Britain (1985-89), the United States (1985-89),

and Norway (1989). Second, we supplemented the ISSP with several other micro-data bases

in order to expand our coverage of countries. Specifically, we used the Class Structure and

Class Consciousness (CSCC) data base compiled by Erik Wright for Sweden (1980) and

Norway (1982); the Income Distribution Survey (IDS) for Australia (1986); and a Bank of




INWAG.D ItZGd9I 9:34 PM
                                                 -12-


    Italy (BI) survey for Italy (1987).' Third, we performed a special comparison for 1984
    between the U.S. and Sweden using two additional data bases with more detailed information

    on personal characteristics and earnings, the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics
    (P511)) and the Swedish Household Market and Nonmarket Activities Survey (HUS).15 In this

 portion of the analysis, the sample is restricted to fuU-time workers and, in the case of the
 U.S. data, to whites. White males are used instead of all males in order to produce a
 relatively homogeneous U.S. sample to compare with the Swedish data. (The 155? did not
 collect information on race.)

          The specific earnings measures used in the data for each country are described in detail
 in the Appendix. For all cases except the 1984 Sweden-U.S. comparison, the earnings figure
 is expressed on an annual or monthly basis. The computation of wage rates from such data is
 complicated by the omission of information on annual weeks worked.'6 Data on weekly hours
 worked are available, however, allowing for some adjustment of earnings for time input
 (described below). For the 1984 Sweden-U.S. comparison, we are able to compute hourly
earnings.

          With the exception of the 1984 HUS (Sweden) and PSID (U.S.), the earnings variable

was generally coded into categories.'7 In the analyses presented below, we arbitrarily coded

'   For descriptions of these data, see Blanchflower and Freeman (1992)—ISSP; Rosenfeld and
Kalleberg (1990)—CSCC; Blackburn and Bloom (1991)—IDS; and Erickson and Ichino
(forthcoming)—BI. The ISSP had information on Italy, but it did not collect data on the
respondents' industriaj sector. We therefore used the BI data instead. Further, preliminary
results indicated that the Australian data in the ISSP were inconsistent with other sources,
leading us to use the more consistent IDS data.
'5 For
         a description of the PSII), see Blau and Kahn (1993), and for information on the HUS,
see Edin and Holinlund (forthcoming).
"  For Australia and for a subset of the 1982 Norway data, weeks worked information is
available. However, we treat these countries similarly to the others in order to maintain
comparability.

    The Australian earnings data were originally reported as a continuous variable. However,
to maintain comparability with the other countries, we recoded the Australian earnings into the
ISSP's intervals for Australia. When the analysis was performed for Australia using the
original continuous variable, the results were virtually identical to those reported here. The B!

INIWAGaDOC 2/2W94 9.34 P11
                                               -13-


the top (open-ended) category as 1.2 times its minimum value. Our results were not sensitive
to assumptions about top-coding. Finally, concern about adequate sample size led us to pool

years of data for those ISSP countries surveyed more than once (see above). However, since

the multiple years of data on Sweden and Norway come from different sources, we do not pool

them.

        The hours-corrected earnings variable shown in Figure 1 is computed as follows. For

each country, the following regression was estimated:



(2)             InEARN = b0 + b1PART +                      b3HFULL + B'X + e,


where InEARN is the log of earnings; PART is a dummy variable for part-time work (less
than 35 hours per week); URPART and ERPULL are interactions of weekly work hours with

pan- and full-time status; X is a vector of explanatory variables including years of schooling,

potential experience and its square, a dummy variable for those married, spouse present, a
union membership dummy variable, one-digit industry and occupation dummies, and year
dummies for the countries for which we pooled different years of data; and e is an error term.

(See Appendix Table A-I for variable definitions.)18
        The PART, HRPART, HRFULL and year dummy variable coefficients from (2) were
used to adjust each person's earnings for work hours and year by assuming a 40 hour work
week and the end year of the pooled years. That is,   for each worker i, we have:




data were also continuous but did not match up with the ISSP categories for Italy.   We
therefore used the continuous earnings variable for Italy.
16 Marital statuswas not available for Italy; union status was not available for Australia or
Italy. For the purpose of comparing the U.S. to these countries, we estimated U.S. equations
that conformed to the same specification as each country. In analyses of the U.. PSID and
the Swedish HUS data shown below, actual labor market experience is used; union status is
not available in the HTJS.



N1WAG.DOC 2(20/94 9:34 PM
                                                 -14-


  (3)      YFULLj = InEARN1 - b1PART1 -                      b3(HRFULLj-40) - ZtTtYRU,


  where YFTJLLis the log of hours-corrected earnings, the b's are estimated coefficients, and Tt

  and YRt are, respectively, estimated coefficient and dummy variable vectors referring to the
 pooled years of data. For the 1984 U.S.-Sweden comparison, the earnings variable is hourly
 earnings, based on the previous year's earnings divided by the previous year' s work hours.'9
           Measures of inequality calculated on the basis of hours-corrected earnings were
 presented in Figure land are also shown in Panel A of Table 1. Weagain see that the U.S.
 has a considerably larger standard deviation of earnings and 90-10 gap than the other
 countries. However, whereas the U.S. 50-10 earnings differential is much larger than it is in
 the other countries (0.582 log points above the nonU.S. average), the 90-50 differential in the
 U.S. is smaller than in Britain, Switzerland and Hungary and only slightly larger than in
 Germany, Austria, and Norway (1989); the U.S. 90-50 gap and is only slightly (0.007 log
 points) larger than the unweighted avenge for the other countries. Similar results are obtained
 for a comparison of log hourly earnings between the U.S. and Sweden in 1984
                                                                                  (Panel B). The
 U.S. 50-10 differential is much larger (0.518 log points) than it is in Sweden, while the 90-50

 gap is only 0.158 log points higher.
         B. The Role of Prices and Measured Characteristics
         A crucial question raised by the results shown in Table 1 is the degree to which the
observed differences in wage dispersion between the U.S. and other countriesare due to
differences in measured characteristics versus differences in the prices of labor market skills
(i.e., wage structure). To shed light on this issue, we employ a fun distributionalaccounting

    For the U.S. PSID sample, we excluded anyone earning less than $1 per hour or more than
$250 per hour in 1983 dollars. The U.S. minimum wage was $3.35/hr at the time. For
Sweden, we excluded anyone earning less than 7 boner per hour, or about 1/7 the avenge
measured wage. This exclusion restriction was made since $1 was about 1/7 the U.S. average.
Since the U.S. wage distribution is more dispersed than the Swedish, any error caused by. these
exclusion restrictions will lead us to understate the Swedish-U.S. difference in wage
dispersion.


IKTWA*3.DoC 2/20/94 9:34 PM
                                              -15-


scheme developed by Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993) to study intertemporal changes in U.S.

wage inequality.
       We begin with a wage equation for worker i in country j:



(4)            YFULLjJ = PjZj + (YjOjj,


where YFULL is hours-corrected (and year-corrected) log earnings (or hourly earnings for the

1984 Sweden-U.S. comparison), Z is a vector of measured characteristics, B is a vector of
coefficients, 9 is a standardized residual with mean 0 and variance 1, and o is the residual

standard deviation of log hours-corrected earnings.

       The first hypothetical distribution for country j is the set of wages that would emerge if

we applied the estimated U.S. wage function (Pu) and residual standard deviation (cTu) to each

worker i in country j:



(5)            Y(l)ij = PuZij + CTuOij.


Y(l)j is computed for each worker in country j by valuing his measured characteristics at the
U.S. coefficient vector fi and his position in his own country's wage residuals (e.g. the 35th
percentile) at the corresponding position in the U.S. residual distribution. The primary
difference between the distribution of YFULL for the United States and of Y(1) for country     j
is the substitution of country j's distribution of measured characteristics for thoseof the U.S.
in the U.S. wage equation.2° Construction of Y(1) is important because it allows us to


20
   Y(1)1 also uses country j's estimated values of 0, but these are
                                                                      standardized across
countriel and therefore do not directly contribute to international differences in the distribution
of wages. However, to the extent that 8 is more strongly correlated with Z for one country
than another, the difference between the distribution of YFULLV and Y(1)j will also rf1!ct the
effects of this difference in correlation. We discuss differences in unmeasured productivity
characteristics below.



D11WAO.DOC 21Of94 t34 PM
                                                   -16-


  determine the extent to which international differences in the distribution of wages are due to

  differences in the distribution of measured characteristics.

            The second hypothetical distribution for country j results from giving each person in

  countryj his own country's estimated wage coefficients but the U.S. wage residual

  corresponding to his position in his own country's residual distribution:



 (6)                 Y(2$j = PjZjj + CuOjj.


 The difference between the distributions of Y(2)jj and Y(l)ij is entirely due to the difference

 between country j's wage function and that of the United States.

           Finally, the impact of wage residuals on country j's wage distribution relative to that of
 the U.S. is the difference between the distribution of
                                                          YFULLij and Y(2)u. We would like to
 interpret this as the effect of unmeasured prices (i.e. the difference between      and aJ).
 However, it also includes the effect of differences in the distribution of unmeasured

productivity characteristics. For example, while the U.S. residual distribution may be more

dispersed than that of other countries because of higher prices of unmeasured skills, itmay

also be the case that the U.S. labor force is more diverse in its unmeasured characteristics.

This latter difference would be included in our estimate of the effect of wage residuals, but

does not reflect unmeasured prices. Our review of the Literatureon wage-setting institutions

suggests that the U.S. does in fact have higher skill prices than other countries; but we cannot

rule out the possibility that some portion of the cross-country differences in wage variation

associated with the wage residuals reflects international differences in unmeasured quantities as
well as unmeasured prices.

          To further support the notion that unmeasured prices are important, wesupplement our

other analyses with a comparison of 1984 data from the U.S. P511) and the Swedish BUS

which is Likely to be less contaminated by unmeasured heterogeneity than our other data

sources. Specifically, as noted above, for the 1984 U.S.-Swedish comparison, we use a

INTWAO.DOC 2/2O.'94 9:34 P7.1
                                               -17-


sample of white, full-Lime employed men from the U.S. and full-time employed men from
Sweden. Thus, racial heterogeneity in the U.S. will not directly affect this comparison. In

addition, we are able to construct actual average hourly earnings in these samples, again

reducing the scope for errors. Finally, we are able to control for actual, rather than potential
labor market experience. While potential labor market experience is a good proxy for actual
experience for men, fewer errors will result if one has data on the real thing and if these data
are themselves accurate.21
        We perform the decomposition of differences in the wage distribution implied by

equations (4)-(6) in two stages. Initially, we include in Z a vector of human capital
characteristics (education, potential experience and its square, and marital status). Next, we
augment the human capital variables with a vector of industry and occupation dummy variables
and union status; i.e., we estimate equation (2) above. A comparison of the results front the
two specifications sheds light on the role of occupation, industry, and unionism in explaining

the international differences.
        The results of performing this decomposition for the standard deviation of log wages
are shown in Table 2. Panel A of the Table shows the human capital specification results,
while Panel B shows the findings for the full specification. The actual U.S.-country
differences are shown in the first column. As may be seen in the second column of the Table,

the distribution of measured characteristics explains relatively little (about 6 percent, on
average) of the higher variation in wages in the U. S. than elsewhere under either
specification. In contrast, prices appear to be important in explaining the differences in
inequality between the U.S. and the other countries. In every instance, measured prices and

residual effects serve to raise the U.S. standard deviation of wages compared to each country.


                                                                                           in
21  In the Swedish data, information on actual experience since age 16 is collected, while
the P50, the variable refers to years of experience since age  18. To make  the two  variables
comparable, we added two times the U.S. white male employment/population ratio for ages
 16-17 to the PSI]) experience figure. These data were collected from USBLS fl985).


IWIWAG.DOC 2/201949:34 P3.1
                                                -18-


 Table 2 indicates that prices of measured characteristics explain a larger share than does the
 distribution of measured characteristics—15 to 20 percent on avenge, with the bulk of the
 difference between the U.S. and the other countries (741o79 percent) attributable to the larger
 residual variation of wages in the U.S. Thus, prices of labor market skills (both measured
 and unmeasured) appear to be the primary cause of the higher variation in wages in the U.S.,
 although we cannot rule out the possibility that the distribution of unmeasured characteristics
 also plays a role. The 1984 U.S.-Sweden comparison is instructive in this regard. Despite the
 more homogeneous U.S. sample and the better measure of wages and experience, the results
 are quite similar to the 1980 U.S.-Sweden comparison. Most notably, measured

 characteristics actually play a smaller part in explaining the U.S.-Swedish difference in the
 1984 comparison.

          We explicitly compare the magnitude and sources of the 50-10 and the 90-50
 differentials in Table 3. The results for the human capital specification are again shown in
 Panel A and the results for the full specification in Panel B. The first column of both Panels
shows the actual U.S.-countryj difference in the 50-10 and 90-50 log wage differentials. As
we saw above, these differences are considerably greater for the 50-10 gap (0.576 log points,
on average) than for the 90-50 gap (0.021 log points, on average)22 The second column of
Table 3 shows that these 50-10 vs. 90-50 comparisons are substantially affected by the
distribution of measured characteristics.

         For each countxyj, the Measured Characteristics Effect is the difference between
YFULLIJ and Y(l) at the indicated percentiles of the distribution. The positive effects for the
50-10 differentials for both specifications indicate that the U.S. distribution of measured
characteristics widens the 50-10 gap compared to that in each country. These effects--O.245
log points for the human capital specification and 0.207 log points for the full specification, on


22
  Note, these figures differ slightly from those presented above because Sweden 1984 is now
mcluded m the non-US average.


LNTWAG DCC 2/23194 3:29 hI
                                                -19-


average—are large indeed. A comparison of the results for the two specifications indicates that

it is the U.S. distribution of human capital characteristics that is relevant in explaining the
international differences, with the U.S. distribution of industry, occupation and union status

slightly lowering the 50-10 gap compared to other countries.23 On average, measured
characteristics are estimated to account for 35.9 to 43.4 percent of the higher U.S. 50-10
differential. In contrast, the distribution of measured characteristics lowers the 90-50 wage
differential in the U.S. compared to other countries. In each case, the Effect is negative with
an unweighted avenge effect of about -0.16 log points in both specifications. For both the 50-
10 and   90-50 analyses, we find the impact of measured characteristics to be quite similar for
the Sweden 1984 and Sweden 1980 comparisons, again suggesting that greater unmeasured
heterogeneity of U.S. workers is not driving our results.
         The findings for the Measured Characteristics Effects imply that a considerable portion
of the wider 50-10 gap relative to the 90-50 gap in the U.S. is accounted for by differences in
the distribution of productive characteristics. With the same distribution of measured
characteristics, the avenge difference between the U.S. 50-10 gap and that for the other
countries would decline to 0.331 to 0.369 log points (from 0.576), while the figure for the 90-
50 gap would increase to about 0.18 (from 0.021). Thus, if we consider the part of the
differential which is not accounted for by measured characteristics (i.e., the sum of the Wage
Coefficients and Wage Residuals Effects) as potentially due to wage structure, we find that the
U.S. wage stricture widens both the top and the bottom of the wage distribution relative to
other countries. In particular, adding the Wage Coefficients and Wage Residuals Effects, we
find that in every case, U.S. prices lead to a widening of both the 50-10 and the 90-50
differentials compared to other countries.




23 To some degree union status, while treated here as a measured characteristic in Panel B of
Tables 2 and 3, could be considered part of the wage-setting institutions. The effects of
collective bargaining are investigated in detail below.


INTWAG.D 2PW94 33S FM
                                                 -20-


           In the decomposition shown in Tables 2 and 3, controlling for personal characteristics
  is especially important, as it reveals the 90-50 widening effect of U.S. prices, an effect that is

  not apparent if one merely compares the raw 90-50 differential in the U.S. with that in other
  countries. Further, it reduces the likelihood that we are overstating the compression at the
  bottom (that would occur if one merely examined the raw 50-10 differentials). However, the

  U.S. wage structure continues to widen the bottom by more than the top. This is true on
  avenge and in nine (Full Specification) or ten (Human Capital Specification) of eleven
 possible cases. Such an effect is consistent with government and trade union wage policies in
 other countries that have their biggest effect in bringing up the bottom of the distribution.
          The last two columns of Table 3 show the effects of Wage Coefficients and Wage
 Residuals separately. For the 50-10 gap, the U.S. human capital wage coefficients usually
 have a small widening effect compared to the other countries (accounting for 4.2 percent of the
 difference, on average), although the effect is negative in four cases. The Coefficients Effect
 is notably increased when the full specification is employed (accounting for 21.7 percent of the

 difference, on avenge), suggesting that it is the prices associated with the industry, occupation
 and unionism variables that are particularly high in the U.S. In both specifications, however,
 the Wage Residuals Effect accounts for a substantial share (42.2 to 53.3 percent) of the U.S.-
 country j difference. In the case of the 90-50 gap, the Coefficients and Residual Effects are
 generally positive and do not differ very much between the two specifications. This suggests
 that the impact of measured prices primarily reflects higher prices of the human capital
variables in the U.S. The Coefficients and Residual Effects are of roughly equal size, on
average.



         C. The Effect of Institutions; Collective Bargaining and Contract Extension
         In our discussion of trade unionism, four important points were emphasized that each
leads us to expect a higher wage dispersion in the U.S. than in other countries. First, the U.S.

is less unionized, implying a relatively smaller low variance sector. Second, the union-

INTWAGD.DOC 2/VJ9 3:35 PM
                                               -21-


nonunion wage differential is larger in the U.S. Third, collective bargaining is more
centralized in other countries than in the U.S. Fourth, in several countries, the terms of
collective bargaining agreements are commonly extended by law to nonunion workers, a
feature not present in the U.S. industrial relations system. In addition, the extent of voluntary
emulation of union pay structures by the nonunion sector (i.e., spillover effects) is likely to be
greater in other countries than in the U.S. due to their larger union sectors.
         These latter two aspects of wage-setting lead us to expect lower wage dispersion in both
the union and nonunion sectors in other countries compared to the U.S. Whether the union or
the nonunion effect is larger (relative to the U.S.) is an empirical question. On the one hand,
suppose that the wage spillover due to contact extension and voluntary imitation is virtually
complete in the non-U.S. counties, but that unions in these countries have only a slightly
greater narrowing effect for their members than U.S. unions do. Then we would expect the
nonunion differences in inequality between the U.S. and other counties to be larger because,
outside the U.S., workers not in unions would essentially be treated as union members. On
the other hand, suppose that the spillover to nonunion workers in the non-U.S. counties is
partial and that unions in these counties have a much greater narrowing effect for their
members than U.S. unions do. Then U.S.-non-U.S. differences in union inequality could be
greater than nonunion differences.
         These issues were investigated using data on the countries in our sample for which
collective bargaining status was available. Thus, Italy, Australia and Sweden 1984 were
excluded for lack of data. In addition, Sweden 1980 could not be included because of the
small sample of nonunion workers (59) in the data set. With a unionization rate of 85.7

percent, Sweden may be considered essentially a unionized country so that a union-nonunion
comparison may not make a great deal of sense in any case.
         Table 4 decomposes the international differences in the overall variance of wages by
union status. It is.constructed along the lines suggested by equation (1) and further developed

in equation (7) below.

D41WAO. DOG 2/22/94 3:31 PM
                                                  -22-


  (7)              =
           Vu-VJ       (txau(vaj-vaj) + (lCau)(vnu..vnj)J
                   ÷ EVaj(cau_ctaj) +   Vnj{(laa& - (aj)}]
                   + (au{(wauw*&2 - (WayW*j)2} + (l_ctalJ){(wfluw*u)2 - (Wnj..wj)2}]
                   + E(WajW*j)2(CcauC(aj) + (WnjW*j)2((1..C(au) -


 where Vu and vj are the overall U.S. and countryj variances in log wages; tXa is the fraction

 of workers unionized; Va and v are the variances of union and nonunion log wages; Wa and

        are average union and nonunion log wages; and w is the overall average log wage.
           The first square-bracketed term of (7) is the Within-Sector Variance Effect which
 measures the contribution to the overall wage variance difference of U.S. -country j differences
 in variances within the union and nonunion sectors. The second square-bracketed term of (7)
 is the Within-Sector Composition Effect which measures the contribution to the overall wage
 variance difference of U.S.-country j differences in the representation of workers in the high

 variance sector. The third square-bracketed term of (7) is the Between-Sector Wage
 Differential Effect which measures the contribution to the overall wage variance difference of

 relatively high union-nonunion wage differentials in one country. Finally, the last square-
bracketed term of (7)is the Between Sector Composition Effect which measures the
contribution to the overall wage variance difference of a higher representation of employment

in the sector with wages relatively far from the avenge.
          Table 4 indicates that the overwhelming portion of the gap between the U.S. and other

countries in the variance of wages—on average, about 86 percent (O.3320/O.388l)--is due to
higher U.S. variances within the union and nonunion sectors. Mother substantial proportion.
about 12 percent of the avenge U.S.-countryj gap in variances, comes from the Within-Sector

Composition Effect. That is, a higher proportion of U.S. workers are nonunion, and this is
the sector with a larger variance in all countries. The higher union-nonunion wage differential
in the U.S. causes a small widening of the U.S. variance relative to other countries, with the

IN1WACD. DCC 2P2VN 3:31 PM
                                                -23-


 Between-Sector Wage Differential Effect accounting for, on average, about 2 percent of the

 average U.S.-other country variance gap. Finally, the Between-Sector Composition Effect is
 found to be negligible.
          Table 4 implies that the key to understanding 1.1.5.-other country differences in wage

 inequality is explaining inequality within the union and nonunion sectors. We begin such an

 analysis in Table 5, which provides summary measures of union and nonunion wage

inequality. With the exception of Hungary, wage inequality, as measured by the standard

deviation of the log of wages, is smaller in the union than in the nonunion sector of each

country. For the most part, this is associated with smaller 50-10 and 90-50 gaps in the union

sector. While the U.S. conforms to this general pattern, the standard deviation of wages is

greater in both the union and nonunion sectors in the U.S. than elsewhere. And the avenge

1.1.5.-other country differences are similar: 0.259 log points for union workers (0.633 - 0.374)

and 0.270 log points for nonunion workers (0.799 - 0.529). However, mirroring the

aggregate patterns, while the 50-10 gap is larger in both the union and nonunion sectors in the
U.S. than in each of the other countries, the 90-50 gap is about the same (nonunion sector) or

smaller (union sector) in the U.S. Thus, in a descriptive sense, what distinguishes the U.S.

wage distribution from that of other countries in both sectors is the greater spread at the

bottom. Moreover, the U.S.-countryj difference in the 50-10 gap is much larger, on avenge,
for the nonunion sector (0.566 log points) than the union sector (0.285 log points), and in

every case, the intercountry difference is larger for nonunion than union workers.

         Together, Tables 4 and 5 suggest that the higher overall U.S. wage variance is due to a

higher wage variance within both the union and nonunion sectors in the U.S. Moreover, the

higher U.S..variance within each sector is associated with a larger 50-10 gap in both sectors in

the U.S. than elsewhere, with the U.S-countiyj difference in the 50-10 gap being larger for

the nonunion than for the union sector. This is suggestive of larger union spillover effects on

nonunion wage structures in other countries than in the U.S., although it could still be due to

the impact of measured characteristics. In order to shed light on the impact of prices as


DITWAAJt.Dec 2/fl/U 3:31 PSI
                                                  -24-


     opposed to the distribution of measured skills, we perform the regression-based decomposition
   outlined in equations (4)-(6) separately for union and nonunion workers
                                                                           in each country using
   the full specification. That is, we employ the overall regressions for the full
                                                                                     specification to
   obtain the estimated coefficients, but then examine the distributions of YFULL, Y(l) and Y(2)
   separately for union and nonunion workers.24

            The results of performing this decomposition for the standard deviation of wages, and
  the 50-10 and 90-50 differentials are shown in Table 6. In each case, we present the overall

  U.S.-countiyj difference, the Measured Characteristics Effect, and the Wage Structure Effect
  (i.e., the sum of the Coefficients and Residual Effects). The findings for theWage Structure
  Effect indicate what the U.S.-country j difference would be after adjusting for differences
  between countries in the distribution of measured characteristics. Our discussion of institutions
  implies that these labor market prices would lead to a higher dispersion of both union and
  nonunion wages in the U.S. than elsewhere. Looking first at the standarddeviation of log

 wages, we find that it continues to be substantially higher in the U.S. in both the union and
 nonunion sectors even after taking into account the distribution ofmeasured characteristics.
 The wage structure effect is positive (i.e. the U.S. structure raises the standard deviation of
 the log of wages compared to other countries) in each instance. Moreover, in each case, the

 U.S.-countzy.j difference is larger for the nonunion than for the union sectoc the Wage
 Structure Effect is 0.337 for nonunion workers, on average, compared to 0.243 for union

workers. This same pattern obtains for the 50-10 differential: the U.S. gap remains larger
than that elsewhere in both sectors after adjustment for the distribution of characteristics, with

the U.S.-country j difference being considerably larger, on avenge, for nonunion than for
union workers (i.e., 0.423 versus 0.284 log points). The effect is larger for nonunion workers
in five of seven possible comparisons. In contrast, while the U.S. does tend to have a larger

24
   Ideally one would like to esthpag separate union and nonunion equations to allow the
coefficients to vary across sectors, but, unfortunately, small sample sizes precluded this
approach.


tNI'WAQflDOc 2121)94 3:3* PM
                                                 -25-


 90-50 gap than elsewhere after adjustment for the distribution of measured characteristics, the

 difference between the U.S. and the other countries is smaller and tends to be about the same

 size in the nonunion as in the union sector (i.e., 0.192 versus 0. 166 log points, on average).
The nonunion effect is larger than the union effect in four of seven cases.
         Thus, after controlling for the distribution of measured characteristics our central
conclusions remain the same: the variance of wages is greater within the nonunion and union
sectors in the U.S. than elsewhere, with the wage structure in other countries tending to be
considerably more compressed at the bottom in both sectors. Moreover, we now find that both
of these features are more pronounced for the U.S. nonunion sector than for the union sector.
These findings are consistent with a considerably more decentralized wage-setting process in
the U.S. union sector and the absence in this country of contract extension and other
mechanisms which extend union-determined wages to the nonunion sector. Evidently, the
spillover from union to nonunion wage structures in the other countries is strong enough to
outweigh the direct effects of centralized bargaining on union workers' wage dispersion.
         An additional implication of the wage compression-contract extension phenomenon is
that the union relative wage effect (i.e., union wages compared to nonunion wages, all else
equal) should be higher in the U.S. than in other countries. Further, this effect should be
especially high for U.S. unskilled workers compared to unskilled workers in other countries.
That is, unions in all countries may be expected to raise the wages of low skill more than those
of high skill workers; however, outside the U.S., these effects are transmitted to nonunion
workers to a much greater extent. To probe for the consistency of our findings with this

institutional view, we perform quantile regression analysis for each country. This technique
allows one to analyze given portions of the wage distribution (e.g.. the 10th, 20th, or 50th
percentile) conditional on a set of personal characteristics Z.25


25 For further discussion of the quantile regression technique, see Koenker and Bassett (1978)
or Chamberlain (1991).


1wrWAG.DOC 2122)94 3:31 PM
                                                  -26-


           Suppose, for example, that we can express the qth percentile of this conditional
  distribution for country j as:


  (8)              YFULLQ I Z      BqZ,


  where YFULLqJZ is the qth percentile of the conditional distribution of hours-corrected
  earnings given Z, and      is a vector of quantile regression coefficients. Since union
  membership is an element of Z, we can make inferences about the impact of unions on the

 wage distribution by comparing the union quantile regression coefficients at different portions
 of the conditional distribution of wages given Z. An additional benefit of using quantile
 regressions is that we no longer need to assume comparability in the explanatory variable

 definitions across countries, as we did in the decompositions in Tables 2, 3 and 6. For
 example, in these earlier analyses, we treated a year of schooling as comparable across

 countries. In the quantile regression analysis, we merely ask, within eachcountry, what the
 union-nonunion pay gap is for workers at different points of the wage distribution, controlling
 for education level (and other explanatory variables).

         Table 7 provides union membership coefficients from quantile regressions of the form
 of equation (8) with the flail specification. The Table indicates that, at each point of the
 distribution, the U.S. ceteris pan bus union-nonunion wage differential is larger than

elsewhere. The finding of a larger union premium in the U.S. also characterized our Ordinary
Least Squares (OLS) results and has been obtained in previous OLS analyses (Blanchflower
and Freeman, 1992). It is strongly suggestive of contract extension and other mechanisms by
which union wages in other countries "spill over into the nonunion sector thus lowering their
estimated ceteris paribus union-nonunion differentials relativeto the U.S.

         Second, within virtually every country, the union wage effect is larger for the lower
quantiles of the distribution. This is consistent with union pay-leveling effects—being in. a
union matters more for one's wages the lower down one would have been in the nonunion

INTWAOn.DOC 2fZ2/N 3:31 FM
                                                -27-


 wage distribution. This finding has been obtained in quantile regressions on U.S. data
 (Chamberlain, 1991). However, the decline in union effects as we move up the wage
 distribution is steeper in the U.S. than elsewhere. For example, in the U.S., the cexeris
pa,rthus union-nonunion pay gap at the 10th percentile is 0.363 and declines to 0.176 at the

 median—a decrease of 0.187 log points. In contrast, the nonU.S. average union premium is
0.102 at the 10th percentile and fails to 0.016 at the median, a drop-off of 0.086 log points.

Thus it appears that union pay policies that bring up the bottom of the union wage distribution
ale common to all countries, including the U.S. The difference between the U.S. and the
countries observed here is that, in those countries, such policies are extended to the nonunion
sector to a greater extent. The use of quantile regression increases our confidence that the 50-
 10 findings in Table 6 actually reflect pay-setting institutions rather than the impact of
measured characteristics.

         The effects of union status continue to decline in almost every case as we proceed from
the 50th percentile to the 90th percentile. The decline for the U.S. is 0.053 log points, and the
average for the other countries is 0.029 log points. These are, in both cases, much less
dramatic than the decreases from the 10th to the 50th percentiles, again suggesting that unions

place particular emphasis on bringing up the bottom relative to restraining the top.


         0. An Alternative Explanation: Supply and Demand Effects
        The findings in Tables 2 and 3 indicate that prices of labor market skills play an
important role in explaining international differences in inequality, since international
differences in the distribution of measured characteristics do not account for the differences in
wage equality. While the results presented in Tables 4-7 suggest that differences between
countries in union pay-setting institutions are consistent with the observed patterns of wage
inequality, we must also consider the possibility that supply and demand forces in the labor
market are equally consistent.



DI1WAGfl.DOC VU194 3:31 PM
                                                -28-


          To investigate the impact of supply and demand, we divide each country's labor force

 into three skill groups. To do this, we first pool the entire sample and estimate the following
 wage equation:


 (9)             YFULL=do+dlED+d2EXP+d3EXPSQ+E'c+e


 where ED is education, EXP and EXPSQ are potential experience and its square, C is a vector
 of country dummies, and E is an error term.26 The estimated coefficients from equation (9)
 were used to compute SKILL, a predicted wage for each person in each countryj:


 (10)            SKILLj=d0 + diED1 + d2EXPj +d3EXPSQj,


This predicted wage is a measure of the persons skill based on a world-wide pooled regression

including only productivity characteristics (and eliminating country shift-terms).
        We then divide each country's work force into three skill groups based on the following
percentiles of SKILL: 0-33, 33-67, 67l0O.27 These percentiles are computed in two ways.

First, we construct a set in which the percentiles refer to the country's own distribution of
SKILL, so that the skill groups will be of the same relative size across countries. This
                                                                                           sample
considers skill to be a relative concept, with, say the 33rd percentile of SKILL in one country

considered comparable to the 33rd percentile of SKILL in another country. One cannot
analyze the effects of relative supply among these groups, since, by construction, they are all


 26 Equation (9) was run using weighted least squares with the weights being (EMP/Sample
Size), where EMP is average male employment in the country for the years in question and
Sample Size is the size of the microdata sample for the given country. In effect, we weight by
the world-wide likelihood that each worker is a member of the
                                                               sample. Employment
information was taken from ILO (1991). The results were similar when unweighted
regressions were used.
27 The intervals are closed at the bottom and open at the top, except for the 67-100 group,
which is closed at each end.


tNTWAGflC Vfl/94 3:31   P31
                                               -29-


proportionally the same size. Second, we construct a set of skill groups based on the U.S.
cutoffs for SKILL. These percentiles consider skill to be an absolute concept: for example,
those who place below the cutoff for the 33rd percentile of the U.S. distribution of SKILL in
one country are considered comparable to those who place below this level for the SKILL
variable in another country. The relative sizes of the three groups can differ across countries
under this latter definition. A similar analysis is performed separately on the 1984 P511) and
1984 Swedish data sample.
        Table 8 provides information on wage differentials by skill group. Panel A compares
skill groups based on own country cutoffs, while Panel B uses U.S. skill-group cutoffs. In
both cases, the findings are similar to those obtained when we simply compared wage
distributions. In particular, there is a larger pay gap between the middle-(33-67) and low-(0-

33)skillgroupsintheU.S. thanineachoftheothercountries. Incontrast, thegapbetween
high-and middle-skill groups tends to be fairly similar in the U.S. as in the other countries: the
U.S. gap is about the same as the non-U.S. avenge when own country cutoffs are used; and
slightly smaller than the non-U.S. avenge when the U.S. cutoffs are employed. Looking
from the top to the bottom, the high (67-100) vs. low (0-33) gap is, with only one exception
(Switzerland using the U.S. cutoffs), larger in the U.S. than in each of the other countries.
For the 1984 U.S.-Sweden comparison, the results are roughly similar when the relative
cutoffs are used in that the U.S.-Swedish difference is considerably larger for the low-middle
gap than for the middle-high gap. When the absolute cutoffs are used, however, .the U.S.-
Swedish difference between the middle-low gaps is now the same size as the difference
between the middle-high gaps. Regardless of the cutoff used, however, the U.S. high-low gap
exceeds the Swedish high-low gap.
        To analyze the impact of supply and demand, we construct supply and demand indexes
by skill group for each country relative to the U.S. in a manner similar to Katz and Murphy's
(1992) analysis of changes over time in U.S. inequality. We focus on the results from panel B
above using the U.S. skill group cutoffs since they are more relevant for the supply indexes

INIWAG.DOC 2122/94 3:31 PM
                                                -30-


  (and the net supply index which we develop below). Thus, the pattern which we seek to

  explain is a relatively high pay gap between the middle-and low-skill groups in the U.S.

  combined with a high versus middle skill differential in the U.S. which tends, with two

  exceptions (i.e., Sweden 1984 and Norway 1982), to be about the same or smallerthan

  elsewhere. Despite these countervailing differences, the pay gap between the top and bottom

  tends ovcrwhelminglyto be higher in the U.S.

          Turning first to demand, we wish to know whether the composition of output by

 industry (and the consequent derived demand for labor) favors one skill group over another in
 the U.S. relative to other countries. Following Katz and Murphy (1992), we consmjct

 industry-occupation cells and view the output' of particular occupation groups as an
 intermediate product

          The following demand index, ln(1 +ADi), was created for each skill group k for each

 country relative to the U.S., where:


 (11)


 where o refers to occupation-industry cell, c.jk is skill group ks share ofemployment in

 occupation-industry cello in the U. S., SE0 is the difference between the U.S. and countryj's

 share of total labor input employed in cello, and Ek is the U.S. share of total laborinput
accounted for by skill group St The demand index thus measures the degree to which the

occupation-industry structure favors skill group kin countxyj relative to the U.S., using U.S.
weights.
         Supply indexes 55k are computed as follows:


(12)             '15k lflEkj - lnEkw




IWTWAOaDQC 222I94 3:31 PW
                                                -31-


 where       and E are respectively, the share of country j's and the U.S.s totallabor input
 consisting of skill group k, using the U.S. cutoffs for skill groups. Thus, the supply indexes
 compare the relative representation of each skill group in country j's labor force, using the
 U.S. shares as the norm.
         We may then compute net supply as:



 (13)            SNSk =ask-ln(1+aDk)

 where ask and 4ADi are defined in equations (11) and (12) above. (Recall that all magnitudes
are in log points and have been normalized relative to the U.S.) As Katz and Murphy (1992)
show using a simple equilibrium model, differences across countries in relative wages for each
skill group will be negatively related to differences in net supply, 4NSk. Intuitively, the
larger the supply of skill group k relative to demand in countryj compared to the U.S., the
worse skill group k will fare in countryj compared to the U.S.
         Table 9 presents results for the relative demand indexes by skill group. The actual
entries are of the form ln(l + 4Db) and are approximate percentage effects. The occupation-
industry categories include six industries crossed with three occupation groups.29 Labor input
is measured in hours in PanelA and in earnings in Panel B.29
         The results in Table 9 indicate that demand tends to ftvor low and middle skill workers

in other countries relative to the U.S., particularly when labor input is measured in earnings.
In addition, when the earnings measure is used, the demand index for the low-skill group is a



    The industries are: 1) apiculture; 2) mining, manufacturing and construction; 3)
transportation, communication and public utilities; 4) trade; 5) finance, insurance, real estate
and services; and 6) government. The occupations are 1) managers and professionals; 2)
clerical and sales workers; and 3) craftsworkers, operatives, laborers and service workers.
29 For
       the purposes of constructing the demand and supply indexes, the self-employed are
included in all countries. For the 1984 Sweden-U.S. comparison, part-time workers are
included (in addition to full-time workers and the self employed) in measuring the labor input.


D1TWAOn.D 21VA4 3:31 PM
                                                 -32-


  bit (0.044 log points) larger, on avenge, than for the middle-skill group which might be
 consistent with a differential in favor of low-skill workers in other countries relative to the
 U.S. In contrast, demand appears less favorable to high-skill workers in other countries
 relative to the U.S., and this is not consistent with a differential between high-and middle-skill
 workers which tends to be the same or larger in other cOuntries than in the U.S. Of course to

 fUlly evaluate the consequences of these patterns for relative wages, we need also to take into
 account relative supply.
         Table 10 presents the supply indexes with the labor input measured in hours (Panel
                                                                                            A)
 or in earnings (Panel B). The results indicate that while demand effects
                                                                  may be partially
 consistent with the observed wage gaps, supply effects are not. Using both measures (hours
 and earnings), other countries have much greater shares of their labor input in low-skill labor
 and much smaller shares in high-skill labor. If relative supply were the entire explanation,
 then the middle vs. low skill pay gap should be smaller in the U.S. as should the highvs.
middle skill pay gap. These indexes are not consistent with the wage differential findings in
Table 8.

        Relative demand and supply are considered together in Table 11 which shows the net
supply indexes. Again, Panel A gives the results when labor input is measured in hours and
Panel B gives the results using earnings. Table 11 clearly shows that the supply effects swamp
the demand effects for low skill workers. Using both measures, net supply is positive for this

group, on avenge, and within each country. While net supply is also positive, on avenge, for
the middle-skill group, the avenge net supply figure for the low-skill group exceeds that for
the middle-skill group for both the hours measure (0.33 1 vs. 0.095) and the earnings measure
(0.490 vs. 0.146)." Thus, the supply and demand analysis suggests that low skill workers




30 This is also the case in nine out of a possible eleven pair-wise (U.S. vs. country j)
comparisons for both the hours and earnings measures.



UflWACflo 2(flM 3:31 PM
                                                  -33-


 should in general fare wont relative to the middle in other countries than they do in the U.S.
 and cannot explain the smaller low-middle skill differentials that prevail in these countries.

          In contrast to the pattern for the low skill group, the net supply effects for the high skill

 group are consistently negative. Further, they are, on avenge, quite large in absolute value
 (i.e., -0.785 using the hours measure and -0.710 using the earnings measure). While in two
 cases   (Italy and Sweden 1984) net supply is also negative for middle-skill workers (using both
 measures), in none of the four possible cases is the net supply figure for the high-skill
                                                                                             group
 larger than the net supply figure for the middle-skill group. Thus, supply and demand analysis

 would predict differentials in favor of high-skill workers in other countries relative to the U.S.
 While this may be consistent with the findings from Panel B of Table 8 that the U.S.
 differential is moderately (.034) smaller than the non-U.S. average, when we consider the high

 (67-100) vs. low (0-33) wage differential, the results are inconsistent with the predictions of

 supply and demand analysis in virtually every case. Table 11 indicates that high-skill workers

are considerably scarcer relative to low-skill workers in other countries relative to the U.S.,

yet Table 8 shows that with one exception (Switzerland), they earn more relative to low-skill
workers in the U.S. than elsewhere.

         Thus, differences in relative supplies and demands for skill in other countries compared

to the U.S. do not appear to be broadly consistent with the observed pattern of relative wages

by skill in other countries compared to the U.S. In particular, they do not explain the most
striking difference between the U.S. and the other countries, namely their greater wage

compression at the bottom relative to the top or the middle. Having said that, we must note

some important qualifications. First, since relative wages for low skill workers are higher in
all countries than in the U.S. and we use an employment-based measure of industry demand,

we may have understated the demand for low skill workers that would occur at constant wages

relative to the U.S. Similar reasoning implies that our supply estimates may have been

overstated. Thus, we may have overestimated net supply at constant relative prices. Second,




DTWAO. 2/flA4 3:3! PM
                                                -34.-


our demand index does not include any differences across countries in within industry-
occupation demands for skill. It is unclear what effect this might have on our results.
         Third, we have implicitly assumed a separability in production between other factors
and the three skill groups. However, other factors such as women's labor may not be equally
substitutable for male labor of different skill levels. Topel (1992), fix example, has suggested
that women's labor is more substitutable on average for low skill than for high or medium skill
men. In our data, women's work hours account for a larger share of total hours worked in the
U.S. (about 44%) than in the other countries (36%, on average). Topel's (1992) findings
suggest that the relatively poor showing of low skill men in the U.S. could be duo to its high
female labor supply. While this phenomenon may explain a portion of our results, we believe
that it is not the whole story. In particular, as shown in the next subsection, female labor
supply differences across countries are much less closely related to differences in male wage
inequality than are differences in wage-setting institutions.
         Finally, we note that our findings may reflect an interplay of institutions and market

forces. That is, given wage-setting institutions, it is possible that the wage gap between
middle-and low-skill workers in other countries relative to the U.S. is larger than it would
have been under more favorable net supply conditions for low-skill workers. Similarly, the
high vs. middle skill differential in other countries might well have been more compressed
relative to the U.S. had net supply conditions for high skill workers been less favorable. Even
if this is the case, however, it does not negate the strength of the institutional forces. Indeed,
the finding that the most striking difference between the U.S. distribution and that in the other
industrialized countries in our sample—the greater compression at the bottom of the wage
distribution—occurs in the face of supply and demand forces which would have produced the
opposite result is powerful evidence in favor of the importance of wage setting institutions.
        E. The Effects of Institutions: Toward a General Test
        The evidence so fax has suggested that the relatively decentralized wage-setting system

in the United States is responsible for at least some of this country's higher wage dispersion

WTWAC. DCC Vfl194 3:31 P14
                                                    -35-

     and greater spread at the bottom of the distribution compared to the OECD countries in our
     sample. While our sample is relatively small (10), it is still possible to investigatewhether this

  relationship between centralization and the wage distribution holds generally, i.e. beyond the
  individual U.S.-other country comparisons which we have made up to this point. Performing
  such a test requires one to operationalize the concept of centralization in wage
                                                                                     setting. Several
 authors have produced rankings of countries with respect to their extent of
                                                                                 centralization,
 including Blyth (1979), Bruno and Sachs (1985), Calmfors and Driffihl (1988), Cameron
 (1984), and Schmitter (1981). These rankings take into account the degree of coordination

 within and between labor and management organizations, the level at which bargaining takes
 place, and the power of central bodies to conduct wage negotiations (Calmfors and Driffihl,
 1988). We use as a measure of centralization the unweighted avenge of these rankings (which

 are shown individually in Calnifors and Driffill, 1988, p. 18), correcting for differences across
 authors in the number of countries ranked.

           Based on this average ranking, Austria, with a ranking of 1.493 out of 17 countries,
 had the most centralized wage-setting system among the countries in our sample; while the
U.S., with a ranking of 15. 191 out of 17, not surprisingly, had the least.3' While Hungary as
a Communist county in the 1980s was not included in the rankings; we assigned it the highest

level of centralization since the government setwages there. The results were qualitatively
similar when Hungary was excluded from the analyses.
          We then used this cmv) measure of centnlinrion (DECEN1) as an explanatory
variable in two kinds of analyses. First, we ran regressions with the following dependent
variables: i) the country's standard deviation of YFULL (i.e., the log of hours'corrected
earnings, as shown in Table 1); u-lu) the 50-10 and 90-50 differentials in YFULL (Table 1);
iv-v) the 50-10 and 90-50 prices effects (i.e., YFULL net of personal characteristics) for the

31 The degree of centraliliflon for the other countries in our sample was: West Germany
6.943; Britain 12.632; Switzerland 10.904; Sweden 2.736; Norway 2.536; Australia 10.766;
and Italy 14.325.


DTWAG.DOC 2/12194 331 FM
                                                   -36-


counbyin question relative to the U.S. with the full specification (Fable SB).32 In addition,
in light of Topel's (1992) findings on the impact of female labor supply on male wage
inequality, we included the log of the share of total hours worked by women (LNFEM) as an

explanatory variable in some specifications.33

         The second kind of aggregate cross-country analysis involved estimating the
determinants of the middle-low and high-middle skill group log wage differentials, as shown in
Table 8 (absolute skill groups—i.e., U.S. cutoffs for SKILL—were used here). Explanatory
variables in this case included DECENT, the log of relative female labor supply measured in
hours, and relative net supply. For example, in the analysis of the middle-low skill group
wage differential, the net supply of middle skill relative to the low skill group was included as
a right-hand variable. Since the net supply measures are defined relative to the U.S. (Fable
11), we define the wage differentials and female labor supply relative to the U.S. as well.3'
         Tables 12 and 13 contain our results. The major findings are for DECENT and are
strildng. First, decentralization of wage setting is found to be positively associated with the
standard deviation of log wages (Fable 12). This effect is 2.6-2.9 times its standard error and
holds whether or not female labor supply is included and whether or not the effects of the
distribution of male personal characteristics have been removed. At the mean value of
DECENT, the coefficients imply an elasticity of the standard deviation of wages of 0.10-0.12.

         Second,    as   was the case in the U.S.-countryj comparisons of Table 1, wage
compression at the bottom of the distribution appears responsible for the association between
centralization and the overall log wage variance. For example, in Table 12, decentralized


32 In these analyses, the two observations on Norway were averaged using sample size as
weights. Sweden 1984 was excluded since the wage variable in that analysis was defined as
log of actual hourly earnings, unlike the rest of the sample.
   The results were unchanged when female labor input was measured as the share of all
earnings accounted for by women.
' The U.S. was included and given zeroes for relative wages and relative female labor
supply. DECENT is, up to a constant, already defined relative to the U.S.


DJTWAOfl.DOC 2/fl194 3:31 PM
                                                        -37-


   wage-setting has a positive association with the 5010 log wage differential. The effect is
   robust with respect to controlling for the distribution of
                                                              male personal characteristics and the
  inclusion of relative female labor supply. It is 2.2-3.8 times its standard error and implies an

  elasticity of the 50-10 wage ratio of 0.12-0.25. Similar findings for
                                                                               compression at the bottom
  of the distribution are obtained in Table 13 which exaznineswage differentials between skill
  groups. Specifically, decentralization of wage-setting has a positive association with the
  middle-low skill log wage gap whether or notwe control for relative net supply of these two

  groups and relative female labor supply. The DECENT effects for the middle-low differential
  in Table 13 are 2.0-2.5 times their standard errors and correspond to elasticities of 0.09-0.10.

          In contrast to the strong positive association between centralization and wage
 compression at the bottom of the distribution, DECENT has very weak effects on compression
 at the top. In Tables 12 and 13, decentralization of pay-setting has small positive effects on
 the 90-50 or high-middle skill group wage gap which are in every case but two smaller than
 their standard errors.
         In contrast to the findings for DECENT on wage compression at the bottom of the

 distribution, the results for female labor supply are mixed and generally notprecisely
 estimated. In Table        12,   greater female labor supply is associated with a larger 50-10 maleS
 wage differential (as predicted by Topel's (1992) results), but the effect is smaller than its
 standard error in three of four cases, and is not significant in the specification where we
control for measured male personal charactethtics. In Table 13, female labor supply has the
  wrongw sign for the middle-low wage gap (i.e. it is negatively associated with thegap) and is

0.3 times its standard error. Finally, the effects of female labor supply on overall male wage
variance (Table 12) and wage compression between the top and the middle of the distribution,
as shown in Tables 12 and 13, change sign depending on specification and are in all cases but
one smaller than their standard errors.

        The effects of net supply shown in Table 13 are also mixed. On the one hand, net

supply has the Nwrongw sign for the middle-low wage gap—it is positively associated with this

NTWAG.DOC 2/22/94 3:31 PM
                                                -38-


gap; however, it is smaller than its standard error. On the other hand, net supply is negatively

associated with the high-middle pay gap, as predicted and suggested by Tables 8 and 11, and is
1.9 times its standard error.
         The results of Tables 12 and 13 suggest that wage centralization leads to less wage
inequality generally and that it has a particularly strong effect in bringing up the bottom of the
wage distribution. Admittedly, our sample of countries is extremely small—only 10; and the
causality between the wage distribution and wage setting institutions, as well as our measures
of female labor supply and net male labor supply, can run in both directions. However, these
results in conjunction with the individual U.S.-other countzy comparisons lend plausibility to
the idea that institutions are important.
IV. Conclusions
         In this paper, we have compared male wage inequality in the U.S. and nine other
industrialized countries primarily in the middle to late l980s. Consistent with previous work,
the results indicate that overall wage inequality is much greater in the U.S. than elsewhere.
Interestingly, however, when we disaggregate the measure of inequality to examine various
parts of the wage distribution, we find that the distribution in other countries is much more
compressed at the bottom relative to the U.S. than at the top. Thus, while the 50-10
differential is considerably larger in the U.S. than elsewhere, the U.S. 90-50 differential is

quite similar to that in other countries.
         We then evaluated several possible explanations for these patterns of inequality. First,
differences in the distribution of measured characteristics across countries were found to be
responsible for some but not all of the international differences in the wage distribution. If the
U.S. had other countries' distribution of measured characteristics, its overall wage variation
would remain much higher than elsewhere. Moreover, while the gap between the middle and
bottom portions of the U.S. wage distribution would be reduced, the high-middle gap would
be increased. Most importantly, the wage distribution in other countries would still be more



U(TWACV. DOC 2t22/94 3:31 PM
                                                -39-


 compressed at the bottom than at the top relative to the U.S. These results suggests that U.S.
 labor market prices contribute to our observed fmdings.

         Second, we noted that, unlike the U.S., most of the other countries have very

 centralized systems of collective bargaining and many haveprovisions to extend the terms of
 union contacts to nonunion workers. Voluntary emulation by nonunion finns of the union

 wage structure due to threat effects is also expected to be greater in these other countries given
 the larger size of their union sectors. Consistent with these observations, we found a larger

variance of wages and less wage compression at the bottom within both the U.S. union and
nonunion sectors compared to other countries. Indeed, the larger variance of overall wages in
the U.S. is primarily due to the higher variance that prevails here within each of these sectors.
Moreover, controlling for the distribution of measured characteristics, both of these salient
features of the U.S. distribution-a higher wage variance and a lesser compression at the
bottom—are more pronounced in the nonunion than in the union sector. This result suggests
that contact extension and other mechanisms which extend union-determined wages to the
nonunion sector have a larger effect on their wage structures relative to the U.S. than do their
more centralized wage-setting institutions within the union sector.
        Third, we examined indexes of relative supplies and demands across countries to see
whether market forces could provide an alternative explanation for the observed patterns,

particularly for the high relative wages of low skilled workers in other countries. Demand
effects were found to be weakly consistent with the greater non-U.S. compression at the
bottom, but relative supply was inconsistent with this pattern. Taking both supply and demand
into account suggested that low-skill workers should fare wone relative to the middle in other
countries than they do in the U.S. and cannot explain the smaller low-middle skill differentials
that prevail in these countries. Thus, market forces, as best as we could measure them, do not
appear to be consistent with the observed pattern of relative wages by skill in other countries
compared to the U.S.



CNTWAG.OOC2P2V94 3:31 PM
                                               40-

         Finally, we present evidence that wage centralization, as commonly measured by
comparative industrial relations researchers, is negativelyassociated with wage dispersion, the
50-10 differential in the log of wages, and the pay gap between middle and low skill workers.
Further, this compression at the bottom occurs even when we control for the distribution of
personal characteristics, relative female labor supply, and relative male labor supply net of
demand differences.
         Our findings provide strong evidence for the importance of labor market institutions in
explaining international differences in the levels of wage inequality. To the extent that
institutions are important, we would expect adverse impacts on employment and productivity
due to resource allocation effects. To some degree, labor market policies such as government
employment or training programs and relocation subsidies can compensate for such effects.
One interpretation of government labor market policy in many OECI) countries, then, is that
wage-leveling policies are encouraged by the government on the one hand to achieve a desired

level of wage inequality. The greater compression at the bottom, in particular, suggests that
these other countries use the labor market to a greater extent than in the U.S. to provide a
 safety net" for low wage workers. On the other hand, the more activist government policies
regarding employment, training and relocation often found in these countries (see, e.g., Edin
and Holmhind, forthcoming) may be seen in part as corrective measures for the adverse -

employment and allocation effects of the wage distribution policies.




DITWAOn.DOC 2t22194 3:31 PM
                                         Ref erences

 Blackburn, McKinley L. and David B. Bloom, "Changes in the Structure of Family Income
       Inequality in the U.S. and Other Industrialized Nations During the 1980s," (June
       1991).
 Blanchflower, David and Richard Freeman, "Unionism in the U.S. and Other Advanced
       O.E.C.D. Countries," industrial Relations 31 (Winter 1992): 56-79.
 Blank, Rebecca, "Why Were Poverty Rates So High in the 1980s?" NBER Working Paper
        3878, October 1991.

 Blau, Francine D., Equal Pay in the Office (Lexington, Mass: D.C. Heath, 1977).
 Blau, Prancing D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, "The Gender Earnings Gap: Learning from
        International Comparisons," American Economic Review 82 (May 1992): 533-538.
 Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, "The Gender Earnings Gap: Some International
        Evidence," in Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz, edt, D5ere,wes and Qianges in
        Wage Structures, (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).
 BIau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, "The Impact of Wage Structure on Trends in U.S.
        Gender Wage Differentials: 1975-87," paper presented at the NBER Labor Studies
        Conference, Cambridge, MA., March 1993.
 Blyth, CA., "The Interaction between Collective Bargaining and Government Policies in
        Selected Member Countries," in OECD, Collective Bargaining and Government
        Policies (Paris: OECD, 1987), pp. 59-93.
Bound, John, and George Johnson, "Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980's: An
      Evaluation of Alternative Explanations," American Economic Review 82 (June 1992):
      371-392.

Bruno, M. and I. Sachs, The Economics of Worldwide Stagfiation (Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
       1985).

Calmfors, Lars and John Driffill, "Centnilhtion of Wage Bargaining," Economic Policy 6
      (April 1988): 14-61.
Cameron, D. it, "Social Democracy, Corporatism , Labour Quiescence and the
     Representation of Economic Interest in Advanced Capitalist Society," in I. H.
     Goldthorpe, ed., Order and Cbnflica' in Coniemporwy CapitaiLsm (Oxford: Clarendon,
     1984), pp. 143-178.
Chamberlain, Gary Quantile Regression, Censoring, and the Structure of Wages," mimeo,
     Harvard University, June 1991.
Cutler David M. and Lawrence F. Katz, "Macroeconomic Performance and the
       Disadvantaged," Broolings Papers on Economic Activity, 1991, pp. 1-74.
Davis, Steven I., "Cross-Countzy Patterns of Change in Relative Wages," NBER Working
       Paper No. 4085, June 1992.
                                             -42-

 Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, "Wage Dispersion between and within U.S.
        Manufacturing Plants," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics,
        1991, pp. 115-180.
 Deaton, D.R. and P.S. Beaumont, "The Determinants of Bargaining Structure: Some Large
       Scale Survey Evidence for Britain," British Journal of industrial Relations 18 (July
          1980): 202-216.
 Edin, Per-Anders and Bertil Hoimlund, "The Swedish Wage Structure: The Rise and Fall of
        Solidarity Wage Policy," in Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz, eds., Djfferences
        and Changes in Wage Structures, (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
        forthcoming).
 Ehrenberg, Ronald 0. and Robert S. Smith, Modern Labor Economics, 5th edition (New
       York: Harper Collins, 1994).
 Erickson, Chris and Andrea Ichino, "Wage Differentials in Italy: Market Forces and
        Institutions," in Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz, eds., Derenca and Changes
        in Wage Structures, (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).
European Industrial Relations Review, (ElM), "New Industrial Relations Talks Continue,"
      No. 192 (January 1990): 7.
European Industrial Relations Review, (EIRR), "Italy," No. 223 (August 1992): 9-10.
European Industrial Relations Review, (ElM), "Minimum Pay in 18 Countries," No. 225
      (October 1992): 14-21.
European industrial Relations Review, (ElM), "Minimum Pay Setting: Germany," No. 226
      (November 1992): 14-16.
Freeman, Richard S., "Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages," Industrial and Labor
      Relations Review 34 (October 1980): 3-23.

Freeman, Richard B., "Union Wage Practices and Wage Dispersion Within Establishments,"
      Industrial and Labor Relations RevIew 36 (October 1982): 3-2 1.

Gottschalk, Peter and Mary Joyce, "Changes in Earnings Inequality: An International
       Perspective," mimeo, Boston College, 1992.
Groshen, Erica L., "The Structure of the Female/Male Wage Differential: Is it Who Your
      Are, What You Do, or Where You Work?" Journal of Human Resources 26 (Summer
      1991): 457-72.
Hendricks, Wallace B. and Lawrence M. Kahn, "The Determinants of Bargaining Structure in
      U.S. Manufacturing Industries," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 35 (January
      1982): 181-195.
Hendricks, Wallace E. and Lawrence M. Kahn, Wage Indexation in she United Stoics: Cola
      or Uncola? (Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1985).
ILO, Yearbook of Labour Statistics, 1991 (Geneva: ILO).



INTWAG. DCC 21fl194 3:34 FM
                                            -43-

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce, "Accounting for the Slowdown in
       Black-White Wage Convergence," in M. Kosters, ed., Workers and Their Wages
       (Washington, D.C.: AEL Press, 1991), pp. 107-143.
Juhn, Chinhul, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce, "Wage Inequality and the Rise in
       Returns to Skill," Journal of Political Economy, 101 (June 1993): 410-442.
Kahn, Lawrence M. and Michael Curme, "Unions and Nonunion Wage Dispersion," The.
      Review of Economics and Statistics 69 (November 1987): 600-607.
Katz, Harry C., "The Decentralization of Collective Bargaining: A Literature Review and
       Comparative Analysis," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47 (October 1993): 3-
       22.

Katz, Lawrence F., Gary W. Loveman and David Blanchflower, "A Comparison of Changes
       in the Structure of Wages in Four OECD Countries," in Richard Freeman and
       Lawrence Katz, eds., D(fferences and Changes in Wage Structures, (Chicago, IL:
       University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-87: Supply and
       Demand Factors, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (February 1992): 35-78.
Kennedy, Thomas, European Labor Relations (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1982).
Killingsworth, Mark, The &onomics of Comparable Worth (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn
       Institute for Employment Research, 1990)
Koenker, Roger and Gilbert Bassett, "Regression Quantiles," Econometrica 46 (January 1978):
     33-50.

Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers, "Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
      Structure," F.conometrica 56 (March 1988): 259-293.
L.athnde, Robert J. and Robert H. Topel, "The Assimilation of Immigrants in the U.S. Labor
       Market," in G. Bojas and It Freeman, eds., Immigration and the Work Force
       (Chicago:, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1992): 67-92.
Leion, Anders, "Sweden," in B.C. Roberts, ed., Industrial Relations in Europe (London:
       Croom Helm, 1985), pp. 204-221.
Rezier, Julius, "The Industrial Relations System in Hungary After the Economic Reform," in
       Universite de Strasbourg, Annaire de L 'URSS a des Pays Socialistes Europeens 1972-
       3, pp. 385-405.
Rosenfeld, Rachel and Arne Kaiieberg, "A Cross-national Comparison of the Gender Gap in
      Income," American Journal of Sociology 96 (July 1990): 69-106.
Schmitter, P.C., "Interest Intermediation and Regime Governability in Contemporary Western
      Europe and North America," in S.D. Berger, ed., Organizing Interests in Western
      Europe (Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press, 1981), pp. 287-327.
Thorsrud, Einar, "Norway," in B.C. Roberts, ed., Industrial Relations in Europe (London:
      Croom Helm, 1985), pp. 180-203.


INTWAG.DX 2/221W 11:37 PM
                                             -44-

 Tomandi, Theodor and Karl Fuerboeck, Social Partnership (Ithaca, N.Y.: uS Press, 1986).
 Topel, Robert H., "Wage Inequality and Regional Labor Market Performance in the United
        States," mimeo, University of Chicago, June 1992.
 Treu, T., "IJy," Bulletin of Comparative Labour Relations 19 (1990): 227-250.
 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Handbook of Labor Statistics, 1985 (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
       Government Printing Office).
 U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States 1992 (Washington,
       D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1992).
 U.S. Department of Labor, Foreign Labor Trends: Hungary
                                                  -
                                                         1991-2 (Washington, D.C.:
       U.S. Government Printing Office, 1992).
 Wrong, Gale, "Switzerland," Bulletin of Comparative Labour Relations 16 (1987): 183-201.




DflWAG.DOC 2/22/94 3:37 PM
                                        Appendix
     Variable Definitions, Means and Earnings Regression Results by Country
       Definitions of the explanatory variables are given in Table A-i. The earnings
definitions for each country are listed below:

       Austria: Net Monthly Income from Employment

       Germany and Switzerland: Net Income per Month after taxes and social
              insurance

       Italy: Annual labor income
       Britain: Total annual earnings before taxes

       USA: Previous year's earnings from occupation before taxes
       Hungary: Monthly earnings
       Sweden: Income (from all sources) in previous year
      Norway: Annual income from all jobs.
      Australia: Annual earnings from all jobs.
                                         Table A-i
                            Dermitions of Explanatory Variables


         EDUC = years of schooling completed
         PEXP=age-EDTJC-6
         PEXPSQ = PEXP squared
         EXP = actual experience (P50 and HUS only)
         EXPSQ = EXP squared (PSID and HUS only)
         MAR = 1 if marned spouse present and 0 otherwise
         UNION = dummy variable for union membership
         Occupation dummy variables:
                 PROF = professional and technical workers (the omitted category)
                 MGR = managers, except farm
                 CLER = clerical workers
                 SALES = sales workers
                 CRAFT = craft workers
                 OPER = operatives
                 LAB = laborers, except farm
                 SERVWK = service workers
                 FARMMGR = farm managers
                 FARMLAB = farm laborers
         Industry dummy variables:
                AG = agriculture, forestry and fisheries
                MINCON = mining and construction
                MANDUR = durable goods manufacturing
                 MANNON nondurable goods manufacturing
                 TRANS = transportation, communications and utilities
                 WTRADE = wholesale trade
                 RTRADE = retail trade
                 FIRE = finance, insurance and real estate
                 SERVS = services
                 GOVT = government (the omitted category).
        Industry dummy variables for Hungary:
               AG (see above)
               MINMAN = mining and manufacturing
                 CONST = construction
                 TRANS (see above)
                 TRADE = wholesale and retail trade
                 SERVS = services, finance insurance and real estate
                 GOVT (see above), the omitted category
        Occupation dummy variables for Australia:
              MGR = managers and farm managers
              CLER, CRAFT, and OPER (see above)
              LAB = laborers and farm laborers
              SALESW = sales and service workers
              PROF (see above), the omitted category



INTWAQDOC 2120194 9:34 PM
                                       Table A-i, cont'd
                             Definitions of Explanatory Variables


           Industry dummy variables for Australia:
                  AG, TRANS, MJNCON (see above)
                  MANUF = manufacturing
                    TRADE = wholesale and retail trade
                    FJSERV = finance, insurance, real estate and services
                    GOVT (see above), the omitted category

           Occupation dummy variables for Italy:
                 BLUE = blue collar
                 WHITELOW = lower level white collar
                 WHITEHI = higher level white collar, the omitted
                                                                  category
           Industry dummyvariables for Italy:
                  AG, TRAINS, TRADE (see above)
                  IND = Mining, Construction and Manufacturing
                   FIRE, GOVT (see above)
                   SERVS (see above), the omitted category




EN1WAG.DOC 2/2W94 9:34 III
                                a     6sI A.MION                               nct Ataiopl

                                a     nd     A,MJON                            .11.—by

                                      0951 ti.p..ag                            oasI 'ap.9
                                                                               Apis

                                                                               .1-bY
                                                                               sasi A.i.I.M

                                      AaIwq4

                                                                               yen
                                                                                                   K
cc                                                                                                 a
a"I                                                                                                £
z
'U                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                   a
        2$         2
                       0002 20
              punfljj olroG                       .0
                                                       0 0 •POl4Iø
                                                           0 0 090$00      a
                                                                           0
                                                                                                   a

                                                                                              -a
                                                                                                   I,

                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                   0


                                .     GUt A.i.I.M

                                      Ma-v
                                                                           U   u$1 AI.M
                                                                               .n$i —
                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                   3




                                                                                                   a
                                                                               oggi
                                                                                                   a
                                      Z$fl                                     "4—v
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   U-



                                      Apis

                                      wa                                       p4piI.as
                                      out '-n-s                                —M




                                      '9.—v                                                         I

                                      ysfi                                     Yen                  I'I
      o to 0 C 0 C
      ooodddóóoo                net                    000
                                                       0.4 P00 ? 2
                                                                                                    U



             '.op.tap papo.,.                              r,u..ma os-os
                                                    TABLE 1

                              SUMMARY MEASURES OP WAGE INEQUALITY



                                                           50-10                 90-50        90-10
                                  Standard             Percentile          Percentile     Percentile
                                  Deviation           Differential        Differential   Differential

                                              A. Log Hours-Corrected Earnings

 Germany                            0.470                  0.456                 0.539       0.995
 Bñtain                             0.489                  0.594                 0.683       1.277
 USA                                0.772                  1.040                 0.552       1.592
Austria                             0.424                 0.391                  0.508       0.899
Switzerland                         0.549                 0.464                 0.777        1.241
Sweden 1980                         0.523                 0.382                 0.452        0.834
Norway 1982                         0.441                 0.372                 0.382        0.754
Australia                           0.622                 0.755                 0.439        1.194
Hungary                             0.431                 0.462                 0.661        1.123
Italy                              0.488                  0.478                 0.486       0.964
Norway 1989                        0.360                  0.224                 0.525       0.749

Non-US Average
lUnweighted)                       0.480                 0.458                  0.545       1.003

                                            B. Log Hourly Earnings
Sweden 1984                        0.343                 0.254                  0.388       0.642
USA 1984                           0.543                 0.772                  0.546       1.318




 INTT1.XL$ 12/1/93 307 PM (.Mw6nd.4,J
                                                   TABLE 2

                        DEcOMPOSmON OF THE US-COUNTRY .1 DIFFERENCES
                            IN THE STANDARD DEVIATION OF LOG WAGES




                               US Std Dcv              Measured                    Wage              Wage
                                - Country j        Characteristics           Coefficients         Equation
                                   Std 0ev                 Effect                  Effect   Residual Effect

                                              A. Human Capital Specification

 Germany                              0.301                 0.008                 0.020             0174
 Britain                              0.283                 0.044                 0.021             0.218
 Austria                              0.348                 0.006                 0.062             0.279
 Switzerland                          0.223                 0.001                 0.035             0.187
 Sweden 1980                          0.248                 0.034                 0.017             0.197
 Norway 1982                          0.331                 0.018                 0.047             0.266
 Australia                            0.150                 0.014                 0.036             0.100
 Hungary                              0.340                 0.038                 0.078             0.224
 Italy                                0.284               -0.0004                 0.048             0.236
 Norway 1989                          0.411                 0.023                 0.042             0.347
 Sweden 1984                          0.200                -0.001        -        0.069             0.132


 Non-US Average
 (Unweightedl                         0.284                 0.017                 0.043             0.224

                                              B. Full Specification

 Germany                              0.301                 0.021                 0.032              0.248
 Britain                              0.283                 0.037                 0.037              0.209
 Austria                              0.348                 0.008                 0.075              0.265
 Switzerland                          0.223                .0.004                 0.032              0.195
 Sweden 1980                          0.248                 0.032                 0.018              0.198
 Norway 1982                          0.331                 0.014                  0.071             0.246
 Australia                            0.150                 0.007                  0.051             0.092
 Hungary                              0.340                 0.025                  0.111             0.205
 Italy                                0,284                 0.020                  0.037             0.227
 Norway 1989                          0.411                 0.008                  0.076             0.327
 Sweden 1984                          0.200                 0.011                  0.080             0.109


 Non-US Average
 (Unweighted)                         0.284                 0.016                  0.056             0.211




INflLXLS 2/21)94 33O PM (.Uw&ndad.)
                                                           TABLE 3

                            DECOMPOSITION OF THE US-COUNTRY J DIFFERENCES IN
                               THE 50-10 AND 90-50 DIFFERENTIALS IN LOG WAGES

                                                A. Human Capital Specification



                                  US Differential             Measured                 Wage              Wage
                                         - Country)       Characteristics        Coefficients         Equation
                                         Differential             Effect               Effect   Residual Effect

                                                            50-10 Log Wage DifferentjaJ
   Germany                                    0.584               0.312
   Britain
                                                                                     -0.019             0.291
                                              0,446               0.083               0.089
   Austria                                                                                              0.274
                                              0.649               0.299              -0.005
   Switzerland                                                                                          0.355
                                             o.sie                0.254               0.053             0.269
   Sweden 1980                               0.658                0.385               0.034             0.239
   Norway 1982                               0.668                0.331              -0.013             0.350
   Australia                                 0.285               0.069                0.068             0.148
   Hungary                                   0.578               0.158               0.038              0.382
   Italy                                     0.562               0.246               0.041              0.275
   Norway 1989                               0.816               0.338               -0.037             0.515
   Sweden 1984                               0.518               0.225                0.018            0.275

   Non-US Average
   (Unweighted)                              0.576               0.245               0.024             0.307

                                                           90-50 Log Wage Differential
  Germany                                   0.013                                    0.095             0.101
  Britain                                   -0.131              -0.134              -0.043             0.046
  Austria                                   0.044               -0.199               0.121             0.122
  Switzerland                              -0.225                                    0.046             0.029
  Sweden 1980                               0.100               -0-075               0.078             0.097
  Norway 1982                               0.170               -0.132               0.086             0.216
  Australia                                 0.113               -0.067               0.054             0.126
  Hungary                                  -0.109               -0.190               0.208            -0.127
  Italy                                     0.066               -0.161               0.114            0.103
  Norway 1989                               0.027               -0.104              0.065             0.066
  Sweden 1984                               0.158               -0.190              0.152             0.196

  Non-US Average
  (Unweighted)                              0.021              -0.157               0.089             0.089




INTTtXLS 2)21/94 3:36 PM (S1w64.4.zJ.p
                                                  TABLE 3 CONT'D

                         DECOMPOSmON OF THE USC0UNThY J DIFFERENCES IN
                            THE 50-10 AND 90-50 DIFFERENTIALS IN LOG WAGES

                                                 B. FuU Specification



                               US Differential            Measured                 Wage              Wage
                                  - Country j         Characteristics        Coefficients         Equation
                                  Differential                Effect               Effect   Residual Effect

                                                        50-10 Log Wage Differential

  Germany                                0.584                0.301               0.087             0.216
  Britain                                0.448                0.010               0.192             0.244
  AustrIa                               0.649                 0.208               0.144             0.297
  Switzerland                           0.576                 0.218               0.170             0.188
  Sweden 1980                           0.658                 0.294               0.205             0.159
  Norway 1982                           0.668                 0.370               0.057             0.241
  Australia                             0.285                 0.127               0.046             0.112
  Hungary                               0.578                 0.145               0.174             0.259
  Italy                                 0.562                 0.233               0.092             0.237
  Norway 1989                           0.816                 0.212               0.129             0.475
  Sweden 1984                           0.519                 0.164               0.104             0.250


  Non-US Average
  lUnweighted)                          0.576                 0.207               0.125             0.243

                                                        90-50 Log Wags Differential

  Germany                               0.013                -0.177               0.091             0.099
  Britain                               -0.131               -0.149              -0.056             0.074
  Austria                                0.044               -0.151               0.093             0.102
  Switzerland                           -0.225               -0.231              0.049              0.055
 Sweden 1980                             0.100               -0.091               0.080             0.111
 Norway 1982                             0.170               -0.191               0.166             0.195
 Australia                               0.113               -0.129               0.098             0.144
 Hungary                                -0.109               -0.206               0.196            -0.099
 Italy                                  0.066                -0.108               0.048             0.126
 Norway 1989                            0.027                -0.132               0.058             0.103
 Sweden 1984                            0.158                -0.140               0.132             0.166

 Non-US Average
 (Unweighted)                           0-021                -0.155               0.078             0.098




INTEl .XLS 2/31/94 iae PM (Slw&ndjd.)
                                                                   TABLE 4


                    DECOMPOSITION OF THE US-COUNTRY         J   DIFFERENCESIN LOG WAGE VARIANCES BY UNION STATUS


                                                            Within-Sector                       Between-Sector
                                            US Variance           Variance     Within-Sector      Wage 01ff or-    Between-Sector
                                     - Country j Variance           Effect Composition Effect      ential Effect

     Germany                                     0.3743            0.3412            0.0232            ooioa             -0.0003
     Britain                                     0.3566            0.3188            0.0267            0.0113           0.00001
     Austria                                     0.4157            0.3580            0.0506            0.0057            0.0015
     SwItzerland                                 0.2941            0.2399            0.0418            0.0119           -000003
     Norway 82                                   0.4012            0.2692            0.1245            0.0037            0.0037
     Hungary                                     0.4093            0.3809            0.0192            0,0077            0.0017
     Norway 89                                   0.4656            0.4160            0.0377            0.0117            0.0001

     Non-US Average
     (Unwelghtod)                                0.3881            0.3320            0.0462            0.0089            0.0010




1Nfl2.Xl_S 12(11933:15 PM (aIIwSind.*Iul
                                                    TABLE 5

                       SUMMARY MEASURES OF WAGE INEQUALItY BY UNION STATUS



                                                             50-10             90-50          90-10
                                   Standard             Percentile         Percentile.    Percentile
                                   Deviation           Differential       Differential   Differential

                                               A. Unlon.Workers


Germany                                0.361                 0.362             0.508          0.870
                                                                      •
Britain                                0.436                 0.510             0.532          1.042
USA                      .            O.633                  0.689             0.416          1.106
Austria                               0.348                  0.365             0.446          0.811
Switzerland                           0.430                  0.447             0.779          1.228
Norway 1982                           0.321                  0.445             0.290          0.735
Hungary                       .       0.410                  0.511            0.606           1.117
Norway 1989                           0.309                  0.185            0.508          0.691

Non-US Average
IUnwelgfltedl                         0.374                  0.404            0.524          0.927

                                               B. Nonunion Workers


Germany                               0.525                  0.513            0.559           1.072
Britain            .                  0.536                  0.641            0.816          1.457
USA                                   0.799                  1.082            0.622          1.704
Austria                               0.506                  0.459            0.519          1.038
Switzerland                           0.625                  0.479            0.781          1.260
Norway 1982                           0.614                  0.626            0.575          1.201
Hungary                               0.461                  0.386            0.626          1.012
Norway 1989                           0.435                  0.509            0.383          0.892


Non-US Average                                           -


lUnweightedi                          0.529                  0.516            0.617          1.133




   INrrl.XLS 1211/93 3:1 2PM 4.LIwOiMads)
                                                                               TABLE 6

           REGRESSION-BASED DECOMPOSITION OF US-COUNTRY                  J DIFFERENCESIN VARIOUS MEASURES OF INEQUALITY BY UNION
                                                                                                                                 STATUS
                                                                       (FULL SPECIFICATION)


                                             Standard Deviation                             50-10 Differential                          90-50 Differential
                                  Difference       Measured          Wage     Difference          Measured          Wage Difference           Measured          Wage
                                    (US -          Character-     Structure     (US-             Character-      Structure   (US -           Character-
                                 Country J)      Istics Effect                                                                                               Structure
                                                                     Effect            J)      Istics Effect        Effect Country .1)     istlcs Effect        Effect
                                                                                            A. Unlen Workers
Germany                                 0.272            0.068                    0.327              0.149         0.178        -0.092          -0.290
Britain                                 0.197                                                                                                                  0.198
                                                         4.005      0.205         0.179             -0.092         0.271        -0.1 16
Austria                                 0.285                                                                                                   -0.209         0.093
                                                         0.043      0.242         0.324              0.007         0.317        -0.030
Switzerland                             0.203                                                                                                   -0.266         0.236
                                                                    0.195         0.242             -0.027         0.269        -0.363
Norway 82                               0.312                                                                                                   -0.348        -0.015
                                                         0.052      0.260         0.244              0.116         0.128
Hungary                                                                                                                         0.126           -0.277         0.403
                                        0,223            -0.050     0.273         0.178             -0.174         0.352
Norway 89                                                                                                                      -0.190           -0.308         0.118
                                        0.324            0.002      0.322         0.504              0.032         0.472       -0.090           -0.217         0.121
                                                                                   .
Non-US Average
                                                     .
(Unwelghted)                           0.259             0.016      0.243         0.285             0.002          0.254       -0,108          -0.274          0.166
                                                                                       B. Nonunion Workers

Germany                                0,274         -0.025        0.299                            0.269         0.300         0.063          -0.120         0.183
Britain                                0.263             0.008     0.255          0.441             0.047         0.394        -0.194
Austria                                0.293                                                                                                   -0.178         -0.016
                                                                   0.401          0.623             0.196         0.427         0.043
Switzerland                            o.i 74                                                                                                  -0.195          0.238
                                                     -0,052        0.226          0.603             0.341         0.262        -0.159
Norway 82                              0.185                                                                                                   '0.234          0.075
                                                     -0.191        0.376          0.456            -0.141         0.597        0.047
Hungary                                0.338                                                                                                   -0.201         0.248
                                                         0.018     0.320          0.696             0.204         0.492
Norway 89                                                                                                                      -0.004          -0.164         0.160
                                       0.364         -0.115        0.479          0.573             0.085         0.488         0.239          '0.218         0.457
Non-US Average
(Unwelghted)                           0,270         -0.066        0.337          0.566            0.143          0.423        0.005

     INT'13 XIS 2(21/94 3:44 PM (undecomp.yt.)
                                                           TABLE 7

                          QUANTILE REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS FOR UNION MEMBERSHIP. FULL SPECIFICATION

                                                (ASYMPTOTIC STANDARD ERRORS)




                                                                     RepressIon   Quantile
                                            0.10             0.20                    0.50      0.80          0,90

   Germany                                 0.056            0.019                  -0,002     0.021         0,019
                                           (.035)           (.027)                  (.023)    (.022)        (.028)
   BrItain                                 0.099            0.061                   0,047     0.064         0.072
                                           (.033)           (.023)                  (.019)    (.029)        (.030)
   USA                                     0.363            0.229                   0.176     0.138         0.123
                                           (.083)           (.064)                  (.033)    (.027)        (.039)
   Austria                                 0.137            0.117                   0.042     0.020         -0.002
                                           (.027)           (.031)                  (.022)    (.031)        (.043)
   Norway 1982                             0.191            0.030                  -0,003     0.029         -0.039
                                           (.047)           (.037)                  (.034)     (.027)       (.037)
   Hungary                                 0.056            0.052                   0.015     .0.057        -0.017
                                           (.025)           (.018)                  (.022)     (.023)        (.041)
    Norway 1989                            0.074            0.022                  .0.002     -0.044        -0.110
                                           (.051)           (.045)                  (.015)     (.038)        (.067)


    Nan-US Average                                                                                      .

    (Unwelghted)                           0.102            0.050                   0.Ô16     0.005         -0.013




INrr2.XLS 1211193 3:16 PM (SlwSiS.xI.)
                                                                         TABLE    8
                                                      WAGE DIFFERENTIALS BY SKILL GROUP



                                             A. Own Country             Cutoffs                 B. US Skill Group Cutoffs
                                           33-67             67-I®                67-i®       33-67        67-100           67-100
                                                 vs                                      vs      vs              vs             vs
                                            0-33              33-67               0-33        0-33          33-67            0-33
     Germany                                0.313               0.269                 0.582   0.320           0.369          0.689
     Britain                                0.238               0_lie                 0.416                   0.343          0.620
     USA (ISSP)                             0.530               0.265                 0.795   0.530           0.265          0.795
     Austria                                0.228               0.223                 0,451   0.215          0.268           0.483
     Switzerland                            0.396               0.375              0.772      0.454          0.343           0.797
     Sweden 1980                            0.357               0.203              0.560                     0.361           0.668
     Norway 1982                            0.230               0.265              0.495      0.274          0.197           0,471
     Australia                              0.414               0.201              0.615      0.317          0.269           0.586
     Hungary                                0.195               0.189              0.385      0.208          0.243           0.451
     Italy                                  0.280               0.306              0.586      0.293          0.315           0.608
     Norway 1989                            0.180              0.249               0.430      0.230          0.285           0.515

     Non-US Average
     (Unwelghted)                           0.283              0.246               0.529      0.289          0.299           0.589



     Sweden 1984                            0.133              0.232               0.365                     0.178           0.383
     USA (P510 19841                        0.328              0.300               0.628      0.328          0.300           0.628



INTSAM4.XL$ 12/1/93 3:20 PM Oni.kull.'l. ,nflsoJ.KI. t'n'sup.xI.)
                                                                          TABLE 9

                                          DEMAND INDEXES BY SKIU. GROUP RELATIVE TO THE U.S.

                                                       (6 INDUSTRIES AND 3 OCCUPATIONS)



                                          A. Labor InpUt Mea5ured         In Hours              B, Labor    Input Measured in Earnings

                                            0-33               33-67             67-100            0-33              33-67          67-100

                                            -0.007               0.035               -0.029        0.012              0.039              -0.036
   Germany
    Britain                                 -0.009               0.026               .0.018        -0,008              0.012
                                            0.032                0.036               -0.068         0,078              0.056             -0.085
    Austria
    Switzerland                             -0.121              .0.054               0.149         -0.165             -0.085
                                            0.043                0.047               -0.092         0.100              0.046             -0.089
    Sweden 1980
                                            0.011               -0.005               -0.011         0.066              0.013
    Norway 1982
                                             0.068               0.021               -0.089         0.109              0.040
    Australia
                                             0.212                0.076              .0.346         0.340              0.103             -0.317
    Hungary
                                             0.090               .0.021                             0.128              0.016             .0,079
    Italy
                                             0.027                0.035              -0.062         0.053                                -0.045
    Norway 1989
                                             0.020               -0.001              .0.017         0.062              0.028             -0.047
    Sweden 1984

                                                                                                    .
    Non-US Average
                                             0.033                0.018                             0.070              0.026             -0.065
    (Unweighted)

                       Note: For Construction of demand Indexes, see            text. Units for demand   indexes are log points.




INTSAM4.XL.S 12/1/13 3:21 PM IinI.kâII.XS)(int.1do3.xIe) (int.up.Sl)
                                                                       TABLE 10

                                         SUPPLY INDEXES BY SKILL GROUP RELATIVE TO          mE U.S.


                                        A. Labor Input MeasuredIn Hours                B.    labor Input MeasuredIn   Earnings
                                           0-33               3387          67-100          0-33           33-67           67-100

    Germany                                0.409               0.211          -1.172         0.593          0.289                -1.000
    Oritaln                                0.039               0.530          -1,291         0.233          0.562                -1.113
                             •

    Austria                                0.386               0.095          -0.746         0.638          0.133                -0.746
    Switzerland                            0.122               0.208          -0.423        0.128           0.257                -0.335
    Sweden 1980                            0.440               0.199          -1.261        0.672           0.260            -1.119
    Norway 1982                            0.378               0.021          -0.578        0.610           0.070            -0.597
    Australia                              0,454               0.110          -1.012        0.677           0.186            -0.938
    Hungary                                0.369               0.104          -0.719        0607            0.148            -0.718
    Italy                                 0.698               -0.294          -0.680        0.786          -0-232            -0.519
    Norway 1989                           0.313                0.243          -0,928        0.525           0.297                -0.879
    Sweden    1984                        0.498               -0.191          -0.465        0.702          -0.069                -0.497

    Non-US Averag.                                                                .


    (UnweigMedi                           0.364                0.112          -0M44         0.561           0.173                -0.775


                       Note: For Constructionof supply Indexes, see text. Units for supply Indexes are log points.




INTSAM4.XtS 12111933:22 PM Ont.kIllad.I CntflAo3.th)   ntsjp.i.}
                                                                     TABLE 11

                                     NET SUPPLY INDEXES BY SKILL. GROUP RELATIVE TO THE U.S.



                                       A. Labor Inp ut MeasuredIn       Hours                   6. Labor Input Measured In Earnings

                                          0-33               33-67            67-100               0-33            33-61           67-100

   Germany                                0.416                 0.176           -1.143             0.581            0.250             -0.964
   Britain                                0.049                 0.505            -1.274            0,241            0.651             -1.168
   Austria                                0,354                 0.059            -0.678            0.559             0.077            .0.661

   Switzerland                            0.249                 0.262            -0.572            0.293             0.342            0.460
    Sweden 1980                           0,396                 0.152            -1.175            0,572             0.214            -1.031

    Norway 1982                           0.362                 0.026            -0,568            0.543             0.057            -0.554
    Australia                             0.386                 0.089            -0.923            0.569             0.147            -0.851
                                          0.157                 0.027            -0.373            0.267             0.045            -0.401
    Hungary
                                          0.508                -0.273            -0.612            0.658            -0.248            -0.440
    Italy
                                          0.286                 0.208            -0.866            0,473             0.273            -0.834
    Norway 1989
    Sweden 1984                           0.478                -0.190            -0.448            0.640            -0.097            -0.450

                                                                                                       .
    Non-US Average
                                          0,331                 0.095            -0.785            0.490             0.146            -0.710
    lUnweightedi


                  Note: For Construction of net supply Indexes,         see   text. Units for net supply Indexes are log points.




INTSAM4.XL$ 12/1/93 3:23 PM llnt.dH4.) IinI.kIo3.KIs)   (lnt.upd.)
                                                  TABLE 12

                    EFFECTS OF CENTRAUZATION OF WAGE-SETTING AND FEMALE LABOR
                                  SUPPLY ON MALE WAGE INEQUAUTY




     Standard Deviation of YFULL               0.0133           0.0148           0.0392           0.1747
                                               (.0051)          (.0054)          (.2307)          (.1780)

                                                                                                  0.6295
                                               (.0099)          (.0084)          (.4392)          (.2768)
    90-50 Differential of YFULL                0.0044           0.0040          -0.0828          -0.0457
      .                                        (.0072)          (.0080)          (.2437)          (.2663)
    Standard Deviation of YFULL,               0.01 27          0.0144          -0.0679           0.2001
    Corrected for Personal                     (.0049)          (.0049)          (.2182j          (.1624)
    Characteristics                                                                       .




    50-10 Differential. Corrected             0.0155           0.0173            0.0473
    for Personal Characteristics
                                                                                                  0.2058
                                              (.0072)          (.0077)           (.3003)          (.2547)
    90-50 Differential. Corrected             o.ooss           0.0108           0.0648
    for Personal Characteristics
                                                                                                  0.1642
                                              (.0056)          (.0059)          (.2149)           (.1969)
    Specification                                             DECENT                            DECENT
                                               only             and               only            and
                                                               LNFEM                             LNFEM

    Sample Size                                    10               10               10               10
   Note: DECENT is defined in the text and Is an Inverse measure of wage-setting centralization; LNFEM
   is the log of th. share of total work hours accounted for by women. A constant term Is included in all
   regressions.




INTSAMS.XLS 21211943:11 PM
                                                   TABLE 13

      EFFECTS OF CENTRALIZAT1ON. NET SUPPLY AND FEMALE LABOR SUPPLY ON MALE SKILL
                              GROUP WAGE DIFFERENTIAI.S


                                                           Dependent Variable
   Explanatory Variables         Middle vs Low       High vs. Middle Middle vs. Low       High vs. Middle
                                    DWMIDLOW              DWHIMID       DWMIDLOW                DW)-IIMID

   Decentralization                      0.0113               0.0024           0.0122             0.0025


   Net Supply
                                         (.0057)

                                         0.0540
                                         (.0979)
                                                              1.0027)

                                                              -0.0540
                                                               (.0288)
                                                                               (.0048)
                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                  (.0031)




   Female Labor Supply                   .0.0603              -0.0801               —                  —-•

                                         (.1882)               (.0942)

   Constant                              .0.3024              -0.0447          -0.3076            0.0161
                                         (.0582)              (.0345)           (.0453)           (.0297)

   Sample Size                                 10                  10                10                 10




   Note: Variables are relative to the U.S. DWMIDLOW and DWHIMID are m4ddle-Iow and high-middle
   skill group log wage gaps; net supply is the relative net supply of th. relevant pair of skill groups;
   female labor supply is LNFEM.




INTSAMS.X1.S V21194 304 PM
