NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MINIMUM WAGE EFFECTS ON
EMPLOYMENT AND SCHOOL ENROLLMENT

David Neumark
William Wascher

Working Paper No. 4679

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1994

David Neumark is Assistant Professor of Economics at the University of Pennsylvania and a
Faculty Research Fellow of the National Bureau of Economic Research. William Wascher is
a Senior Economist at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. We thank
Joshua Angrist and Stephen Oliner for helpful comments and Patricia Karns, Nancy Nicosia,
and Donna Sarti for research assistance. The views expressed are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board, its staL or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.

NBER Working Paper #4679
March 1994
MINIMUM WAGE EFFECTS ON
EMPLOYMENT AND SCHOOL ENROLLMENT

ABflRACF
We argue in this paper that the focus on employment effects in recent studies of minimum
wages ignores an important interaction between schooling, employment, and the minimum wage.

To study these linkages, we estimate a conditional logit model of employment and enrollment

outcomes for teenagers using state-year observations for the period 1977 to 1989. The results
show a negative influence of minimum wages on school enrollment and a positive effect on the

proportion of teens neither employed nor in school. We further suggest that our results are

consistent with substitution by employers of higher- for lower-skilled teenagers, with the
displaced teens ending up both out of work and out of school.

David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia. PA 19104
and NBER

William Waseher
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
20th and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C 20551

Recent increases in minimum wages at the state and federal levels
and the debates surrounding these adjustments have renewed interest in the

labor market effects of minimum wage laws. Taking advantage of the
additional variation provided by new legislation. a number of recent studies
have reexamined the long-standing consensus that had emerged from the work of
the Minimum Wage Study Commission and others (see Brown at al. •

1982) that

minimum wage laws reduce employment opportunities for youths (Card. 1992a.
l992b: Katz and Krueger. 1991. 1992; Spriggs. 1992; Card and Krueger. 1993:

Neumark and Wascher. 1992: and Taylor and Kim. 1993). A striking feature of
most of these studies (including ours) is that simple comparisons, or
regressions controlling for exogenous shifts in labor demand, do not reveal
disemployment effects of minimum wages for teenagers.

The recent set of studies of the minimum wage have focused on
estimating employment effects and have not explored in any detail the

potential implications for other aspects of the teenage labor market. In
this paper. we argue that the standard employment equations are suggestive of

an additional effect on youth labor market behavior. In particular, when the
school enrollment rate is controlled for in the employment equation. the

estimated disemployment effects of the minimum wage rise markedly. We
interpret the sensitivity of the minimum wage effect on employment to the
introduction of schooling controls as evidence that the recent literature has
missed an important influence of minimum wages that operates through
interactions between schooling, labor force participation. and minimum wages.
Thus. in this paper. we move beyond the earlier research and examine in more
detail the linkages between minimum wages. employment, and enrollment.

In our empirical work, we specify enrollment and employment as
jointly determined, and therefore add exogenous determinants of enrollment as

variables affecting employment. Our procedure does not significantly alter
the reduced-fort estimates of the disemployment effect of minimum wages.

However, we find that minimum wages also lead to a decline in the school
enrollment rate and an increase in the proportion of teenagers who are

neither employed nor enrolled. One hypothesis consistent with these findings
is

that

labor demand shifts toward higher-productivity teenagers after a

minimum wage increase, and that these teenagers take jobs in lieu of
enrolling in school, in the process displacing lower-productivity teens from

employment. Alternatively, there may not be substitution away from the
lower-productivity workers, but rather a shift from enrollment to queuing for

minimum wage jobs. In either case, our results indicate effects of minimum
wages that are not revealed in the standard reduced-form estimates of the
effects of minimum wages on employment.

I. Reduced-Form Effects of Minimum Waees on Teenase Employment:
A Reinteroretatign
The basic dataset used in this paper is similar to that used in

Neumark and Wascher (1992). In particular, the sample consists of panel data
on the 50 states and Washington. D.C. for the period 1977-1989. Included in
the dataset are wariables measuring federal and state minimum wage lewels.

coverage by federal minimum wage statutes, and state averages (estimated from
May CBS files) of wage rates, unemployment rates, employment rates, school

enrollment rates, and the age composition of the state population. In
addition, we have augmented the standard set of explanatory variables used in
research on employment effects of minimum wages with information on statutory
schooling requirements and educational quality: specifically. the upper end
of the age range mandated by state compulsory schooling laws and awerage

teacher salaries (deflated by the consumer price index). In both cases, the
variables are intended to capture changes engineered by state and local

education officials that influence enrollment rates. Summary statistics for
each of the variables are shown in the appendix table.

To begin, we review evidenc, from the standard employment equation
estimated in much of the minimum wage literature:

(1)

EftDNWit+Xij+tit
is the employment-to-population ratio for teenagers aged 16-19 in state i

at time t. HW is a measure of the coverage-adjusted relative minimum wage.
constructed as the federal coverage rate for the state, multiplied by the

-3-

higher of the federal or state minimum wage level, divided by the average

wage in the state. Finally. X represents a set of control variables.
including fixed state and year effects.

tile include in the regressions the

previous year's minimum wage variable along with the contemporaneous variable
in order to pick up the lagged effects of the minimum wage on employment that
were documented in Neumark and Wascher (1992).

Some previous research (e.g. Mincer. 1976; Abowd and Killingsworth.
1981; and Tauchen. 1981) has distinguished between minimum wage effects on
individuals covered and not covered by minimum wage laws, or has studied the
effects on each sector separately, an approach that might be relevant here as

well. However, lacking clear identifying information as to the
classification of individuals into those not covered by minimum wage laws and
those who are covered but whose equilibrium wage is above the minimum, we
have chosen here to address aggregated estimates as in equation (1) .

Because

this aggregate equation is then a combination of observations for which the
minimum wage is binding and observations for which it is not (and for which
wage rates are determined by the intersection of the demand and supply
curves), equation (1) should be thought of as a reduced'form model that

includes both exogenous demand and supply shifters, Thus, the estimated
minimum wage coefficient should not be interpreted as a labor demand
elasticity. but rather as the net effect averaged over workers for whom the
minimum wage is and is not binding. (In Neumark and Wascher (1994) . we
provide an alternative approach to this issue.)

The first column of Table 1 shows the estimates of this standard

specification using our dataset. The estimates are based on a GLS estimator
that permits a block-diagonal covariance matrix, with heteroskedastic errors
across states and first-order autocorrelation in the residuals within states.
to obtain consistent estimates of the standard errors and efficient estimates

of the coefficients. Consistent with other recent studies that fail to find
disemployinent effects for teenagers, the elasticity of employment with

respect to a change in the minimum wage is small (-0.03) and is not
statistically significant.

-4.

Because this equation is essentially a reduced-form model, it is

appropriate to include exogenous supply variables in the specification. A
variety of such variables have been used in past studies (for a survey see
Brown et al. .

1981). aithough in column (1) of the table, we have used only a

cohort size variable. An alternative supply variable that has been used in
some previous minimum wage studies (e.g. Al'Salam et al. . 1981: Ragan. 1977.

1981; Mattila, 1978, 1981) is school enrollment, Schooling is an important
alternative to work for many teenagers, and thus exogenOus variation in
enrollment can arguably influence employment rates,

The remainder of the jable reports estimates of the basic employment
equation that control for shifts in th. school enrollment raie.

Specifications using two alternative measures of enrollment are included to
ensure that the results are not overly sensitive to measurement or

definitional changes. The first (labeled Si) includes only teenagers who
were enrolled in school and were not in the labor force. This variable is
designed to capture enrollment decisions that preclude seeking employment.
The second definition of enrollment (labeled 52) includes all individuals who

reported that their major activity was school, This is a broader measure
that includes most iüdividuals who were both working and in school,

As shown in the second column, when the proportion enrolled in
school and not in the labor force is included in the regression (and treated
as exogenous), the elasticity jumps to -0.23 and is three times its standard

error. When the broader measure of enrollment is included instead (column
(3)). the minimum wage elasticity is the same (-0.23). but with a larger

standard error of 0.11. In both equations, the coefficient on the enrollment
variable is negative and significant, consistent with the view that
employment and enrollment are alternative activities for many teenagers.

A potential problem with a causal interpretation of the estimates
shown in columns (2) and (3) of Table 1 is that th, enrollment

rate may be

endogenous, If exogenous factors that raise employment rates tend to lower
enrollment rates by drawing individuals out of school, then this

endogeneity

transmits a negative bias to the coefficient on the school enrollment
variable.

(On the other hand, if exogenous factors that raise employment

-5,

rates also lead individuals to remain in school or draw into school
individuals who previously were neither working nor in school, then the

endogeneity bias in the school enrollment coefficient is positive.) The
coefficient on Si may be especially prone to this type of bias because, as
Card. et al. (1994) point out, employment and enrollment (as defined by Si)
are mutually exclusive activities.

Nonetheless, the sensitivity of the estimates of minimum wage
effects in standard specifications such as equation (1) to the inclusion of

the school enrollment rate, even if overstated, suggests that exploring the
linkages between employment, enrollment, and the minimum wage may yield

additional insights into the workings of the youth labor market, Indeed. one
explanation of the sensitivity of the minimum wage coefficient to the
addition of controls for enrollment shifts might be that there is another
effect of the minimum wage through its influence on the teenage school

enrollment rate. In particular. if a higher minimum wage encourages
individuals to leave (or not enroll in) school in order to take a job, then

we would expect to see a larger negative effect of minimum wages on
employment after taking account of the negative partial correlation between

employment and school enrollment. In this case, the negative impact of
higher minimum wages on enrollment rates can be interpreted as a labor supply
response stemming from a demand shift towards the teenagers who would have
otherwise chosen to be enrolled in school.

To see this more clearly, suppose that, at the state level.
employment is determined by

(2)

E —

aJ4W

+ yS + £

where S is the enrollment rate, a < 0 and y < 0 (as in the Table 1
estimates), and IC has been dropped. 1' is assumed to reflect the effect of

exogenous variation in S on E. If enrollment is negatively related to the
minimum wage through the reduced'form equation

(3)

S — a'MW +

a'

-6-

where a' < 0. then the reduced form for the employment equation is

(4)

E —

(a + a'yJMW +

t''

In this reduced form, the expected sign of the minimum wage coefficient may
be close to zero (or even positive) even though the individual minimum.wage

coefficients a and a' are negative. Note that if the minimum wage had no
effect on the school enrollment rate (so that a' 0) or if employment and
enrollment decisions were unrelated (so that y—0) ,

the coefficient on the

minimum wage in the employment equation would not be sensitive to the
exclusion or inclusion of the enrollment rate,

Previous research has identified correlations between minimum wage
changes and the schooling decisions of youths, although the evidence is
relatively scant and there is some disagreement about the direction of the

correlation. Using time-series data. Mattila (1978) finds a positive effect
of the minimum wage on school enrollment, which he argues suggests that
raising the minimum wage prompts teenagers to remain in school to increase
their likelihood of gaining employment in the covered sector in the future.
Ehrenberg and Marcus (1980. 1fl2) examine the effects of the minimum wage on

school enrollment with cross-section data. Using grouped data by state for
t970. they find very little evidence of an effect of the minimum wage on

enrollment. In contrast, their estimates derived from the 1966 National
Longitudinal Survey suggest that minimum wages reduce enrollment rates for
low-income teenagers and increase enrollment rates for teenagers from high'

income families. Cunningham (1979) also finds that a higher minimum wage
reduces enrollment: we will return to his results in more detail later in the

paper. Finally. Card (1992b) finds a negative partial correlation between
school enrollment and the minimum wags in his study of the 1988 increase in

California's minimum wage. In the next section. we turn to a fuller
characterization of minimum wage effects on employment and enrollment of
teenagers using our dataset.

.7-

II. Minimum Waee Effects on Enrollment and Emnlovment
The Empirical Approach
Our modeling strategy is based on the assumption that youths choose

among a set of J alternative activities (york. school. etc.). with the choice

influenced by a set of determinants. X. In particular. let

—

1(X) +

t: k—i

jl

be the probability that individual k chooses activity j.

In this framework.

X includes variables relating to the costs of participating in each activity
(e.g. schooling costs and foregone leisure) and the benefits from
participation (e.g. current and future wage rates), while unmeasured
individual specific tastes and abilities as well as unmeasured costs and
benefits are captured in e.
Averaging over individuals (for example. for each state and year).
the proportion of teenagers choosing a particular activity becomes

(6)

— g(X') +

C': ji

.1.

Average differences in the unobservables are captured in the error term. c'.

In addition, some elements of X that were exogenous to individuals are
endogenous with respect to the aggregate proportions (e.g. the market wage
for teenagers). and so X' has been redefined as the exogenous determinants of

the costs and benefits of each activity. In this sense, equation (6) can be
viewed as a set of reduced-form equations. subject to the constraint that the
sum of the proportions is equal to one.

This framework gives rise to the conditional logit model suggested
by McFadden (1973) .

In

particular. we specify employment and enrollment as

jointly determined by a set of exogenous variables, including the minimum

wage. In the results shown below, we employ grouped data to estimate the
parameters of the multinomial logit specification. This approach has been
used in previous analyses of the youth labor market by Ehrenberg and Marcus
(1980. 1982) •and Wachter and Kim (1982).

-8-

Following Ehrenberg and Marcus. we divide the youth population into
four mutually exclusive categories of youth activity, distinguished by

employment status and enrollment status. Specifically. SN! is the proportion
of individuals in school but not employed; SE is the proportion of
individuals in school and employed: ENS is the proportion of individuals
employed but not in school: and NSNE is the proportion of individuals not in

school and not employed. We consider several groupings of these activities
in the results that follow, but in the terminology of the GLS estimates

presented in Table 1. El? — SE + ENS. $1 — SN!. and £2 — SN! + SE.

(The

inexact correspondence between 51 and SN! reflects the fact that the use of

the employment status recode of the C?S for the construction of Si causes
individuals both unemployed and in school to be excluded from this measure.

while the use of the major activity variable to distinguish the alternative
activities in this section leads to the inclusion of such individuals in
S NE.)

Given the categorization just described, the conditional logit model
is comprised of a set of equations specifying the logarithms of the odds
ratios as functions of a set of independent variables:

(7a) log(SNE/NSNE) — a11MW

+

1 + X,D1 + tlit

(7b) log(SE./NSNE.) —

a21MW + a22MWj

(7c) log(ENS.t/N5NE.)

c13iMw1 + j32MW j +

+

+

+ t3it

where i indexes states and t indexes time. This set of equations is
estimated with grouped state-year observations as in Table 1. The exogenous
variables used in the estimation include the current and lagged relative

coverage-adjusted minimum wage 0''i and 'it'1 as defined in the previous
section. and other exogenous determinants of employment and enrollment (X).
In addition to the relative minimum wage, we use the prime-age male

unemployment rate as an exogenous labor demand indicator, the relative size
of the teenage cohort as an exogenous supply indicator, and average teacher

-9-

salaries

and the upper end of the age range of compulsory schooling laws as

exogenous indicators of the demand for education. Compulsory

schooling

laws

are split into controls for four distinct categories: less than age 16. age
16. age 17. and age 18. We use compulsory school age of 16 as the omitted

reference category in the results described below. Fixed state and year

also included to capture state- or year-specific variation in
tastes or abilities or in unmeasured determinants of the costs and benefits
effects are

of these alternative activities. Finally, as before, the model is estimated
with a block-diagonal residual covariance matrix allowing for
heteroskedasticity and AM1) errors.
Results
Parameter

estimates from the conditional logit model of youth

activity are presented in Table 2. In the left two columns, we divide
potential youth activities into three distinct groups; (1) employment
(E—SE+ENS). (2) in school and not employed (SNE). and (3) neither in school

nor employed (NSNE). This grouping corresponds closely to column (2) of
Table 2. where we define school enrollment (51) using the employment status
recode.

The results in Panel A indicate that minimum wages reduce both the
proportion in school and the proportion employed relative to the proportion

neither in school nor employed. The sum of the minimum wage coefficients is
statistically significant and negative in both equations. With regard to the
remaining variables, the adult male unemployment rate is estimated to have a

negative effect on employment, but no effect on enrollment. Higher teacher
salaries are estimated to have a positive effect on enrollment and
employment, while compulsory schooling laws have essentially no determinable
effect.

To get a better sense of how to interpret these results. Panel B of
the table shows the estimated implied elasticities of the proportion in each

employment'enrollment category with respect to the minimum wage. Consistent
with the evidence from the results in Table 1. the elasticity of the
proportion employed with respect to the minimum wage is essentially zero

-10'

(0.05 and insignificant). However, the results also indicate a significant
negative elasticity (-0.34) of enrollments with respect to the minimum wage

and a positive and significant elasticity (0.67) of the proportion neither in

school nor employed. Thus, the primary net impact of a higher minimum wage
is to increase the proportion of teens neither in school nor employed (NSNE),
and to reduce the proportion in -school (SNE+SE). These findings clearly
indicate that the reduced-form employment equation masks shifts in enrollment
rates of teenagers, and perhaps also minimum wage effects on employment rates
of subgroups of teenagers.

To explore these relationships further, columns (3) to (5) of Panel
A present results that additionally split the employed category into two
distinct groups: in school and employed (SE). and employed but not in school
(ENS) .

This results in a model with the four mutually exclusive categories

as originally defined. Consistent with the earlier results, the estimates
show generally statistically significant minimum wage effects that induce
individuals away from each of the employed and/or enrolled groups to the not

enrolled and not employed category. Panel B again shows the implied
elasticities of the proportions of teenagers in each employment-enrollment

category with respect to the minimum wage. As in the three-category
estimates, the largest increase occurs in the proportion of teenagers neither
in school nor working. In this specification, however. -the estimates also
suggest a sizable decline in the proportion in school and employed.
Finally, on net, the employment effect (SE+ENS) is negative, although small.

Robustness Checks

Table-3

reports a variety of estimates of the minimum wage

elasticities implied by the conditional logit model, exploring the robustness
of the results to variations in model specification and the structure of the

covariance matrix. For comparison purposes. Panel A repeats th. baseline
elasticities for the four-category model from Table 2.

In Panel B, we report

estimates that exclude the exogenous determinants of schooling (teacher

salaries and compulsory schooling laws). The estimates are little affected
by this omission, suggesting either 'that

thsre

is room to improve the

'11-

specification of the determinants of enrollment decisions or that enrollment

is little affected by schooling measures. In Panel C. we omit tha lagged
minimum wage variable to focus on the contemporaneous effects of an increase

in the minimum. As expected given the results in our previous paper (Neumark
and Wascher. 1992). some of the effects on schooling and employment are

smaller when the lagged variable is omitted, but not strikingly so. The
estimate of the elasticity of the proportion neither in school nor employed

with respect to the minimum wage is 0.44. about a third less than the
baseline, and still statistically significant.
In Panels 0 and E. we examine the effects of changing the assumed

structure of the covariance matrix. When a single autocorrelation parameter
across all states is estimated (Panel D). the results are nearly identical to

the baseline shown in Panel A. although with larger standard errors. Using a
scalar residual covariance matrix, as in Panel E. leads to some (offsetting)

decline in the minimum wage effects on the two employment categories (SE and
ENS) as well as increased standard errors, but overall the results again are
qualitatively similar.

Finally, in Panel F. we report the elasticities when the model is

estimated excluding the fixed state effects. This should produce results
more analogous to the cross-section results of Ehrenberg and Marcus (1980).
although that study focused on differences in minimum wage effects across

income classes and did not introduce any time-series variation. Nonetheless.
comparisons of the estimates in Panel P with those in Panel A are consistent

with the criticisms of cross-section studies of minimum wage effects put

forth by Freeman (1982). In particular, the estimated disemployment effect
(SE+ENS) rises considerably when th. fixed state effects are excluded.
consistent with Freeman's argument that unmeasured economic conditions across
states could give rise to a positive correlation between wages and employment

and hence a spurious negative correlation between the relative minimum wage

variable and employment. If high wage rates also induce a positive labor
supply response. there could be a spurious positive correlation between the
relative minimum wage variable and the enrollment rate as well; this is
consistent with the finding that the elasticity of the proportion in school

-12'

and not employed becomes positive when the state effects are excluded. The
spurious correlations between the relative minimum wage and employment and

enrollment induced by ignoring state effects are roughly offsetting. and the
elasticity of the proportion neither in school nor employed is slightly
smaller (0.58) in this specification.

Interpreting the Results

The structure of the model is not sufficiently complex nor are the
data sufficiently detailed to enable us to infer precisely why the proportion
of teenagers neither in school nor employed rises in response to a higher

minimum wage while the employment rate is little affected. However, the
estimates in Table 2 are consistent with two possibilities.

First, the estimates may be picking up a shift in labor demand

toward higher-skilled workers. One effect of a higher minimum wage is to
raise the cost of lower-skilled labor relative to the cost of higher-quality

substitutes (such as teenagers with more schooling). If high- and low'
skilled teenagers enter separately in the production function, this change in
the relative wage reduces the demand for lower-productivity workers by moving

employers up the demand curve for low-skilled labor. However, the increase
in the minimum wage also shifts out the demand curve for higher-productivity

labor. irducing higher labor supply and employment for these workers. Thus.
if higher-skilled teenagers are more likely to be enrolled in school, and if
school is properly viewed as an alternative to working, this increase in
labor demand will result in a decline in enrollment rates, as the higher'

productivity teenagers choose to enter th, labor market rather than enroll

(or remain enrolled) in school, Moreover, these teenagers will displace some
relatively lesser'sksll,d teenagers in the work force, mitigating the overall
employment loss associated with the minimum wage and, of course, masking the

employment declines among the less-skilled teens, The displaced lower'
skilled workers would tend to end up neither enrolled nor employed

given

their presumably lower propensity toward additional schooling. Thus, in the
substitution model, increases in the minimum wage do reduce the employment of
some workers, presumably those who are •the least productive. In this sense.

'13-

the

competitive view of minimum wages applies to this subset of workers, even

though reduced-form employment equations reveal little or no disemployment
effect of the minimum wage for the teenage group in the aggregate,

A second and related possibility is that teenage workers are
homogeneous. but that the higher minimum wage leads some teenagers to leave

school and queue for jobs in the covered sector. br this model to explain
the results, the higher minimum wage must induce an increase in desired labor

supply but have little or no effect on labor demand, Thus, some individuals
leave school and end up neither enrolled nor employed, but there is no
disemployment effect even for a subset of workers.

Note that in both models, the main result is that a higher minimum
wage increases the proportion of teenagers neither enrolled nor employed and

decreases the proportion enrolled. The primary difference is that the
substitution hypothesis suggests that a subset of workers may be "priced out

of the market" relatively permanently by a minimum wage increase, whereas in
the queuing model, the time spent neither enrolled nor employed is more
equally distributed across the teenage population, especially if some
teenagers who queue for minimum wage jobs eventually obtain them,
In our view, there is some evidence suggesting that the substitution

model better characterizes the data, The substitution model predicts an
exogenous effect of enrollments on employment, because as teenagers leave
school to take jobs, the price of their labor should fall, and employment
rise.

In contrast, the queuing model predicts essentially no exogenous

effect of enrollments on employment, because the teenagers who leave school

simply queue for minimum wage jobs. The estimates of the coefficient on the
enrollment variable in the employment equations of Table 1 are decidedly
negative, which seems to lend support to the substitution argument. However.
as we indicated. these estimates are potentially contaminated by endogeneity
bias, and if this bias is the main source of the negative partial correlation

between enrollment and employment, these results cannot be used as evidence

in favor of the substitution model, In fact, a greater propensity for
teenagers to join the queue when employment conditions are good would
generate this negative endogeneity bias.

-14-

To assess the importance of endogeneity bias, we reestimated the
specifications in columns (2) and (3) of Table 1. instrumenting for the
enrollment rate with the school quality and compulsory schooling variables,

When the proportion of teenagers in school and not in the labor force (Si) is
used as the enrollment variable, the IV procedurs produces a slightly larger
negative coefficient on the enrollment rats ('0.93 with a standard error of

0.28). When the broader enrollment measure (S2) is used, the coefficient
drops slightly to -0.31 with a standard error of 0.26. Thus, the IV results
do not suggest that the negative coefficients on the enrollment rate in the
employment equation are due to endogeneity bias, and in that sense lend
support to the substitution hypothesis.

In addition, the substitution model is. in our view, somewhat more
consistent with the findings of other research on the effects of the minimum
wage, although this research has not addressed the substitution versus

queuing models explicitly. One relevant study is a recent paper by Currie
and Fallick (1993). who study the effects of the minimum wage on the

employment of low'wage workers using panel data on individuals. As long as
there is excess supply at the original minimum wage, an increase in the
number of identical workers queuing for minimum wage jobs should not affect

the probability of job loss for an existing worker. In contrast, this study
finds that the probability of a job loss for a low'wage worker rises 3 to 4
percent with an increase in the minimum wage. a result consistent with the.

prediction of the substitution hypothesis that minimum wages lead to job
losses for some workers.

Another pertinent study is that by Cunningham (1979). who employs a
methodology similar to ours, using stats data from the 1960 and 1910

decennial Censuses of Population. He finds that a higher minimum wage leads
to an increase in full-time employment in the sector covered by minimum wage
laws and a decline in part-tim. employment in-that sector; in addition.

school enrollment among workers in the covered sector falls. This is
consistent with a substitution of higher- for lower-quality workers, as part'
time workers in the covered sector who were also in school increase their
hours (and leave school) and displace the lower-qua),ity workers (who were not

-15-

in school). In contrast to our findings. Cunningham's results do not show a
sharp increase in the proportion of teenagers neither in school nor employed,
but instead show that most of the displaced workers enter the uncovered

sector. This difference may simply reflect increases in coverage since 1970
that have reduced the size of the uncovered sector. Finally.

using cross-

state data from the 1970 Census. Ehrenberg and Marcus (1980) find that for
male teenagers. minimum wage increases redistribute jobs from the children

of

the poor to the children of the nonpoor. although their results using 1966
NLS data suggest the opposite.
On the other hand. Card (1992b) reports enrollment declines
associated with the 1988 minimum wage increase in California and argues that
these declines "were not directly associated with the relative growth in

California employment" (p. 48). He bases his claim on the fact that the
employment rate for enrolled teenagers increased by about as much as the
employment rate for all teenagers following the minimum wage increase.
However, this evidence does not rule out the substitution hypothesis since
there may have been increases in employment among those who remained enrolled

as well as transitions from employment to enrollment. Thus, on balance, we
view the results reported in these previous studies as more supportive of the
substitution model than of the queuing model, although, as with our results.
the evidence is indirect.

III. Conelusions
The evidence in this paper indicates that an exclusive focus on the
effects of minimum wages on employment is inadequate for understanding how

minimum wages influence the low-wage labor market. In particular, the
sensitivity of the estimated disemployment effect of minimum wages for
teenagers to the inclusion or exclusion of the school enrollment rate
suggests that there is an important interaction between schooling,
employment, and the minimum wage that has been ignored in much of the recent
literature.

To study these linkages more carefully, we broaden the analysis of
the effects of the minimum wage using a conditional logit model of

-16-

alternative employment and enrollment outcomes. Estimates from this model
consistently show a negative influence of a higher minimum wage on school

enrollment. Perhaps most importantly, we find that there is a significant
increase in the proportion of teenagers neither in school nor employed in
response to art increase in the minimum wage.

The results in this paper are consistent with the hypothesis that a
higher minimum wage leads employers to substitute away from low-productivity

teenagers toward higher-productivity teenagers. This increase in the demand
for higher-quality workers induces a labor supply response among teenagers

who were formerly in school. The upshot is that lower-productivity workers
are displaced by higher-productivity teens (who also leave school), and

become neither employed nor enrolled. Under this interpretation, reducedform estimates of minimum wage effects on employment mask disemployment

effects among the least productive workers. The results are also consistent.
although in our view less so. with the hypothesis that, as a result of a
minimum wage increase, teenagers leave school to queue for minimum wage jobs.

without any disemployment effect among those already employed. Of course.
some individuals who queue for minimum wage jobs will. eventually find

employment so that in either case, some teenagers leave school for work.

Whether a minimum wage-induced transition from school to work is
desirable from a policy perspective is ambiguous, depending on.

among other

factors, the substitutability of experience for education in a human capital

production function. However, individuals displaced from both school and
work seem unambiguously worse off. Whatever the welfare evaluation of these
changes. the results clearly indicate that focusing solely on the reducedform estimates of minimum wage effects on employment masks

changes

in school

enrollments of teenagers and perhaps also changes in employment that should
be of interest to policymakers.

'17-

REFERENCES

Abowd. J. N.. and Killingsworth, N. R. (1981). "Structural Models of the
Effects of Minimum Wages on Employment by Age Groups." Report of the
Minimum Wage Study Commission. Vol. V. Washington. D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office. pp. 143-169.
Al Salam, N.. Quester. A.. and Welch. 1. (1981). "Some Determinants of the
Level and Racial Composition of Teenage Employment." in The Economics of
Legal Minimum Wages. ed. S. Rottenberg. Washington. D.C.: American
Enterprise Institute. pp. 124-154.
Brown. C.. Gilroy. C.. and Kohen. A. (1982). "The Effect of the Minimum Wage
on Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature. 20. 487528.

Card. D. (1992a). "Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects
of the Federal Minimum Wage." Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 46.
22-37.

Card. D. (1992b). "Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of
California." Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 46. 38-54.
Card. D.. Katz. L. F.. and Krueger. A. 3. (1994). "Comment on David Neumark
and William Wascher. "Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum Wages:
Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws"." Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, forthcoming.
Card. U.. and Krueger. A. B. (1993). "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case
Study of the Fast Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania." Working
Paper No. 4509. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cunningham. .3.. (1981). "The Impact of Minimum Wages on Youth Employment.
Hours of Work, and School Attendance: Cross-Sectional Evidence from the
1960 and 1970 Censuses." in The Economics of Legal Minimum Wages. ed. S.
Rottenberg. Washington. D.C.: American Enterprise Institute. pp. 88-123.

Ehrenberg, R. G.. and Marcus. A. 3. (1980). "Minimum Wage Legislation and the
Educational Outcomes of Youths." Research in Labor Economics. 3. 61-93.
Ehrenberg. R. G.. and Marcus. A. 3. (1982). "Minimum Wages and Teenagers'
Enrollment-Employment Outcomes: A Multinomial Logit Model." Journal of
Human Resources. 17. 39-58.

Freeman. R. 8.. (1982). "Economic Determinants of Geographic and Individual
Variation in the Labor Market Position of Young Persons." in The Youth
Labor Market Problem: Its Nature. Causes, and Consequences. ed. K. B.
Freeman and D. A. Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 115-154.
Katz. L. F.. and Krueger. A. B. (1991). "The Effect of the New Minimum Wage
Law in a Low-Wage Labor Market." Proceedings of the Forty-Third Annual
Meetings (Washington. D.C.. Dec. 28-30. 1990). Madison. Wis.: Industrial
Relations Research Association. pp. 254-265.
Katz. L. F., and Krueger. A. 8. (1992). "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
the Fast-Food Industry." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46. 6-21.
Mattila. 3. P. (1978). "Youth Labor Markets. Enrollments, and Minimum Wages."
Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual Meetings (Chicago. Aug. 29-31.
1978). Madison, Wit.: Industrial Relations Research Association. pp. 134140.

Mattila, .3. P. (1981). "The Impact of Minimum Wages on Teenage Schooling and
on the Part-Time/lull-Time Employment of Youths." in The Economics of Legal
Minimum Wages. ed. S. Rottenberg. Washington. D.C.: American Enterprise
Institute. pp. 61-87.

-18-

McFadden, D. (1973). "Conditional. Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice
Behavior," in Frontiers in Econometrics, ed. P. Zarembka. New York:
Academic Press.

Mincer. J. (1976). "Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages." Journal of
Political Economy. 84. 587-5105.
Neumark, D.. and Waacher. W. (1992). "Employment Effects of Minimum and
Subminimum Wages: Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws." Industrial and
Labor Relations Review. 46. 55-81.
Neumark. D.. and Wascher. W. (1994). "Minimum Wage Effects and Low-Wage Labor
Markets: A Disequilibrium Approach." Working Paper #4611. National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Ragan. J. F. (1977). "Minimum Wages and the Youth Labor Market." Review of
Economics and Statistics. 59. 129-136.
Ragan. .7. F. (1981). "The Effect of a Legal Minimum Wage of the Pay and
Employment of Teenage Students and Nonstudenta." in The Economics of Legal
Minimum Wages. ed. S. Rottenberg. Washington. D.C.: American Enterprise
Institute. pp. 11-41.

"The Effects of Changes in the Federal Minimum Wage:
Restaurant Workers in North Carolina. mimeo. • Economic Policy Institute.

Spriggs. tJ. E. (1992) •

Tauchen. C. E. (1981). "Some Evidence on Cross-Sector Effects of the Minimum
Wage." Journal of Political Economy. 89. 529-547.
Taylor. L. 3.. and Kim. T. (1993). "The Employment Effect in Retail Trade of
California's 1988 Minimum Wage Increase." Working Paper #93-16. Heinz
School of Public Policy and Management. Carnegie Mellon University.
Wachter. N. L.. and Kim. C. (1982). •Time-Series Changes in Youth
Joblessness." in The Youth Labor Market: Its Nature. Causes, and
Consequences. eds. R. Freeman and D. Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press pp. 155-185.

Table 1: Within-Group Estimates of Minimum Wage Effects on Employment, Teenagera (16.19)i

reetner (I6-lc
Minimumwagc

(1)
.13
(.11)

Minimum wage,
lagged one year

-.18

(.12)

Proportionofagegroupin

(3)

(2)
-.13
(.07)

.01
(.10)

-.11
(.08)

(.11)

-.23

-.78

school and not employed (Si)

(03)

Proporion of age group with
major activity school ($2)

-.39

(.03)

Minimum wage elasticity2

(13)

-23

-.23

(.08)

(.ii)

1. The sample coven the 50 Mates and Wathingtoa D.C., (or the yean i978-1989. Standard errors an reponed in parentheses.
The minimum wage variable is the minimum wage leveL multiplied by covenge, divided by the average wage in the azaic. All
sethficjtjops include fixed as. cc and year cit a the unemployment race for prime-age male., and the proponioc of the
popuiacion in the age group. The nhilnin allow (or different residuai cant variances across states, and An cacti, with
different autocorrelation parameters serosa slain. The .'ii—'tn arccomputed by estimating the autocoerelacioo parameter (tool
the OLS residuals for each state, quasi'diffcrcneing (drcpping the rm obseivadon), and applying GL.S.
2. Long-run elasticity, evaluated at ample means. Standard ens treat coefficient estimates, but not means, as random.

Table 2: Conditional Lcgii Estimates of Minim tam Wage Effects on Employment and School Enrollacas, Teenager. (16-19)'

A FsIi,npte,'

lisin, End Stints Recode (Sit
S/NSNE
(1)

Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage

Covenge-adjusted relative
minimum wage, lagged

yw

Proportion ot population

aged 1649
Prime-age male
umcmploym.as nEc

Commlsory ichool agecló
Compulsoty school age-I?
Compulsory school age- IS

-2.26

E/NSNE
(2)

47

Ulne Ems Staluc Recode and Mijo. Activit, (2l
SNE/NSNE
(3)

(.60)

(.63)

-1.40
(.70)

-.63

-1.31
(.71)

-.86
(.75)

(.61)
.06

EflS/N5p4g
(5)

(.79)

-.15
(.75)

-1.56
(.88)

-.95
(.83)

-1.43
(1.28)

-1.14

-234

(125)

(1.60)

-2.65
(.62)

1.76

-1.69

(.61)

(.79)

(21)

-.04
(.21)

.15
(.23)

.13

-.11

(29)

(.32)

-.12
(.09)

.01

(.09)

-.10
(.09)

-.08
(.12)

-.07
(.09)

-.21
(.10)

-06

-.05

0?

-.05

(.11)

(.10)

(.14)

(.11)

-128
(131)

(1.45)

-3.08
(.89)

-1.11
(.77)

(1.14)

34
(36)
-.04

Average teacher
salaries/laO

3.42

2.41

(1.03)

(Ifl)

(128)

Sum at minimum wage

-2.90

-1.78

-2.26

effects

SE/NSNE
(4)
-133

(45)

(49)

.57

(.76)

-.61
(1.49)

-2.17
(.64)

1.88

Table 2 (continued)

B. Minimum Wa'e Elnijcidc.'
Mean
proportion

Proportion in school (5)

Proportion employed (E)
Proportion not in school,
not employed (NSNE)

(I)
.40

.43

.17

Predicted
change
(2)

Mean
proportion

(3)

.34

Proportion in school,

(.17)

not employed (SNE)

.05

Proportion in school,
employed (SE)

.21

(.16)
.67
(.14)

Proportion employed,
not in school (ENS)

.n

Proportioenotinschool,
not employed (NSNE)

.45

Predicted

change
(4)
•.13
(.11)
-.40

(27)
.28

(.25)
.12

.64

(.14)

I. The sample coven the $0 states and Washington, D.C.. (or the years 1978-1989.
2. Standard errors arc reported in parentheses. The minimum wage variable is the minimum wage kvel multiplied by
coverage,
divided by the average wage in the state. All specifications include fixed state arid year effects. Compulsosy
schooling age of
16 is the omitted reference category. The estimates allow lot different residual error variance. across Mates, and AR! errors
with different autocorrelation parameters across slates The estimates arc cocipuled by estimating the auzocorrelation
parameter
From the 01.5 residuals for each state, quasi-diflereacing (dropping the first observation), and applying CU
tion-by-cquaiion
to the quasidif1ertnced data. (This latter step is equivalent to applying CU to the system of equations for the quasi-differenced
data.)
3. Mean proportions are sample means. Predicted changes are evaluated at sample means. Standard errors of predicted changes
are eaJculaced treating sample means as fixed, and coefficient estimates as random, using first-order linear approximations to the
nonlinear functions of the parimeter estimates Wbile the estimated minimum-wage elasticities are independent of which
category
is the reference category in the conditional lot estimation, the standard errors vary slightly based on this choke, since the first.
order approximation used in the standard error calculation varies.

Tabk 3: Seuthivity Aaa1ysis toe
Mthimumi Wage

F1.I41in1

Logit Enimaics.

A. flssdi.e itable lb
SHE
-.13
(.17)

SE
-.40

ENS

28

£4

(27)

(.25)

(.14)

NSNE

Prnoe.annc V_L....H.._ n.:....

W

SHE

.14

SE
-.40

(.17)

(27)

ENS
.29
(.25)

NSNE

£7
(.14)

C. Omittin, Lsn.4 Mi.iniam Ws,c EIFs
SHE

SE

ENS

NSNE

-.14

-27

28

(.14)

(.22)

(20)

.44
(.12)

I). Shirk Aalnroryelstjnn Psramnn frw Each Stale
SHE
-.09
(.19)

SE

ENS

-30
(31)

29

NSNE
£5

(.27)

(.16)

E Homnakedailic Nnn-A.lnear,ehtr4 Errors
SHE

SE

-.15

-.11
(.38)

(.24)

ENS
.12

HSNE

(36)

(.20)

.60

F No Flint Stale Effects
SHE

SE

.04

-30
(20)

(.10)

ENS
-.11
(.14)

NSHE

38
(.08)

L Exccpl wbcxc othcrwisc spccilicd, I ootnoics from Tablc 2 apply. All specifications usc major aciiviiy Ia the survey week to
define cnrotlment (Si).

Appendix Tabk: Descriptive Statistics

Mean

Employment rate

.43

Proportion of population

.09

Charseterissies at Teenann (16-1Q
Standard deviatiOn Minimum
Maximum
.09

.09

.67

.06

.14

.17

.73

aged 16-19

Proportion of population in
school and nOt employed (Si)

.40

Proportion of age group with

45

.08

.39

major activity in school (52)

Stale rhnaeieriuit,
Mean

Standard deviation Minimum

Coverage-adjusted relative
minimum wage

.35

.04

Prime-age male (2544)
unemployment rate

.05

03

Average teacher salaries
(1,0W 1982 dollars)
CompuJsoq school age
<16

20.1

Proportion

3.7

Maximum
.49

.20

13.8

35.7

# changes to S changes from

.04

0

16

.67

18

.14
.14

3
5
4

Ii

.25

2
7
2
1

1. The sample covers the 50 states and Washington, D.C for the years 1978-1989. The minimum wage levol is the greater of
the states or federal minimum wage level. The coverage rats is coverage by federal minimum wage laws for all workers in the
Mate, divided by the avenge wage in the state. Information on teacher salaries and compulsoty schooling ages is taken from
various years of Dinsi of E4nracion Smut U.S. Depan.meat of PA.nttnn.i National Ccatcr for Education Statistics, Euimatn

of Schnol Stnistia National Education Assodatioa, and Iadthrc of Pithik FIew,ljurv and Snrndarv Day Schoo& U.S.
Department of Education. National Caner (or Education Statistics.

