                            NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                POLICY, TECHNOLOGY
                              ADOFrION AND GROWIH




                                     William Easterly
                                       Robert King
                                       Ross Levine
                                      Sergio Rebelo




                                Working Paper No. 4681




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 1994



This paper was prepared for the International Economic Association Conference volume on
"Economic Growth and the Structure of Long Term Development," edited by Robert M.
Solow and Luigi L. Pasinetli. Rebelo gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
NBER Olin fellowship. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Growth. Any
opinions pc:s4 art Woc of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4681
                                                                               March 1994

                                 POLICY, TECHNOLOGY
                                ADOPTION AND GROWTH

                                         ABSTRACF

       This paper describes a simple model of technology adoption which combines the two
engines of growth emphasized in the recent growth literature: human capital accumulation and
technological progress. Our model economy does not create new technologies, it simply adopts
those that have been created elsewhere. The accumulation of human capital is closely tied to this
adoption process: accumulating human capital simply means learning how to incorporate a new
intermediate good into the production process. Since the adoption costs are proportional to the
labor force, the model does not display the counterfactual scale effects that are standard in
models with endogenous technical progress.
       We show that our model is compatible with various standard results on the effects of
economic policy on the rate of growth.



William Easterly                                           Robert 0. King
The World Bank                                             University of Virginia
Washington, D.C. 20433                                     Charlottesville, VA 22901


Ross Levine                                                Sergio Rebelo
The World Bank                                             University of Rochester
Washington, D.C 20433                                      Rochester, NY 14627
                                                           and NBER
     I. INTRODUCTiON

     The belief that economic policy is a major determinant of economic growth has
been expressed in the writings of economists for over 300 years. Sir William
Petty's (1676) comparative study of the standard of living in France and England and
John Smart Mill's (1848) discussion of the determinants of production increases are
examples of early attempts to understand the growth process and to identify public
policies that encourage economic development. The idea that government policy is
important in shaping the growth process has been a recurrent theme of the
development literature for the past three decades (see, for instance, Balassa et al
(1982). Chenery et a! (1986) and Krueger (1978)). Growlh theorists have also shared
this interest in the role of public policy; the neoclassical growth model of Solow
(1956) has been used as testing ground to study the dynamic effects of numerous
policies.

     The empirical evidence based on the cross-country data that we have currently
available is consistent with the idea that public policy can affect the course of
economic development. Table I shows that, over the past 30 years, fast growing
countries had less government consumption. lower inflation, lower black market
exchange rate premia, and more trade than slow growing countries.

     In this paper we discuss the effects of policy on economic growth making use of
the theoretical insights provided by the recent growth literature.      Instead of
reviewing the various theoretical paradigms that have been recently proposed and
their policy implications, we will organize most of our discussion around a simple
model of technology adoption. This model, which is inspired by the work of Romer
(1990) and of Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991) encompasses two central themes of the
recent growth literature:    the importance of the process of human capital
accumulation, and the role played by technological progress and by the introduction
of new technologies.

     Our basic model is presented in section U. In section III we discuss the
effects of various types of government policies regarding taxes and government
                                         1
spending, monetary policy, financial policies, trade and exchange rate policies.
Section IV provides some conclusions.




                                                         TABLE 1

                                                                                    Fastgrowers Slowgrowers
        Share of Investment in GDP                                                     0.27        0.17
        Secondary School Enrollment Rates                                              0.27        0.07
        Primary School Enrollment Rates                                                0.90        0.52
        Government Expenditures/GD?                                                    0.14        0.13
        Government Consumption/GDP                                                     0.08        0.12
        Inflation Rate                                                                 8.42       16.51
        Standard Deviation of Inflation                                                8.75       19.38
        Black Market Exchange Rate Premium                                               4.65               75.03
        Standard Deviation of Black Market Premium                                       6.53             105.69
        Share of Exports in GDP                                                          0.44               0.29

       Mean       Per     Capita    &owil,       Rate      a 1.92%; Fast Growers sit countries whose
       per     capita      p0Mb       nIt is greater or equil thin the man plus one
       standard      deviation.         The      cuioff p0Mb nit was 4% and the number of
       rag      growers       ii    12.           Slow        power.   are       countries     with      per          capita
       growth      nies that an             lower     or equal to the mean                       minus      one    standard
       deviation.          The     cutoff      growth      ale for slow                 grower,       was     -0.2%     and
       the     number        of    slow       growers       is     IS.       The      variables      included     in     the
       table      is     the     subset       of     the       policy  variable       included     I the             Levine-
       lUnch         (1992)      data        set      that       art    statistically      differa.t       between       the
       Iwo groups of      countries.




II. A SIMPLE MODEL OF TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION

     Our economy is populated by N identical individuals who maximize their life-
time utility defined as:


(1)           U=            ePt 1jE [c< -1] dt, ci>O, çi>0

where c represents the level of per capita consumption at time I                                                   (we     will use

                                                                 2
capital letters to denote aggregate quantities and lower case letters to denote per
capita variables).

      There is a single good in this economy which is produced by combining labor
with a continuum of intermediate goods Xt(i) with i€[O A1]:


(2)
                           a A,          (1-a)/y
             Y=B1N jo X'(i)di

     This production function is constant returns to scale if we maintain the range
of intermediate inputs that are used in production (A1) constant. Technological
progress in this economy takes the form of endogenous increases in the range of
intermediate inputs used in production. The parameter y measures the extent to
which the intermediate goods are substitutes: 1/(l-y)         is   the elasticity of
substitution between any two intermediate inputs. When y=l the intermediate goods
are perfect substitutes.

     The intermediate good X(i) costs p1(i) units of output. This cost can be
interpreted as the direct cost of producing the good, or as the price that needs to
be paid to import it from abroad; p1(i) can also include any payments that need to
be made to the foreign firm that holds the patent for x(i).

      Output Y can be used to purchase (or produce) intermediate goods, to consume
or to invest in human capital (Ii):


                =
(3)                  t p1(i) Xt(i) di + Nc1 +
     Our economy does not create new technologies, it simply adopts technologies
that have already been discovered elsewhere. This adoption process is costly. In
order to incorporate a new intennediate good into the production process it is
necessary to invest resources. We assume that the cost of adopting new technologies

                                            3
is proportional to the size of the work force, which in our model coincides with the
population. This seems to be the most natural assumption: without it there would
be scale effects associated with technology adoption implying that larger countries
would find it easier to adopt new technologies.

      In this model the accumulation of human capital is closely tied to the
introduction of new goods into the production process: accumulating human capital
simply means learning how to work with a new intermediate input. This notion of
human capital accumulation is different from that implicit in Lucas (1988) and
closer to the one described in Romer (1993a,b).

      We assume that workers learn how to use new intermediate products sequentially,
so that a worker who is capable of using intermediate good A can also work with
goods in the interval [0 A]. A worker's human capital can then be measured by the
most advanced intermediate good that he can use. Accumulation of human capital can
thus be described as:


(4)            =
                   B2   (I/N)

     Equation (4) implies that the production function for human capital is the same
as that for output: to learn how to use a new good it is necessary to invest 1/B2
units of output.        Postulating a different constant returns to scale production
function for human capital would complicate the growth rate formula described below
but would yield the same qualitative results.

      Since new intermediate goods are created elsewhere, the economy is constrained
by the fact that it cannot adopt technologies that have not been invented. That is,
A has to be smaller than A; which represents the 'technology frontier'. We will
assume that our country is sufficiently far from the technology frontier that the
restriction A.cA can be safely ignored.'



                                           4
ILl The optimal u 21 intermediate goods

       For a given A, the optimal level of utilization of intermediate goods can be
determined by maximizing:


(6)          B1   Na [4 X1(i) di][M         -               X(i) di


The optimal level of Xt(i) equates its price, p(i), to its marginal product:

                                           a)/y] I
(7)         (I-a) B1 N' [.F' X1(i) di]"              XT(i) =     p1(i)


This condition allows us to define output net of the intermediate goods cost as:

                                                     [(1-a)Iy]
(8)         Net Output = a B1
                                  Na [.r XI(i) di]

       To determine the values of X(i) it is    necessary    to make assumptions about the
cost   i(• We will assume that pt(i) is constant over time and identical for all
i. The optimal level of X1(i), which in this case is the same for all ic[O A], can
be computed using equation (7).2 Substituting the optimal level of X in the net
output equation (8), we obtain:

(9)         Net Output = a 01/a (la)(l_a)/a N               -(l-a)/a

where C = (l-y)(l-a)/(wz).

    Since we netted out the contribution of intennediate inputs, the expression
depends only on labor and on the most advanced intermediate good which the
representative worker can use.3



                                            5
     The elasticity parameter B is a decreasing function of a: the introduction of
new intermediate goods becomes more valuable when the labor share in production is
low. The introduction of new goods also becomes more valuable as y approaches zero.
When y is small there are sharply diminishing returns to each intermediate good so
that introducing new intermediate goods in the production process becomes an
important source of increases in production (when y-iO, c-xo). When the intermediate
goods are perfect substitutes (rl) net output is independent of At (e=0). In this
case there will be no accumulation of human capital, i.e. no resources will be
devoted to training workers on how to incorporate new intermediate goods into the
production process.

       Depending how the value of e compares to one we can have accelerating growth as
in Romer (1986) (e>1), declining growth (ccl), or constant growth.4 In the
remainder of the paper we will assume that c=l, so that net output is linear in
this is equivalent to assuming that y=l-a, which is the standard assumption
implicitly used in Romer (1990) and in Grossman and Helpman (1990). This assumption
is convenient because it allows us to focus on steady states and to describe the
response of growth to policy with paper-and pencil methods. The same policy
implications would be present in a model with no steady state but would have to be
described using numerical methods. The fact that using the long time series
collected by Maddison (1982) for various countries one cannot reject the hypothesis
of no trend in the rate of growth lends some credence to the c=1 knife-edge
hypothesis.


       To simplify the notation we will denote net output per worker as:

(10)          Net output per Worker = B   A
where the new constant B is equal to a B'a (la)u<'a. The resource constraint
for this economy can thus be expressed in terms of per capita variables as:



                                          6
(11)         B A -(1-a)/a =        c + (1/N)
      This economy grows always at a constant rate. This is a result of the
preferences that we adopted and of three peculiar features of the economy's
technology: (i) there is only one factor that can be accumulated (Ar); (ii) the
production function is linear in this factor       and (iii) the technology used to
increase the level of A1 coincides with the technology to produce output.


        The rate of growth is given by the familiar expression:

(12)         g = [r - p]/a

The real interest rate (r) is equal to:


(13)         r=      B2   B .a/(I-a)

                (13) can be easily interpreted: foregoing one unit of per capita
       Expression
output allows the economy to introduce a range B2 of intermediate goods and
introducing a new intermediate good into the production process increases net output
by B

       Equations (13) and (14) imply that the rate of growth is:


(14)         g   =         B .aIo-a) - p1/a

       Now that we fmished describing our economy it is useful to compare it with the
'Lab Equipment Model' of Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991). The main difference between
the two models has to do with the incorporation of new intermediate goods in the
production process. Our economy does not invent new intermediate products, it
simply adopts goods that were created elsewhere. To adopt these goods it is
necessary to train workers to incorporated them in the production process, and so it

                                               7
is natural, to assume that the adoption cost• is proportional to the number of
workers. In Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991) new intermediate goods are discovered and
introduced at a fixed cost that is independent of the number of workers who will
later adopt this production process. A finn which discovers a new good is granted a
perpetual patent which allows it to charge a price for the intermediate good that is
above its production cost. The decision to innovate results from comparing the cost
of producing the innovation with the discounted stream of monopoly profits.

     In the models of Romer (1990) and of Grossman and Helpman (1990) the steady
state growth rate increases with the size of the economy.          This scale effect
reflects the fact that to introduce a new good it is necessary to incur a fixed cost
that is independent of the size of the market. In contrast, the cost of adopting a
new good in our economy is proportional to the population and hence there are no
scale effects associated with the adoption process.




HI. THE EFFEC'S OF ECONOMIC POLICY

     The model described in the previous section will now be used to review familiar
policy implications and explore new ones.



111.1 Fiscal Policy


    The effect of fiscal policy on economic growth has been extensively studied so
only a brief review of the main results is warranted here.'

     Looking at the growth formula (14) ii is easy to see that a tax on income would
lead to a decline in the rate of growth, since it would act like a reduction in B.
Subsidies to the accumulation of human capital and to the adoption of new
technologies have the same effect as increases in B2, so they foster growth.'


                                            8
     Given that the supply of labor is exogenous, a tax on consumption produces no
distortions and hence it is equivalent to a lump sum tax. Imposing a constant tax
on consumption leaves the growth rate unchanged. Surprisingly, this result also
holds in some models with endogenous labor supply (see Stokey and Rebelo (1993)).

     Our model abstracted from government expenditures.         Its growth rate
implications coincide, however, with those of a model in which publicly provided
goods enter the production and/or the utility function in a separable manner.

    If we introduced publicly provided goods into the production function (2) in a
non-separable manner consistent with steady state growth we would obtain the same
type results associated with the Bairo (1990) model. The growth effect of an
increase in public expenditures depends on the taxes used to fmance those
expenditures. Increases in the share of productive government expenditures in GDP
increases the rate of growth when they are Imanced by consumption taxes. When
distortionary taxes are used to fund public expenditure programs growth can decrease
or increase in response to a boost in the share of government expenditures in GDP.
The growth effect is the result of two conflicting forces: the distortionary effect
of taxation and the increase in the productivity of the private sector associated
with the government expenditures.



111.2 Monetary Policy


     There has been a variety of authors who have explored the effects of monetary
policy in the context of models of the Lucas (1988) - Uzawa (1965) type.7 The
effects of monetary policy described by those authors, in settings in which money is
introduced via a cash-in-advance constraint or by introducing money in the
production function, could be easily translated into our framework. When money
plays an important role in production or in facilitating investment, increases in
the rate of inflation have the same effect as an increase in p or as a decrease in



                                          9
 B2 in our model, leading 10 a decline in the rate of growth.



111.3 Trade Intervention and Exchan2e Rate Policy


     Suppose for the moment that all intermediate goods are imported from abroad.
Trade restrictions and tariffs will tend to raise the domestic price of these goods
and reduce the rate of growth (see (14)). The evidence uncovered by Dc Long and
Summers (1992) and by Jones (1992) suggests that the price of producer durables is
lower in developed countries than in LDC's. Our model is consistent with this being
an important factor in explaining the poor growth performance of LDC's.

     Since the case in which all intermediate outputs are imported is an extreme
one, it is useful to consider the case in which there are two groups of intermediate
inputs with different prices. The price of goods with names in the interval [0 aA]
is p1. while goods with names in the interval [aA A] cost       where O<ac1. With a
                                                            p2.
few algebraic manipulations it is possible to show that net output has, in this
case, the form:


(15)           Per Capita Net Output = a   B At iap' + (1a)p']
       The associated rate of growth is:


(16)          g=    IS2   B [ap'C + (l.a)p'a]. p},a
       Most trade and exchange rate policies distort the relative price of some goods.
Trade barriers, quotas and tariffs make imported goods more. xpensive. Dual
exchange rate systems or the emergence of black markets for foreign currency also
distort relative prices. Equation (16) shows that, not surprisingly, if we maintain
the price of the first group of intermediate goods, p=p and raise the price of the
second type of goods through distortions the rate of growth will decline.0


                                           10
     Equation (16) does not, however, resolve the issue of whether it is possible to
foster growth by taxing some intermediate goods and using the proceeds to subsidize
other intermediate inputs. Easterly (1993) has shown in a different model that this
is not possible and the same result applies here. In order for for this policy to
work it must be possible to increase production by taxing some intermediate inputs
and using the proceeds to subsidize other inputs. But this would work if the
initial   allocation of intermediate inputs were suboptimal, since the policy
intervention under consideration simply rearranges the mix of intermediate inputs
used in production.



111.4 Forei2n Direct Investment

      The effects of foreign direct investment on the rate of economic expansion can
be given a simple interpretation in terms of equation (14). It is natural to assume
that the cost of adopting new technologies is lower when it is carried out by firms
which have experience in using those technologies. In tenns of our growth formula
this translates into a higher value for     and a more rapid rate of growth.9 This
mechanism could be made more precise if we introduced the type of learning-by-doing
dynamics explored in Stokey (1988) and Young (1991) in the process of technology
adoption.



111.5 Policy Uncertainty

     Two of the variables in Table 1, the standard deviation of inflation and of the
black market premium, suggest that uncertainty about policy is important. To
explore this effect it is useful to employ a simpler model in which there are two
types of capital: one that produces a low but riskless rate of return and another
that generates returns that are high but risky.      This model is simply a re-
interpretation of Merton's (1969) model of portfolio selection under uncertainty so



                                         11
our presentation will be brief.

       Agents in this economy make production        and   consumption decisions so as to
maximize the expected value of life-time utility described in equation (1). The
production function is linear in the capital stock in both the risky and the
riskiess sector. To simplify we assume that capital does not depreciate over time.
The law of motion for the capital stock is given by;

(17)          dK = I[1R2 + (lØ)R1]Kt - C)dt +               v dz

     In this expression ø represents the fraction of capital used in the risky
sector. R is the rate of return in the safe sector while R2 is the expected rate
of return in the risky sector. Naturally, we assume that R1<R2, otherwise no
capital would be used in the risky sector. The parameter v represents the
volatility in the returns to the risky secton dz is a Wiener process.

     Merton (1969) showed that both the consumption-capital ratio and the fraction
of capital employed in the risky activity are constant in this economy:


(18)           C/Kt = [p - (l-a)R1]/a - (l-a)(R2-R191(2v2c?)
(19)            =
                    (R2-R1)/(v2a)


       This implies that the stochastic process for the capital stock is:


       dK =                                           dt + (R2-R)/(v a) K dz
              {(R-p)Icl +(1+cr)(lç-R)2/(2v2a2) } K


       The growth race has thus a mean equal to (R1-p)Ia + (1+a)(RR)2/(2v2a2), and
a variance rate equal to (R1R)2/(v a)2. As one would expect, economies with
higher risk aversion (a) invest a higher fraction of the capital stock in the safe
                                              12
technology, so that they reduce growth volatility at the cost of a lower mean rate
of economic expansion.


       This model suggest that an increase in the volatility (i.e. in v2) of the
return to the risky sector lowers the average rate of growth.'°

      It is worthwhile stiessing that in order for the first of these results to hold
it is essential that there exist a risk free activity. If R1=O, so that investment
could take place only in the risky sector the effects of uncertainty on the rate of
growth depend on the degree of risk aversion, as is familiar 1mm Levhari and
Srinivasan's (1969) classic paper on savings under uncertainty and from Eaton's
(1981) analysis of the interaction between taxation and uncertainty. In this case
the law of motion of the capital stock is:


(20)          dK = [(R2-p)/ci -   (l-o)v2] K dt + V K dz

       For values of a greater than one, the income effect on consumption of a given
change in      dominates the substitution effect so the rate of growth increases with
increases in return volatility. The reverse takes place when ad. When a=l the
mean instantaneous rate of growth is independent of the degree of uncertainty in
production outcomes.

     Even though we described the production uncertainty in the model as having a
technological origin, it is easy enough to re-write the model so that the source of
uncertainty stems from policy variables such as inflation, tax rates, or the
likelihood of expropriation. Suppose there are two sectors in the economy, a formal
sector in which it is difficult to evade taxation and an informal sector which does
not pay taxes. In order for production to take place in both sectors it must be the
case that the formal sector is more productive (R2>R1). Higher uncertainty about
taxes leads in this setting to lower rates of growth.             The impact of this
uncertainty is greater the higher the expected difference in the productivity of the
two sectors (R2-R).

                                             13
111.6 Financial Policy

     This model can be used to illustrate some of the channels through which
financial markets and financial policies can affect the rate of growth. For
example, we just demonstrated that greater uncertainty lowers growth. Consequently,
financial markets that allow individual to diversify and reduce uncertainty will
promote faster growth.     Moreover, policies that inhibit financial markets or
institutions from optimally facilitating the ability of individuals to hold
diversified portfolios will reduce growth (see Levine (1991) and Saint-Paul (1992)).

      Our technology adoption model demonstrates another channel through which
financial policy can affect growth. In the model, it is costly to adopt new and
better technologies. To incorporate a new intermediate good into the production
process however, resources must be invested. King and Levine (1993) modify a model
similar to this one by (i) assuming that these resources for developing new
intermediate goods must be financed externally; and (ii) assuming that the ultimate
value of intermediate goods is costly to discern cx ante. Financial intermediaries
arise to research the value of investing in new intermediate goods and selecting the
most promising ones to finance. In this model policies that interfere with the
ability of financial intermediaries to select the investment opportunities with the
best chances of success will slow economic growth.



IV. CONCLUSION

     In this   paperwe described a model economy in which technological progress
takes the form of the introduction of new intermediate products into the production
process. Our economy does not create new goods, it simply adopts goods that have
been created elsewhere.     This adoption process is costly because it involves
training the work force to use these new technologies. Learning how to use new
goods is the only type of human capital accumulation that takes place in the



                                           14
economy. This contrasts with the human capital accumulation process described in
Lucas (1988) model, which is independent of the introduction of new technologies

    Since new technologies are created in only a handful of developed countries
models of technology adoption such as the one outlined here are natural vehicles to
think about cross-country differences in rates of growth.

     We have shown that many of the positive (as opposed to normative) policy
implications that had been derived in the context of the class of models proposed by
Lucas (1988) and Uzawa (1965) continue to hold in our simple model of endogenous
technology adoption. We think that further work on growth models with technology
adoption will sharpen our understanding of the link between economic policy and the
development process.




                                          15
                                   REFERENCES

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt, "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,"
Econometrica, 60: 323-51, 1992.
Barn, R., "Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth," Journal of
Political Economy, 98: 5103-125, 1990.
Barro, R. and X. Sala-i-Martin, "Public Finance in Models of Economic Growth,"
forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies, 1993.
Balassa, B. and Associates, Development Strategies in Semi-Industrial Countries,
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Chenery, H., S. Robinson and M. Syrquin, Industrialization and Growth:              A
Comparative Study, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1986.
De Long, J. and L. Summers, "Equipment Investment and Economic Growth," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106: 445-502, 1991.
Easterly, W., "How Much Do Distortions Affect Growth?," mimeo, World Bank, 1993.
Easterly, W. and S. Rebelo, "Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: An Empirical
Investigation," Journal of Monetary Economics, 32: 417-458, 1993.
Eaton, Jonathan "Fiscal Policy, Inflation and the Accumulation of Risky Capital."
Review of Economic Studies, 48: 435-445, 1981.
Goodfriend, M. and J. McDermott, "Early Development," mimeo, University of Chicago,
1990.

Grossman, G. and H. Helpman, "Comparative Advantage and Long Run Growth," American
Economic Review, 80: 796-815, 1990.
Grossman, G. and H. Helpman, "Quality Ladders in the Theory of Economic Growth,"
Review of Economic Studies, 58: 43-61, 1991.
Jones, C. "Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital," mimeo, MIT, 1992.
King, R, and R. Levine, "Finance, Entrepreneurship and Growth:           Theory and
Evidence," Journal of Monetary Economics, 32: 513-542, 1993.
Krueger, A. Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:             Liberalization
Attempts and Consequences, Cambridge, MA: N.B.E.R., 1978.




                                           16
Levhari, P. and T. N. Srinivasan, "Optimal Savings Under Uncertainty," Review of
Economic Studies, 35: 153-63, 1969.

Levine, R. "Stock Markets, Growth, and Tax Policy," Journal of Finance, 46: 1445-65,
1991.

Levine, R. and D. Renelt, "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions," American Economic Review, 82: 942-63, 1992.
Lucas, R., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22, 1:3-42, 1988.

Maddison, A. Phases of Capitalist Development, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1982.

Merton, It "Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The Continuous Time
Case," Review of Economics and Statistics, 51: 247-54, 1969.
Mill, J. S., Principles of Political Economy, 1848.
Mino, K., "Money and Endogenous Growth in a Cash-in-advance Economy." mimeo,
Hiroshima University, 1990.
Parente, S. and E. Prescott, 'Technology Adoption and Growth," NBER working paper
3733, 1991.
Petty, W. Political Arithmetick, 1676, republished in C.H. Hull The Economic
Writings of Sir William Petty, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1899.
Rivera-Batiz, L. and P. Romer, "International Trade with Endogenous Technical
Change," European Economic Review, 35: 971-1001, 1991,
Romer, P., "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy,
94: 1002-1037, 1986.

Romer, P., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 98:
S71-S102, 1990.
Romer, P. "Two Strategies for Economic Development: Using Ideas and Producing
Ideas," World Bank Economic Review, 63-91, 1993a.
Romer, P. "Idea Gaps and Object Gaps in Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 32: 543-574, 1993b.
Saint-Paul, 0. "Technological Choice, Financial Markets and Economic Growth,"
European Economic Review, 36: 736-81, 1992.
Solow, R., 1956, "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 70: 65-94.

                                          17
Stokey, N. "Learning by Doing and the Iniroduction of New Goods," Journal of
Political Economy, 96: 701-17, 1988.

Stokey, N. and S. Rebelo "Growth Effects of Flat Taxes," mimeo, University of
Chicago, 1993.
Uzawa, H. "Optimal Technological Change in an Aggregate Model of Economic Growth,"
International Economic Review, 6: 18-3 1, 1965,
Wang, P. and C. Yip, "Alternative Approaches to Money and Growth," minieo, The
Pennsylvania Slate University, 1991.
Young, A. "Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106: 369-405, 1991.




'When the economy's technological level, A is close to A; the economy may start
devoting resources to the discovery of new technologies, so we might observe the
type of transition emphasized by Goodfriend and McDermott (1990).

2X1(i) is obviously equal to zero for iE[A 0,].
3The   notion of an intermediate good being more advanced is more natural in the
quality ladder models of Aghion and Howitt (1992) and Grossman and Helpman (1991)
than in this type of model in which intermediate goods are symmetric.

4hi order for the growth rate to be well defined life-time utility (see equation
(1)) must be finite; o>l is a sufficient condition for finiteness of U in economies
with positive growth.

5For general references to this literature see Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1993) and
Easterly and Rebelo (1993).




                                           18
6See Parente and Prescott (1991) for a discussion of the effects of taxation on
technology adoption.

'See, for instance, Mino (1990) and Wang and Yip (1991).

8Barriers to trade are unambiguously bad for growth in this model because we ruled
out infant industry phenomena.


9See Romer (1993a,b) for a discussion of the role of foreign direct investment in
the growth process.

'°Higher volatility in the returns to the risky sector result in lower volatility in
the rate of growth. If we think of LDC's as having higher return volatility, this
model has the counterfactual prediction that the variability of growth should be
smaller in LDC's than in developed countries.




                                        19
