                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT,
                          EMPLOYMENT VOLATILITY AND
                              CYCLICAL DUMPING




                                     Joshua Aizeninan




                                 Working Paper No. 4683




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 1994




The research reported here is part of the NEER's research program in International Trade and
Investment. Any opinions expressed sic those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Reseaich.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4683
                                                                                March 1994


                             FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT,
                             EMPLOYMENT VOLATILITY AND
                                 CYCLICAL DUMPING

                                         ABSTRACT

       This paper analyzes the impact of foreign direct investment (FIN) on the patterns of
cyclical dumping (exporting at a price below marginal cost). We consider a global economy
where manufacturing is monopolistic-competitive, and productivity is subject to countxy-specific
shocks. Labor is risk averse and immobile across counthes, and entrepreneurs are risk neutral.
Labor employment and income is governed by implicit contracts, which offer stable real income
and volatile employment Capacity investment is irreversible, and is done prior to the resolution
of uncertainty, If investment in manufacturing capacity is characterized by returns to scale.
higher volatility of productivity shocks is shown to induce producers to diversify internationally
by means of FDI. The resultant integrated equilibrium is characterized by greater volatility of
employment, as the multinational effectively reallocates employment from a low-realized-
productivity to a high-realized-productivity country. We derive a simple condition characterizing
cyclical dumping - it occurs when the percentage shortfall of the realized employment exceeds
Lerner's ratio of market power (the inverse of the demand elasticity). Cyclical dumping is more
frequent in more competitive and more labor-intensive industries. FDI is shown both to improve
welfare, and to increase the incidences of cyclical dumping.



Joshua Aizenman
Economics Department
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
1.    Introduction and Summary
     .me proliferation of foreign direct investment (P01) in recent years has raised both
hopes and concerns. The upbeat view refers to FDI as another form of welfare improving
international trade. The more pessimistic view blames FDI for the disappearance of jobs
and the decline in real wages of unskilled labor in the United States. Recent studies
disputed the last notion, but left open the issue of the implications of FDI on labor
employment patterns.1 The purpose of this paper is to focus on this issue, analyzing the
implications of P01 on employment volatility and cyclical dumping in an integrated global
economy, subject to country-specific shocks. We consider an economy where the
manufacturing sector is characterized by monopolistic competition. Capacity investment
is irreversible, and the short-run manufacturing employment is characterized by the
absence of labor mobility among producers, where the realized employment and labor
income is governed by prenegotiated contracts. The production of a given manufacturing
variety requires capital investment in a setup cost, and the employment of a variable input
(labor) is subject to diminishing marginal productivity. The capital is characterized by
returns to scale, so that the setup cost of investing in two plants is less than twice the set up
cost of one plant. The labor market is governed by implicit contracts that guarantee a
threshold expected utility. Entrepreneurs are risk neutral, determining the manufacturing
capacity and hiring labor ex ante, prior to the realization of productivity shocks.
       Our model indicates that P1)1, in the presence of returns to scale, is a useful vehicle
for the global diversification of producers' exposure to productivity shocks. The
diminishing marginal productivity of the variable inputs implies that gains from


1      For a review of P1)1, see Lizondo (1990). For empirical studies dealing with FbI see,
for example, Froot and Stein (1989), Edwards (1990), Klein and Rosengren (1990), Goldberg
(1991), Slaughter (1993) and Brainard (1993).
                                           - 2-
diversification occur even if entrepreneurs are risk neutral. These gains are in the form of
increasing the flexibility of production and enabling producers to reallocate effective
employment from the less- to the more-productive location. Hence, as long as the
productivity shocks are not fully correlated across countries, a higher volatility will
increase the gains from diversification. If returns to scale are significant enough, higher
volatility induces a switch from a nondiversified equilibrium to an integrated global
economy. A by-product of this switch is that goods are losing their national identification
and, instead, are identified by the multinational producing it Hence, the international
diversification changes the organization of markets, inducing an integrated equilibrium
where multinationals command an important role.
      To gain clarity, our analysis assumes similarity among the supply and demand
conditions facing all producers, implying that there are only two types of equilibria: an
integrated world where all goods are produced by multinationals, and a nationalistic
equilibrium where a given good is produced only in one country. We identify conditions
that will induce a regime switch. It is shown that the move to the integrated equilibrium
increases the volatility of employment. The employment of labor under implicit contracts
delinks the observed marginal cost of labor from the present market conditions, as the
marginal cost of labor is preset, prior to the realization of the state of nature. As Ethier
(1982) illustrated, this circumstance implies that occasionally cyclical dumping (defined as
exporting at a price below the marginal cost) may be observed.2 Our anaJysis applies this
logic for monopolistic competitive industries. We derive a simple condition
characterizing cyclical dumping - it occurs when the percentage shortfall of the realized
employment, relative to the expected employment, exceeds Lerner's ratio of market power


2     His contribution formulated dumping in a competitive industry where adjustment

of some rewards to factors of production is sluggish. Implicit contracts in a Heckscher-
Oblin framework were studied by Matusz (1985).
                                            - 3-

(defined by the inverse of the demand elasticity). Applying this condition we show that
the switch to the integrated equilibrium (induced either by opening capital markets, or
due to higher volatility of productivity shocks) increases the incidences of cyclical
dumping. Yet, in our model this switch improves welfare of all the involved parties
(including labor). Hence, there is no simple correspondence between cyclical dumping and
welfare. While one may attempt to associate PD! with more frequent incidences of cyclical
dumping, this association is fully consistent with the possibility that PD! is welfare
enhancing.
     Before continuing it is constructive to place this work in context of the existing
literature. EDI is a multifaceted phenomenon explained by several complementary forces.
Among the explanations for PD! we find the factor proportions differential hypothesis
(Markusen (1984), Helpman (1984)], proximity to markets [Xrugman (1983fl, informational
and technology-control factors (Etheir (1986)]. The approach of the present paper is akin to
that of Helpman and Krugman (1985), where returns to scale in the presence of
monopolistic competition play a key role in explaining market structure. The scope of this
current paper differs, however, as it focuses on the role of uncertainty in inducing PD! in
the presence of implicit labor contracts. The gains from the diversification of location via
PD! resemble the gains from portfolio diversification obtained in the financial literature.
However, in our model these gains are attributed to diminishing marginal productivity of
the variable input, and are viable even if agents are risk neutral.
      Section 2 presents the key behavioral assumptions of the model. Section 3
characterizes the equilibrium. Section 4 analyzes the implications of production
diversification on employment volatility and cyclical dumping. Section 5 closes the paper.
The Appendix summarizes the derivation of several key equations.
                                             - 4-
2. The Model
      We review the model by describing the preferences, production, the labor market,
the consumers, and the investors problem. We assume a global economy composed of a
large number of countries, denoted by q. All the countries are symmetric ex ante, prior to
the realization of productivity shocks. Each country is populated with C risk-averse
workers, and with risk-neutral entrepreneurs.
Preferences
      There are two types of goods: a homogeneous product denoted by Y, and d varieties
of manufacturing goods. The utility derived from consuming d varieties of the
differentiated products is denoted by D2;           is the consumption level of variety i in
period 2, and      is the consumption of the homogeneous good at period•1. Each consumer
is endowed with one unit of leisure, a fraction of      which is spent as work time. The
utility of workers is given by


      (1)       1nYi+j—l--(5lnD2+fl-5)(l-:)
where 2 is the Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) utility function

      (2)       D2 =
                        E1 (D24f]
for o < a c 1; p > 0. The subjective rate of time preference is reflected by p. This
specification assumes risk aversion for goods consumption, but risk neutrality with respect
to the consumption of leisure.
      The utility of entrepreneurs is given by


      (3)     Y1+—L—D2,
                       I ÷p
                                             -5-
where D is defined by (2). The specification of (3) embodies the notion of risk neutrality of
the entrepreneur. Agents in all countries have the same utility function.3


Production
      The economy is endowed in period one with V of the homogeneous good, which
serves both as the consumption and investment good in that period.4 The production of
good i in the second period in country c is given by


       (4)   Xc.i=Cd1 cjLcj]       for Ocyci.

where measures the productivity in country c,            is the number of workers employed
in the production of variety i, each supplying i working time. We assume that the
productivity shocks are independently distributed across the various countries, drawn
from the same distribution. The production of differentiated products requires also a start-
up cost in the first period. An entrepreneur may invest in one of the two countries, at a


3      A version of this model was applied by Aizenman (1993) to analyze the merits of
fixed versus flexible exchange rates in the presence of nominal contracts. it is shown there
that the literature of the eighties overstated the case for a flexible exchange rate regime.
4      To focus the analysis we refrain from modeling the first-period production. One can
add production without modifying the key results. For example, one can recast the model
in a framework where good Y is replaced with the manufacturing goods produced in the
first period, and these goods are used both for consumption and investment purposes. In
such a model we start period one with a given capacity that leads to a given manufacturing
output. Assuming that capital depreciates within one period (alternatively, that
maintaining capacity requires periodic investment K), one can re derive all our results in
such an extended model.
                                               - 6-
cost of K. The investment is location- and product-specific, allowing the production of
differentiated product at the chosen location. Entrepreneurs may diversify their productive
capacity by investing in two locations, at a cost of K(1-i-q), for ii i. The value of 1 - 1
measures the returns to scale, associated with the presence of fixed costs that may be shared
by both locations.


The Labor Market
      Manufacturing employs labor subject to implicit contracts, hiring L workers under a
contract that specifies ex ante state-contingent labor income and employment schedule,
denoted by [Is; ç] , respectively (where s is the state of nature). Competition in the labor
market implies that the implicit contract is designed to yield an expected utility in
manufacturing that matches the reservation utility leveL
Consumer's Demand
      Consumption in the second period is characterized by the solution to

      (5)
                          t                      1/a




                                I=    1
                                          P24D24= 2

where p24 IN2 are the second-period prices of good i and the second-period income,
respectively. The solution of the consumer's problem is characterized by


                                                                                 -1/(aa)
      (6)                       for       a=1/(1-a) and P2 =
              D24=(_2_) -r4,                                   [1   (p2 .yc&aj

The overall CPI is P2. Applying (5) and (6) it follows that
                                             - 7-

      (7)
                    P2

The Uncertainty and the Investor's Problem
      The uncertainty pertains to the future productivity of labor in the differentiated
goods sector. Investment is implemented at period one, prior to the resolution of the
uncertainty regarding the productivity in period two. The entrepreneur's utility function
(3) is additive. Equations (3) and (7) imply that investment I in period one, generating real
profits it2 in the second period, will be undertaken if E[it   2 - 1(1 + p)   0. It can be shown
that if the supply of Y is large the real interest rate is determined by entrepreneurs
preferences ( = l+p). In such a case, the actual investment is determined by the demand for
investment at that real interest rate. Henceforth we assume that this condition is met: the
supply of Y is large enough to support the investment demanded at real interest rate p.
There is free entry, and hence rents are dissipated. A strategy of capacity diversification
"buys" the option of channeling production to the more-productive location. More
formally, let us denote the real gross profits (revenue minus the wage bill) of a diversified
and a specialized producer by ,d and           respectively. A nondiversified equilibrium.
where each producer specializes in one location, can be characterized by


       (8)          a. x']=K(l +p)                             b. jd]<K(l +p)(1 +'i)
where E stands for the expectation operator, referring to the first-period expected level of
second-period profits.5 Similarly, the diversified equilibrium is characterized by



5      Equation (8a) is generated by the free entry, implying the break-even condition.
Condition (8b) implies that the marginal producer does not have an incentive to diversify
internationally, The value of        is obtained by calculating the profits that will accrue to
a marginal producer who will switch to a multinational strategy, assuming that all other
producers behave as nondiversified.
                                             - 8-


       (9)           a.    E[ltd]=K(1+p)(l+n)               b.     4gS]<K(1+p)

       A diversified producer operates as a multinational firm, having the capacity to
produce his variety in both countries. 6




3.       The Equilibrium
      We will study the equilibrium in several stages.           First, we characterize the
equilibrium in the absence of PD!, as is the case where (8) holds and producers do not have
the incentive to diversify, or if capital is immobile. Next, derive the condition inducing
the regime switch from nondiversified to the integrated equilibrium. We then discuss the
equilibrium when all producers diversify, as will be the case when (9) is satisfied and
capital is mobile.
A Nondiversified Equilibrium
      In the absence of FDI each country produces and exports m varieties of
manufacturing goods, importing m(q-1) foreign varieties. The nondiversified equilibrium
can be characterized by the following conditions:


6     It is noteworthy that entrepreneurs may also inaease their production capacity by
investing at home in two plants, at a capital cost of K(1+). In the absence of
transportation costs, and in the absence of uncertainty, producers will be indifferent
between choosing to produce in two plants operating at home, or one operating at home
and one abroad. A small uncertainty (as well as small transportation costs) will suffice to
induce producers who operate with two plants to prefer international diversification,
benefiting from both the extra capacity and the diversification of country-specific shocks.
                                                      - 9-
Goods and Labor Market Equilibrium
Equality of the supply and the demand for product r produced by country c implies:
                                                             q
                                                        a = NJ
                                                         .'
      (10)                     6c (ç,l,41= ()
where IN is the income in country j , (1          j     q). For notation simplicity we suppress the

index indicating the state of nature and the period index, but it is important to keep in
mind that, with the exception of the number of workers (L), all the other variables in

(10) are state dependent.
      We turn now to study the equilibrium in a representative country. The number of
workers, the employment level of each worker, and the real income in terms of the CPI
(L i L, respectively) are determined according to the implicit contract, under which the
producer maximizes expected profits subject to the restriction that the worker's expected
utility equals the prevailing reservation level:




        (11)
                  L1-l
                   ' a' s s=1 [P5epsL]7 J.4s=1                    [SIn(18)   +(l -6)(l-9]$5-L10)



where      denoted the probability of state s, there axe z states of nature, and £ is the
prevailing reservation expected utility level. In solving the above problem the producer
recognizes that he faces a demand whose elasticity is a, as follows from (10). A more
compact way of summarizing the producer's problem is


          MAX             PSC4SLI1 -
                      £
         L;    i; l                    15L   -A(E[6 ln{13} ÷(l - 6)(l- l)}- i)

where E is the expectation operator. The corresponding first-order conditions are
                                              - 10-


      (11) a. a7E(xs}=E(IsLJ               b. ct74x5=X(1-8)13                   C.
                                                                                     IL?.8

Applying the first-order conditions and equation (10) yields (see the Appendix for an
overview of the derivation):



                 a.          =            L            b.               =
                                                                Eli5]
      (12)
                                                      l/(l-y)
                                      (1-ucz
                 .                                                      we
                           1s=[1mE[(ts}    (1iI                 L




Condition (12a) is in line with the prediction of the implicit contracts literature [see
A.zariadis (1975)]. Risk-neutral producers would offer a contract that provides complete
income insurance, setting the real income of a worker in such a way that labor gets a fixed
share (a?) of the expected real revenue. Hence, the equilibrium Labor income is state
independent:                                                                -



       (12a') I =     I.
Condition (12b) implies that the expected employment is determined by the importance of
goods consumption relative to leisure, and (12c) determines the actual employment in
state s. The labor market equilibrium implies that the total employment equals the labor
force, or that

       (13) mLr=E

Free entry implies that rents are dissipated. Applying (Sa) and (12a) we infer that
                                             — 11   —




      (14) K(1+p) =(l-cLy)9IYA1s1_]

Combining (10) and (12)-(14) we infer that the number of varieties produced in the
economy, and the worker income are (see the Appendix for derivation):



                                                          1
             a.
                    m =[(ERot1}q(1                                          wheret=S_
                                                    1-6] (1+p)K                        1-cry
      (15)


             b.          cry [m(l+p)K]
                        1-cry    •L
We will henceforth assume that the various heterogeneous goods are dose substitutes,
and that the labor share is large enough that a(l ty)> 1 This assumption is needed in
order to insure that a higher setup cost IC will reduce the number of varieties offered and
plays a similar role to the Marshall-Lerner condition in trade theory.7
      The nondiversified equilibrium is stable if condition (8) is met (or if FDI is
prohibited). This will occur if a marginal producer cannot. benefit by diversifying
internationally, investing in capacity in both countries and employing labor in each
country subject to a contract that offers the prevailing reservation utility. In the Appendix
we show that the nondiversified regime is stable if


7     It can be shown that the elasticity of expected real profits with respect to the number
of varieties is (I - a(l+y)1/a . If the demand for the various varieties is relatively inelastic,
more varieties will reduce the labor employed in the production of a representative
variety, raising thereby profits. This implies that profits will go up with the number of
varieties, and that a higher setup cost will imply more producers. The assumption that the
varieties are dose substitutes rules out this outcome.
                                                - 12-



               4[Hc11 1tU-i)]
        (16)                    <1+11
                    4 oX]

where Hd12 =                              c1,   E   being two independent realizations of the

productivity shock.
        Further insight can be obtained by contrasting two extreme mean invariant
configurations of a two-state productivity distribution. First, in the absence of uncertainly,
if = 11(16) reduces to 2(1i)0/ft<fl'I cl +.         Hence,   if the return to scale is large enough (
small   enough), producers will diversify internationally even in the absence of
uncertainty.8 Alternatively, consider the case in which productivity is given by £ = 2 or 0,
each occurring with a probability of one-half (this is the configuration that maximizes the
variance, while holding the mean of productivity equal to 1). In these circumstances (16)
does not hold (it reduces to 2> 1+11 ); hence all producers diversify and an integrated
equilibrium is observed. This example illustrates the principle that, if productivity shocks
are not perfectly correlated, producers diversify if the volatility is large enough to
compensate for the extra capacity cost.




        This will enable the producer to overcome the diminishing marginal productivity
that operates at the level of each plant. In this case, in the absence of transportation costs
producers are indifferent between choosing to produce in two plants operating at home, or
one operating at home and one abroad. A small uncertainty (as well as small
transportation costs) will suffice, however, to induce the international diversification.
Inspection of equation (16) reveals that the tendency to diversify internationally depends
positively on the international returns to scale (measured by 1-i) and the substitutability
among the various varieties (measured by a).
                                                - 13 -

      If condition (16) is violated, we observe an integrated equilibrium where all
producers diversify. We turn now to evaluate the integrated equilibrium, assuming that
the conditions for diversification hold.


Diversified Equilibrium
      The symmetric nature of our framework implies that if the condition for
international diversification applies, all producers would choose to operate as
multinationals, producing in two countries. If each country produces n goods, the total
number of goods is O.5nq . The goods market equilibrium for a representative good r,
produced in countries ci and c2, equates the global supply-and-demand conditions


                                                              —   aji j
      (17)
                                          7
                           Ccl (lr.clLr.cl) +
                                                         y=
                                                              )p
The labor contract offered by the multinational is the outcome of



                                           £ ((sc/clLcl].+€a (Jc2Lc2)7} -
                                                                            IclLclIc2Lc2}
      (18)                                                    +(l
             Lj ;L7;lr.iz;Ii I
                                                              + (1- 6)(l-1C2)] -
                                                                                   °c2)
For notation simplicity we suppress the state index, but one should keep in mind that with
the exception of L1 L which are ex ante determined, all the other variables are state
contingent. Note that the multinational produces in both countries and deals with two
labor contracts, corresponding to the labor markets in the two countries. Our symmetric
specification implies that in the resultant equilibrium the same labor contract is applied in
both countries. Applying the resulting first-order conditions yields (see the Appendix for
further details):
                                        - 14-


                            I
               a.            Pst4s1]i
                      11=aiE[
      (19)     b.           =


                                                (1—a)/[a(l—y)]              1/(1'y)
                                                                                         [€]1'0_5
               C
                                         -si)                        {lI)             L{Hd12)"5
                                    1/(1—S          11(1-5
      where             Hdi2=(Ei)            +(s)
The labor market equilibrium implies that total employment equals the labor force, or that


       (20)    flLr=t
Free entry implies that rents are dissipated, or that (which follows from (9a) arid (18a))



       (21) K(1+p)(1+)
                                 2(l)PSSij
Combining (19)-(21) we infer that the number of varieties produced by each country, and
the real labor income are (see the Appendix for further details):

       (22)
                                                                                                  a
                        "(I-i)    l-y                                                          cdt-PS-i
a        [;r____________                                     -
                                                                 1
                                                                                      2(1-a5
         I
          \Ira 1,21(l-cxYU-aSjj       12 Er[Hd1•2]tO                 }(laY[8fLY
         U    U.                                                                  (1+P)KU÷11)j


b.      =     cry [O.5n (1 +
             1-cry
                                                     - 15-
4.     Employment Volatility. Production Diversification, and Cyclical Dumping
       In order to characterize the conditions leading to cyclical dumping in the two
regimes, we will start with comparison of the volatility of employment. Applying (12c) we
find that the elasticity of employment in country ci with respect to productivity shocks in
the nondiversified regime are

              dlogç1                 a             dlogI1
       (23)                  =                                    =0
              dlogç1 lad l-ay          dioge                 md

where c is the productivity shock in another country, and index 'nd' stands for the non-
diversified regime. Applying (19c) we infer that the corresponding employment elasticities
facing a multinational that produces in countries ci and c2 in the integrated equilibrium
are:


       (24)
              dlog11        —
                            —
                                 I   +l-2               d1ogl1     —
                                                                          1-a      dlog!1       —o
              dlogcj   Id        2(l-')(1-ay)           dIogc Id       2(l-)(l-a)) dioge    k

where £ is the productivity shock in a country where the multinational has not invested,
and index d stands for the diversified regime. Comparison of the two regimes reveals that
the diversification of production magnifies the responsiveness of employment to domestic
productivity, and transmits negatively foreign productivity shocks.9 Note that:

              dlogl1 dlog11                    =
                                                    a        dlogl1 dlog11        =
       (25)
              dtogc1        dioge
                                         lad       1-cry     dlogc1 d1oge Id          l-y

Hence, employment is more responsive to domestic shocks than to foreign shocks in both
regimes, and the move towards the integrated equilibrium increases the differential



                                                   dIogl1
                                                       C       - dlogl1
                                                                     C
                                                                             =
                                                                                  I-a       >0.
       From(24)and(25)weinferthat
                                                   dloge1 Id      d1oge1   md 2(l-aYXl-7)
                                           - 16-
responsiveness. The greater flexibility of production exhibited by multinationals is
reflected by its ability to shift effective employment towards the location exhibiting the
more favorable productivity shock, increasing the responsiveness of labor to domestic
productivity shocks. The resultant international diversification of production implies,
however, that the volatility of employment goes up. This suggest that we should expect
more frequent episodes of dumping in the integrated equilibrium. We turn now to
evaluate this issue.
International Diversification and Cyclical Dumping
      The organization of labor markets under implicit contracts implies the delinking of
the real wage from the current state of nature. In these circumstances we may occasionally
observe "cydical dumping," where producers export at a price below the marginal cost of
production. 10 One possible measure of dumping is the degree to which the marginal cost
exceeds the price. According to this definition, cyclical dumping occurs if

                           1
      (26)             1

                    ax5IaL Ps
The left-hand side is the marginal cost - computed as the labor compensation times the
reciprocal of the marginal productivity of labor in state s. Applying (4) and the first-order
conditions characterizing the implicit contract, it foliows that cyclical dumping occurs in
states of nature where'1



      This follows from the fact that the labor income (on which the marginal cost
depends positively) is preset prior to the resolution of uncertainty. In bad times, the MC
goes up at a rate that exceeds the rate of price increase, as the labor income is not
responsive to productivity, leading to the possibility of dumping.
11
       Equation (4) implies that (26) is equivalent to1L >&. Applying (11') we infer that
                                                     TX5   ps
                  L. Combining these two conditions we derive (26')
ctTPtcs =Y'
                                            - 17 -

        (26')         !a     6/(1-6)   -
                               81(1-8)

 The LHS is Lerner's measure of the market power enjoyed by the producer (the inverse of
 the demand elasticity). The RHS measures the percentage decline of employment relative
 to expected employment, 81(1-8) [note that 61(1-8) corresponds to full employment in the
absence of uncertainty]. Hence, cyclical dumping occurs where the producefs market
power is smaller than the percentage shortfall of employment. Applying the previous
results we infer that cyclical dumping in the nondiversified equilibrium will occur when12

        (27) a >      (c)t


In the diversified regime the corresponding condition is:

                      (e )'Hd I1(l-a)I(l-cry)
                                  l.2J
       (28) a>
                  delh/74Hdl 21(1-a)I(l-crY)]
To gain further insight, it is constructive to turn to the simplest stochastic example: two
states of nature in each country, with equal probability of occurrence, independently
distributed across the q countries. While being a special case, it allows us to highlight the
role of uncertainty in determining the employment and cyclical dumping. Each country
can experience with probability 0.5 either high or low productivity:

       (29)       e=1+h or 1-h             h>O

The functioning of the global economy can be summarized with the help of Figures 1-2.
While they focus on a spedal case, the qualitative results reported in these figures can be


12
       Applying (12c) to (26') we obtain a condition with m and L Replacing these variables
with (ISa) and (lSb), collecting terms, we infer (27). A similar procedure [applying(19c),
(22a) and (22b) to (26')] yields (22).
                                                  - 18-

shown to be general. We choose the return-to-scale parameter lj such that in the absence
of shocks producers are indifferent between operating one versus two plants (i.e.,
                = 1 +rfl. The solid curves (denoted by nd) correspond to the nondiversified

regime, whereas the dotted curves (denoted by d) to the integrated equilibrium. Figure 1
reports the pattern of labor income in the two regimes. The figure provides the
information needed to compare labor's expected utility in the two regimes.13 Figure 2
reports the employment in the good state in both regimes. The employment in the bad
state is a mirror image of the good state (reflected on I = 1/3, as the sum of the employment
in both states of nature adds up to 2/3).


                                            /



         :I
                                                            1


                                        I                          /           '1




                 I

                0.21
                        I
                       0.4
                              I


                             0.6


           Figure 1: Labor income
                                    I


                                   0.8
                                            'It
                                            1
                                                                __ 0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8


                                                     Figure 2: Employment in the good state
     The above example assumes y 0.85, a 0.75, 6= 0.25, IC = 1.2, E 100, q = 14 and
                                                                                           i'h

                                                                                           p0


13
        Note that the worker's second period expected utility is
                                                Hence, it is fully determined by L
                                             - 19-

       For the two states of nature example considered, dumping in the nondiversified
equilibrium occurs if

       (27) a>         2l' hit
                    [1+h]t +{1hJt
and the corresponding conditions in the integrated equilibrium is



               a.         a>            4(1.h)U(7)/f(lh)hi(l+h)hI'0}
                                                                 [(lh)t+(l+h)tj 2 (l-a)/(I-uy)

       (28')
                                                                   (l-u(l-ay)
               b.        a>                 4(l_h)')J[2 (l.h)1hit)]
                                                                                  (1-a)I(l-ay)
                                 [(l_h)11o_s÷(l÷b)11o_Y)]°'+ [(l_h)t+(l+h)t]


Recalling that a multinational operates two plants in two countries (say countries 1 and 2),
there are two possible configurations associated with dumping by country 1. Condition

(28a) corresponds to the case where productivity in country 1 is low while the productivity
in country 2 is high. Condition (28'b) corresponds to the case where the productivity is low
in both countries. Curves nd and di in Figure 3a plot the configurations of volatility and
substitutability (h, a(h)) associated with equality in (27) and (28'a), respectively. Dumping
in a given regime     occursfor points that are above the corresponding curve. Direct
inspection of (27) and (28'a) reveals that both curves are downward sloping, starting at
point (0,1) and asymptotically approaching point (1, 0). The curves are downward sloping
because larger market power (smaller a) implies higher mark-up, reducing the scope for
observing prices that fall short of marginal costs. This in turn implies that with greater
                                               - 20 -

market power the volatility threshold associated with dumping goes up (because dumping
would require worse realization of productivity shocks).14


      a                                                 a
     0.8                                                0.8


     0.6                                                0.6



     0.4                                                0.4



     0.2                                                0.2




             0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8
                                          Ii                   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                       h

                         a.                                          b.
                         Figure 3: Volatility and Cyclical Dumping

       Further inspection of (27) and (28a) reveals that curve nd is further to the right of
curve d. The higher volatility of employment in the integrated equilibrium implies that
FDI increases the plausibility that (26') is satisfied in bad states of nature, where the
multinational effectively reallocates marginal employment from the low- to the high-
productivity counby. Hence, the volatility threshold associated with dumping is lower in
the integrated regime. The area locked between curves di and nd defines the volatility
region associated with dumping in the integrated regime, but with no dumping in the


14
        Inspection of (27) and (28) also reveals that a lower share of the variable input
(lower y) wilt shift the curves in Figure 3 to the right. This follows from the observation
that lower labor share increases the markup, reducing the scope for dumping, increasing
thereby the threshold of volatility associated with dumping.
                                           - 21 -

nondiversified regime. Figure 3b adds curve d2, corresponding to (28'b), where the low
productivity shock hits both plants used by the multinational. While this case
qualitatively resembles the first case (i.e., both curves d1 and d2 are to the left of nd),
dumping is less likely in this circumstance. When low productivity affects both plants,
supply goes down, the price is higher, and dumping less likely (relative to the case where
only country I suffers from low productivity).
      It can be shown that for the example considered in Figures I and 2 (a = 0.75,1 = 0.85),
dumping in the bad state of nature will occur for h> .038 in the integrated regime, and for
h> 0.123 in the absence of FDI.15 For example, suppose that volatility h is 0.1, and FDI is
prohibited. Employment would fluctuate between 0.43 and 0.20 in the good and the bad
state, respectively, and we would not observe dumping. Opening the economies to
unrestricted FDI will induce an integrated equilibrium where employment volatility
increases remarkably (fluctuating between .58 and .08). In the resulting equilibrium the
country experiencing the bad shock dumps its product It will be misleading to infer from
this, however, that FDI is harmful. The greater flexibility of production achieved by
diversification generates efficiency gains, which ultimately are reflected in higher labor
income and higher aggregated investment. In our example, the move to the integrated
equilibrium raises the labor income by about 3% (from 3.69 to 3.79).




5     This calculation assumes that productivity is low in country 1, and high in country 2
(and thus dumping in the integrated regime is described by curve dj).
                                           -22-
5.    Concluding Remarks
      Our paper illustrated that in a world characterized by labor contracts and trade
among similar countries subject to country-specific shocks, EDI increases boththe volatility
of employment, and the incidences of cyclical dumping. The model illustrates an example
where FDI and the induced cyclical dumping are welfare enhancing. In closing the paper it
is useful to qualify these results as being model specific and thus not to be taken as general
welfare statements. Instead, the paper should serve to caution against making welfare
inferences without a more careful specification of the economic structure.               The
assumption that all countries are identical ex ante leads to more elegant formulation that
is easier to interpret, but it may leave out important issues that should be addressed in an
attempt to unravel the welfare effects of dumping. For example, if countries differ in the
functioning of labor markets, some relying more heavily on implicit contracts, others
more heavily on the spot labor market, FDI may have more complex and less clear-cut
welfare implications.
                                                  - 23 -

                                                 Appendix
      The purpose of this Appendix is to provide the detailed derivation of equations 12,
15, 16, 19 and 22.

Equation 12:
      The first-order conditions corresponding to (11) are

      (Al)      a. czie{a xs}=e(L)                 b. ayx5=X(l4)i3        C.
                                                                                 I5L=?8

Equation (AIc) implies that labor income is state independent. Applying this information
to (Ala), infer (12a).     Dividing condition (Aib) and (Aic) (in order• to eliminate Xj,
applying the expectation operator to the resultant equation, and applying to it condition
(Ala), infer (l2b). The derivation of (12 c) is more involved. First, applying (10) obtain that
the relative price of goods produced by country ci. and c2 satisfies

                                             a
      (A2)
                     tci    ci         c2
                     £2 'c2            "ci



      (A3)
               clcl ci'7,
Applying (Alb) infer that

                                 ci
               22 1c2            1c2

Combining the last two equations infer that16
            1       £ W(l-cr9
      (A4)
               c2    £2
Equation (10) can be rearranged as




16    Note that the problem facing entrepreneurs producing different varieties is
symmetric, implying that all of them employ the same L, and face the same
                                                      -24-
                     ac        q    [ c.uii7p.
      (10') 2             =
                              j=i
                                    LEc(lcYPc
Applying (A3) and (A4) to the RHS of (lot), infer that

      (A5) 2
                 aa   =
                                            q      all
                                           .n4e.)

Assuming that the number of countries (q) is large, invoke the law of large numbers to
(A5), implying that
                 q

                 =
      (A6)            q                 EteW(1fl)].
Hence,

                                   mg
      (A7)
                               cil(l-uy)

Applying (Ala) and (Mb) infer that
                       Ps       8
      (AS) [15L}          =cLyrc5
                             P    (1-8)1
Applying (Afl to (AS) infer (12c).
Equation (151:

      Equations (12a), (12c), (13), (14), and (A6) form a simultaneous equations system that
allows us to solve for [. in 1 L,                as a function of structural variables (like q, IC, and

the productivity distribution). Equation (15) is the outcome of solving this system.


Equation (161
      Consider the problem facing a marginal entrepreneur located in country ci who
wishes to diversify, becoming a multinational that produces in country ci and c2, while all
                                             -25-
other producers operate from one location. Denote by d' Lu.       L the price charged, the
working time, and the number of workers employed by the diversified producer.
Applying equation (6) it follows that the price is determined by the following market-
clearing condition:


       (A9    ) £C(C
                   1 L
                     d,cl)   1  L
                           £c2(dc2 d,c2)I
Compare the price of the good produced by the diversified entrepreneur, to the price of
variety r produced in country ci by a nondiversifled producer. Applying (10) and (A9) we
infer that:
                             '+ tc2tjd,c2Ld,c2
               6cl'1d,clLd,clj                   =
       (AlO)
                        '1  L
                    £clIr,cl r,cl)
       The nondiversified regime is stable if in the resultant equilibrium the expected
profits for a multinational are below the cost of capital:


       (All) (1 - ay) F                                 c
                                            (ed. aLdil } K(l+p)(1+Tl).


Such an entrepreneur offers two implicit contracts to the labor employed fri ci and c2, each
guaranteeing expected utility that equals the market reservation utility level. The ex ante
symmetry of the two countries implies that these contracts are identical. Direct derivation
of these contracts reveals that the first-order conditions in (Al) continue to apply for each
country. Applying this information to the first order conditions in (Al), and comparing
                                                    - 26 -

the   work time in the multinationals plant in country ci with the work time in a
nondiversified producer in country ci infer that 17


                        d,clLU =
                        1
                                     1'd
       (A12)
                            trLr     r
Applying (AlO) and (A12) to (A9) infer that


                                                       (l-aXl-W(l-a)

        (A13)                                                          =—



Note that in the nondiversified regime

        (A14)    (1 -   a)                       = K(l÷p)
                             E {Mecl[lr"r]"I }
Applying this condition to (All) infer that the nondiversified regime is stable if


        (Ai5) (I - a) E             [Ecl[ldclLdi"+ec2 ('d, C21.d?l) <(1 -
                                                                            SB
                                                                                 {?[ECl[cL]i }u÷n
Applying (A7), (All), (A13) to (A15), collecting terms and using (i2c) obtain (16).


Equation (19):
        The first-order conditions that correspond to the implicit contract offered to labor in
ci and c2 are identical to (Al), but each country has its own corresponding Lagrange
multiplier. Applying the logic discussed at the beginning of the Appendix (19a) can be



17      This is obtained by taking the ratios of the two first order conditions (Aib) that apply
to both producers.
                                                  - 27 -
inferred.   From the first-order conditions it follows that the working time in the
mul€national's two plants are given by
                           1Ifl-y)
      (A16) .EL= _si_
              1C

In the integrated equilibrium each good i is produced in two countries. Denote by cii and
c12 the two countries where product i is produced, 1 S i S 0.Sq n. Suppose that good r is
produced in country 1 and 2. Equation (10) can be rearranged as


                         0.5 'w
                     —                (idlY tci2 (1Y]P i
                         j=I
Applying (Aib) and (Aic) infer that for good I
      (A18) IL _!_[i +               = cry?[edi (ldlL)' +   e
Applying (A16) to (A18) infer that
                    a =
                   I—
      (A19)                                    6cil
                          ccr--(1iL)
Applying (A19) for good r, and dividing the resultant equation by(A19) infer that

                    _!= -- l-y_!_
      (A20)
                    r        c1         tcii
Applying (A16) and (A20) to (A17) infer that


      (A21)

(P)ac =                                               where Hd1, =

Assuming that the number of countries (q) is large, the law of large numbers can be
invoked, implying that
                                            - 28 -


                                               1-y)/( 1-ai)]
      (A22)         rjP1   = O.Snq 4JHd1 2ff
                                        [HdlarlS/(laY)
Applying (Afl) to (A19), infer (19c).
Equation 22
      Equations (19a), (19c), (20), (21), and (All) form a simultaneous equations system
that allows us to solve for [. n I. L1, Is] as a function of structural variables (like q, K,
and the productivity distribution). Equation (15) is the outcome of solving this system.
                                           - 29 -

                                        References



Aizenman, Joshua. "Monetary and Real Shocks, Productive Capacity and Exchange Rate
      Regimes." 1993, forthcoming, Economica.
Azariadis, Costas. "Implicit Contracts and Unemployment Equilibria." lournal of Political
      Economy 83. December 1975, pp. 1183-1202.
Brainard, S. Lael. "An Empirical Assessment of the Factor Proportions Explanation of
      Multinational Sales," Working paper 4583, December 1993.
Dixit, Avinash IC. and Stiglitz, Joseph. "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
      Diversity," American Economic Review 67, 1977, pp. 297-308,
Edwards. Sebastian. "Capital Flows, Foreign Direct Investment, and Debt- Equity Swaps,"
      NEER W.P. no. 3497, October 1989.

Ethier, Wilfred J. "Dumping", Journal of Political Economy. June 1982, pp. 487-506.
_____   "The Multinational Firm," Ouarterly journal of Economics. 1986, pp. 806-33.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Jeremy C. Stein, "Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment,"
      Working Paper no. 2914, March 1989.
Goldberg, Linda, "Exchange Rates and Investment in the United States Industry,"
      manuscript, August 1991.
Helpman Elhanan. "A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
      Corporations," Journal of Political Economy. p. 451.
_____ and Paul Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade, the MIT Press, 1985.
Klein, Michael and Eric Rosengren, "Foreign Direct Investment Outflow From The U. S.,"
      manuscript, 1990.
Markusen, James. 'ls4ulunationals, Multi-plant Economics, and the Gains From Trade,"
      journal of International Economics. 16, pp. 205.
Matusz, Steven J. "The Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model with Implicit Contracts,"
      Ouarterly Journal of Economics. November 1985, pp. 1313-30.
                                         - 30-

Lizando, Saul J. 'Foreign Direct Investment," IMP Working paper 90/63, 1990.
Slaughter, Matthew J. "International Trade, Multinational Corporations, and American
      Wage Divergence in the 1980's," manuscript, MiT, 1993.
