                            FIBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ACCOUNTING STANDARDS,
                            INFORMATION FLOW, AND FIRM
                               INVESTMENT BEHAVIOR




                                     Jason 0. Cummins
                                      Trevor S. Hauls
                                      Kevin A. Hassett




                                  Working Paper No. 485




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       March 1994


The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors, and do not reflect those of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Cumnilns's research funded by the Center for International Business Education
(CIBE) and the Chazen Institute at Columbia University. Hauls's research partially funded
by the CIBE and the Rudolph Schoenheimer Fellowship. We thank Valerie Amerkhail, Rusty
Goldin, R. Glenn Hubbard, Steve Oliner, Pete Wilson, Penelope Winkle and the conference
participants for helpful comments and suggestions. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Public Economics.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4685
                                                                               March 1994


                              ACCOUNTING STANDARDS,
                            INFORMATION FLOW, AND FIRM
                               INVESTMENT BEHAVIOR


                                         ABSTRACt


       We present a description of two different accounting regimes that govern reporting

practice in most developed countries. "One-book" countries, e.g. Germany, use their tax books

as the basis for financial reporting and "two-book" countries. e.g. the United States, keep the

books largely separate. We derive a structural model and formalize a testable implication of our

discussion: firms in one-book countries may be reluctant to claim some tax benefits if reductions

in taxable income may be misinterpreted by financial market participants as signals of lower

profitability. Econometric estimates suggest that accounting regime differences play an important

role in describing domestic investment patterns both within and acmss countries.



Jason 0. Cummins                                           Trevor S. Harris
Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
Columbia University                                        Columbia University
420 West 118th Street                                      420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027                                         New York, NY 10027
and the Boaxti of Governors of
  the Federal Reserve System


Kevin A. Hassett
Boast of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System
20th and Constitution, NW
Washington, D.C. 20551
1 Introduction
In many countries, capital markets provide the major source of external
financing for firms. In these countries, a financial accounting system has
developed over time that seeks to fulfill a regulatory objective of providing
relevant and reliable information about the financial position and profitability
of the firm to shareholders and lenders. In other countries, capital markets
have played a less crucial role7 and the information objectives have been less
well defined.
    Tax authorities have also developed reporting requirements that facilitate
the accurate calculation of tax liabilities. In the United States and several
other countries the two sets of information are largely distinct (so called
"two-book" countries); one is designed to accurately describe the firm's tax
liability, and one is designed to convey to the market essential information for
assessing the flzm's profitability.1 The existence of two sets of books reflects
the different objectives of financial market participants and policymakers.
The most effective rules to enforce tax regulations may not be the same
rules that induce efficient transmission of information about the firm to the
market.
     Many countries do not have a two-book system similar to that in the
United States. Instead, these countries typically require firms to match their
tax and accounting statements for each taxable entity. Under tax conformity
(so called "one-book" countries), firms may only take tax deductions if they
 have been recognized in reports to shareholders either before or concurrent
 with tax recognition. Firms operating in these countries face a fundamentally
 different environment in which signals of the firm's profitability to external
investors are intermeshed, perhaps inextricably, with the firm's tax accounts.3
   For the most part, tax research has ignored differences in accounting
   tAs discussed in section 2, the designation "two-book" does not imply that all measures
differ for accounting and tax purposes. Rather, it refers to the regulatory environment
that separates accounting and tax reporting.
   3Firzns everywhere must keep a careful account of their assets in order to operate
efficiently. This set of 'operating books" could also be quite useful for information purposes
(e.g.,during a friendly takeover or to banks with insider holdings). Technically, this means
that we should be referring to "two-book" and "three-book" countries. Since the operating
books are not constrained by law (and thus their value is difficult to assess), and are
generally unavailable for applied research, we will continue with our terminology.


                                              1
 regimes. In this paper, we carefully document some of the institutional details
 of one-book and two-book countries, with the goal of identifying significant
 differences between the two regimes. We then explore the extent to which
 accounting regimes might be expected to affect the interaction between tax
 policy and real behavior.3
     If information flows less smoothly to the market in one-book countries,
 one would expect several consequences. First, firms may have relative dif-
 ficulty raising funds in equity markets, if they cannot provide reliable in-
 formation to shareholders. As a result, one-book firms may have relatively
 more capital supplied by, and closer relationships with banks, which could,
 in principle, provide the careful monitoring necessary in a world without
 particularly useful accounting information. As we discuss below, there is al-
 ready some limited evidence suggesting that this is the case (see, e.g., Hoshi,
 Kashyap, and Scharfstein, 1991). Second, while firms in the U.S. may freely
 act to minimize their tax burdens by availing themselves of all legal tax ben-
efits, as we discuss below, firms in one-book countries may have to equate
the benefit of tax-minimization strategies, which effectively reduce their re-
ported taxable income, with two potential costs; lower reported incomemay
inadvertently signal that the firm's prospects have worsened, and, may, in
addition, reduce the pool of funds that can be legally distributed to share-
holders. These trade-offs may make finn investment in this environment
much less sensitive to tax policy than is the case in the United States.
    These arguments suggest that multinationals based in one-book countries
may be at a disadvantage when investing in countries with generous tax
incentives. A necessary but not sufficient condition for this to occur is for
firms in one-book countries to demonstrate less responsiveness to domestic
tax incentives. By induction, if one-book firms do not utilize domestic tax
benefits they also may not utilize those earned abroad. Using panel data
drawn from the Global. Vantage database, we explore this question below,
and show that investment is in some cases less sensitive to tax policy in
one-book countries.
   The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we provide a description of
   31t is not the purpose of this paper to model the equilibrium between the accounting
system and the institutional environment or to explain the evolution ofa country's system.
   4The direction of causality could well be the opposite. The demand for external equity
capital may be low where close relationships with lmnks are allowed. In this case, low
demand for information may explain the lack of a second set of financial accounts.


                                           2
the major differences in accounting systems across countries. In section 3, we
develop a structural model in order to formalize and explore the implication
that in countries with one-book accounting standards domestic firm-level in-
vestment may be less sensitive to tax law changes. In section 4, we introduce
a multi-country firm-level panel data set that, combined with panels of tax
information, allows us to estimate the model derived in Section 3. Section
5 summarizes our results.Three appendices provide additional detail on the
accounting system in each country of the sample, the dataset, and the tax
parameters.

2 The Different Accounting Regimes
There are certain generic attributes that apply in several countries that il-
lustrate the key differences between national accounting regimes. We first
focus on two countries, the U.S. and Germany, and then discuss in appendix
A how other countries vary from the two benchmarks. It is critical to un-
derstand from the outset that these regimes are not static and that national
accounting systems are moving towards a more global equilibrium as global
capital markets evolve. Hence, we relate some historical detail to develop
an understanding of the dynamics of the environment over the period we
consider.

2.1 The United States: A "Two-Book" Case
13.5. public companies are required to provide periodic published financial
statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP'
While the requirement for publicly available annual financial statements de-
rives from specific laws, the precise features of GAAP are determined by
private sector organizations, primarily the Financial Accounting Standard
Board (FASB). The FASB operates under the watchful eye of a regulatory
agency, the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), that occasionally pre-
scribes its own rules or interpretations that become part of GAAP. There is
an established hierarchy whereby the SEC and FASB rules largely determine
U.S. GAAP.
    The clearly stated objective of U.S. GAAP is to provide information to
investors and creditors to enable them to predict the future cash flows and

                                      3
 profitability of the enterprise. The FASB has tried to ensure that it is not
 perceived to be providing a measure of income that is useful necessarily for
 meeting the fiscal objectives of tax regulators. In fact, reporting require-
 ments for tax purposes have evolved independently over time.5 The tax base
 used for calculating income taxes is determined by the tax code, and dif-
 ferences arise in the valuation criteria and measurement rules applied for
 tax and financial reporting purposes. For example, tax regulations allow a
 specific accelerated schedule of depreciation for equipment. U.S. CAAP re-
 quires companies to allocate the costs of equipment so as to reflect how it is
 consumed in the production of revenue. While companies choose among a
 set of alternatives often choosing an accelerated method, it is most unlikely
that this method would yield the same depreciation schedule used for tax
purposes, as the latter is determined by efforts to influence firm's capital
investment practices.
    The spirit of ftnaacial reporting practice is to reduce the information
asymmetries between managers and owners by reflecting the economic ac-
tivity of the entity. This information can then be used to evaluate how well
managers have utilized their resources, allowing shareholders and creditors
to determine their investment strategies based upon expected profitability.
By maintaining a dual valuation and measurement system the potentially
conflicting objectives of information revelation and fiscal policy can each be
achieved independently.
    Of course, accurate forecasts of tax liabilities are crucial for evaluating
a firm's prospects. To aid in reconciliation of the two sets of books, U.S.
CAAP requires a detailed explanation of material differences between tax
payable on the basis of tax law and a hypothetical tax expense based on the
product of accounting income and the federal tax code.
    The separation of the two sets of books is the rule, but there are excep-
tions that help shed light on the forces that may govern behavior in one-book
countries. The case of accounting for inventory provides an interesting ex-
ample. Under U.S. tax regulations, companies may adopt a last-in-first-out
(LIFO) policy to account for inventory. This practice will usually lead to
higher expenses, and hence lower taxable income when prices of inputs rise.
   5The Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) was an attempt to partially bridge the gap. To
ensure that GAAP did not become tax driven, the FASB lobbied against making taxable
income or AMT based on U.S. GAAP.



                                         4
At the time LIFO was first allowed, the tax regulations required that com-
panies adopting LIFO for tax purposes also use the method for financial
reporting purposes. Thus1 LIFO is the primary example of tax conformity
in the United States. Initially, companies were not permitted to provide in-
formation about the value of inventory accounted for using other methods,
such as the first-in-first-out (FIFO) method. However, this was perceived by
managers and shareholders as creating biases in the information system. As a
result, many managers chose not to adopt LIFO practices, even though such
adoption would have significantly reduced tax liabilities. Eventually, firms
lobbied for rules that allow for supplementary disclosures of the more current
(and, presumably, more informative) measures of inventory. While extensive
research has been performed analyzing why many companies choose not to
adopt LIFO, it seems reasonable to assume that, given rational investors
and managers, the benefits from information based on unbiased measures
outweighed the costs of potential tax savings in this episode.6
   To summarize, U.S. GAAP utilizes a broad proprietary concept, that
assumes shareholders and to an extent creditors are the focal point for re-
source allocation decisions, and that the corporate entity is the vehicle for
the efficient use of the allocated resources. It is also widely presumed that
profit maximization is the goal of both managers and shareholders, so that
by providing information about the use of resources, investors can ensure
their efficient allocation. Tax reporting rules have evolved independently
over time. In the one recent case where conformity of the books was required
by law, some U.S. firms, surprisingly, chose not to use LIFO, even though
this choice increased tax liabilities.

2.2 Germany: A "One-Book" Case
The U.S. perspective contrasts to the traditional German approach to ac-
counting. The primary source of German accounting regulation has been the
Commercial Code, Handelsgesetzbuch (HGB), that was revised in 1985 to in-
corporate the Fourth and Seventh Directives of the European Community.7
  'A recent example of research in this area includes, Jennings, Meat, and Thompson,
1993.
   'The Fourth Directive defined the format of financial statements, basic concepts and
valuation principles, and required the accounts to be evaluated in terms of providing a
"true and fair" view of the firm's financial position. However, within each of these ate-


                                           5
   In addition, there are several other laws that influence accounting practice,
  including the income tax law.
       We shall describe the relationship between tax and accounting regulation
  in some detail, but, initially it is useful to understand that the accounting
  laws have, from their beginning, been oriented towards a determination of
  what income is available for distribution to stakeholders (shareholders, tax
  authorities, and employees) with a clear objective of protecting creditors
  and "ensuring" the maintenajice of the entity as an operating unit. German
  law and the institutional framework are oriented towards protecting and
  developing the capital base of each entity. The accounting system reflects a
 similar objective and utilizes an entity concept as the core framework. This
 creates fundamental differences relative to the proprietary approach adopted
 in the U.S., where the purpose of reporting rules is less conservative.
      The emphasis on capital maintenance and minimization of distributable
 income is manifested in the legally dictated dominance of the application of
 prudence for measuring assets and liabilities. Asset accruals are governed by
 the "imparity principle" (Imparititsprinzip), requiring recognition of both re-
 alized and unrealized losses (for example, on foreign exchange contracts) but
 disallows recognition of any unrealized gains.' This introduces a conservative
bias in the reported net asset measure. As in the U.S., German income is es-
sentially equal to the change in cum dividend net assets. However, German
taxable income is measured directly from the tax balance sheets, whereas
U.S. taxable income is derived from revenue and expense flows:
     Traditionally, Germany has also required a dose conformity between tax
and financial reporting measures. As explained, the legally-based accounting
rules are formulated on the basis of determining what income can be dis-
tributed. Ordelheide and Pfaff (1993) argue that the tax law takes a similar
perspective as it is based on taxing the earnings that can be distributed by an
enterprise while maintaining the productive capacity of the income source.
Hence, in Germany there has been a symmetry in the objectives of tax and
financial reporting that does not exist in the United States. This leads to the
observation that both German tax and financial reporting regulations focus
goñes, flexibility was permitted to reflect different jurisdictional preferences. The Seventh
Directive focused on the requirement to present fully consolidated financial statements for
groups of companies forming a single economic entity.
   'b ntrut                        recoe ]hed gai and                      in certain cases,
such as foreign exchange contracts.


                                             6
on long-run maintenance of the capital base and therefore, of the source of
income, even if this may not lead to profit maximization in a neoclassical
sense. •The imposition of prudence has a noticeable effect on the pattern of
German returns. German companies have lower average reported profitabil-
ity than their U.S. counterparts but there is also less cross-sectional variation
in the reported profitability (see, e.g., Harris, Lang, and Möller, 1993).
    The similarity between tax and financial reporting systems is not only the
result of confluent objectives. The German tax computation is based on bal-
ance sheets prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting prin-
ciples. This is known as the authoritative principle (Maflgeblichkeitsprinzip)
and the direction of causality is from accounting to tax. While this is the ini-
tial direction of the relation, there is a second effect that goes in the opposite
direction and is known as the "reverse authoritative principle" (uxngekehrte
Maflgeblichkeitsprin.zip). The latter generally allows companies to use the
tax rules to determine certain accounting policies when no specific policy is
prescribed by the accounting law. The tax law requires companies to take
the expense for accounting purposes in order to have it deducted for tax
purposes1 much like LIFO in the U.S., and hence the two sets of books are
virtually identical.9
   The discussion so far describes how the German laws facilitate a lower tax
base to restrict distributable and taxable income. However, once the base
is determined the tax law creates an incentive to distribute the income by
the differential rates applied to distributed and retained current income (See
appendix C).
    Another significant difference between the German and U.S. systems is
the treatment of consolidation. German income tax is largely applied at
the level of the legal entity with investments in subsidiaries measured at
acquisition cost or lower. The HGB of 1985 required companies to present
fully consolidated financial statements.10 To some extent, the HGB of 1985
permits companies to apply different accounting standards in their consoli-
dated statements than they use for the legal entity tax-conforming financial
statements. Consequently, to the extent that German companies perceive
a cost created by tax conformity requirements they can choose a two-book
   9This explains the one-book nomenclature.
  10After 1990, all German companies satisfied this requirement, but before then only a
subset did.


                                          7
 approach if they have to present group accounts. While this may appear
 to create a system similar to that found in the U.S., this is unlikely to be
 the case for several reasons. First, the information and accounting systems
 in place generate data for each of the individual, legal-entity tax conform-
   ing statements. The consolidated statements are compiled from these1 and to
   the extent that the legal entity statements are uninformative because oftheir
  basis in tax law, this would also apply to the consolidated statements. The
  basic reporting practice is still governed by tax regulations. Second, users of
  financial statements have, presumably, developed an understanding of how
  to interpret the individual legal entity reports or have created mechanisms
  to reduce information asymmetries. Thus, the marginal benefit of a change
  in accounting practice is probably less thtn it would be if the information set
  consisted solely of the financial statements. Nevertheless, since both types of
  firms appear in our sample, in the empirical tests of the model we consider
  controlling for these factors by differentiating between companies applying
  full consolidation and. those that do not.
      If reports are perceived to be somewhat uninformative, alternative sources
 may emerge if the benefits of additional information are perceived to be high
 by market participants. In Germany, financial analysts have developed a
 process to yield an adjusted earnings measure that is meant to be more
 useful for making cross-sectional and time-series comparisons. Some firms
 voluntarily supply the information and if it is not supplied then analysts
 attempt to impute it. The measure, known as the DVFA/SG earnings, does
 not adjust specifically for tax-oriented items, however, to the extent a tax
 based valuation measure makes earnings less comparable it will be adjusted
 in the calculation.
     In sum, the one-book basis of accounting in Germany arises from a com-
mon objective of capital maintenance for tax and reporting. This objective is
weighted more heavily than profit maximization, which is a dominant objec-
tive in the United States. While the reasons for the German system having
evolved in this manner are outside the scope of this paper, they are dearly
related to the sources of capital available to firms, the history and institu-
tional framework of the country, including the use of bearer shares, the lack
of large amounts of institutional capital outside of banks, the acceptance of
weaker anti-trust regulation, and the lack of regulation of insider-trading.
However, increasing demand for international sources of capital is shifting
the institutional structure toward a two-book system.

                                      8
2.3 Summary of Accounting Differences
Charts 1 and 2 summarize the basic features of the U.S. and German ac-
counting regimes, respectively. In the U.S., the tax and financial reports are
governed by separate bodies. The subsidiaries' information is consolidated
by the parent into two separate statements, one prepared for the IRS and
one for the SEC.
   In Germany, the organization is more complicated. All reporting is based
on the Commercial Code, which governs unconsolidated tax returns filed by
the parent and each subsidiary. These returns are filed with the Ministry of
Finance. To some extent the tax rules feed back into the reporting practice
via the "umgekehrte Massgeblichkeitsprinzip." Finally, parents prepare con-
solidated statements that are mostly based upon the same accounting rules
that govern the tax returns.


3 Accounting Regimes and Firm Investment
In this section, we develop a structural model to help explore a precise impli-
cation of our descriptive analysis: the responsiveness of domestic investment
to changes in the domestic tax code may also depend upon the accounting
regime. The reluctance of domestic investors to utilize tax incentives will
drive a wedge between the costs of capital faced by investors from different
countries. In our view, this investigation is a crucial precursor to the analysis
of the effects of accounting regimes on foreign capital flows.
   To derive testable implications from a model with varying information
revelation by firms, we begin with the standard Euler equation model for
investment." The firm maximizes the present discounted value of after-ta
dividends. The firm's production function is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas
with constant returns to scale:

                          =                   = AK_,NZ,                            (1)
where Y is output, K is the capital stock, N is labor input, i is the firm
index and t is the time index. Investment in capital, I, that depreciates at
constant geometric rate, 5, is assumed to be subject to quadratic adjustment
costs:
  "Oliner, Rudebusch, and Sichel (1993) provide an excellent review of these models.

                                          9
                                      =   &o       J     —
                                                                                        (2)
                                          2    (              S1)
     In addition, we assume that in countries relying upon only one set of
 books, the market participants employ an independent monitor, that verifies
 the firm is actually investing at the level of I. One could think of these as
 costs incurred by the shareholder in order to gain an accurate description of
firm activity.t2 These costs result from the fact that high deductions lower
the firm's tax base, and the market requires that this type of reduction be
distinguishable from a reduction due to lower profitability. In a two-book
country, higher tax benefits are footnoted in the financial statement, and so
should be desirable from the perspective of the finn. In a one-book country,
this may not be the case. Tax benefits that are large relative to earnings may
require significant additional information costs.'3 Specifically, we assume
that the firm faces an additional information revelation cost function:

                      fl(J',, .K_1) =     . (rt
                                          2K1,_,
                                                       'i1t
                                                    K1,1_,,                  (3)
where l' describes the tax benefit of investing, which, in the U.S., is defined
as:

                      = k2 + >(l + pi,. + lrj,,Ytrj,,Dep41(s — t),
                                                                                       (4)
where It is the investment tax credit, p is the real required rate of return, r
is the marginal corporate tax rate, and Dep(a) is the depreciation allowance
permitted an asset of age a discounted at a nominal rate that includes the
inflation rate ir. This expression may be defined slightly differently depending
on the tax code.14 We use the detailed information on each country's tax code
  t2The DVFA/SG earnings report is an example of the type of monitoring that we are
attempting to model. Kannianen and Sodersten (1993) use such monitoring costs to
develop a model in which a firm chooses not to maximize its tax debt, because higher tax
debt would lead to higher marginal monitoring costs.
   131n a one-book country with few investment incentives, these coats should be inconse-
quentiaL But in all the countries in our sample investment incentives exist (especially for
depreciation), and are, in general, generous (see appendix C).
  '4For example, a slight redefinition would be necessary for those countries in our sample
that have different rules for basis adjustment.

                                            10
(contained in appendix C) to calculate the above expression. This function
has the desirable properties that the marginal cost of revelation increases
with the tax benefits, and that these costs have a lower bound of zero if
tax benefits are also zero. The assumption that these costs are quadratic is
somewhat restrictive, but simplifies our estimation problem significantly.'5
   The finn is assumed to be a price-taker in the prices of output, p, capital
goods, g and labor, w. To simplify the exposition, the price of output is
normalized to equal unity, so that the purchase price of capital and labor are
relative prices and the relative price of capital goods to output is simply g.
    The firm chooses investment to maximize the expected present discounted
value of after-ta dividends,

                                     =                                              (5)
                                          E
                                          .=t (n)
                                              j=t
where


            =   (1
                     —
                         r.,.)[F(K,,_,, Ni,,) — C(I,., .K1,._,) — IZ(I.,, K,_,)]
                           —
                               ,,,)I1,,                                             (6)

subject to the capital accumulation constraint;

                               K1, = (1 — 8.)K.,._, + I.,.,                         (7)
where E is the expectations operator conditional on information available
at time 2, and f3jj is the period j discount factor for firm i. The derivationa.1
details and resulting Euler equations that incorporate equity and debt is-
suance are omitted here for expositional simplicity. Their addition generates
few additional insights into the issues on that we have focused.
    To derive the Euler equation for investment, set the derivatives of the
Lagrangian that results from equations (6) and (7) to zero at time 2:
                                          —
                     (1 — rj,e)
                                  [, (11—rittrt) + ci, + a4] = ii,t,                (8)

  '5Thc monitoring adjustment cost is not a function of the depreciation rate because we
believe that information costs are high when tax benefits are high relative to earnings.


                                              11
      E1 {,B,÷(1 —                     — CK, — 11K1) + (1 —        £)A4÷1} =           (9)
Equation (8) is the first order condition that equates the marginal cost of
acquiring capital and the shadow value, 1A1, of an increase in the capital
stock at time 2. Equation (9) indicates that it is optimal to set the return
in period 2 + 1 of a marginal unit of capital equal to the cost of capital in
period 2 + 1. To derive the equation we estimate, we use (8), and (8) rolled
forward one period to substitute out for the unobservables, kg and d\j,g+1:

                          —
                              rig+l){ (FK —
                    +(i — 6J[C1+1 + 114+t + gjgj
                                                         —

                                                              i   —r1+1
                                                                  — rigj)
                    = (1 — ;,g) [c7. + c,           +    fi —
                                                          i   —
                                                                  7g)]               (10)

Substituting in the specific functional forms for C, Q and F:


                    =
                              /   11    —
             C11
                                                                                     (11)
                    —
                    —   Ui
                              tt
                             r'                                                      (12)

                                                                      \
                                  jig—i
                                                2
             Cic1   —
                    —
                        G                                                  'j,t4-i
                                        —&)             '°(K      —
                                                                      i)             (13)

                    =     a1 /
                                                                                     (14)
                             2 cj't1t÷i          )
After rearranging terms, simplifying, imposing rational expectations to elim-
inate the expectations operator, and generalizing the expectations error to
account for the panel nature of our data, we obtain:


         —
             'ri1t+i){ Q1+1 +
                              ° (I+\2 a1 (           2

                        Kj,g  2   Kj1g) +2 t" K'It /
                                          1%




                                               12
      +ao(1 — &)
                    ("') +
                         i1t
                                  (1 — S)
                                            [fli.t+1 (1—  rt+i) +
                                                      — Tht+1                'C,1


      -ao(Si-)}
      —(1—    r1)   a0
                         (                        —r\ + a1'2 ____
                             K,—1 —&) +fli,g     1 — r,1   )
      = u + v14.1 +                                                                 (15)
   The first error term on the right hand side of equation (15), u, is a firm-
specific measurement error in the levels of the left hand side variables. This
error is assumed to be approximately constant over time. The last two error
terms,       and       are expectational errors3 where Es(v.+, + e,1+,) = 0.
The Euler equation we estimate follows directly from this equation. Equa-
tion (15) is first differenced to remove the first error term and estimated
by generalized method of moments (0MM) with time dummies. The 0MM
estimator accommodates conditional heteroskedasticity of unknown form in
the error term ;,g..j and the time dummies estimate v1..1 in each period.'6
    While the model is somewhat stylized, it does provide a structural test
for the importance of accounting regimes for domestic investment behavior.
Strictly speaking, for firms in two-book countries, a1 should be equal to zero,
and for firms operating in one-book countries, a1 should be greater than zero.
To the extent that finns in one-book countries are able to avoid information
restrictions, a1 may be zero even in one-book countries.


4 Empirical Analysis
In this section we present estimates of our model. For estimation, we use the
Global Vantage dataset and panels of tax information, described in detail in
appendices B and C, to estimate the first difference of equation (15) for one-
book and two-book countries. As we indicated above, in many countries,
mechanisms have emerged that attempt to provide a second set of books
for some firms in one-book countries. In addition to the most basic split
between one and two-book countries, we also explore the extent to which
 '6The moving average error introduced by first dfferencing is treated by using instru-
ments dated before 2 — 1 and by a Bartlett spectral density kernel to correct the 0MM
weighting matrix.

                                            13
 consolidation helps firms in one-book countries avoid signalling problems.
 To briefly foreshadow the results, we will show that we can identify large
 differences in investment behavior between one and two-book firms when we
only include in our sample firms who can clearly be classified one or two-
book. Simply classifying by country, which ignores additional information
about firm specific accounting practices, leads to inconclusive results.
 •
     The discussion of accounting regimes raises serious measurement issues
that will affect any empirical studies that use the Global Vantage database.
When constructing the model, we have specific variables for output, taxes,
and capital. The extent to which the variables recorded in our database
 conform to these definitions varies considerably across and within countries.
 Nowhere is the measure as precise as we prefer. These measurement problems
 are serious in every country in our sample, but it is important to note that one
should not conclude from our accounting discussion that measurement error,
in the classical regression sense, is higher in one-book countries. The theme of
our discussion is that the information reported by firms in one-book countries
is not as comprehensive and relevant for assessing future profitability as it is
in two-book countries. The principle advantage of the second set of books is
their ability to provide a signal of current earnings and hence profitability to
external capital markets perhaps better than tax accounts could. The degree
to which specific variables are measured well or poorly is highly idiosyncratic,
however. For example, the tax books may well be the best tool for measuring
the impact of a change in the tax law on a specific firm. These effects
may appear larger in one-book countries, if the variables reported in Global
Vantage are based upon tax conformity.
    To help minimize the problems of measurement error, we pay careful at-
tention to the source of each data item. Within our one-book countries, data
for different firms are based upon different levels of consolidation. To aid
in a more precise mapping of accounting effects and econometric estimation,
Global Vantage identifies the firm's accounting standard (see appendix B).
The tax rules in many countries apply at the level of the legal entity. In the
Global Vantage data base, recorded data are frequently drawn from consol-
idated reports, which may have little correlation with the variables that go
into the tax calculation. Moreover, these consolidated reports also may in-
clude foreign investments, which in many countries fall outside of the sphere
of domestic tax policy. Global Vantage identifies whether the annual finan-
cial statements represent the legal entity report, a holding company report

                                      14
(rarely used), a domestic consolidation or full consolidation report.'1 Over
our sample period, consolidation becomes increasingly prevalent, and we are
able to explore the impact on our results of restricting our sample to firms
whose data are drawn from consolidated and unconsolidated reports. In gen-
eral, consolidation causes the most problems for our empirical analysis when
it incorporates substantial foreign assets that are not covered by domestic tax
laws. When this occurs, the measure of investment includes investment not
necessarily covered by domestic law, which can bias tax coefficients severely.'8
   Details of variable construction are contained in appendix B. Table 3
provides the means and standard deviations for the some of the variables
we use. In addition, the number of observations available for estimation is
reported in each cell.
   The structural model developed in section 3 has many antecedents. Specif-
ically, if a is set equal to zero, so that the fl adjustment function (equation
3) has no affect, equation (15) reduces to a standard investment Euler equa-
tion (see, e.g., Abel, 1980, Curnmins and Hubbard, 1994, in this volume;
Hixnmelberg, 1990, and Hubbard and Kashyap, 1992). This standard invest-
ment equation has been estimated on many different datasets under a wide
variety of different assumptions. To provide a link to this literature and to
introduce the model in this paper, the estimates of the standard investment
Euler equation are provided in Table 4.
    For one-book countries, a0, the investment adjustment cost parameter, is
estimated to be 1.21 with standard error 0.499. For two-book counties, the
estimate is 2.32 with standard error 0.771. The test of the overidentifying
restrictions rejects the model, at standard coniidence levels, for one-book
countries and does not reject for two-book countries. Both parameter esti-
mates are within the range reported in previous research using U.S. firm-level
panel data (see, most recently, Hubbard, Kashyap, and Whited, 1994).
    To the extent that these results conform with previous estimates, we feel
confident that the data will allow extension to incorporate the features of the
model derived in section 3. However, we advise caution in interpreting the
  'tHarris1 Lang, and Möller (1993) provide a discussion of this issue for German
companies.
  '8For any single firm-year there is only one of the reports within the data base. Hence,
while it would be useful to discriminate between the legal entity (one-book) and consol-
idated (possible two-book) reports for a given firm-year, this is not possible with Global
Vantage.


                                           15
 estimates of the standard model literally, and especially in interpreting the
 test of the overidentifying restrictions. While it is usual in this literature to
  "accept" a model if the test statistic is less than the critical value, the test is
 only of the orthogonality of the instruments and the error terms. This may
 pose a more serious problem than usual in this dataset since we have argued
 throughout that there are a wide number of measurement error problems
 in the variables that we use for instruments and in estimation. We have
 attempted to alleviate these potential biases in constructing the variables
 and in estimating the model but we, necessarily, remain agnostic about the
 degree to which these efforts are successful.19
    Table 5 presents estimates of a0 and a1 in equation (15). The investment
 adjustment cost parameter, &o, in both samples is positive and significant.
 For one-book countries, it is estimated to be 0.739 with standard error 0.351.
 For two-book countries, it is estimated to be 0.998 with standard error 0.265.
 Both these estimates are within the range of adjustment costs — although
 somewhat lower than — estimated using the Euler equation formulation. An
 estimate of 0.998 implies that an extra dollar of investment will lead to about
 0.05 dollars of adjustment costs.2°
    To provide additional insight into these estimates it is useful compare
them to those reported in closed-form q-model formulations. These estimates
are substantially smaller than ones implied by closed-form q formulations
estimated with either U.S. firm level panel data (see, e.g., Gilchrist and
Himmelberg, 1991) or with U.K. firm level panel data (see, e.g., Blundell,
Bond, Devereux, and Schiantarelli, 1992).21 The small estimates reported
in the q studies implied unreasonably large adjustment costs, implying the
    '9The range of point estimates and their standard errors was relatively tight, but we
 found that wild swings in the x2 statistic could result from seemingly innocuous changes
 in the instrument set.
   20lnterpretation of the size of the adjustment costs depends on the proximity to the
 steady state. Near the steady state, most of investment is replacement investment, which
 does not incur any adjustment costa in the model. For the first few dollars over and
above depreciation,
                     marginal adjustment costs are low, by the convexity assumption. Far
away from the steady state, marginal adjustment costs can be very high, even given
our parameter estimates. For the comparison reported in the
                                                               text, we applied the sample
means of the investment to capital ratio and depreciation rate (0.21 and 0.16, respectively)
in order to gauge the relative adjustment costs.
   215ee Cuminjus, Hassett, and Hubbard, 1993, who use the q model but estimate much
smaller adjustment costs, in-line with those reported above.


                                            16
scale of the adjustment cost is substantially larger than that of the purchase
cost of the investment good. The estimates above indicate significantly lower
adjustment costs.
    The accounting adjustment cost parameter a1 in Table 5 is negative and
insignificant in the one-book sample, and negative, substantially larger, and
significant in the two-book sample. For one-book countries the estimate
is -0.696 with standard error 0.489. For two-book countries the estimate
is -4.84 with standard error 1.36. However, we should not overemphasize
the precision of these results: the tests of overidentifying restrictions are
rejected in both models (with tiny implied p values). Both estimates have
the incorrect sign. An extra dollar of investment leads to 0.03 dollars more
in total adjustment costs, in the one-book sample, and 0.003 dollars less in
adjustment costs in the two-book sample, given the sample means of the
relevant parameters (see footnote 24).
    There are a variety of reasons why this result may not be spurious in
spite of the fact that it confounds the intuition outlined in the description
of the countries' institutional features and the assumptions in deriving the
 model. However, we believe the crude one-book, two-book distinction, may
 not be what the model captures. In section 2, we outlined how firms, even
 in one-book countries, can avoid restrictions placed on them by the tax au-
 thority and how they attempt to mitigate the information costs associated
 with their home countries particular institutional features. Perhaps the es-
 timation results were not illuminating because we incorrectly grouped firms;
 one-book, two-book may not be the exact partitioning between firms facing
 low information revelation costs and high ones.
     There are a number of different sub-samples that might provide evidence
on this point. In Table 6, we consider two polar opposites that seem to
confirm the analysis of why one-book and two-book is too coarse a distinction.
Table 6 presents estimates for two sub-samples. The first is, one-book firms
that report only in accordance with domestic accounting standards and are
not fully consolidated (that is, report as legal entities). The second is, one-
book firms that report in accordance with U.S. GAAP (nearly all of whom
are fully consolidated). The groupings incorporate firms from many different
countries.22
  22The largest number of firms in the first sub-sample ii from Germany and from Japan
in the second.


                                         17
    In the first sub-sample, both adjustment cost parameters are positive
 and significant. In the second, similar to the result in two-book countries
reported in Table 5, the investment adjustment cost parameter is positive
and significant while the accounting adjustment cost parameter is negative
and not significant. In the first sub-sample, ao is estimated to be 0.520 with
standard error 0.219 and a1 is estimated to be 3.64 with standard error 1.02.
These estimates imply that an extra dollar of investment leads to a total
of 0.07 dollars of adjustment costs, with 0.05 dollars of that attributable
to the accounting adjustment costs, given the sample means of the relevant
parameters. In addition, the model cannot be rejected at standard confidence
levels.
   In the second sub-sample, a0 is estimated to be 1.91 with standard error
0.683 and a1 is estimated to be -7.55 with standard error 4.52. The test of the
overidentifying restrictions is rejected conclusively. These estimates accord
closely with those reported for two-book firms in Table 5, providing some
evidence that firms that report according to U.S. GAAP face adjustment
costs similar to those faced in two-book countries. The total of the two
adjustment costs is roughly zero. The investment adjustment cost parameter
is plausible, the accounting adjustment parameter is negative, and the test
of the orthogonality conditions is decisive.
   The results in Table 6 seem to confirm the hypothesis that additional
costs can be associated with the taking of tax benefits in one-book countries
and that this cost is largely avoided by a portion of firms even in one-book
countries. Monitoring costs appear to be important, and their size depends
critically on identifying which firms are likely to be subject to them within
one-book countries. The size of the monitoring costs is at the high end
of estimates for the investment adjustment cost parameters in the Euler
equation literature and. dominate investment adjustment costs in our model.
Firms in one-book countries that prepare accounts according to U.S. GAAP
appear to be qualitatively similar to firms in two-book countries.

5 Conclusions
We describe two different accounting regimes that govern reporting practice
in most developed countries. We provide a structural model that formalizes
a testable implication of our discussion: that domestic firm-level investment

                                     18
in one-book countries may face additional adjustment costs and, as a result,
be less sensitive to tax law changes than is investment in two-book countries.
In our discussion of the accounting regimes, we indicate that over time mcdi-
anisms have emerged in one-book countries that allow some firms to provide
information in alternative ways. Our econometric estimates suggest that ac-
counting regime differences play an important role in describing the domestic
investment pattern across countries. In particular, firms that operate under
a "pure" one-book system behave as if they face an additional cost when uti-
lizing investment incentives. The firms appearing most constrained are those
that do not file consolidated statements according to U.S. CAAP. Firms in
one-book countries filing according to U.S. GAAP behave much more like
U.S. firms. Since most multinationals face some type of consolidation re-
quirement, our evidence suggests that the playing field for multinationals is
probably roughly even with respect to ability to claim tax benefits. Infor-
mation costs may have driven a wedge in historical user costs of capital, but
these forces are likely diminishing today; many one-book countries are grad-
ually moving towards two-book systems, as exemplified by the Fourth and
 Seventh directives of the European Community.
     Our results, taken at face value, suggest one should not study interna-
 tional taxation in isolation. The institutional environment in which multina-
 tionals operate may be crucial to their decision making. We have studied one
 particular aspect of this interaction, but there are many others. In work in
 progress, we are exploring whether international capital flows have become
 more efficient over time in response to the gradual easing of information
 asymmetries imposed by accounting regimes.




                                      19
 6 References
Abel, Andrew B. 1980. Empirical Investment Equations: An Integrative
  Framework. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 12
   (Spring): 39-91.

Alexander, D. and S. Archer. 1991. Comprehensive European Accounting
   Guide: US Edition, New York: Harcourt, Brace-Jovanovich.

Auerbach, Alan J. 1982. The New Economics of Accelerated Depreciation.
  Boston College Law Review, 23 (September): 1327-55.

Auerbach, Alan J. 1983. Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost
  of Capital. Journal of Economic Literature 21: 905-940.

Ballon, it. 3. and I. Tomita. 1988. The Financial Behavior of Japanese Cor-
   porations, Tokyo: Kodansha International Ltd.

Blundell, Richard, Stephen Bond, Michael Devereux, and Fabio Schiantarelli.
   1992. Investment and Tobin's Q Evidence from Company Panel Data.
   Journal of Econometrics 51 (January/February): 233-258.

Busse von Colbe, W. K. Geiger, H. Haase, H. Reinhard, and G. Schmitt.
   1991. Ergebnis nacb DVFA/SG, Dusseldorf: Schaffer-Verlag.

Coopers & Lybrand. various years. International Accounting Summaries.
   New York: Wiley.

Coopers & Lybrand. various years. International Tax Summaries. New
   York: Wiley.

Cumrnins, Jason C., and Kevin A. Hassett. 1992. The Effects of Taxation on
  Investment: New Evidence from Firm-Level Panel Data. National Tax
  Journal 45 (September): 243-252.

Cummins, Jason C., Kevin A. Hassett, and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1993. A
  Reconsideration of Investment Behavior Using Tax Reforms as Natural

                                   20
attempt to fill the gap. As is the case in Germany, such alternative conduits
have also emerged in Japan. Japanese companies began to access capital
in the international markets in the 1960's. Many of these companies (e.g.
SONY) sought capital in the U.S. but only had legal entity financial state-
ments. Consequently, they "voluntarily" prepared consolidated statements
iii conformity with U.S. CAAP to comply with U.S. regulations. In 1983,
Japan required fully consolidated financial statements for the first time for
all listed companies. Those companies already preparing their consolidated
statements under U.S. GAAP, were allowed to use these for Japanese pur-
poses too. Hence, to some extent, a two-book system has existed for some
Japanese multinationals. In addition, managers systematically provide fore-
castE of operating profits and sales. Darrough and Harris (1991)show that
these forecasts have information content, particularly at the legal-entity level.
     In sum, Japan has a one-book system applying to the majority of corpo-
rations. However, both via application of U.S. GAAP for certain companies'
consolidated statements, and via supplementary information, investors re-
ceive additional information for valuation purposes.

6.6 France and Belgium
Traditionally, French companies have followed a one-book system and this
persists for legal entities. The French have a long tradition of a codified
accounting system. There is a legally-defined chart of accounts (from the
Plan Comptable Gnéra1) which is followed for both financial reporting and
taxation purposes, at least at the legal entity levçl.
    Requirements for additional information oriented towards investors first
occurred in 1967 with the creation of a stock exchange regulatory authority,
the Commission des Operations de Borse (COB), which encouraged compa-
flies to reveal more investor-oriented information. As consolidated accounts
were urged by COB but had no legal basis several large companies adopted
their own approaches with several choosing U.S. (MAP or International Ac-
counting Standards. France adopted the EC's Seventh Directive, which re-
quired consolidated accounts for listed companies, and from 1986, companies
were allowed not to apply French GAAP at the consolidated level. Hence,
we find that there is a mix of accounting approaches applied for the French
companies in our sample.
   An interesting example of how French groups take a flexible approach to

                                       29
   and Q with Multiple Capital Goods: Theory and Evidence from Panel
   Data on Japanese Firms. Econometrica, 59 (May): 731-753.

Himmelberg, Charles P. 1990. A Dynamic Analysis of Dividend and Invest-
  ment Behavior under Borrowing Constraints. Mimeograph, New York
  University.

Hoshi, Taiceo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. 1991. Corporate Capital
  Structure, Liquidity and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial
  Groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (February): 33-60.

Hubbard, ft. Glenn, and Anil K. Kashyap. 1992. Internal Net Worth and
  the Investment Process: An Application to U.S. Agriculture. Journal of
   Political Economy, 100 (June): 506-534.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Amil K. Kashyap, and Toni M. Whited. 1994. Internal
  Finance and Firm Investment. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.

Hulten, Charles R., and Frank Wykoff. 1991. The Measurement of De-
  preciation. In Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from
  Capital. ed. Charles R. Hulten. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation, various issues. Annual Re-
   port.

International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation, various issues. European Tax
    Handbook.

International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation, 1993. Guide to European
   Taxation: Volume II: The Taxation of Companies in Europe.

International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation, various issues. Tax News
   Service,

International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation. 1993. Taxes and Investment
   in Asia and the Pacific: Part II: Countries.


                                   22
International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation. 1993. Taxes and Investment
    in Canada.

Jennings, R., D.P. Mest, and R. B. Thompson. 1992. Investor Reaction to
   Disclosures of 1974-75 LIFO Adoption Decisions. The Accounting Re-
   view, (April): 337-54.

King, Mervyn A., and Don Fullerton, eds. 1984. The Taxation of Income
   from Capital: A Comparative Study of the United States, United King-
   dom, Sweden, and West Germany. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kannianen and Sodersten. 1992. A New View of Corporate Taxation: Mon-
  itoring Costs, Expectations, and the Cost of Capital. Mimeograph, tJni-
  versity of Helsinki.

Ordeiheide, D. and M. Pfaff. 1993. German Financial Reporting, London:
   Routledge Press.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1991. Taxing
   Profits in a Global Economy: Domestic and International Issues.

Oliner, S., G. Rudebusch, and D. Sichel. 1993. New and Old Models of
   Business Investment: A Comparison of Forecasting Performance, Mimeo-
   graph, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Salinger, Michael, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1983. Tax Reform and Corpo-
    rate Investment: A Microeconomic Simulation Study. In Behavioral Sim-
    ulation Models of Tax Policy Analysis. ed. Martin Feldstein. Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press.

 Shoven, 3., and 3. Bulow. 1975. Inflation Accounting and Nonfinancial Cor-
    porate Profits: Physical Assets. Brookings Papers on Economic Activitr
    556-98.

 Tax Bureau, Ministry of Finance. 1990. An Outline of Japanese Taxes: 1990.
    Tokyo: Ministry of Finance.


                                     23
Viner, Aron. 1988. Inside Japanese Financial Markets, New York: Dow
  Jones, Irwin.




                              24
Appendix A: Summaries of Country Specific
Accounting Practices
6.1 Canada
Canada has a two-book system with financial reporting accounting standards
based on a proprietary approach prescribed by the Canadian Institute of
Chartered Accountants. There is a close similarity to U.S. GAAP that is
evidenced by the SEC allowing mutual recognition of Canadian accounting
standards for Canadian firms listing in the United States. However, Canadian
GAAP does not provide the detailed reconciliation of tax expense for tax and
financial reporting purposes that we find in the United States. Canadian
taxes are applied on the consolidated results but on a territorial basis.

6.2 The U.K. and Ireland
The U.K. has a two-book system since the Corporation Tax was first intro-
duced. The basic financial reporting requirements derive from the Companies
Act first issued in the mid-nineteenth century and amended many times since
then. The Companies Acts of 1985 and 1989 are the key regulatory items
currently in force. The Companies Acts require audited financial statements
to present a "true and fair view" in conformity with GAAP. GAAP has been
outlined by various private bodies in a similar manner to that found in the
United States. The most recent standard setting body is the Accounting
Standards Board, which is structured on a basis very close to the FASB.
   Two distinctions between the U.K. and the U.S. are worth noting. First,
there is no SEC equivalent to provide a tight regulatory link. Second, the
existing codification of U.K. GAAP is much less detailed, and less compre-
hensive than in the United States. There are also distinctions between U.K.
and U.S. GAAP, some of which are relevant to the issues considered in this
paper. The first distinction is that U.K. managers may revalue their assets
periodically.23 These asset revaluations are discretionary and the gains and
losses are not taxable, nor are they reported in current reported income.
Thus, gross investment in assets measured from Global Vantage using tan-
  Asset revaluations in different forms occur in many countries in our sample. See
appendix C for whether and to what extent countries allow revaluations.


                                       25
 gible fixed assets (see appendix B) is measured with error as in some cases
 it includes revaluation adjustments (see, e.g., Easton, Eddey, and Harris,
 1993). The second distinction is that U.K. tax law does not permit the use
of LIFO for inventory valuation. Thus, while LIFO is permitted by U.K.
GAAP, it is not used. Third1 the accounting treatment for temporary dif-
ferences in the timing of tax and accounting revenues or expenses is usually
different in the U.K., relative to the United States. In the U.K., companies
have the option to accrue only for those differences which are expected to be
realized ("crystallize") within a five year period. In the U.S., all temporary
differences must be accounted for. The alternative treatments may cause a
difference in reported debt, equity, and income measures.
     The U.K. financial reporting system follows the proprietary approach with
equity being a major source of capital. Taxable income is determined by tax
rules which are not bound by U.K. GAAP, so it is a two-book case.

6.3 Australia and New Zealand
 The roots of accounting and tax practice for these countries lie in the U.K.,
 with the U.S. playing a greater role in more recent times. Both countries
 adopt a proprietary approach to their financial reporting practices and have
established capital markets as the major source of capital for large firms.
As in the U.K., discretionary revaluations of assets are permitted and occur.
Easton, Eddey, and Harris (1993) find that these revaluations are value-
relevant but also demonstrate the potential errors in extracting this level of
information from the aggregated data in Global Vantage, as we noted in the
discussion of the U.K. practice. Hence, we note that our gross investment
proxy is knowingly measured with error, in part because of the idiosyncracies
in the accounting systems.

6.4 Netherlands
The Netherlands provides another example of a two-book system. Histori-
cally, the Netherlanth had an essentially laissez-faire system with companies
applying generally acceptable accounting standards. While various laws have
been enacted since the first Accounting Act, effective since 1971, for most
of the time listed companies have usually followed accounting principles on-
ented towards representing the economic substance of transactions.

                                     26
    The tax law has its own specific requirements but requires taxable income
to be based on sound business practice. So there is an implicit, but no direct
link to financial reporting requirements.
    The accounting law was amended to incorporate the Fourth Directive of
the EC with an effective date of January 1984 and the Seventh Directive of
the EC effective from January 1990. However, both of these amendments
were more in form than substance as listed Dutch companies were already
complying with most of the standards.
    As in the case of Australia, New Zealand and the U.K., Dutch companies
may revalue their assets or apply a full current cost system. In such cases,
as the tax system continues to be based on historical costs, the depreciation
charge may be higher for accounting purposes for certain assets.
    In general, in the Netherlands we expect the differences between tax and
accounting income to be less than for several other two-book systems.

6.5 Japan
The accounting system originates in the German Commercial Code which
was "imported" at the time of the Meiji Restoration and revised on the
basis of changes in Germany's Commercial Code through 1938 (Ballon and
Tomita, 1988). Following World War II, revisions of the Commercial Code
and the first Securities Exchange Law (1948) were based on U.S. practices.
Hence, the Japanese system is a mix of our two benchmark systems. The
focus of both tax and financial reporting has been the legal entity, as we find
in Germany. Currently, tax is still applied on the legal entity results rather
than the consolidated group accounts.
    An example which helps to illustrate the legal versus consolidated entity
aspect of taxation is the often misunderstood issue of the tax-deductibility
of goodwill. The tax law allows goodwill to be amortized over five years and
deducted in the calculation of taxable income. But this goodwill is generally
not the goodwill found in consolidated financial statements which arises from
investments in the equity of subsidiaries. For such investments, there is no
goodwill separately reported in the legal entity statements. The taxable
goodwill that arises is from an asset purchase made at a premium to market
value. On consolidation the two goodwill measures are accounted for in the
same manner but in the legal entity reports they are treated differently and
hence are not taxed in the same manner.

                                     27
    To better understand the relationship between tax and financial reporting
in Japan, it is useful to be aware of some of the regulatory influences and the
evolution and perceived relevance of consolidated reporting. The foundation
of financial and tax reporting is the Commercial Code which applies to all
legal entities and is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice. On the
other hand, the Securities Exchange Law applies to listed companies, and is
the source of regulations for consolidated reports. The Securities Exchange
Law is administered by the Ministry of Finance, which is the de facto source of
GAAP for listed companies despite the existence of advisory committees like
the Business Accounting Deliberation Council. Measurement rules used to
obtain taxable net income are largely based on CAAP for financial reporting
purposes at least as applied to the legal entity level. Thus, expenses such
as depreciation and cost of goods sold conform in the tax and accounting
income measures.
    Differences arise in the two sets of books as a result of certain tax exempt
or disallowed items or when a company chooses to take expenses in excess
of those allowed for tax purposes. A common example is in the accrual for
employee post employment benefits. The tax law allows a deduction equal to
forty percent of the amount payable at the fiscal year end. Many companies
accrue between forty and one hundred percent of this amount. As we might
expect from rational tax minimization strategies, we know of no instances of
companies that accrue less than the forty percent. There are other examples
where the tax-based reserve is usually in excess of what would be required
under an information-oriented system. A simple example i the reserve for
bad debts which is based on a percentage of total receivables plus allowances
for specific doubtful customers.
   There is a growing body of evidence that the reports which result from this
hybrid system interact in idiosyncratic ways with market indicators. First,
there is both anecdotal (see Viner, 1987) and empirical evidence that the pri-
mary accounting information source in Japan is the legal-entity rather than
consolidated report (see, e.g., Darrough and Harris, 1991; and Hall, Hamao,
and Harris, 1993). Second, French and Poterba (1991) and Hall, Haxnao,
and Harris (1993) show that equity prices are not related to accounting data
in any manner which is consistent with what is found in the United States.
This finding is consistent with what we might expect in a one-book country.
    As we argued earlier, if the books are unreliable signals of the market
performance of firms, alternative information sources may well emerge which

                                      28
attempt to fill the gap. As is the case in Germany, such alternative conduits
have also emerged in Japan. Japanese companies began to access capital
in the international markets in the 1960's. Many of these companies (e.g.
SONY) sought capital in the U.S. but only had legal entity financial state-
ments. Consequently, they "voluntarily" prepared consolidated statements
iii conformity with U.S. CAAP to comply with U.S. regulations. In 1983,
Japan required fully consolidated financial statements for the first time for
all listed companies. Those companies already preparing their consolidated
statements under U.S. GAAP, were allowed to use these for Japanese pur-
poses too. Hence, to some extent, a two-book system has existed for some
Japanese multinationals. In addition, managers systematically provide fore-
castE of operating profits and sales. Darrough and Harris (1991)show that
these forecasts have information content, particularly at the legal-entity level.
     In sum, Japan has a one-book system applying to the majority of corpo-
rations. However, both via application of U.S. GAAP for certain companies'
consolidated statements, and via supplementary information, investors re-
ceive additional information for valuation purposes.

6.6 France and Belgium
Traditionally, French companies have followed a one-book system and this
persists for legal entities. The French have a long tradition of a codified
accounting system. There is a legally-defined chart of accounts (from the
Plan Comptable Gnéra1) which is followed for both financial reporting and
taxation purposes, at least at the legal entity levçl.
    Requirements for additional information oriented towards investors first
occurred in 1967 with the creation of a stock exchange regulatory authority,
the Commission des Operations de Borse (COB), which encouraged compa-
flies to reveal more investor-oriented information. As consolidated accounts
were urged by COB but had no legal basis several large companies adopted
their own approaches with several choosing U.S. (MAP or International Ac-
counting Standards. France adopted the EC's Seventh Directive, which re-
quired consolidated accounts for listed companies, and from 1986, companies
were allowed not to apply French GAAP at the consolidated level. Hence,
we find that there is a mix of accounting approaches applied for the French
companies in our sample.
   An interesting example of how French groups take a flexible approach to

                                       29
their group accounts is in the treatment of premia on acquisitions of other
companies. Since the 1980's this "goodwill" is frequently capitalized and
labeled "market share" with no amortization generally applied. There is no
tax consequence to this treatment.
   The tax regulations use the legal entity reports in a similar manner to
what we have described in other one-book countries. However, at least since
the mid-1980s many French companies have deviated from the valuation rules
applied for tax purposes, at least for their consolidated accounts.

6.7 Scandinavia
We describe Sweden as representative of the Scandinavian countries in our
sample, which include Denmark and Norway. Tax law in Sweden has al-
lowed a series of tax-free reserves which histbrically must be reflected in the
published financial statements. These reserves have included an inventory
reserve, investment reserves, and special depreciation reserves. Thus, while
the tax rate has been relatively high this has been compensated for by a
lower base. Recent tax reforms have eliminated many of the ta-free reserves
(see appendix C).24
    Scandinavian systems have been influenced by the German system and
have a one-book approach. Nevertheless, to facilitate some separation of the
tax-free reserve data, the annual adjustments have been reflected as a sepa-
rate part of the income statement and the cumulative amounts are reported
as a non-distributable reserve in the balance sheet. Hence, while the one-book
model applies, the information related to specific ta-oriented adjustments
can be largely differentiated.

6.8 Italy
Italy has a one-book system with roots in a Napoleonic Civil Code. The
Italian system is perceived to be strongly tax driven which may have led
to the fact that it was unable to pass legislation to incorporate the Fourth
and Seventh Directives of the EC until the 1990's. The new Directives are
irrelevant for our sample of companies.
  24Denmark has a narrower investment reserve and Norway none at all (See appendix
C). In general, Denmark has the most investor oriented system.


                                       30
    However, similar to France, Italy created a regulatory body to oversee
the Stock Exchange and listed companies. This body, known as CONSOB
(Commissions Nazionale per la Societe la Borsa), required listed companies
to apply International Accounting Standards as no domestic standards ori-
ented towards investor information existed. Prior to the recently approved
amendments, lAS allowed several options. Hence, it is likely that the finan-
cial reports even under LAS will closely mirror the legal entity statements
which are based on the tax conformity principle.

6.9 Spain
The Spanish system was also based on the French system but until the 1980s
the system was almost entirely tax driven. Spain incorporated the Fourth
and Seventh Directives in 1989 and 1990 so most companies will not meet
these new reporting requirements during our sample period.

6.10 Switzerland
Historically, the only legal obligation for Swiss companies has been to prepare
legal entity balance sheets and income statements. While many large com-
panies have provided additional information, historically there has been no
common approach by these companies. In the last few years there has been
a trend by Swiss Companies to adopt International Accounting Standards
although not always in a uniform manner.
    The tax system cannot be described in a concise manner as there is no
single federal tax rate and the federal taxes need not even be the most signif-
icant (see appendix C). There are canton, municipal and sometimes church
taxes applied to varying degrees. Furthermore, the tax rates are often based
on average income so taxes may be applicable to income in years after the
income is earned.




                                      31
Appendix B: Data Description
The data set we use is an 11-year (1982-1992) unbalanced panel of finns for 17
countries from the Global Vantage industrial database.25 This database con-
tains information on approximately 6,650 companies from 31 countries. Data
for most companies are available since 1982. Comprehensive balance sheet
and income statement data are provided. Definitions are standardized to
insure intra-company data consistency between different accounting periods,
and inter-company data consistency within and across countries. However,
Global Vantage does not adjust data for accounting differences. Instead, it
provides extensive additional information on relevant accounting standards,
data definitions, and available firm-specific disclosures to enable the user to
make whatever adjustments necessary. OECD member countries with more
than 20 firms reporting data are chosen for analysis. Unlike the Coinpustat
database, Global Vantage has relatively few firm entrants and exits, making
the data set nearly balanced.
    The variables used are defined as follows. To facilitate replication and
extension of our empirical results and to aid researchers in data construction
on this relatively unfamiliar dataset we provide the data item numbers in
parentheses after each variable. Cross investment is the sum of the change in
the net stock of tangible fixed assets (data item # 76) and depreciation (data
item 11).° A more precise estimate of depredation can be obtained (data
item # 12), but we choose the one above since most firms do not separately
report the more precise figure. The definition of economic depredation used
is the same as used in previous research with the Compustat database (see,
e.g., Cummins, Hassett, and Hubbard, 1993). The investment variable is
divided by the value of its own beginning-of-period capital stock. Output
is defined as net sales/turnover (data item # 1), and is also divided by the
value of its own beginning-of-period capital stock. The Euler equation model
we derived has a parsimonious specification so that the above variables are
the only ones we need construct from Global Vantage.
  2tSee Table 1 for a list of all the counties.
  26Deflning gross investment as the change in the gross stock of tangible fixed assets
(data item # 77) is not feasible since that data item is frequently not reported by firms,
or was not required to be reported by firms (e.g., German firms did not report the gross
stock of fixed assets until the KGB of 1985). There is no data item in Global Vantage
comparable to the capital expenditures data item in Compustat.


                                              32
    In addition to those variables above we construct several others to use in
the instrument set for econometric estimation. Operating income is defined
exactly as such (data item # 14). Net income is defined as income before
extraordinary items (data item # 32). Economists usually define cash flow
as the sum of net income and depreciation (defined above). This definition
is, at best, a coarse measure. The accounting literature stresses that better
measures are available. We experiment with an alternative definition of cash
flow derived from this literature. Alternative cash flow is defined as the sum
of net income, depreciation, deferred taxes (data item #180), transfers to
provisions (data item 182), gain (loss) on sale of fixed assets (data item
# 181), transfers to (from) reserves (data item # 22), the change in current
liabilities (data item 104), minus, the change in inventory (data item
66), and the change in accounts receivable (data item # 63). The efficacy of
this alternative measure was unclear in our empirical work; perhaps because
the usual definition of cash flow is only another measure of income (whereas
the alternative better measures free cash flow) or because the alternative
definition is available less frequently or subject to more serious measurement
error. Total income tax is defined exactly as such (data item # 23). These
variables are also divided by their beginning-of-period capital stocks. The
dividend payout rate is defined as the ratio of common dividends (data item
# 36) to operating income (defined above). Alternative definitions of the
payout ratio have no qualitative affect on the empirical results. We chose
the above definition because it limited the number of negative observations.
Total debt is defined as the sum of short-term debt (data item # 94) and
long-term debt (data item 106). The debt-to-asset ratio is defined as
total debt divided by the sum of the equity value of the firm and total
debt. The equity value of the finn is complicated to calculate in Global
Vantage. There is no one shares outstanding variable to match with one
stock market price variable. Instead, a separate database (called the issues
Me) contains market-related data items, which includes multiple issues with
multiple prices for firms in several countries (reflecting the differences across
countries in capital markets). The equity value of the firm is defined in the
standard manner (end-of-year stock price multiplied by stock outstanding)
when one issue exists.27 When more than one issue exists the value of each is
calculated in the standard manner and all the issue values are summed. The
 2tTbe issues file uses descriptors instead of data item numbers.


                                          33
firm's average interest rate is defined as the ratio of interest expense (data
item 15) to total debt. All variables are deflated by the country's GDP
deflator.
   Firm-specific depreciation rates are constructed using the method in Cum-
ruins, Hassett, and Hubbard, 1993. Past studies using foreign firm-level data
have relied on the one-digit SIC code depreciation rates constructed from
Hulten and Wykoff (1981) and capital stock weights.2' We feel that the Eu-
ler equation model requires the more precise firm-specific depredation rate,
and, that while the assumption of homogeneous capital stocks may be ap-
propriate for some very large countries, it is inadequate for our sample of 17
countries.
    The present value of tax savings from depreciation allowances is cén-
structed from those tax parameters following Salinger and Summers (1983).
The discount rate, fi, is defined as 1/(1+(1_r)*i_re), where i is the nominal
interest rate, calculated as firm's average interest rate. Alternatively, fixing
fi at values between 0.90 and 0.99 did not qualitatively affect our empirical
results. Finally, GDP deflators, and investment price deflators (i.e., the price
of capital goods) are from the OECD National Accounts tables.
    Global Vantage provides information particularly well suited to the model
derived in this paper. There are data that potentially allow precise identifi-
cation of the accounting information that we have hypothesized have real a!-
fects. We use two period descriptors for additional identification of the model
in our empirical work. Global Vantage provides a descriptor each period of
the firm's accounting standard. Most usefully, the data reflects a domestic
standard if a company omits a reference to a specific standard. When re-
ported the standards include: Domestic standards; Domestic standards in ac-
cordance with U.S. GAAP; Domestic standards generally in accordance with
OECD or International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) guidelines;
Domestic standards for parents and domestic subsidiaries, native country or
U.S. standards for overseas subsidiaries; Modified U.S. standards (Japanese
companies' financial statements translated into english); and, U.S. standards.
Another useful variable for our empirical analysis is the level of consolidation.
This period descriptor identifies whether a company's financial statements
represent consolidated or unconsolidated information. Applicable categories
identified are: Only domestic subsidiaries are consolidated; Fully consoli-
  23See, e.g., flayashi and Inoue, 1992.


                                           34
dated (parent company and subsidiary); Nonconsolidated holding company;
and, Nonconsolidated holding company (parent company only).
    This appendix concludes with several caveats which may help guide ap-
plied researchers using Global Vantage in the future. Global Vantage offers
a wealth of data that, in many ways, improves on more familiar firm-level
panel data sets such as Compustat, Datastream, and Value-Line. There are,
however, several negative features of the d.ataset. The dataset is split into
four different files: industrial, financial services, issues, and currency.29 The
financial services file is superior to the industrial file in coverage and detail,
reflecting the fact that it was complied after the industrial file. For example,
equipment and structures capital stock data are provided in the financial
services file but not in the industrial file. The biggest defect not easily over-
come is that there is no way to seeznlessly move between the industrial or
financial services file and the issues file because there is no common refer-
ence variable across files. The issues file is in-itself difficult to use because of
the multiple equity issues discussed above. Finally, perhaps the most subtle
and potentially important feature of the data is that the variables are scaled
within each country. For example, data are reported in billions of yen or
lira, and in thousands of pound sterling. Additionally, the scaling is not con-
sistent within country. For example, data for the British company BP are
reported in millions of pound sterling while most of the other companies in
the U.K. sample are reported in thousands of pound sterling. Failure to ac-
count for this reporting difference causes data to be incorrect at three orders
of magnitude with obvious consequences.
    The programs used for data extraction and construction, and for estima-
tion are available from the authors on request.




  "The currency file contaàs exchange rates and cross-rate tables for designated curren-
cia to facilitate cross-country analysis.

                                         .35
Appendix C: Tax Parameters
This appendix details the tax parameters we use and relevant features of each
country's tax code. It is divided into four sections. The first provides the
marginal corporate income tax rate, r. The second provides the investment
incentive (credit or deduction), k. These first two sections consist primarily
of two tables, annotated, where appropriate, to reflect particularly important
features of the country's tax code. For additional detail we refer the inter-
ested reader to Cnrnmins, Hassett, and Hubbard, (1994) which speciflca]iy
addresses the effects of tax reform on firm investment behavior. The next
two sections provide depreciation and inventory valuation rules. Neither one
of these sections of the tax code is easily or accurately summarized in a ta-
ble so we provide a detailed description for each country. Descriptions for
the U.S. are omitted (see, e.g., Auerbach, 1982, 1983; Hulten and Wykoff,
1981; Salinger and Summers, 1983; and Shoven and Bulow, 1975). While
depreciation and inventory valuation rules change much less frecpiently than
corporate tax rates and tax credits they do change over our sample period.
We will note particularly significant changes below but, again, we refer the
interested reader to Cummins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1994) for additional
detail.
    There are four data sources for this appendix. The primary source for
current tax law is the loose-leaf services of the International Bureau of Fiscal
Documentation (IBDF). The IBDF publishes guides to taxation in separate
services for Europe, Asia and the Pacific, and Canada. These are, respec-
tively, Guide to European Taxation: Volume II: The Taxation of Companies
in Europe, Taxes and Thvestj-nent in Asia and the Pacific: Part II: Countries,
and Taxes and Investment in Canada"° These services do not, in general,
contain historical detail necessary to construct a time-series of changes in
tax law. For that purpose, we use the IBDF's Tax News Service, which is a
weekly periodical containing every significant tax law change. Some of the
detail in the Tax News Service is contained in the IBDF's Annual Report
and in its European Tax Handbook.
   Two other sources are useful to validate and further illuminate the above
sources. Neither provide sufficient detail, or, in some cases, accurate in-
 301n addition, the IBOF also publishes guides to taxation in Africa, the Middle East,
China, Latin America, and the Caribbean.



                                         36
formation, on relevant tax parameters. The OECD's Taxing Profits in a
Global Economy: Domestic and International Issues, which tries to extend
the King and Fullerton (1984) methodology, provides an annex which con-
tains summaries of individual country's tax law. The summaries contain
broad detail on country's tax law but caution is advised. The data sources
are undocumented and several items were found to be incorrect. Coopers &
Lybrand's International Tax Summaries and International Accounting Sum-
maries provide concise and accurate yearly descriptions of country's tax law.
The volumes sometimes lack sufficient detail on depreciation and inventory
valuation rules and on the timing of tax changes.

Marginal Corporate Tax Rates
Table 1 reports the statutory marginal corporate income tax rates for the 17
countries in our sample from 1981—1992. Close attention must be paid to the
footnotes since no single rate completely summarizes the wide variation in
the countries' tax systems. Two regularities are obvious. Rates vary widely
and have steadily declined in nearly every country.

Investment Incentives
Table 2 reports the investment tax credits and deductions for the countries in
our sample. Interestingly, only a few countries provide broadbased statutory
investment incentives. However, all countries in our sample have investment
incentives for specific regions or industries, for certain types of business fred
investment, or for research and development which are not reported. These
special incentives tend to be extremely complex and, in many cases, they
cannot be summarized because they are essentially negotiated between the
taxpayer and tax authority.

Depreciation Rules3'
Australia
Depreciation of assets is calculated on the cost price and the useful life of
  3tUnless otherwise noted, assets may be revalued in conformity with the relevant tax
law.



                                         37
the assets (which before 1991 was estimated by the tax authority), which the
taxpayer estimates based upon the statutory definition. The tax authority
continues to publish recommended depreciation rates which the taxpayer may
elect over estimating useful life. Plant and machinery may be depreciated on
either a straight-line (SL) or declining-balance (DB) basis. In the absence of
a formal election for the SL method, the DB method is used. Most assets
acquired alter 1992 are depreciable by reference to a six-rate schedule, with
useful lives ranging from 3 to more than 30 years and DB rates ranging from
10% to 60%. SL rates are two-thirds of DB rates. Assets may be depreci-
ated at a lower rate at the option of the taxpayer. Assets with an effective
life of less than 3 years or low cost assets may be depreciated immediately.
Structures may be depreciated at 2.5% per year if construction commenced
after September, 1987, 4% per year if construction commenced between Au-
gust, 1984 and September, 1987, and 2.5% if construction commenced before
August, 1984. The period over which the depreciation may be claimed is
40 years for structures subject to the 2.5% rate and 25 years for structures
subject to the 4% rate.
Belgium
Depreciation of assets is calculated on the cost price and the useful life of the
assets, and is allowed as of the financial year in which they were acquired or
produced and must be applied every year. The law allows only SL and DB
methods. SL is the normal method. The depreciation periods and the corre-
sponding rates are normally fixed by agreement between the taxpayer and the
tax authority, although for certain assets the rates are set by administrative
ruling (e.g., commercial buildings 3%; industrial buildings 5%; machinery
and equipment 10% or 30%; and rolling stock 20%). DB is optional, as is a
combination of both methods if in a certain year the amount of depreciation
computed by applying DB is lower than that computed according to SL, then
a company can switch to the latter method. Accelerated depreciation (AD)
is available for certain assets based on administrative ruling (e.g., ships, and
scientific equipment).
Canada
The capital cost allowance system groups depreciable assets into various
classes (similar to the method used in the U.S.). Each class is depreciable at
a specific rate, generally on a DB basis. In the year of acquisition, only half
the normal rate may be claimed on that asset. The depreciation allowances
are elective, allowing the taxpayer to claim any desired amount (subject to

                                      38
the maximum). The following sets out some of the more common types of
depreciable assets with the applicable DB rates: structures 4%, machinery
and equipment 30%, and autos and computers 30%. Assets revaluation is
not allowed.
Denmark
SL depreciation for business structures is permitted. For most types of build-
ings the depreciation rate is 6% of cost during the first 10 years, and 2%
thereafter (a lower rate is applied to service buildings of 4% and 1%, and a
higher rate to building installations of 8% and 4%). Between 1982 and 1990,
the depreciable base was adjusted annually for inflation. For equipment DB
depreciation is allowed on a collective basis. The rate may be chosen by
the taxpayer but may not exceed 30% in any year. Tax depreciation is not
allowed for accounting purposes.
France
Depreciation is normally computed by the SL method. However, the law
provides for other methods, namely DB and AD. The SL màthod may be
applied without restriction. The rates are computed by dividing the expen-
diture by the estimated useful life of the asset as determined in accordance
with accepted business practice. Taxpayers may opt for a varying deprecia-
tion rate based on a different useful life estimation but this will be accepted
only if the difference is within 20% of customary practice. The DB method
is allowed on a more limited scale. It may not be applied to assets whose
useful life is less than 3 years nor to many classes of assets. The rate is
computed by multiplying the rate of SL depreciation by 1.5 if the useful life
is 3 or 4 years, by 2 if the life is 5 or 6 years, and by 2.5 if the life exceeds
6 years. AD in the form of an initial deduction is available for certain assets
(e.g., environmental protection equipment). Only limited asset revaluation
is permitted.
Germany
Systems of depreciation allowed by law are the SL, DB, and certain other
methods (e.g., sum-of-the-years' digits). A switch-over from DB to SL is
permitted, but not vice versa. The rates of depreciation for buildings are set
out in the law and for other assets in the official recommended tables (over
90 tables) which are issued by the various tax authorities. The taxpayer may
deviate from them in individual cases on reasonable grounds. For business
structures. the annual SL rate is 4%. The corresponding DB rates are, 10%
for the first 4 years, 5% for the following 3 years and 2.5% for the remaining 18

                                       39
years. For fixed assets a general table applies SL rates of 10% for machinery,
20% for office equipment, 10% for office furniture, 20% for computers, and
20% for motor vehicles, If the assets are depreciated according to DB the
annual rate is limited to 3 times the SL rate with an allowable maximum
of 30%. AD is allowed for certain special assets (e.g., those in development
areas or private hospitals) and if justified by excessive wear and tear. Assets
revaluation is not allowed.
Ireland
Depreciation is granted for structures and plant and equipment (which has a
relatively wide meaning). The SL method is typically used. Rates for princi-
pal depreciable assets are, 4% for industrial structures, 10% for commercial
structures, 10% for machinery and. equipment, 20% for motor vehicles (DB
method used), and 100% for research expenditure.
Italy
Depreciation of tangible assets is permitted on a SL basis. Depreciation is
determined by applying the coefficients established by the tax authority, re-
duced by half for the first fiscal year. These coefficients are established for
categories of assets based upon normal wear and tear in various productive
sectors (rates for structures vary from 3% to 7%, and for machinery and
equipment from 20% to 25%). AD is also allowed. In addition to normal
depreciation, the deductible amount may be increased by 200% in the year
in which the assets is acquired and in of the following two years. Moreover,
normal depreciation may always be increased in proportion to a more in-
tense use of the asset (intensive depreciation). The amount of depreciation
may be less than normal depreciation and the difference may be spread over
subsequent fiscal years. Only limited asset revaluation iá permitted.
Japan
The amount depreciable on assets per year is computed on the assumption
that their salvage value is 10% of the acquisition cost. However, companies
may claim depreciation until the residual value of the asset reaches 5% (i.e.,
up to 95% of acquisition costs). The statutory useful lives of assets are
prescribed by the tax authority. They range from 4 years (for motor vehicles)
to 65 years (for office buildings). Special depreciation is available for assets
subject to abnormal wear and tear and due to extraordinary circumstances.
AD is also available for designated assets and industries (e.g., environmental
protection equipment and ships). Initial year depreciation rates range from
8% to 30%, and further AD can follow. Asset revaluation is not allowed.

                                      40
Netherlands
Depreciation of assets is compulsory whether the company is profitable or not.
Assets with a low cost can be fully depreciated in the year of acquisition.
All systems of depreciation are permitted provided that the system is in
accordance with sound business practices and that it is consistently applied.
This means that changes in the system will not be allowed when a change is
made just for tax purposes. Depreciation is based on historic cost price, useful
life, aid the salvage value of the asset. No official guidelines for depreciation
exist. In practice, the rates are agreed upon between the taxpayer and the
tax authority.
New Zealand
A new depreciation regime became law in April, 1993. The pivotal differ-
ence between the old and new regime is that under the latter the taxpayer
has a statutory right to a deduction for depredation. Previous depredation
deductions were at the tax authority's discretion. The taxpayer may choose
SL or DB methods. The method may be changed from year to year. Depre-
ciation rates are calculated from a formula that accounts for acquisition cost,
market value, and useful life. The tax authority provides a very extensive
schedule of estimated useful lives (ranging from 4 years to 50 years), with
applicable DB and SL rates. Application for special rates may be made in
certain circumstances. Previously, the tax authority mandated choice of SL
or DB methods and depreciation rates.
Norway
The DB method of depreciation is mandatory. The 1992 tax reform has inilu-
enced the system of depredation by changing the division of business assets
into a smaller number of classes and by generally reducing the maximum
rates allowed. Depreciable assets are divided into eight classes (maximum
rates follow in parentheses): (1) office machines (30%), (2) goodwill (30%),
(3) motor vehicles (25%), (4) equipment (20%), (5) ships (20%), (6) aircraft
(20%), (7) industrial structures (5%), and (8) commercial structures (2%).
Assets in classes (1)—(4) are written down on a collective basis; classes (5)—(8)
are depreciated individually. AD for ships, aircraft, and certain structures
has been abolished as of 1992. Assets with an estimated life of less than 3
years and low cost assets may be depreciated immediately.
Spain
Depredation is allowed on all tangible and intangible fixed assets on the ba-
sis of their normal useful life. Depredation may be calculated by the SL

                                       41
method. In certain cases (e.g., industrial machinery and computers), the DB
method is permitted. Rates for depreciation are contained in official tables.
Examples of general maximum SL rates follow (with the minimum rate fol-
lowing in parentheses): Industrial structures 3% (2%), commercial structures
2% (1.33%), machinery 8% (5.6%), tools 20% (12.5%), office furniture 10%
(6.67%), computers 25% (16.7%), and motor vehicles 14% (9.1%). Assets
intensively used may be depreciated at a maximum rate increased by 33%
for each additional shift. Under the DB method, the annual depreciation
rate is increased by 50% (if the useful life is less then 5 years), by l00years)
or by 150% (if the useful life is 8 years or more). The tax authorities can
accept, at their discretion, special AD (or even free depreciation) for certain
assets and industries. Asset revaluation is not permitted.
Sweden
Machinery and equipment are normally depreciated by the DB method. The
maximum depreciation allowance is 30% of the aggregate book value of all
assets at the beginning of the tax year, plus the cost of assets acquired, less
the amount received for assets sold during the year. Should a SL depreciation
of 20% per year on all assets result in a lower book value in any year, the
annual depreciation may be increased correspondingly. if the taxpayer can
prove that the real value of machinery and equipment is lower then that
resulting from the above-mentioned depreciation methods, the depreciation
may be allowed in an amount resulting in the value. Assets with a useful life
not exceeding 3 years and low cost assets may be depreciated immediately.
For buildings, only the SL method is permitted. In general, depreciation is
based on cost and useful life. The rates vary between 1.5% and 5% per year
as agreed by the taxpayer and the tax authority.
Switzerland
The SL and DB methods are allowed but depreciation must conform to usual
business practice. Official guidelines for depreciation are published, but they
are not obligatory. In practice, depreciation rates vary among the cantons.
AD (up to 80%) is allowed in certain cantons. Assets revaluation is not
permitted.
U.K.
Industrial structures are eligible for 4% annual depreciation on the SL method.
There are no allowances for commercial structures. Plant and equipment
(which has a relatively wide meaning), are eligible for 25% annual deprecia-
tion on the DU method.

                                      42
Inventory Valuation32
Australia
For valuation of stock, the tax authority accepts average cost (AC), standard
cost (SC), specific identification (SI), and first-in-first-out (FIFO). Last-in-
first-out (LIFO) and base-stock methods are not allowed.
Belgium
The tax code does not contain special provisions for the valuation of stock.
The tax authority therefore requires that the stock must be valued at cost or
market value, whichever is lower. As for methods, AC, SI, FIFO, and LIFO
methods are accepted but the base-stock method is not.
Canada
Permissible inventory valuation methods include AC and FIFO. In some
circumstances, the tax authority will accept the SC method. The LIFO
method is not accepted.
Denmark
The AC, SI, FIFO, and SC methods are considered appropriate; LIFO is
acceptable but rarely used.
France
The FIFO and AC methods are usually used. The LIFO method is not
generally permitted except when used in consolidated financial statements.
Germany
From the assessment year 1990 LIFO is allowed. AC and SI are typical
methods, FIFO is not allowed unless it approximates actual physical flows.
Ireland
FIFO, AC, or any similar method is allowed; LIFO is not acceptable.
Italy
Any system of inventory valuation is permitted provided it is not less than
if the LIFO method is used.
Japan
For valuation of stock, the tax authority accepts AC, SI, LIFO and FIFO.
The method should be applied consistently and not distort the computation
of the income of a corporation.
Netherlands
  32Unless otherwise noted, stock is valued at the lower of cost or maxket value.


                                           43
Under the sound business practice principle many systems of inventory val-
uation are allowed (e.g., LIFO, FIFO, or base-stock methods). The system
must be applied consistently.
New Zealand
The tax authority accepts the AC, SC, or FIFO methods of inventory valu-
ation. LIFO and base-stock methods are not allowed.
Norway
The FIFO method must be used for inventory valuation.
Spain
Accepted methods for inventory valuation are AC (in practice, the gener-
ally applied method) and FIFO. The LIFO and base-stock methods are not
accepted for tax purposes.
Sweden
Prior to 1991, inventories were frequently carried at an amount lower than
the maximum amount permitted by the lower of cost or market value, due
to tax incentives. In determining inventory valuation, FIFO method should
be applied.
Switzerland
Acceptable inventory valuation methods include, AC, SC, and FIFO. LIFO
is not permitted.
U.K.
FIFO, AC, or any similar method is allowed. LIFO is not acceptable.




                                   44
                         Char I


                         U.S.



   IRS              Regulating Body         FASB — SEC




  4,                                             4,
Consolidated                                 Consolidated
 Tax Return                               Financial Statement




                    PAREN'r COMPANY
                                      /
               /4         4

     SUBSIDIARY A    SUBSIDIARY B     SUBSIDIARY C
         Owi 2


    GERMANY




                            umgckehnc
                          Massgcblichkths
                              —p




          4           1
    Massgcbflchkths
        —'zip


• Commercial Code
 Ministry of Justice
                               Table 1: Marginal Corporate Income Tax Rates


    Country             1981     1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992

    Australia4           .46      .46       .46      .46      .46      .49      .49       .39      .39      .39        .39        .39
    Belgium6             .48      .45       .45      .45      .45      .45      .43       .43      .43      .41        .39        .39
    Canada              .483      .483     .472      .46     .483      .483     .464     .391     .391     .391        .391      .391
    Denmark              .40      .40       .40      .40      .50       .50      .50      .50      .50      .40        .38        .38
    Fr4ncet              .50      .50       .50      .50         .50    .45      .45      .42      .39      .37        .34        .34
    Germany1             .56      .56       .56      .56         .56    .56      .56      .56      .56      .50        .519      .519
    Irlandd              .45      .50       .50      .50         .50    .50      .50      .47      .43      .43         .40       .40
    Italf               .363      .413     .413     .464 .464          .464     .464     .464     .464 .464            .478      .552
    Japanc&              .42      .42       .42     .433     .433      .433      .42      .42      .40     .376        .384      .384
    Netherlands          .48      .48       .48      .43      .43      .42       .42      .42      .35      .35         .35      .35
    New Zealand          .45      .45       .45      .45      .45      .48       .48      .28      .33      .33         .33      .33
    Norwa?              .508      .508     .508     .508     .508      .508     .508     .508     .508     .508        .508      .28
    Spain                .33      .33       .35      .35      .35       .35     .35       .35      .35      .35         .35      .35
    Sweden'              .58      .58       .58      .52         .52   .52      .52       .52      .52      .40         .30      .30
    Switzerland1        .098     .098      .098     .098     .098      .098     .098     .098     .098     .098        .098      .098
    U.K.                 .52      .52       .52      .45         .40   .35      .35       .35      .35      .35        .33       .33
    U.S.t                .46      .46       .46      .46         .46   .46      .40       .34      .34      .34        .34       .34


Nota:
    TJndi.tributed profit. were taxed at the rate o(.S0 until an izupistation ay.tem cam, into operation July. 19*7.
o   Exca. profit. uztax at the rate of .04 applied until 1932.
  Addition.! corporate income tax levied by nate and/or municipal goverumons which i. rebat.dor 1'nfrJ. at the fader.! leveL
'Corporate income taxi. levied as a lower rate on manufacturing firm..
• Split-rae system, which applied a higher tax rate to di.tnbuted profit.. we. in effect (ron ISIS until 1992.
/ Dinnbuted profit. taxed at a lower rate of .35.
I Disuibtated profit. were taxed aLa .10 Iowa rate until 1988. In 1939, diattibuled profit. we.. lazed at a .05 lower ret.. Tb.
.plit.rate eyaton wa. permanently aboli.hed in 1990.
               corporate income taxes wer, levied at municipal level and for taz equaliaatlon ftmt renlting in a            rate
of .23 which wa not deductible Iron. th. federal rate of .278. Effective 1992, the federal corporate income tax waa           "'d, th.
municipal rate waa lowered to .11, end the taz equalization (unt rate wa. inae..ed to .17.
'Additional corporate income tea levied at municipal level, which we. -'-1- at federal lewd, w.a aboliabad In 1998.
  Federal, canton.! an4 municipal corporate income tue., which err typically partially '-""" .ga&net ona.aaother, a.. levied
at graduated rate, band on the proportion .1 taxable profit. to eqttity capitaL Top federal rate reported.
                                         Table 2: Investment Incentives°

II
     Country           1981     1982     1983      1984     1985     1986     1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992

                     1.18        J8       .18       .18      .18       0        0        0         0        0        0
     Belgium'           .05      .05      .05      .05       .05      .05      .05      .05       .05      .04      .03       0
     Cana4a             .07      .07      .07      .07       .07      .07      .05      .03        0        0        0        0
     Denma.rke           0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0
     Franceb            .10      .15       0        0         0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0
     Germany             0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0
     Ireland             0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0
     Italy               0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0
     Japan               0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0
     Netherlands        .12      .12      .12     .125      .125     .125     .125       0        0         0        0        0
     NewZeajand          0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0        0        0         0        0
     Norway              0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0        0        0         0        0
     Spain9             .15      .15      .15      .15       .15      .15      .15      .10      .05      .05       .05
     Sweden"
     Switzerland
                        .10
                         0
                                 .10
                                  0
                                          .10
                                           0
                                                    0
                                                    0
                                                              0
                                                              0
                                                                       0
                                                                       0
                                                                                0.0
                                                                                0        0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                             .05
                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                              0
     U.K.                0        0        0        0         0        0        0        0        0        0         0        0
     U.S.d              .1       .08      .08      .08       .08      .08       0        0        0        0         0        0

Motes:
• Au 17 countrie, have mve.tmens incentive, for speci& region, or ind*s.lxie., for certain type. of 1.         fixed invatinat,
for research and development which are not reported.
• Investment incentive was, deduction.
• investment incentive was a deduction. Before 1982, the incentive was an invesimant reserve.
'investment intensive was an FTC. in Canada, regional and some asset ITCa were retained at rednád ratas after 1983.
• A Umiled investment reserve I. available. See Footnote h below foe a daaiption.
/ investment incentive was an FTC (called "Wa"). In 1984. the vasiewa W rates were '"" Into ons                          rMa before
1984 tha rata reported is chat for most fixed sasets. Beginning In 1990, an Investment dednetion is available .1 degaS,, rats
ranging from .18 to .02 For relatively call scale investment; no dediaction i allowed after tha oat-off total Is reached.
• investment incentive is an FTC. In 1985. a atatutory rate for fixed saaeta was instituted before 1985 the ret. r'sp.etad Is that
for the typical irsvestmertt grant.
k Investment incentive was an irsve,tment
                                           allowance. Until t9go, an investmans reserve prop'sm was also availabla. It allowed oam-
panies to sat aside and deduct, at their own disaetion. up to 50% of their pr..tax profits for fsatun invutmentaia a eoiantceydieal
fund. The benefit of 'be fund was that it could be used for immediat, depreciation of new assets acquired.
                                        Table 3: Sample Statistics4

                    Country             14t;. fsa ash/low. AthL
                                                   —       as,etsp       Firms (1991)

                    Australia            .17     2.58     .26     .25        120
                                        (.21)   (1.93)   (.57)   (.21)
                    Belgium              .27     3.95     .48     .39        51
                                        (.23)   (1.85)   (.55)   (.25)
                    Canada               .18     2.18     .21     .34        299
                                        (.19)   (2.02)   (.41)   (.25)
                    Denmark              .23     3.70     .30     .36        64
                                        (.19)   (1.85)   (.32)   (.24)
                    France               .29     4.40     .48    .29         201
                                        (.19)   (2.06)   (.51)   (.20)
                    Germany              .30     4.23     .40    .23         237
                                        (.19)   (1.97)   (.34)   (.22)
                    Ireland              .17     3.35     .29     .27        45
                                        (.22)   (1.96)   (.62)   (.22)
                    Italy                .24     3.25     .44    .34         79
                                        (.22) (1.87)     (.48)   (.23)
                    Japan                .24   4.02       .31    .26         336
                                        (.16) (1.84)     (.23)   (.19)
                    Netherlands          .21     3.61     .38    .33         101
                                        (.16) (1.89)     (.38)   (.25)
                    New Zealand          .18     3.20     .24     .37        21
                                        (.24)   (1.85)   (.37)   (.22)
                    Norway               .22     2.81     .19    .50         45
                                        (.21) (1.85)     (.32)   (.22)
                    Spain                .12   2.03       .24     .31        75
                                        (.19) (1.92)     (.33)   (.27)
                    Sweden               .22   3.67       .31    .49         68
                                        (.20) (1.84)     (.32)   (.25)
                    Switzerland     I    .24     3.41     .38    .40         107
                                        (.19) (1.78)     (.40)   (.23)
                    U.K.                 .21   3.71       .43    .21         598
                                        (.22) (2.00)     (.48)   (.18)
                    U.S.                 .21   3.28       .32    .30        2486
                                        (.20) (2.14)     (.66)   (.25)


Standard deviations are in parentbcsa below tEe mans.
                       Table 4: Standard Euler Equation Estimates

                                         Investment
                                       Adjustment Cost Test of Overidentifying
                                          Paraxncter         Restrictions
                                                                      .43

              One Book Countries              1.21                    22.23
                                             (.499)                   (.039)

              Two Book Countries.             2.32                    19.65
                                             (.711)                   (.104)



The standard Euler equation sets a1 equal to zero in Equation (15).

One book countries are: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden,
and Switzerland. Two book countries are: Australia, Canada, Ireland, Netherlands, New Zealand,
United Kingdom, and United States.

Standard errors, in parentheses, are computed from a heteroscedastic-consistent matrix. Significance
levels of Hansen's test of overidentifying restrictions are in parentheses beneath the statistic.

The one book sample contains 1890 firms.        The two-book sample contains 4420
firms. The instrument set used for estimation includes:                (f),      (f)..' (i0_,'
(*). (ca.shflou,/K)_2, (ca.shflow/K),_3, (sales/K)s_s, (saks/K)....3, (depreciation/K),_,,
(dividends/operatingincome),_2, (dcbt/asscts)1_2, (interest/K),_2, (taxes/K),.4, (k + rz),_3,
(1 + rz)_2.
                             Table 5: Euler Equation Estimates


                                Investment          Accounting
                             Adjustment Cost Adjustment Cost Test of Overidentifying
                               Parameter        Parameter          Restrictions
                                    a0                  a1



      One Book Countries           .739               -.696                   45.33
                                  (.351)              (.489)               (9.O5x1O)
      Two Book Countries           .998                -4.84                  77.09
                                  (.265)              (1.36)               (1.48x10'1)


One book countries are: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden,
and Switzerland. Two book countries are Australia, Canada, Ireland, Netherlands, New Zealand,
United Kingdom, and United States.

Standard errors, in parentheses, are comptaed from a heteroscedastic-consistent matrix. Signikance
levels of Hansen's test of overidexitifying restrictions are in parentheses beneath the statistic.

The sample SIZeS and instrument set are the same as reported in Table 1.
       Table 6: Euler Equation Estimates (One Book Country.Sub-Samples)


                                          Investment          Accounting
                                      Adjustment Cost Adjustment Cost Test of Overidentifying
                                        Parameter        Pirameter           Restrictions
                                            a0               Q.-



 Domestic Accounting Standards                .520                  3.64                  1721
 and Domestic Consolidation                  (.219)                (1.02)                (.122)

 Domestic Accounting Standards                1.91                  -7.55                  56.17
 in accordance with U.S. GAAP                (.683)                (4.52)              (1.12x10_T)



One boo]c countries are: Belgium, Denmark, }ance, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden,
and Switzerland.

Standard errors, in parentheses, are computed from a heteroscedastic-cousistent matrix. Significance
levels of Hansen's test of overidentifying restrictions are in parentheses beneath the statistic.

The first sub-sample contains 790 firms. The second sub-sample contains 381 firms. The instrument
set used for estimation is the same as reported in Table 1.
