NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OUTWARD DIRECF INVESTMENT
AND THE U.S. ECONOMY

Robert E. Lipsey

Working Paper No. 4691

NATIONAL BUREAU CE ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1994

This paper was originally prepared for the NBER conference of International Taxation held in
Cambridge, January 14-15, 1994. It is a part of the NBER program in International Trade
and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Reseaivh.

NBER Working Paper #4691
March 1994
OUTWARD DIRECT INVESTMENT
AND THE U.S. ECONOMY

ABSTRACT
Investment in production outside the United States is a method by which U.S. finns raise

their shares in foreign markets and defend them against foreign rivals from the host countries and

from other countries. The investing firms are exploiting their firm-specific assets such as
proprietary technologies, patents, or skills in advertising or marketing, and the opportunity to

produce abroad raises the value of these assets and encourages firms' investment in them by
extending the range of markets and the length of time over which they can be exploited.
Overseas production has contributed to the ability of American multinationals to retain
world market shares in the face of the long-term decline in the share of the U.S. as a country and

short-term changes such as exchange rate fluctuations. It has performed the same functions for
Swedish firms and, more recently, for Japanese firms.

Within U.S. multinationals, those with higher shares of their production overseas have
higher employment at home relative to home production. Foreign production appears to require
larger numbers of employees in headquarters activities such as R&D and supervision.

Robert E. Lipsey
Queens College and Graduate Center
CUNY
Rushing, NY 11367
and NBER

Lipsey, Robert E.

Outward Direct Investment and the U.S. Economy
Robert E. Lipsey

Any judgjeent about the wisdom of tax changes that raise or lower the

profitability of American firms' foreign operations, must involve some
judgment as to the desirability of increasing or decreasing the extent of

these operations. The purpose of this paper is to review past research on the
effects of U.S. firms' overseas activities on the U.S. economy and to report
some further analysis with more recent data.
The first question to be answered is what we mean by the U.S. economy.

The ambiguity of the term troubles appraisals of many policies. One way of
looking at it is to ask whether the object is to maximize Cross National

Product or Cross Domestic Product. The former is an ownership-based concept
that includes the profits from overseas operations of U.S. firms and other
income earned overseas by U.S. residents, but excludes profits earned in the

United States by foreign residents. The latter is a geographically-based
concept that covers production that takes place in the United States,

regardless of ownership. It thus excludes profits and other income earned
overseas (from overseas production), but includes all income earned in the

U.S. (from production in the U.S.) by both U.S. and foreign residents. One
way in which the distinction surfaces in policy discussions is over whether
various types of assistance or preferences are to be applied to U.S. -

controlled

firms, regardless of where they operate, or to firms producing in

the U.S., whether domestically' or foreign-owned.

-2I will try to construe the issue broadly. That means I will consider
effects of outward foreign direct investment on the labor employed in the U.S.
by the investing companies and also those on the companies themselves,
including their stockholders, and more generally on the trade and other
aspects of the U.S. economy.
Various studies of the behavior of multinational firms, including some

of my own, view the firms as facing fixed or relatively fixed, worldwide
markets for their products and making decisions mainly about how to supply

that demand most profitably. The firm is pictured as choosing whether to
supply the demand by exporting from the U.S., by producing abroad, or by
licensing technology, patents, or other assets owned by the firm to foreign
licensees who would produce outside the United States.
The assumption of a fixed market for a firm tends to bias conclusions
toward finding that foreign production by U.S. firms substitutes for

production in the United States. An alternative view is that production
abroad is often mainly a way of enlarging a fin's share of foreign markets,

or of preventing or slowing a decline in that share. The inadequacy of the
fixed market assumption is obvious in any attempt to examine the impact of
direct investment in service industries, since the nature of most of these
industries precludes substantial exporting trot one country to another and

market share is almost completely contingent on production at the site of

consumption. While this is most obvious for service industries, it applies
equally to the service component of manufacturing industries, a major part of
the final value of sales of manufactured products.

-3The Growth of Internationalized Production
The establishment of foreign operations by American firms, and the
establishment by any country's firms of production, including sales and
service activities, outside the home country, is often referred to as the

internationalization of production. In order to understand the process, and
the reasons behind it, it is useful to ask whether it is uniquely or mainly an

American

phenomenon or is, under

some circumstances common to foreign firms as

well.

The studies of Cleona Lewis (1938) and Mira Wilkins

(1989) on foreign

investment in the United States make it clear that direct investment and

internationalized production were not an American invention. When the United
States lagged technologically in many fields, foreign fins found it
profitable to develop marketing and production facilities in the United States

to exploit their superior sophistication. The industrial distributions of
these operations from different countries clearly reflected some specific
technological advantages, such as those of Great Britain in various aspects of
the textile industry and of Germany in chemicals.

What has been unique about the United States is that direct investment
has been the characteristic form of U.S. foreign investment as far back as
data exist, even when the U.S. was still, on balance, importing capital

(Lipsey, 1988). That fact, and the lists of early U.S. investors (Lewis,
1938, Southard, 1931, Wilkins, 1970), concentrated among the leading firms in
various U.S. industries, emphasize the association of direct foreign
investment not with large aggregate supplies of financial or physical capital
but with the possession of firm-specific assets, knowledge and techniques,
sometimes reflected in patents or brand names, that are mobile within firms,

-4even across national borders, but not among firms.
Not only was direct investment the dominant form of U.S. outward
investment, but the U.S. was the dominant source of the world's direct

investment for a long period. The U.S. share of the world's stock of outward
direct investment was over half around 1970, with the U.K., the next most
important investor, far behind the U.S. at about 15-17 per cent and no other

single country the source of more than 6 per cent. The share of the developed
countries outward direct investment flows originating in the U.S. was well
over half in the l960s and still over 40 per cent in the 1970s. In the late
1980s, however, less than 20 per cent of the world's outward flows originated
in the U.S. and, in a reversal of roles1 the U.S. absorbed over 40 per cent of

the flows from other countries (Lipsey, 1993). In the early l990s, Japan's
role as a source of direct investment flows and the U.S. role as a recipient

both declined sharply. In 1992, the U.S. was again the largest supplier, at
about a quarter of the OECD total, and was not a significant net recipient.
withdrawals and losses equaling or exceeding gross inflows (OECD, 1993, Table I).
The heyday of outward U.S. direct investment outflows, in the 1960s and
at least part of the l910s, involved a considerable internationalization of
U.S. firms' production, in the sense that higher and higher proportions of the
production they controlled took place abroad, larger proportions of their
employees were outside the United States1 and larger shares of their assets

came to be located abroad. Since then, however, the degree of
internationalization of U.S. companies has stabilized or declined, as if the
firms had overshot some desirable level and found it desirable to retreat
somewhat.

The peak in the extent of internationalization in this sense for the

.5U.S. economy as a whole was reached at some time in the late l9lOs (we cannot

date it more closely because comprehensive data exist only for occasional

foreign investment census years). For example, employment in all overseas
affiliates of U.S. firms was almost 11 per cent of total U.S. non-agricultural

employment in 1977, but only 7 1/2 per cent in 1989. Plant and equipment
expenditures by majority-owned foreign affiliates were over 15 per cent of
domestic U.S. plant and equipment expenditures in U.S. dollars in 1974-76 but
fell below 10 per cent from 1984 to 1988 and have not recovered their earlier

levels. Since the exchange value of the U.S. dollar was low in the late
l980s, the decline in real terms was even larger.
U.S. manufacturing firms have long been much more internationalized than
firms in other industries, with their overseas employment reaching about a
quarter of domestic manufacturing employment in 1977 (from only 10 per cent in

1957) and then declining only slightlyto about 22 per cent in the late 1980s.
Overseas plant and equipment expenditures in manufacturing reached over 20 per

cent of domestic expenditure in dollar terms for a few years in the 1970s. It
fell almost to 10 per cent when the exchange value of the dollar was near its
peak, and then recovered, but so far not to earlier peak levels.
Within those U.S. firms that are multinational, the changes have not
been so sharp, partly because of the importance of manufacturing firms in the

universe of multinationals. However, the time pattern has been similar since
1977 (there is little parent information available before that).
Within manufacturing multinationals, foreign affiliate net sales, a
crude measure of production, were larger in the late l980s relative to parent
sales than in 1977 and affiliate employment was close to the earlier levels

relative to parent employment. Thus, this group of fi±ms has not exhibited

-6the shift away from internationalized production that has characterized u.s.
multinationals in general or the U.S. manufacturing sector as a whole. The
affiliate share of production may even have increased (though it is too

volatile to provide a quick judgment that there is an upward trend), and the
affiliate share of employment has not changed much since 1917.
The strongest case for increased internationalization in U.S.

manufacturing is in exports. Affiliates accounted for less than a third of
U.S. multinationals' worldwide exports in 1966, but for more than half in the

second half of the l980s. Their importance relative to total manufactured
exports from the U.S. also more than doubled over this period.
The contrast between the changes in internationalization within U.S.
parents and those for the U.S. economy as a whole reflects the declining role
of multinational parents within the U.S. economy. Parent employment in the

U.S. fell from 28 per cent of U.S.

non-agricultural employment in 1977 to

barely over 20 per cent in the late l98Os, not because employment was moved
overseas, where affiliate employment was also declining, but because these
multinationals were declining in importance as part of the U.S. economy. This
decline was not simply a reflection of the decline of manufacturing's share of

U.S. employment, but took place within manufacturing as well, where
manufacturing parent firms' share of total domestic

manufacturing employment

fell from over 60 per cent in 1977 to a little over 50 per cent in 1988-90.
Thus, the shrinking of many large, established U.S. manufacturing firms
affected both their domestic and their

foreign employment. The many anecdotes

about the shifting of domestic employment abroad do not seem to add up to much
in the aggregate,

especially for the U.S. economy as a whole.

There is one reason why it is as yet difficult to judge whether the

-7apparent retreat of U.S. firms from foreign operations during the 1980s is a

long term trend. The enormous shift in direct investment toward the United
States by foreign firms, to the point where the U.S. absorbed an unprecedented
share of the rest of the world's outflow of direct investment, suggests that
the United States was an exceptionally attractive location for investment

during this period. If that was the case, it might have been particularly
attractive, relative to locations in other countries, to American firms as
well, as to foreign fins, and that attractiveness would show up as a retreat
from internationalization for U.S. firms while it tended to increase the
degree of internationalization of foreign firms.
One reason for this apparent retreat of American firms from overseas
activity may have been the growth of efficient and aggressive foreign

competitors. The levels of internationalization of the German and Japanese
economies were much lower than that of the United States in the 1970s. Since
then, the internationalization pioneered on a large scale by American firms,
has been copied by European and Japanese firms, and now even by firms from
developing countries.
How widespread is internationalized production in the sense of firms

producing outside their home countries? And is it expanding in the world

economy as a whole? Two opposite influences are at work. Internationalization is most prevalent in manufacturing and least common in services. The
rising powers in manufacturing, such as Japan and some of the developing
countries of Southeast Asia, are increasing the degree to which their

companies carry out their manufacturing outside the home countries. At the
same time, the share of manufacturing in most of the world's economies is

declining, and that of services is increasing. The net result of these two

-8forces, and of the opposite directions of changes in the U.S. and in other
countries, is that the share of internationalized production in world
after increasing greatly in the twenty years after 195?, perhaps

output,

tripling, has

grown little since then. The share of Japanese, Cerman, and Swedish firms'
internationalized production has been rising, but that rise has been offset by
the fall in the much larger U.S. share. Internationalized

production by firms

from other countries has almost certainly been rising, but is

starting from

too low a level to have much impact on the total. The share of such
production in worldwide CDP may have been in the range of 10-15 per cent in

1990. The U.S. companies accounted for half or more of this total, and if the
rise from the recent low point in 1988 continues, the world will again be
moving toward a growing importance of internationalized production.
A less equivocal story can be told about the share of production outside

home countries in world trade in manufactured goods. That share is clearly
over 10 per cent and seems to have risen even since 1977, mainly because of
the growth of Japanese affiliate exports, but also because U.S. affiliates
have held on to or even increased their shares

in manufactures, if not

since 1977. Thus, world trade

necessarily aggregate world production or employment,

is increasingly made up of exports from internationalized production.
What can we conclude from these trends in the extent of internationa-

lized production? The practice of

producing outside the home country is well

entrenched, especially in manufacturing, not only for U.S. -based companies

but, increasingly, for fins based in other countries. It is increasingly
common for firms in at least the more successful

developing countries, such as

Korea and Taiwan. Presuniably it is an avenue for increasing profitability,
Probably through increasing market shares that provide economies of scale in

-9the exploitation of the firm's assets, such as patents, other technological
assets, reputation, and more generally, skills in production and marketing.

Overseas Production and Exoort Market Shares in Manufacturinc
The share of the United States, as a country, in world export markets
for manufactured goods has been declining over most of the last

quarter

century. In 1990, after some recovery from the low point in 1987 resulting
partly from the earlier period of high exchange values for the dollar, the

share was about 12 per cent, 30 per cent below the share in 1966. U.s.

U.S. Share of
World Exports of Manufacturesb
1966

17.1

1977

13.2

1982

14.6

1985

13.4

1986

11.9

1987

11.3

1988

12.1

1989

12.8

1990

12.1

•I{arket Economy

LAS defined in BEA

investment

data, including

manufactured foods, but excluding petroleum and coal
products.

Source: United Nations trade tapes

- 10

multinational

-

firms, exporting from the U.S. and from their overseas

production, held on to their shares much more successfully. gy 1985, when the
U.S. had already lost more than 20 per cent of its share of twenty years
earlier, U.S. multinationals had increased their share of world exports.

U.S. Manufacturing Multinationals' Share of
tJorld Exports of Manufacturesb

1966

17.6

1977

17.4

1982

17.4

1985

18.1

1988

16.1

1990

16.1

Market Economy. blncluding manufactured foods;

excluding petroleum and

coal products

Source: United Nations trade tapes and Lipsey (1993b).
They then lost some of that share in the next two years, but ended up in 1990
with a share only 9 per cent below that of 1966.

How was this relative

stability of shares achieved? Performance was very different for the parent
fins, exporting from the United States, and the affiliates, exporting from
other countries.

Until at least 1985, the parent firms lost less of their world export
shares than did non.multinationaj U.S.

fins. Then the parent share fell

- 11

-

Shares in
World Exports of
Manufactures
MajorityU.S.
Owned
Parents
Affiliates

Affiliate
Shares of

Multinationals'
Exports

1966

11.0

6.6

37.5

1977

9.1

8.3

47.9

1982

9.3

8.1

46.3

1985

9.6

8.7

48.2

1986

8.2

8.4

50.8

1987

7.5

8.2

52.2

1988

7.7

8.3

51.9

1989

8.0

8.4

51.1

1990

7.3

8.7

54.3

For definitions, see previous tables.

Source: United Nations trade tapes and Lipsey (1993b).

sharply, more rapidly than that of other U.S. firms. In the meantime, more
and more of the multinationals' exports were supplied by their overseas

affiliates, more than half since 1986, and at a record high proportion in

1990. Thus one way the U.S. multinationals kept their export markets, as the
U.S. lost competitiveness in their industries, was by supplying these markets
increasingly from overseas operations, a strategy obviously not available to

non-multinational U.S. firms. (The affiliate shares included in this
calculation are only shares of export trade and exclude the much more
important affiliate sales in their host country markets).

This rise in the importance of exporting from foreign affiliates was not

- 12

-

unique to the United States. Even in Japan, an extremely successful exporter
from home-country production, exports by overseas affiliates rose from 8 per

cent of exports from Japan in 1974 to 14 per cent or more in 1986-89. Japan's
share of world manufactured exports reached a peak in 1986, shortly after the

high point in the exchange value of the dollar, and then declined from 1986 to

Japanese Manufactured Exports as Per Cent of
World I4anufactured Exports

1965

6.8

1970

8.7

1974

10.5

1977

11.1

1982

12.1

1986

13.8

1987

12.5

1988

12.4

1989

12.0

1990

10.9

For definitions, see previous tables.
Source: United Nations trade tapes

1990. As the country's export share declined, the share of overseas
manufacturing affiliates in their firms' total exports grew from 1986 to 1988
and almost certainly after that as well. Thus, in Japan, as in the U.S.,
foreign operations seemed to play a defensive role in retaining export

- 13

-

Japanese Manufacturing

Affiliate

Exports as Per Cent of

Firms' (Jorldwide Exports

1974

7.4

1977

7.6

1980

9.0

1983

8.5

1986

8.6

1988

11.7

For definitions, see previous tables.

Source: Lipsey (l993b)

markets for firms under adverse conditions for parent exporting.
Sweden underwent large losses in trade shares similar to those of the

United States, although not quite as large. Swedish multinational firms, over
the same period, increased their shares, although the increase was all

concentrated in 1965 to 1970. This increase or stability in the
multinationals' shares was accompanied by, or possibly accomplished by,

- 14

-

Swedish Manufactured Exports and Exports by
Swedish Multinationals as Per Cent of
World Manufactured Exports

Swedish

Sweden

Multinationals

1965

3.0

1.6

1970

2.9

2.0

1974

2.9

2.0

1978

2.4

1.8

1986

2.3

1.8

Source: United Nations trade tapes and

Swedenborg, Johansson-Crahn,

and iCInnwall (1988).

a large shift in the sources of export production, with the

portion of exports

sold by foreign affiliates rising from a tenth of the multinationals' total
exports in 1965 to almost a quarter In 1986.

Exports by Foreign Production Affiliates
as Per Cent of Worldwide Exports

of Swedish Multinationals

1965

10.4

1970

12.5

1974

15.9

1978

19.3

1986

24.3

Source: Swedenborg, Johansson..crahn and Kinwall. (1988).

- 15

-

These three countries are the only ones that collect fairly
comprehensive information on the trade of their multinationals' overseas

affiliates. The data suggest that one major role for overseas production has
been that of retaining market shares when home country economic conditions and
exchange rate changes made the home countries less suitable locations for
export production.

An alternative interpretation of the data1 discussed below, might be
that it was the growth of affiliate production and exports that caused the

reduction in home-country exports. However, home country shares can be
explained to a large extent by home-country price and exchange-rate
movements, not a likely path for influences stemming from decisions to produce
abroad.

Does Foreiwn Production Substitute for Home-Country ExDorts?
Most antagonism against foreign direct investment has historically been
toward inward investment, on the ground that it displaced home-country firms

in home markets. However, there has also been opposition to outward
investment, often led by labor organizations, on the ground that outward
investment "exported jobs," partly by producing products to be imported to the
home-country market but mostly by replacing home-country exports by overseas

production. In the United States, the campaign against outward direct
investment reached a peak with the effort to pass the Eurke-Hartke bill in the
l960s, the Voluntary Program of Capital Restraints from 1965 through 1967, and

then with the compulsory OFDI regulations. These came into effect in 1968 as
an effort to "improve" the U.S. balance of payments, and were specifically

directed against the outflow of capital for foreign direct investment. The
government restrictions were ceilings on the export of funds for foreign

- 16

direct

-

investment, particularly to Western Europe, but were not aimed at the

expansion of U.S. firms' foreign operations if the expansion was financed from
foreign sources (Fiero, 1969). With the defeat of Burke-Hartice and the demise
of the OFtI in 1974, the campaign has faded, although the Afl-CIO continues to
take a din view of outward investment in its annual statements on economic
policy.

Attempts to measure the effects of overseas production on home-country
exports face the problem of defining substitution and of defining a believable

counterfactual case. Exports from Japan's recently established or recently
enlarged operations in Southeast Asia may "replace" exports that formerly came
from Japan, but few would claim, after the rise in the exchange value of the
Yen, that they are replacing exports that could now be made from Japan. A
cross-section analysis does not necessarily escape the problem; it may be Just
those more labor-intensive industries that could no longer export from the
home country that establish production abroad.

A tong line of studies has attempted to find evidence of a relationship
between overseas production and home-country exports. One of the earliest
U.S. studies, by Gary Hufbauer and F.M. Adler (1968), identified the crucial
importance of the assumptions used to the interpretation of any relationships
found, and a similar wide range of possible effects was reported in a major
U.S. Tariff cormsission (1973) study a few years later. The Reddaway reports

(1967) and (1968) explicitly assumed that in the absence of British foreign

affiliates, their markets would have been supplied not by British exports but
by local or other foreign suppliers.

The preponderance of evidence from empirical studies points to either no
effect, or a positive effect, of overseas production in a host-country market

- 17 on home-country exports to that market. Lipsey and Weiss (1981), in a crosssection analysis examining exports in 14 manufacturing industries by the U.S.
and by 13 other developed countries, to many destinations, found that the
level of production by U.S. -owned affiliates in a country was positively

related to U.S. exports in that industry to that country and, in some markets,

negatively related to exports by other developed countries. On the other
hand, the presence of affiliates frost countries other than the U.S. was

positively related to those countries' exports to that host country and, where
there was any significant relationship, negatively related to U.S. exports to
the country. iii other words, the presence of, and production by. a home
country's affiliates in a host country tended to attract exports from that

home country and to discourage exports to that host country from other

countries. Thus the main substitution that seemed to take place was of
country A's host country production in country C for country B's exports to
country C, and of country B's host-country production in country C for country
A's exports to country C.

In these calculations, the variables for U.S. -owned

and foreign-owned affiliate activity were superimposed on a set of standard
gravity equations including host-country income or aggregate imports, distance

from hone to host country, and trade bloc membership. The estimated trade
position in the absence of direct investment is represented by the value of
exports when the home-country affiliate activity variable is set at zero while
the other variables, including foreign country affiliate variables, are at

their actual levels. Since the dependent variables in these equations are
total U.S. and other country exports, rather than the exports by parents, they
take account of any displacements of one firm's exports to a country by the
production in that country by affiliates of another firm from the same home

- 18

-

country.
Each dollar of overseas affiliate production

by U.S. affiliates in these

cross-section equations added, on' average across the

statistically significant

coefficients, about $.].6 to U.S. exports. Most of the coefficients were below

$.20. The coefficients for displacements of other

countries' exports were not

so consistently significant and varied widely, but whenever coefficients for
both U.S. and other countries' exports were

significant, the displacement of

other countries' exports was larger than the addition to 11.5. exports. That
is a reasonable result since the addition to U.S. exports to a host country is
the net balance of positive and negative effects of U.S. -owned production
there, while the effect on other countries exports to that host country are

generally only negative, with no offsetting gains. One
negative relation to foreign countries'

exception

to this

exports would be the case in which the

U.S. parent has affiliates in the other countries that are potential suppliers
to the host country. Thus a U.S. -owned

auto assembly plant in, say, the

Netherlands might give rise to exports of auto components from the same

company's German affiliate rather than, or in addition to, exports from the
parent in the U.S.
If a U.S. -owned affiliate in

one country exported to other countries, it

could displace U.S. exports to those countries without the offsetting effect
of exports of components and other
displacement would be missed in the

inputs to the manufacturing process. That
equations just described, and Lipsey and

Weiss (1984) therefore examined the effects of aggregate affiliate
production
abroad on the total
exports to all destinations of the cross-section of parent
firms. The results were that
the displacement of U.S. exports to third

countries if it existed, was

not large enough to offset the positive effects

- 19

-

on parent exports to host countries; that is, in each industry, firms that
produced mote abroad also exported more in the aggregate.
It is natural, to think that exports by affiliates to third countries

would necessarily displace parent exports to them, but that is not necessarily

the case. A plane, truck, or car assembled or even produced completely by a
U.S. affiliate in country A and exported to country B could later give rise to
the export of parts, accessories, and related products from the U.S. to
country B.

An examination of the same question for a later period (Blomatrom,
Lipsey, and

Kulchycky,

1988). using the direct investment census for 1982

(U.S. Department of Commerce, 1985) produced more ambiguous results. The
later study lacked the information on affiliates of non-U.S. firms that had
been part of the earlier study, but did include a distinction between
affiliate production for export and affiliate production for local sale in the
host country, and also included some equations for production by minorityowned U.S. affiliates, not available earlier.
When there was any statistically significant relation at all (a minority
of industries), affiliate export sales, or production for export from the
affiliate's host country, were consistently associated with higher U.S.

exports to that host country. That is to be expected, since substitution of
affiliate production for U.S. exports, if there was any, would take place

outside the host country, in the third country, and would be unobserved. For
sales within the host country, most coefficients were positive but there were
more negative (5 out of 30 industries) than positive coefficients among those
that were statistically significant at the S per cent level.
When data for minority-owned affiliates in the host countries, including

- 20

-

those 50 per cent owned, were added to the U.S. export equations, these
affiliate operations were found to be associated with higher levels of U.S.

exports to the host countries. In addition, the inclusion of these
affiliates' operations had a strong effect on the coefficients for production
by majority-owned affiliates, moving many from showing negative effects

on

U.S. exports to positive effects.
The role of minority-owned affiliates is puzzling and we can only

speculate on the explanation. One factor is that they are very unevenly
distributed across countries, being, for example, almost the only form of

direct investment in Japan and quite important there. We have speculated that
minority ownership has this strong positive relationship to U.S.
because it may be resorted to in countries or industries where

would

exports

the U.S. parent

otherwise be barred from a market. These may be markets with more

stringent barriers to imports, or where barriers to imports are associated
with barriers to majority ownership of affiliates. Minority-owned affiliates
may, in such cases, be a price for market entry more often than in the case of
majority ownership.

Sweden

is the only country outside the United States for which
individual firm data are available that permit an analysis similar to
carried out for the U.S.

A series of Swedish outward direct

those

investment

surveys was carried out by the Industriens Utredningsinstitut (1131), of
Stockholm, and analyzed in Swedenborg (1973). (1.979),

for the 1986 survey, in Swedenborg,

(1982). and (1985), and,

Johansson-Grahn, and Rtnnwall (1988).

They examined the effects of overseas

production by Swedish firms on Swedish

parent exports. Because of the small number of Swedish parent firms, it was
net possible to run separate

equations for individual industries, particularly

- 21

industries

-

as narrowly defined as in the U.S. studies. However, the Swedish

calculations included many firm characteristics that, in effect, incorporated
industry characteristics, and also separated companies based on Swedish
resource industries.

The Swedish studies included an effort to solve the problem of the
possible simultaneity of direct investment production decisions and homecountry export decisions by a 2SLS approach in which the first stage estimated

the level of production by Swedish affiliates in each host country. The
second stage equation used the estimated production levels from the first
stage, among other variables, in the explanation of parent exports, to each

host country. These equations were applied to each of the survey years and in
a pooled time series-cross section analysis. Swedenborg concluded (1985, p.
235) that OLS estimations, such as those reported above for the U.S.
overstated the positive effects of affiliate production on parent exports.
Her own estimate, from the 2SLS equations, was that each dollar of Swedish
affiliate production added about $.lO to Swedish parent exports, not very far

from the U.S. results mentioned above. From a breakdown of parent exports by
type she concluded that only 2 per cent of the sales provided by foreign
production would be replaced by parent exports if foreign production were
abandoned.

A somewhat different analysis was performed by Elomstrom, Lipsey, and
Kulchycky for 1978, using the same data source as for Swedenborg's studies but
in more aggregated form and with each industry's total manufactured exports

from Sweden, rather than only parent exports, as the dependent variable. All
the coefficients on affiliate sales were positive and, in fact, larger in a

2SLS analysis than in the OLS equations. There was no evidence in the

- 22

-

comparison with Swedenborg's estimates for parent exports, that the positive
effect

on Swedish parent exports came at the expense of exports by other

Swedish firms.

It seems more likely, although the equations are too different

from Swedenborg's to produce a definitive conclusion, that affiliate
production encouraged not only parent exports to the affiliates' host
countries, but also exports to the same countries by other Swedish firms.
An examination of changes over time, between 1970 and 1978, from the

source of data, showed similar results: the greater the increase in
Swedish affiliate production in a country, the greater the growth of exports
same

of

manufactures from Sweden to that host

country. A single exception was

metal manufacturing, where both a high 1970 level of Swedish-controlled
production and high growth in that production in 1970-78 were associated with
reductions in Swedish exports.
A. recent JUl report (Svensson, 1993) challenges the earlier findings for

Sweden using some of the same data plus the latest, still

unpublished, survey

for 1990. The report concludes that an increase in affiliate production for
local host country sale of $1 reduces parent exports by $.14 and that
affiliate production for export to third countries reduces parent exports by
over $.40 for each dollar of such affiliate production.

The apparent contradiction of earlier results is attributed by the
author to his accounting for the effect of affiliate production for export on

parent sales to third countries. However, such effects were included in the
analysis of total parent exports by U.S. firms in Lipsey and Weiss (1984)
without producing any similar negative effects.

The major source of the

difference from earlier results seems to be the formulation of the equations,

which normalizes across firms by the total worldwide sales of the

- 23

multinational

-

firm rather than by parent sales, as in Swedenborg's earlier

studies. The difference is never pointed out and this normalization is
described as a way of eliminating heteroscedasticity. In fact, the result is
that what is being tested is the relationship between the share of worldwide
sales provided by production carried out in a host country and the share of
home-country (parent) exports to that country in the firm's worldwide sales.
It is virtually a certainty that these coefficients for host country
production shares will be negative, but those negative coefficients can be
interpreted as a negative influence on the absolute value of home-country

exports only on an odd implied assumption that is never discussed. The
assumption is that in the absence of foreign production the total size of the
multinational firm's worldwide sales or production would be the same

as

with

foreign production. If Electrolux did not produce in many countries it would

have the same worldwide sales as it has with foreign production. That
assumption would seem to guarantee a negative coefficient for foreign
production on home-country exports, but is not a plausible assumption on which
to rest a study.

On the whole, then, it would seem reasonable to conclude that production
outside the U.S. by U.S. based firms has little effect on exports from the
U.S.

by parent firms or by all U.S.

fins as a whole, and that to the extent

there is an effect, it is more likely to be positive than negative. This
relationship is probably a characteristic of other countries' multinationals

as well. One reason this is true is that foreign production is undertaken to
expand or retain a parent firm's foreign markets and that parent exports are

incidental to these decisions. As foreign affiliates mature, their imports
from their parents become marginal to their total activity, and fluctuate with

- 24

-

exchange race changes and other developments, but there is no indication that
the absolute level of imports from the home country declines over long
periods.

Foreini Production and Home-Country labor

Aside from the relation of overseas production to exports from the

United States, such production could affect the overall demand hr labor
within the United States by parent firms, and the demand for labor of
different types, even if total production in the United States were not

affected, For example, the demand for labor by parent firms might be reduced
if more labor-intensive products were allocated to multinationals'

foreign

operations, while more capital-intensive operations were allocated to U.S.

operations. Similarly, the demand for unskilled labor by parents might
decline if parts of the production process or products

requiring highly

skilled labor were allocated to the U.S. while processes or products requiring
relatively low skills were allocated to overseas affiliates.
The opportunity for multinational firms to engage in such geographical
allocation of their production presumably requires that the product be

tradable. If a fin's output must be consumed where it is produced, as in
many service industries, production will take place where the goods and
services are sold and will respond to host-country demand and to host-country

costs. There could still be differences among production locations in capital
intensity and skill intensity. These might reflect the

elasticity of

substitution between capital and labor or between labor of different skills if
there are significant differences in factor prices, but these should affect
the affiliates' operations rather than those of the parents. More important,
there could still be effects of affiliate operations on parent capital or

- 25

skill

-

intensity if the needs for certain typically central functions, such as

coordination, management, and research and development, were affected by
affiliates' operations.

In this analysis, the level of home country (parent) production is taken
as given and the question is whether, within this fixed level of home
production, the composition of parent production is affected by the parent

fin's foreign production activity in such a way as to alter the parent firm's
demand for labor and for more skilled, as compared with less skilled, labor.
One sign that more labor-intensive activities were being allocated to
foreign affiliates or that production methods were being changed in response
to differences in factor prices would be a lower capital intensity in
affiliate production relative to parent production and a lower capital

intensity in low-income countries than in high-income countries. The data on
net property, plant, and equipment per worker from the latest U.S. outward
investment census indicate that in manufacturing as a whole, the physical

capital intensity of production in developed countries by all affiliates of
manufacturing parents was about 80 per cent of that in parents in the United

States. The capital intensity of manufacturing affiliates in developing
countries was only 42 per cent of that in developed countries.

In contrast,

in a broadly defined services group, including all industries except
manufacturing, petroleum, agriculture, mining, and transportation,
communication, and public utilities, the physical capital intensity of

affiliates was higher than that of their parents in the United States. And
for affiliates in developing countries outside of those in manufacturing and
petroleum, physical capital intensity was higher than for affiliates in the
developed countries (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1993, Tables 11.68, 11.813,

- 26

II.G4,

ILGI1, ILL.1, and TLP1).

-

Of course, some of the difference in these

aggregate comparisons nay rest on differences in industry composition not

related to responses to factor price differences at all. However, it is hard
to avoid the impression that manufacturing firms adapt affiliate production to
differences in factor prices to a much larger extent than service industry
firms do.

A much more thorough investigation of whether multinational fins
adapted their factor proportions to relative factor prices (Lipsey, Kravis,

and Roldan, 1982) concluded that these fins did use more labor-intensive
methods of production, as measured by property, plant, and equipment per

worker, in low-wage countries. The form that the adaptation took could have
been selecting labor-intensive sub-industries for production in low-wage
countries, or selecting labor-intensive production processes for such

production, selecting small-scale operations for which only labor-intensive
methods of production were available, or by operating in a labor-intensive

way, whatever technologies was selected. These relationships were visible not
only within industries but also within individual firms, and for Swedish as
well as American multinationals.

Judging fron these aggregate data, manufacturing firms were more
responsive to factor price differences in allocating their direct investment

activity than were service industry firms. The reason could be simply a
higher elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in manufacturing
than in services, or it could be that the tradability of manufactured products

makes them more suitable for the allocation of, for example, labor-intensive

activities to labor abundant, cheap-labor countries. In the former case, of
higher elasticity of substitution in manufacturing, there should not be any

- 27

effect

-

of overseas production on parent labor intensity. In the latter

case,

of allocation of activities in response to factor prices, larger overseas
operations should produce less employment in the U.S. relative to sales (lower
labor intensity of production).
The predominance of evidence for individual manufacturing firms and
their affiliates in six industry groups in the 1982 investment census was that
higher overseas production was associated with lower employment at home, given

the level of parent production (Kravis and Lipsey, 1988). That was the case
for all manufacturing fins as a group and within most of the six major
industry groups. The only exceptions were that sales by majority-owned
affiliates in electrical machinery and by minority-owned affiliates in nonelectrical machinery were positively related te parent employment1 for any
level of parent production.
Some calculations from the latest outward investment census, for 1989,
suggest a similar relationship, as in equation I:
(1)

PEMP

—

1,234

÷

6.14 PUS

(5.0) (58.1)

.77 ANS

-

—

.867

(5.9)

where:

PEMP —

Parent employment

PNS — Parent net sales (sales less imports from
affiliates),
ANS —

in $ million

Affiliate net sales (sales less imports from the
U.S.),

in $

million

Each million dollars of affiliate production (as proxied by affiliate net
sales), gave rise to a loss of almost one parent employee, given the level of
the parent's production.

- 28

-

If we separate net sates of affiliates into those of manufacturing and
non-manufacturing affiliates, we find that the negative relationship comes
from the manufacturing production; each million dollars of manufacturing
affiliate production subtracts about 1.4 workers from parent employment while
each million dollars of non-manufacturing affiliate production adds 1.2 parent
employees (equation 2).

(2) PEMP —

1.160

6.16

+

(4.7) (58.7)

PNS

-

1.38 MANS
(7.6)

+

1.21 NMANS

—

.870

(2.8)

where:
—

MANS
NMANS

—

Manufacturing

affiliate net sales

Nonmanufacturing affiliate net sales

These equations assume that the impact on parent employment is related
to the absolute value of affiliate production: an addition of a million
dollars of affiliate production has the same impact on parent employment

whether the affiliates are one tenth the parent's size, in the aggregate, or
twice the parent's size.

The same calculations can be performed within the major manufacturing
industry groups, reducing the influence of inter-industry differences. Across
industries, any relation between parent labor intensity and foreign operations

is more likely to represent an effect of labor intensity on the tendency to
produce abroad than of foreign production on domestic labor intensity.

The parent employment level equations for major industry groups are

summarized in Table 1, Within the major industry groups, the relationships
are mixed. In transportation equipment, the group with the largest affiliate
sales, the relation is negative; each million dollars of affiliate net sales
is associated with parents having five fewer employees)- In the next largest

- 29

industry

-

in terms of affiliate sales, machinery, except electrical, each

million dollars of affiliate sales adds one employee to the parent rolls (the

story is similar in the other, much smaller, electrical machinery group). And
in the other major investing industry group, chemicals, there is no relation
to parent employment.
If we separate the affiliates into manufacturing and sales affiliates,

we see that the total affiliate sales coefficients are dominated by those for
manufacturing affiliates, again positive in the two machinery groups and
negative in transportation equipment.
On the whole, these equations for absolute levels of parent employment

are inconclusive, with a mixture of positive and negative relations. We would
not conclude from these results that there is any clear effect of affiliate

production on aggregate parent employment, given the level of parent
production.
A different view of tho effect of overseas production on parent labor

intensity is provided by relating employment per dollar of net parent sales -

a measure of labor intensity - to

the ratio of overseas (affiliate) to

domestic (parent) production, as in equation 3. Virtually none of the
variation in parent employment per dollar of output is explained by the

(3) £&1 — 9.45
PNS

(6.3)

+

1.53
(1.1)

6
PNS

F — .000

equation. The statisttcally insignificant coefficient suggests a positive
relationship, with a one percentage point increase in the ratio of overseas
production to home production associated with a one and a half percentage

point increase in the ratio of parent employment to sales. Such a positive
relation might occur if affiliate production gave rise to needs for

- 30

supervisory,

-

research, or other types of auxiliary employment in headquarters

operations. The addition of parent net sales as a variable, on the theory
that larger parent firms might be either more efficient or more bureaucratic
than smaller ones, did not reveal any effect of parent size.

A distinction between manufacturing and non-manufacturing affiliates
pointed to the former as having no impact on parent labor intensity and the
latter close to statistical significance at the 5 per cent level, but still a
negligible degree of explanation of the variance in parent employment per
dollar of production (equation 4).

(4) Zth
PNS

—

-

(8.1)

.0003
(1.0)

PNS +

.66 MANS
(.4)

+

6.48

—.001

NMANS

(1.8)

Within the six major industry groups, the evidence points to a positive
impact of foreign affiliate production, and particularly foreign manufacturing
affiliate production, on parent employment per dollar of production (Table 2).

The only statistically significant coefficients are in the two machinery
groups, and also for manufacturing production in the food industry. Thus,
from these calculations, we see no evidence of more capital intensive
activities at home from an allocation of labor-intensive activities to

affiliates. More foreign affiliate production, particularly more
manufacturing production, seems to lead to more parent employment in the U.S.

relative to ILS. production. Most likely this is supervisory or other
headquarters employment, but we have no evidence for this conjecture.

The

corresponding equation for parent employment in all service
industries combined, from the 1982 data, showed much larger coefficients
for

manufacturing, negative for majority-owned affiliate sales and

than

positive

- 31

for

-

sales of minority-owned affiliates. However, the equations for individual

service industries produced mixed results: half the significant coefficients
for majority-owned affiliate sales were positive and half

negative. For most

industries, no effect was visible, and only one coefficient for

minority-owned

affiliates was statistically significant. Durable-goods wholesale trade and
insurance were the two service industries in which

foreign affiliate sales

were positively related to parent employment per dollar of parent sales, and
nondurable goods wholesaling and engineering, the two

with

negative

relationships (Kravis and Lipsey, 1988).
One problem with interpreting the data for some service

industries,

particularly those in finance, is that the location of production is hard

to

define. Part of the sales attributed to a foreign affiliate on the books of
the company for tax or related reasons

may involve activity actually carried

out in the United States. However, banking and insurance activities for hostcountry customers, in contrast to that for international customers such

U.S. multinationals, are

without

likely to require

any substitution for domestic

as

both host-country employment,

U.S. employment, and also some

or service employment in the U.S. parent firm. It is this likely
effect, and the impact on multinational firm profits, that is the motivation
behind the insistence of the United States on including
service industry entry
supervisory

rules

in the Uruguay round of CArl negotiations,

A rough estimate can be made of the effect
into the insurance industry in various countries.

of changes in rules for entry
Cross-country regressions

of U.S. insurance affiliate sales (premium values) in various countries

against income and various country characteristics including the severity of
restrictions on entry by foreign finns, suggested that a shift by all, host

- 32

countries

-

to the most liberal regulation regimes would double the sales

(premium values) of life insurance by U.S. -owned affiliates and increase the

sales of nonlife insurance by as much as a third. From the equation for the
relation of insurance parent employment to affiliate sales in icravis and

Lipsey (1988) it can then be estimated that parent employment in the United
States would increase by something in the neighborhood of 10 per tent.

Aside from effects on the parent firms' level of employment, the extent
of foreign operations might also affect the composition of parent employment

in the U.S. and the demand and wages for different skills. To the extent that
parent firms in manufacturing can allocate activities of different skill
levels to different locations to serve worldwide markets, we might expect that
operations intensive in low-skilled labor would be allocated to foreign
affiliates, especially those in countries where low-skilled labor is cheap,
and that high-skill functions would tend to be concentrated in the United
States or, possibly, in other highly developed countries.

Two types of evidence might shed light on this possibility. One is
simply the allocation of activities within U.S. multinationals. Another is
the degree to which a larger share of production carried out abroad is
associated with a higher level of skill in a firm's U.S. labor force.

The data collected on employment include very little on the

characteristics of the parent or affiliate labor forces. One of the few bits
of information is of the proportion of employees engaged in R&D activities,

and another is the average compensation of employees, as a rough indicator of
skill levels.

The data on R&D employment emphasize the concentration of R&D activity
in parent companies:

- 33

-

Employment in R&D as Per Cent of Total EmploymentS 1989
Parentsa

Affiljatesb

Manufacturing

5.46

2.42

Petroleum & coal products

374

.66

Wholesale trade

1.82

1.15

Computer & data processing services

8.94

1.05

Communication

2.52

1.01

& public utilities

aAll nonbank parents of nonbank affiliates

bjorityo.,ed affiliates, by industry of affiliate

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce (1993), Tables 11.21 and III.C2.

The share
affiliates

in

of parent employment in

R&D is more than twice that in

almost every major industry group. It would be more appropriate

to compare parents with their own affiliates, but those data are not
published.

Thus, many of the affiliates in

wholesale trade are subsidiaries

of manufacturing parents, and including them in the manufacturing sector would

heighten the contrast between parents and affiliates in both manufacturing and

wholesale trade. Judging by the data on R&D expenditures, there is a further
allocation of R&D activities between affiliates in developed and developing

countries, with much higher R&D

intensity

in the former group (Lipsey,

Blomstrom. and Kravis, 1990).
An indication of responses to the relative price of skilled as compared
with unskilled labor was provided by data for a cross-section of Swedish firms

and their affiliates. Although the definition of skilled and unskilled labor
was a crude one (salaried vs. wage workers) and only a small portion of the

- 34

variation

-

in skill composition was explained, there did seem to be a

consistent relationship in which more skill-intensive activities were

allocated to countries where the price of skilled labor was lower relative to
that of unskilled labor.

Within U.S. multinational firms, the average level of compensation per
worker, as a crude indicator of average skill levels, can be related to the
extent of production in majority-owned affiliates (Kravis and Lipsey, 1988).

In manufacturing, the association is weak. The !s are low and are
significant at the 5 per cent level only for total manufacturing and for the

food industry. In both cases, the share of assets overseas explained more of
parent compensation levels than the share of production. The only
coefficients that are statistically significant at the S per cent level are
positive ones for affiliate production shares in the same industries (Appendix

Table 5). If parent output and sales by minority-owned and majority-owned
affiliates in absolute terms are used to explain parent compensation, a little

better explanation is reached, but only parent output and minority affiliate
output are ever statistically significant, and the coefficients are always
positive (Table 1).

Thus the general impression is that if there is any

influence of foreign operations it is a tendency toward higher skill levels at
home.

Among service industries, the share of majority-owned affiliates in
production produced significant Ws only for wholesale trade in nondurable
goods, for all services, and for business services (Appendix Table 5).

Adding

the other variables produced little improvement in the degree of explanation,
but the few significant coefficients for affiliate production were positive.

On the whole, we can say that in both manufacturing and service

- 35

industries

-

the effect of foreign operations on the average skill levels in

parent companies, if any, was to raise them, but the effect was not

strong and

not universal across industries.
Foreign and Domestic Investment as Comoecitors for Funds

One channel by which a decision by a finn to invest in foreign
production could affect investment in domestic production in the financial

one. The mechanism that would explain such an interdependence or interaction

would presumably imply an upward sloping supply function for the fin's
external finance, so that investments in different locations compete for

investment funds. It is a channel that would escape the notice of most
analyses that take the level of production in each location as given, or as
determined only by demand and costs of production in each location.

Studies of this question by Herring and Willett (1913), and, to some
extent, by Severn (1972), and Noorzoy (1980), found mostly positive

relationships over time between domestic and foreign investment. Such
relationships, derived mainly from aggregate data, could reflect common
fluctuations

or trends in demand rather than any interdependence.

A study

by Stevens and Lipsey (1992). based on individual firm plant and

equipment expenditure data running for 15 to 20 year periods between the 1950s

and the l970s, attempted to disentangle these effects. Although only seven
fins' data were complete enough to be analyzed, the results were fairly
consistent in suggesting that there was such interdependence. A one per cent
exogenous rise in foreign demand or in a finn's overseas output was estimated
to reduce the parent firm's U.S. fixed investment by amounts ranging from .3
to .8 per cent in most of the firms.

This is a tentative finding based on a small number of firms in a period

of expansion of U.S. firms' foreign production. It would be interesting to

- 36

test

-

the same model over the period of contracting or stagnant overseas

production by U.S. firms and also on larger numbers of firms or on industry
aggregates.

In any case, the possibility of this type of competition between foreign
and domestic fixed investment is worth further investigation.
Conclusions

Many

-

of the analyses of the effects of outward direct investment

reviewed here implicitly assume that differences among firms and industries in
various characteristics can be at least partly explained by differences in the
degree to which they operate abroad. These same characteristics are also used
to explain the propensity of firms and industries to operate abroad. The
explanation of the existence of direct investment and foreign production is
centered around the idea that firms possess individual firm-specific assets,

such as technologies, or patents, or skills in advertising or marketing, that

can be exploited most profitably by producing in many markets. These assets
are mobile across international borders but not among firms, and firms cannot
realize their value by selling them to other firms or by renting them to other
firms by licensing.

The opportunity to exploit these firm-specific assets via direct
investment adds to the incentive to acquire them. If R&D intensity and human
capital intensity are the strongest explanations of the worldwide trade shares
of

U.S. multinationals (Kravis and Lipsey, 1992), and possibly of their shares

in world production as well, a restriction on direct investment would reduce
the value of investment in such assets and therefore reduce firms' investment
in them.

If much of foreign direct investment is defensive, as suggested

earlier, it may make investment in firm-specific assets more profitable by

- 37
extending

-

the length of time over which they can be exploited, a suggestion

made many years ago by Vernon (1966).

While firms from different countries tend to possess different firm
comparative advantages, the leading firns in each country tend to

internationalize their production. With the long-term decline in costs of
international travel and communication, the costs of controlling widespread
production must be declining, and firms from most of the countries in the
world are increasing the extent to which they produce outside their hone

countries. With that fact as background, it seems unlikely that the decline
in internationalization of American firms' production will go much further and
more likely that it will be reversed.
The availability of foreign production locations appears to have

contributed a great deal to the ability of American multinational firms to
retain their market shares in the face of declines in the market share of the
United States as a country, The salle seems to be true for the trade shares of

firms from other countries and this flexibility applies not only to

softening

the effects of long term national declines in export shares and in comparative
advantage in individual industries, but also those of short-term events such
as large changes in exchange rates.
The frequently expressed fear that American multinationals have been, in

some sense, "exporting jobs" by substituting foreign production for American

production has very little empirical support. For one thing, overseas
employment and fixed investment have been for the most part, declining
relative to domestic employment and fixed investment for ten or fifteen yeers.

And U.S. fines that produce more abroad than others tend also to export more

in general and to the countries where the foreign production takes place. The

- 38

-

same relationship is evident for firms based in Sweden, the only other country

collecting similar data on multinational parents and affiliates. Overseas
production has much more to do with contesting market shares than with finding
low-cost production locations, although the latter is also a motivation.
Within multinational firms, the higher the share of overseas operations
in the total production of the multinational, the higher the ratio of home

employment to home production more often than not. A possible explanation is

that a larger share of foreign production requires a larger number of
headquarters employees such as R&D staff and supervisory personnel whose

contribution to output
relationship

production

the

is not confined to the fin's domestic production. The

is not unambiguous, since higher absolute

(rather than relative)

abroad is more often associated with lower home employment, given

level of home production, a finding we at one time interpreted as implying

an allocation of more capital-intensive parts of total production to the
United States and of more labor-intensive parts to affiliates, especially

those in developing countries. The interpretation that it is technical
activities and management that are allocated to home operations is reinforced
by the fact that higher proportions of foreign activity are associated with
higher average compensation at home.
On the whole, the evidence suggests that the effect of overseas
production on the home-country labor market involves the composition of a
firm's employment at home rather than the total amount of its home employment.

That change in composition is mainly a shift toward more managerial and
technical employment, much like the effects of increasing trade and other
aspects of the evolution of the American economy.

- 39

-

Lipsey,

Robert E.

Footnotes

I. There may be an inter-industry effect here; the group includes two very
different industries, motor vehicles and equipment and other transportation

equipment, mainly aircraft. The motor vehicle industry accounts for almost
all the foreign affiliate sales, while the other transportation equipment
industry accounts for note than half the parent employment.

- 40

-

Lipsey,

Robert E.

References

Blomstrom, Magnus, Robert E. Lipsey. and Ksenia Kulchycky. 1988. "U.S. and
Swedish Direct Investment and Exports," in Robert E. Baldwin, Ed., Trade

Policy Issues and Emoirical Analysis. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 259-297.
Fiero, Charles E.

1969.

Statement by Charles E. Fiero, Director, Office of

Foreign Direct Investments, U.S. Department of Commerce, before the
Subcommittee on International Exchange and Payments of the Joint
Economic Committee," January 15.

Herring, Richard, and Thomas D. Wiliett. 1973. "The Relationship between
U.S. Investment at Home and Abroad," Rivista Internazionale di Scienze
Economiche e Cotnerciali, 20. pp. 72-80.

Hufbauer, Gary C., and F.M. Adler. 1968. Overseas Manufacturing Investment
and the Balance of Payments, Tax Policy Research Study No. 1, U.S.
Washington, D.C.: Treasury Department.

Kravis, Irving B., and Robert E. Lipsey. 1988. "The Effect of Multinational
Firms' Foreign Operations on Their Domestic Employment," NBER Working
Paper 2760, November.

_________________ and _______________ .

1992.

"Sources of Competitiveness

of the United States and of its Multinational Firms," Review o
Economics and Statistics, Vol. LXXIV, tao. 2. May, pp. 193-201.

Lewis, Cleona. 1933. America's Stake in International Investments,
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

- 41
Lipsey,

Robert E.

-

1988. "Changing Patterns of International Investment in

and by the United States," in Martin Feldstein, Ed.

•

The U.S, in the

World Economy. Chicago1 IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 475-545.

________________

199]a.

"Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S.: Changes

over Three Decades," in Kenneth M. Froot, Ed., Foreign Direct

Investment. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 113-170.
_________________

1993b.

________________

Magnus Blomstrom, and Irving B. Kravis. 1990. "R&D by

"The Transnationalization of Economic Activity"

Multinational Fins and Host Country Exports, in Robert E. Evenson and
Gustav Ranis, Eds, Science and Technoloey: Lessons for Development
Policy. Boulder and San Francisco: Ijestview Press, pp. 271-300.

________________

Irving

B. Kravis, and Romualdo A Roldan. 1982. "Do

Multinational Firms Adapt Factor Proportions to Relative Factor Prices?"
in Anne 0. Krueger, Ed., Trade and Employment in Develppin2 Countries:

Factor Supply and Substitution. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 215-255.

________________

and Merle Yahr Weiss. 1981. "Foreign Production and

Exports in Manufacturing Industries." Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. LXIII, No. 4, November, pp. 488-494.

_______________

and Merle Yahr Weiss. 1984. "Foreign Production and

Exports of Individual Fims" Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
66, No. 2, May, pp. 304-308.

Noorzoy, M.S. 1980. "Flows of Direct Investment and Their Effects on U.S.
Domestic Investment," Economic Letters, 5, pp. 311-317.

Organisation For Economic Cooperation and Development 1993. International
Direct Investment Statistics Yearbook; 1993, Paris, OECD.

- 42

-

Reddaway, ¶.1.E., in collaboration with LO.N. Perkins, S.J. Potter, and C.T.
Taylor. 1967. Effects of U.K. Direct Investment Overseas: An Interim
Report) Cambridge University, Dept. of Applied Economics, Occasional
-

Paper 12.

Reddaway, LB., in collaboration with 5.3. Potter and C.T. Taylor. 1968.
Effects of U.K. Direct Investment Overseas, Final Report, University of
Cambridge Department of Applied Economics, Occasional Papers: 15,
Cambridge.

Severn, Alan. 1972. "Investment and Financial Behavior of American Direct
Investors in Manufacturing, in Fritz Machiup. Walter Salant, and Loris
Tarshis, Eds., The International Mobility and Movement of Capital. New
York: National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 361-396.

Southard, Frank A., Jr. 1931. American Industry in Europe. Boston & New
York: Houghton Miff lin Co.

Svensson, Roger. 1993. Production in Forei2n Affiliates: Effects on Home
Country ExDorts and Modes of Entry. Stockholm: Industriens
Utredningsinstitut.

Swedenborg, Birgitta. 1913. Den svenska industrins investerin2ar i utlandet.
Stockholm: Industriens Utredningsinstitut.

___________________

1979.

The Multinational Oterations of Swedish Firms. An

Analysis of Deterainants and Effects. Stockholm: Industriens
Utredningsinstitut.

___________________

1982.

Svensk Industri i Utlandet: En Analys av

Drivkratteroch Effekter. Stockholm: Industriens Utredningsinstitut.

- 43
___________________

1985.

-

'Sweden, in John Dunning, Ed. •

th!ltinational

Enterprises. Economic Structure, and International Competitiveness.
London: John Wiley and Sons, pp. 217-248.

__________________ Coran Johansson-Crahn, and Mats Kinnwall. 1988, Q

$venska Industrins Utlandsjnvesterinfar 1960-1986. Stockholm:
lndustriens Utredningsinstitut.

U.S. Department of Commerce. 1985. U.s. Direct Investment Abroad: 1982
Benchmark Survey Data. Washington, DC: Bureau of Economic Analysis.

__________________________

1993.

U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1989

Benchmark Survey. Final Results. Washington, DC: Bureau of Economic
Analysis.

U.S. Tariff Commission. 1973. Imylications of Multinational Firms For World
Trade and Investment and for U.S. Trade and Labor, Report to the
Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate (93-1). February.

Vernon, Raymond. 1966. "International Investment and International Trade in
the Product Cycle," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 80, May,

pp.

190-207.

Wilkins, Mira. 1970, The Enereence of Multinational Enterorise, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
______________ -

1989.

The History of Foreien Investment in the United States

to 1914. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Table I
Equations for Parent Employment as a Function of Parent and Foreign
Affiliate Production, 1989
Six Major Industry Croups

Constant

-

Term

Industry

Food & kindred products 4,125

Parent
Net Sales

4.87
(5.7)

4,125

Coefficients for
Affiliate Net Sales
NonManuf.
Total
Manuf.

-

.58

840

-

4.86

4.93

(18.0)
1,033.
(2.5)

Metals

6.04

629

Machinery,

cxci.

Electrical

(26.1)

480

6.47
(28.2)

475

Electrical. &
Electronic Equipment

-.67
(1.6)

.40

-1.82

(.1)

(2.1)

-

.83

1,642
(5.1)

4.87
(30.6)

.52

.967

-5.33

Parent employment in No. of employees

million

Numbers in parentheses are t-statisttcs

.970

(2.6)

9.10
-4.13
(47.2) (20.2)
9.18

.968

(1.6)

3.34
(4.9)
4.03
(6.1)

(77.5)

.867

.968

.77
(5.8)

1,618
(5.4)

.867

.866

(5.1)

Parent and affiliate sales in $

.81
(1.3)

-.90
(1.9)

6.54

-250
(.4)

.443

.864

(26.9)

(.3)

.18

(.9)

.20

(2.4)

transportation Equipment -257

-

(.6)

5.98

(2.6)

(2.4)

-

4.82

(26.8)

.28

(.8)

(17.5)

611
(2.5)

.453

(.4)

(5.1)

Chemicals

R2

.986

-7.53
(26.5)

7.89
(7.1)

.995

Table 2

Equations for Parent Employment per Dollar of
Production as a Function of Parent Size and Ratio of
Foreign Affiliate to Parent Production 1989
Six Major Industry Groups

Coefficients for
Ratio to Parent Net Sales
Net Sales of
Manufac -

Industry

Food & kindred prods.

Chemicals

Metals

Constant
Term

6.50
(5.6)
7.01
(5.2)
7.29
(5.5)
5.92
(17.7)
6.11
(17.1)
6.13
(16.9)
8.49
(28.4)
8.96

(27.5)
Machinery, except
Electrical

8.98
(27.0)
8.22
(26.8)
8.33
(27.1)
8.48
(27.6)
9.11

Electrical &
Electronic Equipment (13.7)
9.32
(13.7)
10.15
(16.1)

Transportation Equip.

9.74
(16.3)

9.71
(16.4)

9.81
(16.5)

All
Affiliate
Net Sales

turing
Affi-

hates

NonManufAffil.

Parent
Net
Sales

2.04

.024

(1.6)

2.01

.165

-

(1.6)

2.61
(2.0)

-7.87
(1.2)

.124

-

.038

(.6)

.37

.002

-

(.9)
.41

-

(.9)

(1.5)

.29
(.5)
-

.018

(.8)

.68
(.6)

.059

.153

.006

.155

-

.000

(1.5)

.006

-

(.2)

-.065
(.3)

-

.145

.048

(3.2)
-

.046

(.2)

-

.63

(.4)

1.84
(5.2)
1.97
(5.5)

-

.739

.043

(3.2)
.093

2.46
(6.3)

-.09
(.1)

-.285
(2.4)
-.241
(2.0)

6.34

.109
.135

.284

(6.0)

6.28
(8.0)

8.06
(10.5)

-9.02
(3.5)

-.206
(1.4)
-.207
(1.5)

-1.88
(1.0)
-

.288
.421

-.001

.09

-

.080

.027

(1.8)

(.0)

.637
(.3)

-12.66
(1.2)

-

.061

(1.3)

.032

Notes to Table 2

Parent empLoyment in No. of employees

Parent sales in billions of dollars
Affiliate sales in millions of dollars
Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics

