                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS REDUX




                                     Maurice Obstfeld
                                     Kenneth Rogoff




                                 Working Paper No. 4693




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1994




The authors thank the National Science Foundation and the German Marshall Fund of the
United States for support. This paper is a part of the NBER's research program in
International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4693
                                                                                 April 1994


                          EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS REDUX


                                          ABSTRACT


       Until now, thinking on open economy macroeconomics has been largely schizophrenic.

When it comes to analyzing exchange rate dynamics, an empirically-minded economist abandons

modern current account models which, while theoretically coherent, fail to address the awkward

reality of sticky nominal prices. In this paper we develop an analytically tractable two-country

model that marries a full account of dynamics to a supply framework based on monopolistic

competition and sticky prices. It offers simple and intuitive predictions about exchange rates and

current accounts that sometimes differ sharply from those of either modern flexible-price

intertemporal models, or traditional sticky-price Keynesian models. The model also leads to a

novel perspective on the international welfare spillovers of monetary and fiscal policies.



Maurice Obstfeld                                                   Kenneth Rogoff
Department of Economics                                            Woodrow Wilson School
University of California, Berkeley                                 416 Robertson Hall
787 Evans Hall                                                     Princeton University
Berkeley, CA 94720                                                 Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER                                                           and NBER
1 Introduction
This paper offers a theory that incorporates the price rigidities essential to ex-
plain exchange-rate behavior without sacrificing the insights of the intertem-
poral approach to the current account. Until now, thinking on open-economy
macroeconomics has been largely schizophrenic. Most of the theoretical ad-
vances since the late 1 970s have been achieved by assuming away the awkward
reality of sticky prices and instead developing the implications of dynamic
optimization by the private sector. While the intertemporal approach has
proved valuable for some facets of current-account analysis, many of the most
fundamental problems in international finance cannot be seriously addressed
in a setting of frictionless markets. Because the newer paradigm seems so
ill-equipped to explain, for example, the effects of macroeconomic policies on
output and exchange rates, empirical practitioners and policymakers have not
yet been persuaded to abandon traditional aggregative Keynesian models.
    While the time-tested appeal of these models is undeniable, their lack
of microfoundations presents problems at many levels. They ignore the in-
tertemporal budget constraints central to any coherent picture of the current
account and fiscal policy. They provide no clear description of how monetary
policy affects production decisions. Because it embodies no meaningful wel-
fare criteria, the traditional approach can yield profoundly misleading policy
prescriptions even for problems it was designed to address—as we shall show.
   This paper builds a bridge between the rigor of the intertemporal ap-
proach, as exemplified by Sachs (1981), Obstfeld (1982), and Frenkel and
Razin (1987), and the descriptive plausibility of the classic contributions by
Fleming (1962), Mundell (1963, 1964), and Dornbusch (1976). We develop
a model of international policy transmission that embodies all the central
elements of the intertemporal approach along with shortrun nominal price
rigidities and explicit microfoundations of aggregate supply.
    A framework integrating exchange rate dynamics and the current account
yields a new perspective on both. In contrast to overshooting models based
on Dornbusch (1976), monetary shocks have permanent effects on consump-
tion, output, and the terms of trade. If money affects output in the short
run, it generally induces current-account imbalances. The resulting interna-
tional wealth transfer produces real effects that last well beyond the horizon
over which prices are rigid. Many of the model's predictions stem from the
result that money demand depends on consumption, which typically can be

                                        1
smoothed over time more easily in open than in closed economies.' For ex-
ample, even temporary fiscal innovations induce random walks in nominal
exchange rates.2 In contrast to flexible-price intertemporal models such as
those in Frenkel and Razin (1987), a permanent tax-financed increase in do-
mestic government spending produces a home current-account surplus and a
decline in the world real interest rate. In a flexible-price representative-agent
model, neither variable would change. But under sticky prices, a permanent
rise in government demand raises output and saving in the short run.
    Our model embeds features of the static, closed-economy models of Blan-
chard and Kiyotaki (1987) and Ball and Romer (1989) in an analytically
tractable, dynamic, two-country framework. Section 2 sets out an infinite-
horizon monetary model of a monopolistically competitive world economy.
We show how to solve for the long-run and short-run equilibria of a log-
linearized version of the model. In section 3 we analyze positive and norma-
tive aspects of monetary and fiscal policy. Section 4 concludes by evaluating
the model's implications for a range of questions in international finance.
    Various elements of our approach can be found in earlier work by several
authors. Each component of Mussa's (1984) aggregative model is inspired
by individual maximization, but the model as a whole lacks an integra-
tive foundation. McKibbin and Sachs (1991) and Stockman and Ohanian
(1993) develop numerical sticky-price models that incorporate intertempo-
ral maximization but lack foundations on the supply side. The model of
Calvo and Végh (1993) assumes sticky wages and demand-determined out-
put, but presents no rationale for the latter assumption. Also, its small-
country assumption prevents analysis of international transmission issues.
Romer (1993) models a world of two interacting monopolistically competi-
tive economies, but his analysis is static and its microfoundations are not
fully specified. Perhaps the closest precursor to our study is Svensson and
van Wijnbergen (1989); but its assumption of perfectly pooled international
risks, aside from matching uneasily its pricing and rationing assumptions,
precludes discussion of the current-account movements and fiscal shocks that
are central to our analysis.
   'A role for consumption spending rather than output in United States money demand
receives empirical support from Mankiw and Summers (1986).
   2Rogoff (1992) presents a model in which traisitory productivity and government
spending shocks can have long-lasting effects on the real exchange rate due to traded
goods consumption smoothing.

                                         2
2 Macroeconomic Policies in a Two-Country
   Model with Monopolistic Competition: Flex-
   ible Prices
In this section we describe the setup of the model and some of its properties
when nominal output prices are flexible.

2.1 Preferences, technology, and market structure
The world is inhabited by a continuum of individual producers, indexed by
z E [0, 1], each of whom produces a single differentiated perishable prod-
uct. The home country consists of producers on the interval [0, n], while the
remaining (n, 1] producers reside in the foreign country.
    Individuals everywhere in the world have the same preferences, which are
defined over a consumption index, real money balances, and effort expended
in production. Let c(z) be a home individual's consumption of product z.
The consumption index, on which utility depends, is given by
                                      1
                            c=
                                  [j      c(zyrdz]                              (1)

where 0 > 1. The foreign consumption index C* is defined analogously,
where, throughout, stars denote foreign variables.
  There are no impediments or costs to trade between the countries. Let E
be the nominal exchange rate, defined as the home-currency price of foreign
currency, p(z) the domestic-currency price of good z, and p*(z) the price of
the same good in foreign currency. Then the law of one price holds for every
good, so that
                              p(z) = Ep*(z)                              (2)
    The consumption-based money price index3 in the home country is


          = [/   p(z)'°dz]
                             10
                                  =
                                      [J p(z)'°dz + j     Ep*(z)lodz]
                                                                         '      (3)

  3The price index is defined as the minimal expenditure of domestic money needed to
purchase a unit of C.


                                           3
Since both countries' residents have the same preferences, eq. (2) implies
that
                                 P=EP                                    (4)
   There is an integrated world capital market in which both countries can
borrow and lend. The asset they trade is a real bond, denominated in the
composite consumption good. Let Tt denote the real interest rate earned on
bonds between dates t and t + 1, while F and M are the stocks of bonds
and domestic money held by a home resident entering date t + 1. Residents
of a country derive utility from that country's currency only, and not from
foreign currency. Individual z's period budget constraint therefore is
         PF+M = P(l +r_j)Ft_i +M_i +pt(z)yt(z) — PC —PT (5)
where y(z) is the individual's output and T denotes real taxes paid to the
domestic government (which can be negative in the event of money transfers).
   A home resident z maximizes a utility function that depends positively
on consumption and real balances, and negatively on work effort, which is
positively related to output:

                 =   /3 [ 1c +           1   () — Ys(z]                  (6)

Above, 0< /3< 1, p> 1, and 7,6>0.
    Given the utility function (6), a home individual's demand for product z
in period t is

                            (z) =
so that 0 is the elasticity of demand with respect to relative price. Foreign
residents have the same demand functions.
    We assume that home and foreign government consumptions do not di-
rectly affect private utility. Per capita real home government consumption
expenditure, G, is a composite of government consumptions of individual
goods, g(z), in the same manner as private consumption; for simplicity,
we assume identical weights.4 The same is true for G. Since Ricardian
     4That is,

                           G= [j'9(z)idzj
                                     4
equivalence holds in this model, nothing is lost by simply assuming that all
government spending is financed by taxes and seignorage
               —
              C.—T +
                        M — M_1
                                   D
                                         —        *M
                                               G—T+
                                                       — M;_1
                                                                                   (7)
                                  it                              Ut
   Governments take producer prices as given when allocating their pur.-
chases among goods. Adding up private and government demands therefore
shows that the producer of good z faces the period t world demand curve:
                                       -e
                   y(z) =       [z)]        [Qt +   nG + (1- n)   Gfl              (8)


where
                                 Qt nC + (1 — n)C                                  (9)
is total private world consumption demand. Eq. (8) makes use of (2) and (4),
which imply that the real price of good z is the same at home and abroad.
    Each individual producer has a degree of monopoly power. Thus, in the
aggregate, a country faces a downward-sloping world demand curve for its
output, as in Dornbusch (1976). Purchasing power parity holds for consumer
price indexes [eq. (4)1 because both countries consume identical commodity
baskets, but it does not hold for national output defiators and the terms of
trade can change.5

2.2 Individual maximization
Use (8) to eliminate pt(z) from (5),6 then maximize lifetime utility (6) subject
to the resulting budget constraint, taking Qt as given. Define the home-
currency nominal interest rate on date t, i, by

                                 l+i='(l+r)                                       (10)


The model can be extended to give the government a preference for home goods, but the
case in the text is notationally simpler.
   51n an extended version of the model incorporating nontraded goods, many of the basic
results derived below still follow despite the fact that eq. (4) need no longer hold.
   6The substitution yields
                                       I—i
                   pg(z)yt(z)   = Py(z)m   [Qt + nG1 + (1—n) Gfl'



                                              5
with an analogous definition for the foreign-currency nominal interest rate.
Note that since purchasing power parity holds, real interest rate equality
implies uncovered interest parity: 1 + t =     (1 + i7).
   The first-order conditions for the maximization problems of home and
foreign individuals are:
                                     = 3(1 + rt)CC1                                 (11)
                               C1 = i3°(1 + rt)C                                    (12)
                               x (M/P)          —
                                                —                                    13
                                                    1+i
                               x (M/P)          —
                                                —   _____                            14
                                                    1+i
                              (0_i) 1k [Qt
                          =                         + nGt + (1 — n) Gfl'1°          (15)



                              (0_i) c1k [Qt
                          =                          + nG + (1 — n) G7}'t°          (16)

Eqs. (11) and (12) are standard consumption Euler equations. The money-
market equilibrium conditions (13) and (14) equate the marginal rate of
substitution of composite consumption for the services of real money balances
to the consumption opportunity cost of holding real balances. Notice that
money demand depends on consumption rather than income, a distinction
that can be even more important in open than in closed economies.7 Eqs.
(15) and (16) state that the marginal utility of the higher revenue earned
from producing an extra unit of good z equals the marginal disutility of the
needed effort.

2.3 A symmetric steady state
In a steady state all exogenous variables are constant.8 Since this implies
that consumption is constant, the world real interest rate r is tied down by
   71n a model with firm and government holdings of transactions balances, a broader
expenditure measure would be appropriate for analyzing money demand.
   8ft is simple to allow for steady-state growth in the money supplies and other exogenous
variables.


                                            6
the consumption Euler conditions (11) and (12):

                                                                                     (17)

    All producers in a country are symmetric, which implies that they set the
same price and output in equilibrium. Let p(h) be the home-currency price of
a typical home good and p'(f) the foreign-currency price of a typical foreign
good; y and y are the corresponding output levels. If composite consump-
tion is constant in both countries, then each country's intertemporal budget
constraint requires that real consumption spending be equal to net real in-
terest payments from abroad plus real domestic output less real government
spending.9 Thus, steady-state per capita consumption levels are:

                          C=rF+?_G                                                    (18)


                       C*=_r(ifl)F+? —G                                               (19)
(Notice that eq. (19) makes use of the identity nF + (1 — n)F* = 0: world
net foreign assets must be zero.) We stress again that even though people
in different countries face the same relative price for any given good, the
relative price of home and foreign goods (the terms of trade) can vary. Even
the steady-state terms of trade change as relative wealth changes because the
marginal benefit from production is declining in wealth.
    In the special case where net foreign assets are zero and per capita govern-
ment spending levels are equal, there is a closed-form solution for the steady
state, in which the countries have identical per capita outputs and real money
holdings. We shall denote by zero subscripts the particular steady state with
both F0 = F1' = 0 and G0 =        = 0; in it,
                                            0— 1       or(j1)+1

                             YoY(                                                     (20)



                             P0      P0
                                             (l_ x1
                                                   )

                                                            °                         (21)

  91t is at this point that we are imposing the countries' intertemporal budget constraints,
which rule out Ponzi schemes of unlimited borrowing.

                                             7
Eq. (20) is identical to the output equation in the static closed-economy
model of Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987): producers' market power pushes
global output below its competitive level, which is approached only as 0
c. Because this model is dynamic, real money balances in general depend
on nominal interest rates. We have assumed a zero-inflation steady-state,
so this effect shows up in (21) only as an effect of the steady-state value of
-'--=1—
1+r

2.4    A log-linearized model
To go further and allow for asymmetries in policies and current accounts, it
is helpful to log-linearize the model around the initial symmetric steady state
with F0 =  F     = 0 and G0 =       = 0. We implement this linearization by
expressing the model in terms of deviations from the baseline steady-state
path. Denote percentage changes from the baseline by hats; thus, for any
variable, X dX/X0, where X0 is the initial steady-state value.
    The easiest equation to start with is the purchasing power parity relation
(4), which requires no approximation:
                                 E=        —
                                                                          (22)

Given the symmetry among each country's producers, eq. (3) yields

                 P = {nm(h)'° + (1 - 72)

                   = {n [p(h)/E]1° + (1-
Small percentage deviations of consumer price levels from their initial paths
thus are given by
                        = nj3(h) + (1—n) [E +(f)]                         (23)

                        =   n [Pt(h) —
                                       E] + (1 — n) [3(f)]                (24)
where we have used the fact that at the initial symmetric steady state,
po(h) = Eop(f).



                                       8
   Next, take a population-weighted average of (5) and its foreign counter-
part. Combining the result with (7) and (9) gives the global goods-market
equilibrium condition:

             Qt =   [t(h)t — G] + (1 — n) [1't?Yt        — G]            (25)

Thus, linearizing implies that the change in world private demand is



                                                                         (26)
                                 +(i_n){(f)+u/_P*_di]
Remember that in the initial symmetric steady state, po(h) = Po and p(f) =
      Remember also that because world population is normalized at 1 and
initial net foreign assets and government consumptions are zero, Qo = Co =
   = I/o =
   The log-linearized versions of (8) and its foreign counterpart, interpreted
as world demand schedules for typical domestic and foreign products, are

                 = 0 [i —13t(h)} +   +n         + (1 —
                                                         n)'             (27)

                 = ° V; —i(f)] + t +            + (1 —                   (28)
                                                         n)qGt
Eqs. (15) and (16), which describe the optimal flexible-price output levels,
are approximated by

                                                                         (29)


               1+
                    l\                     dG + (1 — dG;
                                   +1 Q + n-—       n)                   (30)

   The consumption Euler eqs. (11) and (12) take the log-linear form

                           O+1 =O+(1—f3)                                 (31)
                                = O+o(1 —fi)                             (32)

                                      9
near the initial steady-state path. Finally, the money-demand eqs. (13) and
(14) become
                      AI —         =        —
                                                      (   +                            (33)

                              —    =         —   .( +                                  (34)


2.5 Comparing steady states
To solve the model, we still need the intertemporal budget constraints, which
are implicit in eqs. (18) and (19) when the exogenous variables are constant.
Linearizing these two equations, and letting primed hatted variables denote
percent changes in steady state values, yields

                                                                                       (35)


                 - 1—               ____ dF'                                     dG'
                      (           ) ( n)                                               (36)

where (17) has been used to substitute for r.
   The final step in solving for the steady state is to observe that eqs.
(26)-(30) hold across steady states, so that they remain valid after time-
subscripted changes are replaced by 'primed' changes. Together with (35)
and (36), they furnish seven equations in the seven unknowns, C', C', ',
', 73(h)' — F', j3(f)' — P', and ', which we can use to determine the new
real steady state. The solutions for consumption are:

                C-'
                          A   (rdF"\ B          (1—n)
                                                          dG'          F (dG"\
                                                                                       (37)
                                                                      zQo)
                          A ( n \ rdF'+B /                    dG'   \ — F (dG' \
where
            C     =
                          K — ) q0                    fl.)                             (38)


                                       A cr[1 + O(p — 1)]                              (39)
                                       B 1 + oj.t —       1)
                                                                                       (40)

                                                 10
                                                        72
               Fcr(O—1)(p—1)+ai               1—                         (41)
                                                   1+a(it—1)
                        —
                            1)( — 1) +         —
                                                   1   +— 1)]            (42)

                               LA+O—1                               (43)
   Consider eq. (37) for home private consumption. An exogenous increase
dF' in home per capita foreign assets would increase steady-state consump-
tion by the amount rdF' were output exogenous. Instead, consumption in-
creases here by less (since A /L < 1). The reason is that higher wealth leads
to some reduction in work effort and production: as (29) shows, higher con-
sumption lowers the marginal utility of consumption and, thus, marginal rev-
enue measured in utility units. Notice that as o —+    (making the marginal
utility of consumption insensitive to its level) , A/L 1. We also see from
                                                      —*

(37) that a steady-state rise in foreign government consumption increases
domestic private consumption because part of the spending falls on domestic
output, which rises in response. When steady-state home government con-
sumption rises, however, home private consumption falls. There is a positive
effect on output, as we explain in a moment, but it is more than offset by
a higher domestic tax burden. Positive output effects do, however, allow
private consumptions to fall by less than the associated tax increases (notice
that P/ and P/ in (37) and (38) are both less than 1).
   To see the effects of net foreign assets and fiscal policies on outputs and
the terms of trade, observe that (27)-(30) and purchasing power parity (22)
imply:
                   o             1             dG'           dG5'
           Y                                                             (44)
                            A[1+o(.—1)] n-—+(1—n)
                                     1          dG'              dG*
           Y=
                   C+ A[1 +(p— 1)]                     +(1 —n)           (45)

                   — j35(f)' — =         (VS! — I) = (a' — O')           (46)
The first two equations above show the multiplier effects of domestic govern-
ment spending on output emphasized by Mankiw (1987) and Startz (1989).
Higher taxes makes producers work harder (this would be true under perfect
competition as well); the resulting net stimulus to aggregate demand rein-
forces this output effect under monopolistic competition. Eq. (46) shows

                                         11
that the increase in the domestic terms of trade (the rise in the relative price
of home products) is proportional to both the increase in relative foreign out-
put and the increase in relative domestic consumption.'° Note that because
the infinitely-lived citizens in both countries have equal constant discount
rates, an international transfer of assets leads to permanent change in the
terms of trade.1'
    With flexible prices, the classical invariance of the real economy with
respect to monetary factors holds in this model. Across steady states inflation
and the interest rate don't change, so (33) and (34) imply that

                                                                                   (47)

                                     =       —   --C'                              (48)


3 The Two-Country Model with Sticky Prices
We are now ready to understand the short-run behavior of exchange rates,
the current account, and other key variables. In the short run, nominal
producer prices p(h) and p*(f) are predetermined; that is, they are set a
period in advance but can be adjusted fully after one period. We will not
explicitly model the underlying source of stickiness here—though one could,
in principle, extend the analysis to incorporate small menu costs of price
adjustment a la Akerlof and Yellen (1985a,b), Mankiw (1985), or Blanchard
and Kiyotaki (1987).12
  '°This proportionality follows from the specific types of shocks assumed, and does not
hold in general. Permanent productivity shocks, which we mention later, would cause a
negative correlation between a country's terms of trade and its consumption. National
bias in government spending also would modify the simple proportionality in (46).
  "In other types of model—for example in an overlapping generations model—a trans-
fer of assets has oniy temporary effects since the generations that receive the transfer
eventually die out.
  '2One can potentially extend this model to incorporate richer price dynamics, for exam-
ple, staggered price setting. Pricing to market issues (e.g., Dornbusch 1987 and Krugman
1987) do not arise here because there are no impediments to trade.




                                           12
3.1      Short-run equilibrium conditions
With preset nominal prices, output becomes demand determined for small
enough shocks. Because a monopolist always prices above marginal cost, it
is profitable to meet unexpected demand at the preset price.'3 In the short
run, therefore, the equations equating marginal revenue and marginal cost
in the flexible-price case, (29) and (30), need not hold. Instead, output is
determined entirely by the demand equations, (27) and (28).
    Although prices are preset in terms of the producers' own currencies, the
foreign-currency price of a producer's output must change if the exchange rate
moves. How do exchange-rate changes affect relative prices and demands in
the short run? With rigid output prices, eqs. (23) and (24) imply

                                    P=(1—n)E                                         (49)
                                       = —nE                                         (50)
In (49) and (50), and henceforth, we use hatted 'unprimed' variables to de-
note short-run deviations from the symmetric steady-state path. Combining
these price changes with (27) and (28) shows that short-run aggregate de-
mands can be expressed as
                                 dG       dG
                    y=O(l—n)E+Q+n—+(l
                                 Qo
                                      —n) Qo
                                                                                     (51)


                         =                  dG          dG*
                             —OnE +    Q + n— + (1 — n)                              (52)
                                                 Qo            Qo
where c is given by (26). The remaining equations of short-run equilibrium
include (31)-(34), which always hold.
    In the specific policy experiments we do, where we consider one-period
(temporary) or permanent changes from the baseline policies, the world econ-
omy reaches its new steady state after a single period.14 Thus, we can re-
place all (t + 1)-subscripted variables in the consumption Euler and money
   3It would be more profitable still to raise the price if this were possible in the short
run. If there is an unexpected fall in demand and the monopolist cannot cut price, there
is no choice but to produce and sell less.
   "With more general assumptions on the exogenous variables, the economy would reach
a possibly moving flexible-price equilibrium after one period absent further shocks.


                                            13
demand eqs. (31)-(34) with the 'primed' hatted variables indicating steady-
state changes. All t-subscripted variables are interpreted as short-run values.
    In the last section, we solved for the new steady state as a function of
the permanent changes in money supplies and government spending, as well
as the change in net foreign assets (the current account). The change in
net foreign assets, however, is endogenous and can be determined only in
conjunction with a full solution of the model's intertemporal equilibrium.
    In the long run here, current accounts are balanced, as implied by the
steady-state conditions (18) and (19). In the short run, however, the home
country's per capita current account surplus is given by
                  F — F_1   = r_1F_1 +            —    —G

and similarly for the foreign country. Thus, since F0 = 0, the linearized
short-run current account equations are given by

                                                                          (53)


               dF;l*o.+EdG*(n)dF                                          (54)
where we have made use of (49) and (50). Note that the primed variables
dF' and dF*F appear above because the asset stocks at the end of period t
are steady-state levels.

3.2 Solution of the model: money shocks
One can formally solve the model in two stages. The first stage, already dealt
with in section 2.5, is to solve for all the steady-state (primed) variables as
functions of the steady state macroeconomic policy shifts and the first pe-
riod current account, dF'. Ten short-run variables remain to be determined:
C, C, , , P, P, E, , , and dF'. The ten equations that jointly determine
them are (26), (31)-(34), and (49)-(53). Though a direct solution is possible,
we prefer an intuitive approach that exploits the model's symmetry.
    We simplify by looking at monetary and fiscal shocks separately, taking
the former first and thus assuming temporarily that dG = dG' = dG
dG' = 0. Nothing is lost by taking this approach, since the effects are
additive.

                                      14
3.2.1 Exchange rate dynamics
Some of the model's main predictions can be seen by looking at international
differences in macroeconomic variables. Subtracting the foreign Euler eq.
(32) from its home counterpart (31) gives

                                                                               (55)
A similar operation on the money-demand eqs. (34) and (33) leads to

                    — r*) — E =   .L (a — a*) —                                (56)
             (icr                 06               (1—fi)e (E' — E)
after using (22), which holds in the short and long runs alike.
   Eq. (55) states that shocks have permanent effects on the difference
between home and foreign per capita consumption. Individuals need not
have flat consumption profiles if the real interest rate differs from its steady-
state value. However, since real interest rates have the same effect on home
and foreign consumption growth, relative consumptions still follow a random
walk. Eq. (56) is, of course, virtually identical to the central equation of
the flexible-price monetary model of exchange rates, despite the presence of
sticky prices here.15 The only essential difference is that in (56), relative
money demand depends on consumption differences, not on output differ-
ences as the monetary model supposes. In the present model, the decision
to hold money involves an opportunity cost that depends on the marginal
utility of consumption. A prediction that money demand depends on con-
sumption or expenditure rather than output is common, however, to many
other intertemporal monetary models.'6
  Recognizing that consumption rather than output should enter money
demand has potentially important empirical implications, especially in an
open economy where intertemporal consumption smoothing typically is eas-
ier. For example, transitory output shocks can have permanent exchange rate
effects if they induce permanent relative consumption movements. Consider
the classic Dornbusch (1976) exercise of an unanticipated permanent rise in
   '5See Frenkel (1976) and Mussa (1976) for discussions of the monetary model.
   '6As noted above, Mankiw and Summer8 (1986) argue that consumption expenditure
rather than output should enter empirical money-demand models. They do not, however,
emphasize the implications of intertemporal consumption smoothing for financial asset
prices or the price level.

                                        15
the relative home money supply. To see the exchange rate implications of
eq. (56), let us first lead it by one period to obtain



which is simpler than (56) because all variables are constant in the assumed
steady state.17 Using the above expression to substitute into (56) for E', and
noting that C —     = — C*I by (55) and that M — M* = M' — M' (since
the money-supply shock is permanent), we obtain

                        E = (icr — icr)    —   -- (6— 6*)                 (57)

so that E = E'. Thus, the exchange rate jumps immediately to its long-run
level despite the inability of prices to adjust in the short run. The intuition
behind this result is apparent from eq. (56). If consumption differentials
and money differentials are both expected to be constant, then agents must
expect a constant exchange rate as well.
    Indeed, although we have considered only permanent money-supply shocks,
the random-walk behavior of consumption differences simplifies the analysis
of more general shocks. For more general money-shock processes, the usual
forward solution to (56) is just

    =
                           (+ _) ( - icc:) - (6 6*) (58)
   The general result here is that the exchange rate jumps immediately to
the flexible-price path corresponding to the new permanent international con-
sumption differential. This doesn't mean, of course, that the model behaves
exactly like a flexible-price model: in a flexible-price model there would be
no consumption effect. Here, in contrast, the exchange-rate change and the
consumption effect are jointly determined.

3.2.2 A graphical solution for the exchange rate
A simple diagram (figure 1) illustrates this interdependence for permanent
money shocks. The MM schedule graphs eq. (57), which shows how relative
  '7lmplicitly, we are assuming away speculative exchange-rate bubbles.

                                          16
           *
           E



a      *
M_K*           M                       G


                                       slope   =       rA+
                                                         —
                                                   rA(e       1)




                                     slope = —1/at

                                           H
                                                   a      a
                                                   c—c*


                          Figure 1
    A permanent unanticipated home money—supply increase
consumption changes affect the exchange rate by changing relative money
demand. (Remember that the consumption Euler equations are built into
MM .) The schedule's vertical intercept is M — M, and it slopes downward
because relative domestic money demand rises as relative domestic consump-
tion rises.
    A second schedule in E and C*_C* is derived by using the current-account
eqs. (53) and (54) together with the long-run consumption eqs. (37) and (38)
to write the long-run consumption difference as

                      —      =       [( — — (a — a) — E]

Eqs. (51) and (52) show that domestic output rises relative to foreign output
as the domestic currency depreciates and makes domestic products cheaper
in the short run:

Combining the last two equations with the relative Euler eq. (55), we arrive
at the GG schedule:

                             E=                 (a - O*)                           (59)
                                   rA(O—1)
This relationship shows the domestic currency depreciation needed to raise
relative home output enough to justify a given permanent rise in relative
home consumption; it therefore is upward sloping.
   The intersection of MM and GG is the short-run equilibrium. The
domestic currency depreciates, but by an amount proportionally smaller than
the increase in the relative home money supply. Since E = E', this is true
in the long run as well.18
   The exchange rate rises less than the relative domestic money supply
because, as figure 1 also shows, domestic relative consumption must rise.
With nominal prices fixed in the short run, the initial currency depreciation
  '8Figure 1 presents an interesting parailel with the textbook diagram of the Mundell-
Fleming model that places the exchange rate on the vertical axis and output on the
horizontal axis. See, for example, Dornbusch (1980) or Krugman and Obstfeld (1994).
The MM schedule is analogous to the Mundell-Fleming model's LM schedule, while GG
is analogous to its IS schedule. The similarity between this model's results and those of
the Mundell-Fleming model is, however, superficial and partial, as we discuss below.


                                           17
switches world demand toward domestic products and causes a short run
rise in relative domestic income.19 Home residents save part of this increased
revenue: by running a current-account surplus, they can smooth the increase
in their relative consumption over the future.
    The exchange-rate effect is smaller the less monopoly power producers
have, that is, the larger is the price elasticity of demand, 0. As 0 —* co and
a perfectly competitive economy is approached, GG becomes horizontal and
the exchange-rate effects of monetary changes disappear. If domestic and
foreign goods are perfect substitutes in demand and their nominal prices are
fixed, there is no scope for an exchange-rate change.2°
   This diagrammatic analysis extends easily to the case of temporary money
shocks. The MM eq. (57) is replaced by (58) while the GG equation
continues to hold for the initial period. Thus, the MM schedule's slope
is unchanged but its intercept is the discounted sum of future monetary
changes from (58). The effects of a temporary money-supply shock on both
the exchange rate and current account are smaller than those of a permanent
shock. The level of C — C* determined by the diagram is still permanent,
but eq. (58) must be used to calculate the exchange rate's path after the
initial, sticky-price period.

3.2.3   The current account, the terms of trade, and world interest
        rates
More can be learned by algebraically solving the model, as we illustrate using
the example of a permanent money shock. Together, (57) and (59) imply that
the exchange-rate change is
                      (rA+i)*re
                  rA(0—1)+(rA+i.)ce (—cr)<ci—icr
                                          —                                        (60)

and the relative consumption change is

                                   rA(0—1)oE
                            rA(O—1)+(rA+L)oe "
                                                          (_*/                     (61)

   '9The increase in relative domestic real income is — — E = (9 — 1)E > 0. Because
demand has been assumed to be relatively elastic (9 > 1), a country's revenue rises when
it sells more due to a fall in its products' prices.
   20Stockman and Ohanian (1993) highlight this possibility in a model in which perfect
competition always obtains.

                                          18
    To find the equilibrium current account, we combine (37) and (38) to
solve for C' — C' as a function of dF'/Q0, then note that C — C = C' —
by (55), and, finally, use eq. (61) to obtain
                   dF'   —
                               (1 — n)(O —   l)zoe        (ç —
                                                                     I               (62
                             rA(Ol)+(rA+i)o.ek
We see from eq. (62) that the larger the home country (the greater n), the
less the impact of a home money increase on its current account. Armed
with dF'/Q0, we can solve for all the steady state values. For example, the
long-run terms of trade are found by combining (62) with (37), (38), and
(46):21


              I    P
                         i" — E' —
                                 —   _______________________             —   M         63
                                     rA(O—l)+(rA+)cT6
A positive home money shock generates a long-run improvement in the home
terms of trade because it leads to an increase in wealth. With higher long-
run wealth, home residents substitute out of work into leisure (the opposite
happens abroad), leading to a rise in relative home prices. In the short
run, of course, domestic goods prices are fixed, and the home terms of trade
deteriorate by E; thus, the short-run and the long-run terms of trade effects
go in opposite directions. Intuitively, one would expect the short-run effect
to be larger in absolute value, since in the long-run, it is only the interest
income on dF'/Q0 that is driving the substitution from work effort into
leisure. Indeed, if one substitutes out for A and z in (60) by using (39) and
(43), and compares the result with (63), one sees that the short-run effect
must be larger. This does not imply, however, that the long-run terms of
trade effect is negligible; it will be large, for example, if j.i is small so that
long-run work effort drops sharply with an increase in long-run wealth.
   The possibility that money shocks may have long-lasting real effects would
seem to be quite general, and not simply an artifact of this particular model.
As long as there exists any type of short-run nominal rigidities, unanticipated
money shocks are likely to lead to international capital flows. The resulting
  21Note that both the short-run and the long-run terms of trade effects are independent
of relative country size. A country's size determines the global impact of its policies, and
not their relative (per capita) impact.


                                            19
transfers will extend the real effects of the shock beyond the initial sticky-
price time horizon. In our infinitely-lived agent model with iritertemporally
separable utility, the real effects are permanent, but in an overlapping gen-
erations setting, the effects should still last much longer than, say, the year
or two horizon of a typical nominal wage contract.
    One can ask whether Dornbusch (1976) type exchange rate overshooting
occurs here, although the issue is complicated by the long-run nonneutrality
of money. The more interesting question is whether sticky prices lead to
more or less exchange rate volatility than one would observe in a world of
flexible prices. In fact, in the present model, preset prices actually reduce
exchange rate volatility when monetary shocks are predominant. The fact
that the inflating country experiences an improvement in its long-run terms
of trade tempers the need for initial nominal depreciation. In an appendix
we present a model with sticky-price non.traded goods in which a Dornbusch
overshooting result can hold. Given the lack of empirical support for the
overshooting hypothesis, however, it is unclear that this should be regarded
as an essential property of an exchange-rate model.22
    It is straightforward to solve for the remaining variables in the model. To
see how an unanticipated permanent monetary expansion affects the world
real interest rate, for example, use the short-run price eqs. (49) and (50) and
the long-run eqs. (47) and (48) to express the money-market equilibrium
conditions (33) and (34) as


                      13)C+(E+1 13) [+(1_n)E] =13
          C+
               (1


                    (1—/3)e         \     1.—/3j
Multiply the first of these expressions by n, the second by 1 — n, and add.
Because, by (37) and (38), Q' = nC' + (1 — n)C*l = 0 for a pure monetary
shock, the consumption Euler eqs. (31) and (32) imply that

                                                                              (64)
  220ne empirical regularity apparently inconsistent with overshooting is the well-
documented tendency for spot and forward exchange rates to move in tandem. See, for
example, Flood (1981).


                                        20
and so
                     =
                         -(+        )   [nit + (1- n)11]
    A monetary expansion either at home or abroad lowers the world real
                                                                            (65)


interest rate in proportion to the increase in the 'world money supply,' riM +
(1 —         and, thus, raises global consumption demand. Note that e and /3
are the only parameters that enter into (65); parameters such as 0 and z wash
out because of intertemporal consumption smoothing. The liquidity effect is
greater the higher is e, which is inversely related to the interest-elasticity of
money demand. Relatively interest-inelastic money demand (a high value of
   means that a monetary expansion will cause a proportionally large decline
in the real interest rate. As per eq. (17), there is no effect on the long-run
real interest rate, which is tied to the rate of time preference.
    What about the nominal interest rate? One can show that monetary
expansion in either country lowers nominal interest rates worldwide provided
&> 1. (This probably is the empirically relevant case.) A related result holds
in the model of the appendix, where the presence of nontraded goods allows
home and foreign nominal interest rates to diverge.
    While a monetary expansion raises global demand in the short-run by
lowering the world real interest rate, it has asymmetric output effects in the
two countries if the exchange rate changes. Eqs. (51) and (52) show the
short-run output changes. Consider the effects of a unilateral increase in the
home money supply. The world real interest rate falls aLld world demand
rises, but because the domestic currency depreciates (E > 0), some world
demand is shifted toward home products at foreign producers' expense. As
a result, home output rises relatively more; in fact, foreign output actually
can fall.

3.3 Welfare analysis of international monetary trans-
         mission
Domestic monetary expansion can raise or lower output abroad. But output
is not a complete measure of welfare. Output is produced only at the expense
of effort; moreover, a country's relative output can rise only if its terms of
trade worsen. The advantage of our dynamic utility-theoretic approach is
that the overall welfare effects of these opposing forces can be rigorously

                                       21
evaluated.
    We break the problem of evaluating welfare changes into two parts by
writing the intertemporal utility function (6) as U = U' + UM, where UR
consists of the terms depending on consumption and output and UM consists
of the terms depending on real money balances.
    Consider the change in UR first. Since the economy reaches a steady
state after one period, the change in a home resident's lifetime welfare due
to consumption and output changes is

              dUR =           — 'cy +                            —
                                             1   /3/3 (c5O'
Eq. (20) and the assumption that Co = Va           =   Qo   show that this equation can
be rewritten as

                                                                                   (66)
          dUR=Q{O_(001)+1/3/3[&_(01)!]}
     Eq. (51) shows the value of    O's value follows from (60), (61), and (64)
as

                                    rA+L
The long-run home consumption change O' can be derived from (37), (60),
and (62),
                          a        (l_n)(O_l)rAE
while (44) shows that the long-run home output change is
                                        —          —
                             —     (1       n)(O
                                            rA+ 1)OTE
The corresponding foreign variables are obtained by replacing 1 — n with —n
in the exchange-rate coefficients of these expressions. Thus, all asymmetric
effects of the monetary shock are transmitted through the exchange rate.
    Returning to (66), we see from the preceding equations and eq. (17) that
the impact of the exchange-rate terms on home welfare is zero, leaving


                                                                                   (67)
                                 dU=Q00Q
                                            22
This change is the product of the aggregate-demand level change, dQ, and
the initial (positive) difference between the marginal utility of consumption
and the marginal cost in utility terms of producing consumer goods. The
obvious symmetry of the preceding calculation shows that for the foreign
country as well,
                                   dU*R =                                            (68)
                                             Q00Q
    Thus, the only effect of the money shock on UR and U*R comes from the
general increase in world demand in the initial period, and both countries
share the benefits equally. This is true despite the permanent increase in
home relative consumption caused by the shock.
    The fact that unanticipated monetary expansion can raise welfare is famil-
iar from the static closed-economy analyses of Akerlof and Yellen (1985a,b)
and Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987). Because price exceeds marginal cost in a
monopolistic equilibrium, aggregate demand policies that coordinate higher
work effort move the economy closer to efficient production, with a first-
order impact on welfare. The surprising result in (67) and (68) is that the
terms-of-trade and current-account effects that accompany unilateral mon-
etary changes—effects long central to the international policy coordination
literature—are of strictly second-order importance here. How can this be?
    The crux of the matter is that if home producers lower prices and produce
more, they gain revenue but work harder to get it. Starting in the initial
equilibrium, where marginal revenue and cost are equal, the utility effects
cancel exactly. An unexpected home currency depreciation, which lowers
the real price of home goods when prices are sticky, has much the same
effect: home producers sell more but work harder too. Foreign producers
face the opposite situation. The first-order effect of the monetary expansion
thus is to raise global aggregate demand and world output. The associated
expenditure-switching effects are only second order. Does the fact that a
current-account imbalance arises upset this conclusion? No. Here, at the
margin, all effects from reallocating consumption and leisure over time have
to be second order as well.
  23Notice that our basic result would hold even with closed international capital mar-
kets. Obviously, a crucial underlying assumption is that in the initial situation, pro-
ducer/workers have equated the marginal disutility of extra effort to the marginal utility
of the resulting revenue. This would not necessarily be the case in an economy with initial


                                            23
    Obviously, our result holds in its extreme form only for small monetary
expansions. For large shifts, the envelope theorem no longer applies and as-
sessments of welfare outcomes require numerical methods. Nevertheless, our
welfare analysis suggests that the possibility of beggar-thy-neighbor currency
depreciation has been overemphasized in the academic and policy literature.
In their studies of the Great Depression, Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) and
Eichengreen (1992) stress that inflationary competitive depreciations led to
net increases in world aggregate demand. Our theoretical analysis provides
support for their contention that the aggregate-demand benefits were at least
as important as the expenditure-switching effects.24
    Thus far we have not discussed real-balance effects, which affect UM and
U.M, but these should not reverse our conclusions. Because the marginal
utility of money is positive, policies that raise real monetary balances can
be Pareto improving. In the case of a unilateral home monetary expansion,
home real balances rise in all periods. Foreign real balances, however, rise in
the first period but fall in the long run because long-run foreign consumption
falls. The net effect abroad is ambiguous.25 But unless x in (6) is implausibly
large, so that real balances have a high weight in total welfare relative to
 consumption, the aggregate demand effects captured in (67) and (68) are the
 dominant ones.

3.4 Government spending shocks
A government's spending falls on both home and foreign goods, but the taxes
that finance it are borne entirely by its own citizens. Their consumption falls,
but because they reduce their leisure at the same time, the net effect on world
aggregate demand is positive. We have already studied government spending
under flexible prices (in section 2.5); now we turn to the sticky-price case, in
which the results can be surprisingly different. Again we draw on the log-
linearized equations of sections 2.4, 2.5, and 3.1, abstracting from monetary
involuntary unemployment resulting, say, from efficiency wages. Whether the expendi-
ture switches induced by exchange rates have first-order effects depends, however, on the
precise mechanisms generating unemployment.
  24Embedded in our results is the assumption that initially there is no net international
debt. If such debt were present, the fall in the interest rate caused by a monetary expansion
would cause a first-order welfare redistribution from the creditor country to the debtor.
  "It. can be shown that for empirically reasonable parameter values, dUM > 0.


                                             24
changes by assuming M = M' =         =      = 0.
   The solution approach is completely parallel to the one followed in section
3.2. In particular, the MM schedule for this case is still given by eq. (57),
but with monetary changes set to zero. Instead of (59), the equation

               rA +L\                           1        dG — dG         (1'\ dG' — dG*I
      —
     E—
           rA(O—l)
                                         + 0—1
                                                              Qo
                                                                    +
                                                                         r)        Qo

describes the GG schedule. MM now passes through the origin. Although
GG has the same positive slope as before, its vertical intercept is proportional
to the present discounted value of differential government spending changes.
(Recall that dG and dG are the first-period fiscal shifts while dG' and dG'
are the shifts in all subsequent periods.)
     Figure 2 illustrates a permanent unilateral increase in home government
spending (in the case of a temporary change the exchange-rate and relative
consumption effects would be muted). Home consumption falls relative to
foreign consumption because domestic residents are paying for the govern-
ment spending. Because this relative consumption change lowers the relative
demand for home money, E rises (a depreciation of home currency relative to
foreign).26 As in our analysis of monetary disturbances above, the exchange
rate moves immediately to its new steady state, that is, E = E'. This re-
 suit does not require that the fiscal shock be permanent. Because individuals
 smooth consumption over time, even temporary fiscal shifts induce a random
 walk in the exchange rate.
     To derive algebraic solutions for the model, one proceeds exactly as in
 the case of money shocks. (To simplify the resulting expressions we hold G
 at zero when this is convenient.) The short-run exchange rate change is

                     —
                                     rA          dG+(1\dG'
                          r A(0 — 1) + (r A +)oe

By eq. (57), O — = —oeE. The current account is given by
     dF'        (1
                     —
                         n)(0 —   1   + o&)rA                      dG'
           —
           —                                              +               —
                                                                              (1   )dG     (69)
     Qo        rA(O—1)+(rA+s)oe Qo                            r) Qo                 Qo
  26Remember that in the fiscal-policy experiment we are considering, relative demands
for national outputs do not change.

                                                    25
                           A
                           E

   H                               G

                                          =     rA + A
              1+rI 1            slope         rA(9 — 1)
               r le—i




                                                          A       A
                                                          C   —   C*
                                       lope = —1/ct
   G                                   H




                        Figure 2
A permanent unanticipated increase in home goverment spending
In the case of a transitory spending increase (dG' = 0), it is clear that the
home country runs a current-account deficit. The dominant mechanism is
similar to that in flexible-price models: because the tax increase is tempo-
rary, consumption falls by less than the rise in government spending. There
is a partially offsetting effect here, however, because the home currency de-
preciation causes a short-run rise in home relative to foreign output. In fact,
for a permanent increase in domestic government spending (dG' = dG = 0),
the home country actually runs a surplus.27 The usual result in flexible-
price representative-agent economies is that permanent government spend-
ing changes have no current-account effects because they do not tilt the time
profile of output net of government expenditure. With sticky prices, however,
an unanticipated permanent rise in G tilts the time profile of output.
   The effects of government spending on the world real interest rate provide
an even more surprising contrast with the flexible-price case. Allowing once
again for foreign government spending, one finds the short-run change in the
world real interest rate to be

            r=   -I        /A [3 +            '
                                     (1 — i3)e}  dG'          dG'
                                  -1)1(1 - ) j n---
                         +                           + (1- n)                            (70)
                              (

The startling implication of eq. (70) is that only innovations in future govern-
ment spending affect the real interest rate. Current temporary innovations
in government spending have no effect. With sticky prices and demand-
determined output, global output rises by the same amount as government
spending, so there is no change in the time path of output available for private
consumption when the government spending increase is temporary. Eq. (70)
also shows that permanently higher government spending temporarily lowers
the real interest rate. This contrasts with the textbook flexible-price result
of an unchanged interest rate (Barro 1993). Because permanently higher
government spending generates a bigger output effect in the short run than
in the long run, it results in a declining path of output available for private
consumption. These results, which stem from the combination of demand-
determined output in the short run with private consumption smoothing,
should not be sensitive to the specific details of our model.28
  27This result follows from (69) because         >r
  280ur results on the interest-rate effects of fiscal policies, which apply equally to closed-
and open-economy models, appear to be new.


                                              26
   As was the case for monetary shocks, nominal exchange rates may be
less volatile under sticky prices than under flexible prices. A consequence
of eqs. (47), (48), and (22) is that the MM equation, E =               —

holds in both the sticky-price and flexible-price cases for any fiscal shock
(holding money constant). Thus, the exchange-rate impact of fiscal policy is
proportional to the induced consumption differential regardless of whether
prices are sticky or flexible. But from our preceding discussion of the current
account, one can readily confirm that both temporary and permanent fiscal
shocks have smaller absolute effects on relative consumption under sticky
prices. Hence, the absolute exchange-rate effects are smaller as well.
    Obviously, some of the precise positive implications of our model could
be changed by allowing for nontraded goods or for home bias in government
spending. Our results on interest rates are, however, likely to be relatively
robust to such modifications.29
   An explicit welfare analysis of fiscal policy along the lines of section 3.3
is straightforward. Again, the induced expenditure switching effects are of
second-order significance. The major new issue that arises is that the citizens
whose government expands foot the entire tax bill for the resulting expansion
in world aggregate demand.
   Before concluding, we note the absence in this paper of an explicit analysis
of productivity shocks. A natural way to portray a productivity shock is as
a shift in the parameter #c in (6). Finally, standard techniques would easily
lead to a stochastic version of the model.


4 Conclusion
Our model offers new foundations for thinking about some of the fundamen-
tal problems in international finance. Existing models, whether traditional
static Keynesian models or newer flexible-price intertemporal models, are too
incomplete to offer a satisfactory integrative treatment of exchange rates, out-
put, and the current account. While our model is seemingly quite complex,
it yields simple and intuitive insights into the international repercussions of
   29For example, in a version of the model with both traded and nontraded goods, in-
tratemporally separable preferences, and monopolistic competition in both sectors, a per-
manent change in government spending on tradables still lowers world interest rates, and
a temporary change still has no effect.


                                           27
monetary and fiscal policies. It can be extended in a number of dimensions,
including the addition of nontraded goods, pricing to market behavior, home
bias in government spending, labor market distortions, and so on.
    Although the model leads to some important and novel positive conclu-
sions, we believe its most striking payoff emerges on the normative side.
Above, we gave an example in which home monetary expansion benefits for-
eign residents regardless of its short- and long-run effects on foreign output,
the current account, and the terms of trade. Some factors emphasized in
Keynesian models of policy transmission turn out, upon closer inspection,
to be important individually but largely offsetting taken jointly. This would
never be apparent without carefully articulated microfoundations.
   In recent historical research, Eichengreen and Sachs question the conven-
tional view that competitive depreciations during the Great Depression were
purely counterproductive. They stress that the resulting net increases in
aggregate demand may have been at least as important as any expenditure-
switching effects: the winners gained more than the losers lost. Our model
provides theoretical support for this view by showing how the expenditure-
switching effects of unilateral monetary policy expansion can be of second-
order importance for welfare compared with the resulting aggregate demand
expansion. Even the supposed victims of 'beggar-thy-neighbor' depreciation
may have benefited.


   APPENDIX: A MODEL WITH NONTRADED GOODS


   Here we sketch a simple model of a small open economy with nontraded
goods in which exchange-rate overshooting is possible. Now, the nontraded-
goods sector is monopolistically competitive with preset nominal prices, but
there is a single homogeneous tradable good that sells for the same price
all over the world. The tradables sector is perfectly competitive and money
prices for the tradable are flexible. A home citizen is endowed with a con-
stant quantity of the traded good each period, YT, and has a monopoly over
production of one of the nontradables z E [0, 1].



                                      28
   The utility function of the representative producer is

 U=                                               x             —
      33_t [a1o CT, + (1— c)log CN, +         1        (M)l_c       _YN3(ZY]
where CT is consumption of the traded good and CN is composite nontraded
goods consumption, defined by
                                                  --
                         CN   =
                                  [j1 CN(Z)9dZ]
Here, P is the utility-based price index P PPjj/aa(l_a)1, with PT =
EP   the nominal price of the traded good; P is exogenous and constant;
and PN is the nontraded goods price index

                              =
                                  {j1o]i
with pN(z) the money price of good z. Bonds are denominated in tradables,
and the individual's period budget constraint, with r denoting the constant
world interest rate in tradables, is
PTtF+Mt = PTt(1+r)Ft_l+Mt_l+pNt(z)yNt(z)+PTtyT_PNtCNt—PTtCTPtTt
It is convenient to assume that there is no government spending.
     In the symmetric market equilibrium, CN = yN(z) for all z and domestic
residents willingly hold the entire domestic money supply. Thus, for the
economy as a whole, the current account is
                       F—F_1 =rF_j+yT—CT
   We again log-linearize around a steady state in which all exogenous vari-
ables are constant and F0 = 0. Consider the effects of an unexpected, per-
manent increase in the home money supply, M. Following the same solution
approach as in the text, one can show that

                                                       M
                           13+(1—/3)(1--cx+cxe)
Here, AI is the long-run change in the exchange rate—rnoney is neutral in
the long run here—because the current account turns out not to change as

                                      29
a result of monetary shocks. Notice that if e> 1, the nominal exchange rate
overshoots its long-run level. One can understand the role of e in overshooting
by noting that in this model, lie is the consumption elasticity of money
demand.


References
 [1] Akerlof, George A., and Janet L. Yellen. 'A Near-Rational Model of
     the Business Cycle, with Wage and Price Inertia.' Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 100 (Supplement, 1985a): 823-38.
 [2] Akerlof, George A., and Janet L. Yellen. 'Can Small Deviations from Ra-
     tionality Make Significant Differences to Economic Equilibria?' Ameri-
     can Economic Review 75 (September 1985b): 708-21.
 [3] Ball, Laurence, and David Romer. 'Are Prices Too Sticky?' Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 104 (August 1989): 507-24.
 [4] Barro, Robert J. Macroeconomics, 4th ed. John Wiley i Sons, 1993.
 [5] Blanchard, Olivier J., and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 'Monopolistic Competi-
     tion and the Effects of Aggregate Demand. 'American Economic Review
     77 (September 1987): 647-66.
 [6] Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A.Végh. 'Exchange-Rate Based Stabili-
     sation under Imperfect Credibility.' In Open-Economy Macroeconomics,
     ed. by Helmut Frisch and Andreas Worgotter. MacMillan, 1993.

 [7] Dornbusch, Rudiger. 'Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics.'
     Journal of Political Economy 84 (December 1976): 1161-76.
 [8] Dornbusch, Rudiger. Open Economy Macroeconomics. Basic Books,
     1980.

 [9] Dornbusch, Rudiger. 'Exchange Rates and Prices.' American Economic
     Review 77 (March 1987): 93-106.

[10] Eichengreen, Barry. Golden Fetters. Oxford University Press, 1992.


                                      30
[11] Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 'Exchange Rates and Eco-
    nomic Recovery in the 1930s.' Journal of Economic History 45 (Decem-
    ber 1985): 925-46.
[12] Fleming, J. Marcus. 'Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under
     Floating Exchange Rates.' International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 9
     (November 1962): 369-79.
[13] Flood, Robert P. 'Explanations of Exchange Rate Volatility and Other
     Empirical Regularities in Some Popular Models of the Exchange Rate
     Market.' Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 15 (Au-
     tumn 1981).
[14] Frenkel, Jacob A. 'A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doc-
    trinal Aspects and Empirical Evidence.' Scandinavian Journal of Eco-
     nomics 78 (May 1976): 200-24.
[151 Frenkel, Jacob A., and Assaf Razin. Fiscal Policies and the World Econ-
     omy: An Intertemporal Approach. MIT Press, 1987.
[16] Krugman, Paul R. 'Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate
    Changes.' In Real-Financial Linkages among Open Economies, ed. by
    Sven W. Arndt and J. David Richardson. MIT Press, 1987.
[17] Krugman, Paul R., and Maurice Obstfeld. International Economics:
     Theory and Policy, 3rd ed. HarperCollins, 1994.

[18] McKibbin, Warwick, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. Global Linkages. Brookings
     Institution, 1991.
[19] Mankiw, N. Gregory. 'Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A
     Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly.' Quarterly Journal of Economics
     100 (May 1985): 529-39.
[20] Mankiw, N. Gregory. 'Imperfect Competition and the Keynesian Cross.'
     Economics Letters 26 (1987): 7-14.
[21] Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Lawrence H. Summers. 'Money Demand and
     the Effects of Fiscal Policies.' Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 18
     (November 1986): 415-29.

                                     31
[221 Mundell, Robert A. 'Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under
    Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates.' Canadian Journal of Economics
    and Political Science 29 (November 1963): 475-85.
[231 Mundell, Robert A. 'A Reply: Capital Mobility and Size.' Canadian
    Journal of Economics and Political Science 30 (August 1964): 421-31.
[24] Mussa, Michael. 'The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments, and
    Monetary and Fiscal Policy under a Regime of Controlled Floating.'
    Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78 (May 1976): 229-48.
[25] Mussa, Michael. 'The Theory of Exchange Rate Determination.' In Ex-
     change Rate Theory and Practice, ed. by John F. 0. Bilson and Richard
     C. Marston. University of Chicago Press, 1984.
[26] Obstfeld, Maurice. 'Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is
    There a Laursen-Metzler Effect?' Quarterly Journal of Economics 97
    (May 1982): 251-70.
[27] Rogoff, Kenneth. 'Traded Goods Consumption Smoothing and the Ran-
     dom Walk Behavior of the Real Exchange Rate.' Bank of Japan Mone-
     tary and Economic Studies 10 (November 1992): 1-29.
[28] Romer, David. 'Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence.' Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 108 (November 1993): 869-903.
[29] Sachs, Jeffrey D. 'The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment
     in the 1970s.' Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1981): 201-68.
[30] Startz, Richard. 'Monopolistic Competition as a Foundation for Key-
    nesian Macroeconomic Models.' Quarterly Journal of Economics 104
    (November 1989): 737-52.
[31] Stockman, Alan C., and Lee E. Ohanian. 'Short-Run Independence of
    Monetary Policy under Pegged Exchange Rates and Effects of Money
    on Exchange Rates and Interest Rates.' Working Paper 4517, National
    Bureau of Economic Research (November 1993).
[32] Svensson, Lars. E. 0., and Sweder van Wijnbergen. 'Excess Capacity,
    Monopolistic Competition, and International Transmission of Monetary
     Disturbances.' Economic Journal 99 (September 1989): 785-805.

                                    32
