                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CAN FOREIGN AID ACCELERATE
                                 STABILIZATION?




                                    Alessandra Casella
                                    Barry Eichengicen




                                 Working Paper No. 4694




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1994




This paper is a part of the NBER's msearch program in International Finance and
Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4694
                                                                                   April 1994


                              CAN FOREIGN AID ACCELERATU
                                    STABILIZA11ON?


                                           ABSTRACT


       This paper studies the effect of foreign aid on economic stabilization. Following Alcsina

and Drazen (1991), we model the delay in stabilizing as the result of a distributional struggle:

reforms are postponed because they are costly and each distributional faction hopes to reduce its

share of the cost by outlasting its opponents in obstructing the required policies. Since the delay

is used to signal each faction's strength, the effect of the transfer depends on the role it plays in

the release of information. We show that this role depends on the timing of the transfer foreign

aid decided and transferred sufficiently early into the game leads to earlier stabilization; but aid

decided or transferred too late is destabilizing and encourages further postponement of reforms.




Alessandra Casella                                           Bany Eichengreen
Department of Economics                                      Department of Economics
Columbia University                                          University of California, Berkeley
New York, NY 10027                                           Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                                     and NBER
                                       I. INTRODUCTION



  The transition from central planning to the market in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet

Union has been characterized by a host of economic difficulties. Prominent among these are

large budget deficits leading to rapid rates of monetization and high inflation. Inflation has

distorted relative prices, disrupted embryonic markets and undermined support for reform.

While the need for stabilization is cleat, observers disagree about the political and economic

prerequisites for bringing it about. One debate concerns the role of foreign assistance. On

one side are those who argue that Western aid can play a critical role in halting Inflation'.

External resources, they argue, can defuse distributionaJ conflicts over the tax increases and

spending cuts needed for fiscal balance and stabilization. By moderating the swdfices

required of those who agree to beat the cost of stabilization, aid cart hasten adjustment. On

the other side are those who argue that aid will only delay the adoption of the requisite

policies.2 Financial assistance, they warn, reduces the pain of living with inflation. By

endowing vested interests with additional resources, aid will encourage them to resist

adjustment and put off the day of reckoning.

   The literature does not offer a systematic analysis of the validity of these points of view.

Providing a first step towards such an analysis Is our goal in this paper.

   Malyzing the impact of aid on the timing of stabilization requires us to posit an explanation

for the persistence of the inflation that is the policy problem. Given the prominence of

distributional considerations in the arguments of advocates and opponents of Western

stabilization alike, we employ a theoretical set-up In which distributional conflict is key. In a

recent article, Jesina and Drazen (1991) have provided such a model. They analyze Inflation

persistence as the byproduct of a distributional war of attrition between interest groups
                                                                                                      2

uncertain about the capacity of their rivals to bear the costs of inflation. ftJthough all interest

groups understand that restrictive policies will eventually have to be adopted, and although all

groups suffer while stabilization is being delayed, each one has an incentive to resist the

adoption of the relevant measures since it hopes that another group will capitulate first and

bear the entire burden of adjustment. Inflation therefore persists until the weakest faction

concedes.

   We argue that this set-up captures the essence of the mechanism underlying many of the

inflations whose persistence has prompted discussion of foreign aid. For example, the

German hyperinflation of 1923, in response to which the Dawes Loan was offered to buttress

stabilization, is commonly interpreted in terms of a distributional conflict between German

industrialists who demanded reductions in real wages and increases in hours of work to

finance reparations payments, and workers who pressed for a capital levy or other forms of

wealth taxation to raise the requisite funds.3 Other post World War I Central and Eastern

Europe inflations, in response to which stabilization loans were extended, are similarly

interpreted in distributional terms. The Polish inflation, whose end in 1926 coincided with a

credit granted by a consortium of foreign central banks, for example, is commonly described

as the outgrowth of a struggle between workers and capitalists.' Our analysis of inflation and

stabilization in post World War II France and Italy similarly concludes that reform was

posponed because of a distributional conflict between capital and labor and assigns to U.S.
aid a pivotal role in bringing about the ultimate stabilization. Schengreen and Uzan (1992)

argue that the Marshall Plan defused distributional conflict and facilitated stabilization not only

in Italy and France but in many of the European countries receiving American aid. To cite yet

another example, distributional conflicts figure prominently In cases, in Latin America and

elsewhere, where IMF stand-by loans have been proposed as a means of encouraging

stabilization.' And the distributional interpretation of inflation in Russia and other post-Soviet
                                                                                                   3


republics has been encouraged by evidence of increasing income inequality, tw avoidance,

and disputes between enterprise managers and finance ministry officials over inter.enterprise

arrears, all of which has fed the debate over the efficacy of foreign aid.

   Since frlesina and Drazens model is familiar, we adopt their formulation. Our innovation is

to add foreign aid. The critical assumption is that aid is not extended instantaneously upon the

advent of inflationary pressures. This assumption is both critical to our results and - we believe

- eminently plausible. Whether to provide financial assistance to a foreign country struggling

with inflation is always a contentious issue. First the existence of an inflation problem must be

identified. Then the case for aid has to be made. A coalition supporting it has to be formed in

the donor country. Finally a mechanism has to be created for delivering the assistance. Each

of these steps is a source of delay between the onset of inflation, the announcement of aid and

its arrival. Such delays feature prominently in virtually all instances where foreign assistance

has been provided. In the case of the Dawes Loan, Germany had suffered several months of

inflation before a Committee of Experts was appointed; the Dawes Loan was then raised in

1924, months after stabilization commenced. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe

experienced prolon9ed inflations before the League of Nations and foreign governments made

credible offers of financial assistance. General George Marshall's speech at Harvard University

in ,June 1947, making the case for the Marshall Plan, culminated a long deDate within the U.S.

government over the advisability of aid and preceded by six months Congressional debate of

the proposal. Similariy. the merits of Western aid to Russia were discussed for more than a

year before the G-7 countries assembled a package of $24 billion in mid-1992. Since then

debate has continued, and at the time of writing the bulk of the funds has yet to be disbursed.

   In our analysis, the effects of aid turn out to hinge on precisely these Issues of timing.

Although some delay is inevitable, our conclusion4s that too long a delay makes aid

counterproductive. id announced and disbursed relatively rapidly can hasten stabilization.
                                                                                                      4


Aid which is offered too late has the opposite effect.

    This result obtains because a foreign transfer has two conflicting effects. On the one hand,

the knowledge that aid will eventually be forthcoming can encourage early stabilization by

lightening the fiscal burden on the faction whose acceptance of a larger share of taxes brings

about the stabilization. The cost of stabilization will be less if some fraction of the budget

deficit is closed by foreign aid; this encourages the group least able to endure continuous

inflation to agree to underwrite the remaining gap. On the other hand, the delay which ensues

between the announcement of aid and its disbursai provides an incentive for each faction to

postpone offering concessions until the assistance actually arrives. Since the sacrifice required

to effect stabilization is larger before the aid arrives than after, each group has an incentive to

wait until the assistance materializes. For each group, the relative importance of these two

effects depends on the costs of inflation, lithe costs of inflation are high, then the first effect

dominates: the reduction in the cost of conceding is sufficient to bring forward the optimal date

of concession. If instead such costs are low, then it is optimal to wait for the transfer.

  If the transfer is announced in the early phases of the inflation, even interest groups which

suffer greatly from price instability would not have conceded yet. They would now find it

optimal to concede at once. If no concession occurs, all groups can deduce that their

opponents do not experience very high costs of inflation: the release of information is
accelerated. On the other hand, if aid is announced late In thegame, everyone knows that all

groups will then prefer to wait until the transfer is disbursed: the announcement delays the flow

of information arid the date of stabilization. In conclusion, when stabilization Isdelayed by

each group's belief that it may be able to outlast Its opponents, the result of any Intervention

depends on its effect on the transmission of Information, Aid may serve as a revelation

mechanism whose effectiveness depends on appropriate timing.

  As this discussion makes clear, we do not model the conditions that donor countries attach
                                                                                                  5


to foreign aid. The effectiveness of conditionality Is a disputed Issue, however, and the most

accurate way of specifying it is unclear. And from a logical point of view it seems natural to

begin by studying the simpler case of unconditional aid.

  Section II of the paper lays out the basic model, wtiile Section III Introduces foreign aid.

Section IV discusses the sensitivity of the results to specific assumptions of the model, and

section V concludes.



                       II. STABIUZATION IN AWAR OF AURITION MODEL



   Aiesina and Drazen describe an economy where government deficits are financed by

distortionary taxes (a proxy for inflation) which impose welfare losses to consumers. These

welfare losses differ across consumers types, are private Information and could be avoided if

consumers agreed to 'stabilize' the economy, that Is If an agreement emerged on higher (but

not distortionary) taxes or lower government transfers. The authors assume that the costs of

stabilization are borne unevenly, with the group conceding first incurring the largest share. In

equilibrium, each faction hesitates to concede, hoping to outlast Its rivals. Although a fully-

informed social planner would stabilize immediately, delay is lndMdually rational.

   The model can be summarized briefly.

   (1) The game staris with a given stock of outstanding bonds (b0), and a given level of

primary government expenditures (go). For simplicity, g0 is constant forever. Prior to

stabilization, in each period a proportion p of total government spending Is financed by

distortionary taxes, the rest by new bond issues. At time t. total public expenditure f Is:


     I, = rbe'                                                                   (1)


where r is the constant Interest rate, b   b. + gc/r, and the exponential term captures the
                                                                                                   6


accumulation of debt overtime. Taxes at time t r1, are therefore


      = p rbe"'                                                                   (2)


  (2) There are two consumers, both earning the same constant Income y and paying an

equal share of taxes in each period. Besides reducing consumers disposable incomes, taxes

cause distortions which result in utility losses. These losses are assumed proportional to the

amount of taxes but different across consumers; they are captured by a parameter 0. which is

private information.

  In equilibrium, each player consumes his disposable income. Ignoring the income term

(which is constant), the two players flow utilities each period (before stabilization) are:


    u=.(9,+ 1/2)prbe°'"                 1=1,2                                     (3)


  0 lies between known extremes Q and 9. Both players estimate the opponent's cost 0

according to the density function f(0) and cumulative probability distribution function 90).

  (3) At the date of stabilization T, non.distortionary taxes become available and are raised so

as to cover all fiscal expenditure. These taxes are divided unequajly between players, with the

player conceding first - the 'loser - shouldering a larger tax burden forever. The tax shares of

the 'loser and the winner are a (larger than 1/2) and (1.a), respectively. With public

expenditure completely financed by taxes, debt subsequently remains constant, as do totai
fiscal expenditures and taxes.

  Since taxes are non-distortionanj, the only utility loss following stabilization is that associated

with the reduction in disposable income, flow utility at time I Is:

    U' = a rbeT
                                                                                  (4)
    U" = - (1-a) rbe°'4"
                                                                                                  7


where L denotes the loser, W the 'winner. The shares a and (1 -a) simply multiply totai fiscal

expenditures at 1. Since no new debt accumulates overtime, flow utility remains constant for

both players forever. Discounted lifetime utility evaluated at T Is:


   V(=.abeoT
                                                                                 (5)
   V = - (1-a) be""

  (4) Each players problem is simply described. In each period, he can concede and bring

about stabilization by agreeing to pay higher taxes forever. Alternatively, he can wait, hoping

that his opponent will concede but enduring distortionasy taxes in the interim. The solution of

the game is a function T(6) mapping the idiosyncratic cost of living in the destabilized

economy 6 into an optimal time of concession T. In equilibrium. I Is such that the marginai

benefit of conceding at T instead of at T + dt equals the marginal benefit of waiting:


    (-u + U' - dV'fdT) = H(T.OJ (r-Vt)                                           (6)


where H(T,6J is the probability that the opponent concedes between T and T + dt, given that

he has not yet conceded, and is given by:



    Hff,O=-
         I(9J
              —
                        1


                                                                                 (7)
                F(6J T(eJ

where the prime sign indicates the first derivative.

   Substituting the functional forms assumed above and concentrating onthe symmetric

equiIibflum equation (6) can be *ritten as:


              f(6)    (2a-1)
                                                                                 (8)
             F(O) rp(6÷112-a)
                                                                                                   8


  The additional assumption > a - 1/2 9uaranteesthat all types 9 > Q concede in finite time.

As shown by (8), and as usual in wars of attrition, the optimal concession time I depends

negatively on 9: the higher is the idiosyncratic cost from distortionajy taxation, the eajiier a

player concedes.

  Moreover, the player with the highest possible cost. 8, concedes immediately, since he

knows that any other type will wait at least a bit. Therefore:


   1(E) = 0                                                                       (9)


  The differential equation (8) together with the boundary condition (9) completely characterize

the symmetrical equilibrium. If, for example, the distribution of 0 is uniform between Q and 9,

(8) and (9) imply:




              (2a-1)        0+1/2-a         0-8
                        [In —          -ln_       J                              (10)
            rp(Q+l/2-a)     0+1/2-a         9-Q


This function is shown in Figure 1.



                             III. STABIUZATION AND FOREIGN AID



  We now study the effect of a foreign transfer on the expected time of stabilization. We

model the transfer as accruing to the government, not directly to consumers, an assumption

consistent with the historical episodes described In Section I. Assume that at time v foreign aid

arrives in the country. It is used to withdraw a proportion (1-8) of outstanding government debt

and to reduce internal financing of direct public expenditure by the same proportion (1-8), with

13 between 0 and 1. For simplicity, the reduction in direct public expenditure is assumed to
                                                                                                     9

continue forever.' From time v onward, total fiscal expenditure Is then given by:


    f1=I3rbe"                    tv                                                (11)


  It is simple to verity that conditions (8) and (9) remain unchanged: the optimal time of

concession does not depend on the size of the budget and therefore is invariant with respect

to changes in fiscal policy. The assumption that the welfare costs of distortlonaiy taxes are

directly proportional to the tax bill implies that the level of fiscal expenditures cancels out in

equation (8): a cut in public spending has an identical effect on the marginal benefit of

conceding and on the marginal benefit of waiting. Since in addition fiscal retrenchment does

not affect the boundary condition, unanticipated foreign aid has no Influence on the timing of

stabilization. We discuss this point further in Section IV.

  In point of fact, foreign aid hardly occurs as an unexpected event. It Is demanded

repeatedly by the prospective recipients and is the subject of bargaining and debate. We
therefore turn next to the case of anticipated aid.

  Suppose that at time s it is announced that aid will arrive (with certainty) at time v.' As

before, aid will be used to withdraw public debt and reduce internal financing of public

expenditure. If stabilization has not taken place by time v, after the transfer has arrived the

game continues along the path described by equation (8).
  Consider the players' problem in the interval between s and v. Immediately following the

announcement and before the transfer has arrived, the welfare loss from distortionary taxes

and the one-period cost of conceding are unchanged, sInce the level of government spending

to be financed remains the same. However, lifetime utilities after the stabilization are affected

by the knowledge that public spending will be reduced from v onward. If the date of

stabilization I falls in the interval between s and v:-


       = - a bettT [1.(1-6)e']
                                                                                                   10


                                                             TE [svj              (12)
    'I" = - (1-a) be"'T [1-(1-6)e]

  Define:


    a(t)    1 -(1 -13)e ''                       t E fs,vJ                         (1 3)


a(t) is always positive but smailer than 1 • is decreasing in t and equals B when t equals v.

  The anticipation of the transfer has two effects. First, since the loser Will finance the larger

share of public spending after stabilization, the anticipation of foreign aid (which reduces the

fiscal burden) diminishes the marginal cost of conceding. Ceteris paribus, this should hasten

stabilization. At the same time, however, since deficit reduction takes place only after the aid is

transfered, there is an incentive to postpone conceding until closer to that moment. The

overall influence on the time of concession is determined by the relative weight of these two

considerations.'0

  Let T(O) denote the function describing the optimal time of concession in the interval

between sand v. Using (3), (4), (12) and (13). the marginal condition (6) becomes:


                 1(0)              (2a-1) aft)
    T(0)     .
                                                                                  (14)
                 F(0)        rp(0+1/2-a) - ar(2.p)(1-offl)

Assume for the moment that the denominator is strictly positive. Comparing (14) to (8), the

slope of the function T(0) is smaller than the slope of 1(0), in absolute value, if and only it:


    (0+1/2)p-2a
                        > (0-t-112)p.2a                                           (15)



Since aft) is always smaller than 1, condition (15). Is satisfied when:


    (O+l/2)p> 2a                                                                  (16)
                                                                                                      11



independently of the value of 13. We have no a priori reason to believe that (16) should be true

for all 0.

   To conclude the characterization of the equilibrium, we must consider the possibility of a

jump in the optimal path of concessions following the announcement of the transfer. Such a

jump could have two causes. First, we have assumed so far that the denominator of equation

(14)is strictly positive, which occurs if:


     (O+1/2)p> 2a - cza(1)(2-p)                                                    (17)


Condition (17) need not be satisfied. If it is violated, the marginal benefit from conceding Is not

positive: even if a player knows with certainty that his opponent will not concede, he still gains

from delay. Since a(T) fails as I rises, it at a given moment In time (17) Is violated for all B In

the game it will continue to be so in the future. In usual wars of attrition, this would mean that

the game has come to an end, with no possibility of further concessions. Here the situation is

complicated by the knowledge that the game will change at time v, returning to the path

defined by equation (8). Since 0 is larger than (a-112), all players will eventually find it optimal

to concede after time v. Imagine a player knowing with certainty that he will concede exactly at

v, before his opponent: if (17) is violated he will nonetheless have no incentive to concede any

earlier. The change in the game when the transfer is conveyed makes possible sri expected

discontinuity that is usually ruled out in wars of attrition.

    A second possible source of discontinuity is a change in the boundaiy condition at the time

the transfer Is announced, triggering a probability mass of concessions. Since the

 announcement is unexpected, there is no reason to exclude this possibility a priori. A change

 in the boundary condition could occur if new information about the opponent's type is

 revealed, or if a player's cost from staying In the game has changed sufficiently that he prefers
                                                                                                      12


to concede even with a positive probability of winning in the next instant. In our formulation,

however, no new information about the opponent is reveaied at the time of the announcement,

and no player ever wants to abandon the game. It follows that this second source of

discontinuity can be ruled out.

   Organizing these results, we can evaluate the effect of an expected transfer on the timing of

stabilization. From time 0 to s, the solution to the game is described by (8) and (9). At times.

the marginal player who is just indifferent between conceding and waiting is of type 6.. where 0.
is defined by:


    T(9J=s                                                                           (18)


   Similarly, 9,, the player just indifferent between conceding and waiting at the moment the
transfer is disbursed, is defined by:


    T(9,) = v
                                                                                    (19)

  We can distinguish three cases.

  Case 1.

  Suppose 0. is such that:


    (O.+1/2)p     2cr
                                                                                    (20)


Then, the marginal benefit from conceding is strictly positive for all 9 larger or equal to 0, and

T(6) is well-defined and decreasing in 0. Since v is larger than s, 0. must be smaller than 6..
Therefore:


    (O.+112)p>2a                                                                    (21)


Two results follow. First, (20) implies that (17) Is satisfied for all 9 larger or equal to 0.. and the
                                                                                                   13


path of concessions has no discontinuities. During the interval between a and v, this path Is

described by (14) and by the boundary condition:


    T(8J = S                                                                       (22)

After v, the relevant equations are (8) and


    T(6.) = V                                                                      (23)


  Second! the delay before stabilization is unambiguously shortened by the provision of aid.

Since the game continues with the original slope after time v, whether stabilization Is hastened

or delayed depends on th! steepness of the function T(6) between s and v, relative to the

steepness of the original function fle). Condition (20) guarantees that 1(8) Is flatter than the

original function at all points in the relevant interval: following the announcement of aid, the

optimal time of concession is lower for all 0. and stabilization is unambiguously accelerated.

This case is depicted in Figure 2a."

  Case 2.

  Suppose instead that 8. is such that:


    (0.+112)p s 2a                                                                 (24)


(which implies that (20) is violated). There are two possibilities. First, it may be that:


    (0.+112)p> 2a -oo(s)(2p)                                                       (25)


In this case, the marginal benefit from conceding is strictly positive at 0.., and T(0) Is well•

defined at the time the transfer is announced. Suppose there exists a 8, smaller than 0.. for

which the marginal beneilt from conceding isO (i.e. for which (17) Is violated). Then on the

path defined by T(0) the optimal delay belore concession for 0 Is infinite. Since T(0) is
                                                                                                     14


continuous in e, the slope of the optimal path tends to infinity asymptotically as 0 approaches

8'. But then by construction 8. must be larger than 9'. and T(O) must be well-defined for all 8

between 8. and 8.. In other words, if there is any lump it must occur at time s when the transfer

is first announced. Therefore (25) is sufficient to rule out discontinuities In the path of

concessions: if (25) is satisfied, the path of concessions is defined by (14), is continuous, and

the boundary conditions at times s and v are (22) and (23), as before. However, (24) Implies

that T(8) is steeper than the original function between s and v, and the conclusion must be that

the transfer delays stabilization. (See Figure 2b).
  On the other hand, if equation (25) is violated, announcement of the transfer causes a

discontinuity. Since all players still in the game must have costs lower than 8., the marginal

benefit of conceding is negative for all of them and continues to be negative as time passes

arid a falls. It follows that no one concedes between s and v. At time v, when the transfer

takes place, the path of concessions starts again, as described by (8) and the new boundary

condition:


    1(8,) = v                                                                     (26)


Again, stabilization is delayed by the transfer (see Figure 2c).
  Case 3.

  An intermediate case exists when (21) is satisfied but (20) is violated:


    (8.+l/2)p 'C 2a                                                                (27)


In this case, discontinuities are ruled out (since (21) implies (25)), and the new path Is flatter

than the original one at s but steeper at v, The transfer may accelerate or postpone

stabilization. (See Figure 2d).

  These conclusions can be summarized In the following proposition:
                                                                                                    15


Proposition A. The announcement at time s of a foreign transfer to anive at time v may
accelerate stabilization only if (9.+ 1 /2)p > 2a, where 9. is defined by equation (18). The
transfer accelerates stabilization with certainty if (9.+112)p 2a, where 0. Is defined by
equation (19).


  Proposition A states that equation (21) is a necessary condition, and equation (20) a
sufficient condition, for hastening stabilization.

  At this level of detail, it is difficult to make reasonable empirical guesses on the support of

the parameter 9 and evaluate the likelihood that (20) and (21) will be satisfied. However, while

the positive implications of the model remain ambiguous, the normative implications are simple

and clear. Since both T(O) and T(9) are monotonic in 9, Proposition A can be rephrased as
follows:


Proposition A'. If there is a delay between the time foreign aid is announced and the time it Is
disbursed, then there exist two dates s' and v (s cv) such that foreign aid announced after s
will delay stabilization, while aid disbursed before V will hasten it. s is the solution to: T(O) =
s, and V to: 1(9) = V. where (9+1/2)p = 2a.


  Proposition A' states that foreign aid can accelerate stabilization but that proper timing Is

essential: aid announced or delivered too late is counterproductive.

  The result is particularly simple because a' does not depend on the size of the transfer.

Whatever its amount, the announcement that aid is coming must be made before a critical date

that depends on the structure of the economy, as captured by the parameters r, p, a and the
support of 9."

  Proper timing is essential not only in announcing aid but also In delivering It. A full

characterization of the critical delivery date V is complex since, unlike s', V depends on the

size of the transfer." Regardless of the size of the transfer, however, the longer Is the interval

between announcement and disbursal, the higher Is the probability that aid will delay

stabilization. But shorter intervals accelerate stabilization only up to a point; as the Interval
                                                                                                      16


grows short, the length of time during which the effects of the expected transfer are left is also

reduced, and the impact on the timing of stabilization tends to disappear.

   Although the size of the transfer is of secondaw importance1 it is not Irrelevant. A larger

transfer (a smaller 13) causes a decline in a(t). As shown by equation (15), thIs accentuates the

difference in the slope of the original path 1(9) and the new path 1(0) that is followed between

s and v. Two implications follow. First, the larger the transfer the higher the return from getting

the timing right. If the announcement of aid comes too late and conditIon (21) is violated, the

expected date of stabilization is delayed longer the larger is the size of the transfer.

Conversely, it the timing of both announcement and disbursal Is chosen correctly, the date of

stabilization is hastened more the larger is the transfer. Second, the larger the transfer, the

shorter must be the interval between announcement and disbursaj for stabilization to be

hastened, Suppose the transfer has been announced eazly enough, so that 1(8) is flatter than

the original path at 0.. Then the critical moment when the marginal player is of type 0 is

reached easlier, and from that moment onward 1(8) is steeper than the original function. The

larger the transfer, the larger the difference in slopes at time 5, and the eadier the moment

when 1(8) becomes steeper than 1(9). Therefore, the larger is the transfer, the shorter must be

the interval between announcement and disbursal for condition (20) to be satisfied.

  Why is timing so important? As mentioned above, a transfer has two effects: it lowers the

lifetime cost of conceding by reducing the fiscal burden on the Iose at the same time it

increases the marginal benefit of postponing concession until the transfer has arrived, since

this means avoiding a number of periods when still-high fiscal deficits must be financed by the

loser. The relative importance of the two effects depends on the welfare costs of dlstortlonasy

taxation, If these costs are high, the first effect dominates: even taking Into aàcount the

temptation to wait until the transfer arrives, the reduction in the cost of losing is sufficient to

accelerate concession. If. on the other hand, the costs ofdlstortlonary taxation are low, it
                                                                                                     17


makes sense to hold out longer in order to approach the time when the cost of losing is

reduced by the arrival of aid. When the transfer is announced and disbursed early, high cost

players are still in the game. For them the first effect dominates: eaziler concession is now

optimal, and if no concession is observed each player has additional information with which to

update his estimate of his opponent's cost. When high es are still in the game, the

announcement of a transfer hastens the rate at which information about types is conveyed.

But if the announcement is late, players already know that both have relatively low costs. Such

players will want to wait for the transfer to arrive and the fact that no concession takes place

conveys little new information about the opponent's type. Stabilization is delayed because the

acquisition of information is slowed down. To summarize, timing matters because an expected

transfer creates different incentives for high and low cost players. As a result, the transfer

affects the rate at which information is revealed, accelerating stabilization if the timing is correct
but delaying it otherwise.

  We conclude our discussion with a few remarks on the role of the parameters a and p.

While equations (20) and (21) make clear that the values of a and p influence the results, In

general their impact is ambiguous. Consider first a, which we interpret as a measure of the

polarization of society, following ftjesina and Orazen. The higher is a - the more costly it Is to

concede - the higher 9, and 9. must be to satisfy (20) and (21). At the same time, the hIgher Is

a the slower is the rate of concession in the original game, and therefore the higher is the 9

characterizing players still in the game at any point in time, Since these two effects work In

opposite directions, the length of time alter which foreign aid becomes counterproductive may

become longer or shorter as the distributional fight becomes more polarized. The same

reasoning applies to p. The larger p - the greater the recourse to dlstortlonaiy taxation -the

lower 9. and 9. must be to satisfy (20) and (21). But the larger p the higher the origInal rate of

concession, and the lower the Idiosyncratic costs borne by players stlU In the game at any
                                                                                                    18


given time. Again, it is not clear whether greater recourse to distortionary taxation advances or

delays the date after which aid is counterproductive."



                                          IV. DISCUSSION



  .Alesina and Drazen built their model with the goaj of analyzing a rational delay in

stabilization as the outcome of a distributional war of attrition. Other models could produce

similar results. Bargaining models are a natural alternative, where delay could result from

incomplete information (as in, for example. Admati and Perry, 1987) or from the richness of the

players' strategies even when information is complete (as in Femandez and Glazer, 1991). In

our opinion, however, the representation of the problem as a war of attrition is sufficiently

faithful to historical experience to be the appropriate starting point.

   How sensitive are our results to the particular simplifying assumptions adopted by Alesina

and Drazen? As they note, the main weakness of their model is the absence of money: while

it is natural to interpret the distortionary taxes financing the deficit before stabilization in terms

of inflation, no explicit monetary mechanism is present For our purposes, this has two

implications. First, the specification of the welfare costs of inflation is arbitrary. The model

provides little intuition about the right way to link those costs to the size of the deficit. Second,

and more troubling, the model excludes the role of expectations: a reduction in public deficit

causes a commensurate reduction in distortionary taxation at exactly the moment it occurs and

has no effect before that time, even if it Is anticipated.

   The full specification of a monetary economy Is beyond the purposes of this note. Here we

limit ourselves to a few observations.

   With respect to the first point, the proportional link between distorlionary taxation and

welfare costs is responsible for the conclusion that unexpected transfers have no impact On the
                                                                                                         19


date of stabilization. However, we can easily think of other specifications under which this

result would be modified. Suppose for example that we wanted to capture the intuitive

scenario where welfare costs rise less than proportionally with inflation for low inflation rates,

and more than proportionally with high inflation rates: welfare costs are initially concave and

then convex in distortionary taxation. Since different agents have different abilities to protect

themselves from the distortion, both the level of the costs and the threshold of inflation

corresponding to the inflexion point of the costs function depend on the agents' type. In a

simple linear approximation, the specification of flow utility before stabilization becomes:


    Ut = - max (0. t ÷ 9-c) - 1/2 t               Vt1> 0                             (3')


where c is a constant. The costs of distortionary taxation are positive only when it rises beyond

a certain threshold that depends on 9. A necessary condition for an unexpected transfer to be

stabilizing is that its impact on the deficit is larger than its impact on welfare costs for the

rnarginai player willing to concede at the time the transfer takes place. With specification (3'),

this condition amounts to requiring &> c, where 9. characterizes the marginal player at the

time the transfer is effected: players with sufficiently high welfare costs must still be in the game

when the transfer occurs. Once again, this is equivalent to a restriction on timing: for aid to be

stabilizing it must be disbursed sufficiently eacly."

   More generally, a transfer will accelerate stabilization if its effect on future deficits Is larger

than its immediate effect on inflation. Thus it is more likely to hasten stabilization in an

economy where inflation has an inertial component (due for example to the existence of long

term nominal contracts). Since inertia tends to disappear as the economy approaches

hyperinflation, we expect aid to be more effective in addressing distributional conflicts when

inflation Is not yet out of control. Despite their Impressionistic nature, these considerations

support ow- condusion on the importance of timing.
                                                                                                    20


   We have derived rigorously such conclusion in the analysis of an expected transfer, and it Is

in this context that Ignoring expectations can be particularly misleading. It Is important to show

that the result is not modified when we allow the public discussion of a future transfer to affect

immediately expectations of future monetization.

   Suppose that each player's welfare costs depend not only on the current level of

distortionary taxation but also on his expectations of future distortionary taxes. Consider player

i, whose optimal concession time is T and specify his flow utility before stabilization as:



         = - (0+1/2) t -0 [(Prob T(0J T) JI r.e1' ds +
                                                                                       (3")
                          +J
                             r         r"
                                j It.e ds f(S) dSJ
                            (IWTI<fl


where the probability that the opponent is more patient (Prob T(0JT4) is conditional on him not

having conceded as of time t, and where the discount rate r is large enough to guarantee that

u, is falling in 0 for all t - a condition now not automatically satisfied. The terms in square

brackets in equation (3") sum to the discounted stream of expected future distortionary taxes,

which depends on the expected date of stabilization, itself a function of the probability that the

opponent is more patient (the first term in the brackets) or less patient (the second term) than

player i. This specification leads to results that are in fact identical to those of the previous

section. The intuition is simple: at the margin each player considers the cost of postponing

his concession by evaluating the welfare cost of staying In the game for another Instant at time

1. But at time T his expectation of future distortions Is necessarily zero since thegame is

ending: only the present distortion matters. The marginal condition must be identical to the

one derived above. As long as the problem is well-behaved and the boundary condition

unchanged, we are back to the set-up studied in the earlier section of the paper. An
                                                                                                    21



announced future transfer affects flow utilities before stabilization but still leads to the same

marginal condition. Mowing for forward-looking expectations does not affect our

conclusions."



                                        V. CONCLUSIONS



  This paper has analyzed the conditions under which foreing aid can help to accelerate

stabilization. We have modeled the persistence of inflation as the byproduct of a distributional

war of attrition. In this model, the policies of adjustment needed to hail the inflation are

delayed not because their need is unappreciated but because each distributional faction seeks

to shift the cost of implementation onto its rivals. We show that the timing of foreign assistance

is critical in conditioning its effects. Aid announced and disbursed relatively early in the

inflation process can accelerate stabilization, while aid announced or delivered after a

considerable delay will have exactly the opposite effect.
    Figure 1



I




               0   0
     Figure 2a       Figure 2b

1•               T




                 V




V                S

S


                                 be
     Figure 2c       Figure 2d
T




V



$
                                                                                                    22


                                            FOOTNOTES


  We thank Alberlo .Ajesina. Mike Crosswell, Allan Drazen, Sebastian Edwards, Raquel
Fernandez, Bob Powell and especially Eddie Dekel-Tabak, Richard Gilbert, Matthew Rabin and
Paul Rorner for discussions and advice. PJessandra Caselia thanks the Institute for Policy
Reform (IPR) and the Agency for International Development (AID) for financial support This
paper was prepared under a cooperative agreement between IRA and AID, Cooperative
Agreement No. PDC.0095-A-00-1 126-00. Views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of IPR or SAiD. Barcy Elchengreen thanks the National
Science Foundation for research support.

1. See for example Allison and Yavlinski (1991) and Sachs (1994).

2. A representative statement of this view is Eberstadt (1992).

3. For details, see Maier (1975), Elchengreen (1992) and Feldman (1993).

4. See Sargent (1966) and Santaella (1993).

5. See for example Rothschild (1992), pp. 53-54.

6. Casella and Elchengreen (1993). The view that distributional struggles were responsible for
delayed and contradictory policy measures is shared by other authors. See for example De
Cecco (1968) and Do Cecco and Giavazzi (1993).

7. See for example the contributions to Williamson (1983).

8. If aid is used only to withdraw public debt, or only to finance direct government expenditure,
the mathematical expressions are less simple but the substance of the analysis is unchanged.

9. Throughout the paper, we assume that the disbursement of the transfer takes place at a
given date with certainty. Uncertainty may be added to the analysis, but the more interesting
its source the more complex the extension. If there is uncertainty about whether or not the
transfer will take place, but it is known that if the transfer takes place at all it must take place at
v, then the problem is identical to the discussion in the text, with a minor reinterpretation.
However if the date of the trasfer is uncertain, then the analysis changes non trivially because
estimates are updated with the passage of time. Note also that although the transfer Is certain
to occur at date v, the receiving country is not allowed to borrow immediately against It. The
constraint seems realistic.

10. In symbols, and referring to equation (6), the first effect causes a decline in the term (P-
V), the second an increase in d"fldT.

11. Given the time of the announcement s, the impact Is largest if v is chosen so that (20)
holds with equality.

12. A simple example makes the point immediately. Suppose the distribution of 9 is uniform
overthe interval (1,101, r = lopercent,p = I (all fiscal expenditure before stabilization is
                                                                                                  23


financed with distortionaty taxes) and a = I (the loser shoulders the entire fiscal deficit). Then
equations (10) and (21) imply that any foreign aid, of whatever size, must be announced before
12.8 periods have elapsed. The interest rate is the anchor implicitly defining the length of the
period. It enters the expression in a simple multiplicative fashion: for example, if all other
parameters are as in the text but the interest rate is halved to 5 percent, the maximum number
of periods is doubled to 25.6. If we ignore compounding, the presence of the Interest rate
insures that the arbitrary choice of the length of the period does not affect the result.

13. Notice that T(O) depends on (3.

14. A little more can be said if we assume a specific distilbution for 9. For example, if the
distribution is uniform, equations (10) and (21) Imply that I increases with a if p is low, but falls
as a rises if p is high. On the other hand, s' fails monotonically with p. The lack of a closed
form solution for T(6) prevents us from adding anything on the link between a, p and ¶f.

1 5. Notice that 9.> c implies a negative threshold for distortions: i.e. distortionary taxation is
costly for type 9. even if it is very small, as long as it is positive. For all 9 9. welfare costs
have a discontinuity at i=0. The restriction 6> c - ;(3/2 - a). implying that welfare costs are
positive for all players already at time 0, is sufficient to guarantee that the the game is well-
behaved.

16. The counterintuitive conclusion that expectations do not matter depends on the
assumption that welfare costs are a function of IndMdual expectations of future distortions
which can then be manipulated by individual action (concession). Notice that these
expectations, although rational, differ between the two players since each one knows his own
idiosyncratic cost 9. An alternative specification would have the expectation of future
distortions, which is the proxy for inflation, be formed by an outside observer. Each player
would take this expectation as given and could not affect it be conceding, and expected future
events would appear in the marginal condition. However, if an equilibrium strategy exists, we
believe that the substance of our conclusion would not be modified. Suppose that the timing
of the transfer were such as to induce eaalier stabilization, ignoring expectations. The shorter
horizon reduces future expected distortionary taxes and therefore current welfare costs and the
incentive to stabilize. But in equilibrium the effect of expectations cannot be strong enough to
delay the expected date of stabilization: othewise the horizon would be longer and the
incentive to stabilize even stronger than without expectations. In other words, the change In
the slope of the T(8) function in response to news of a future transfer may be reduced but
cannot switch sign. We find the assumption of an external observer forming expectations that
directly affect individual utility very artificial and do not pursue It further.
                                                                                                24


                                         REFERENCES


Admati, Mat and Motty Perry, 1987, 'Strategic Delay in Bargaining', Review of Economic
Studies, UV, pp.345-364.

AJesina, AJberto and .AJlan Drazen, 1991, 'Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?, American
Economic Review, December, pp.1170-1188.

Allison, Graham and Grigory Yavlinski, 1991, Window of Opportunity. New York: Pantheon.

Casella, Aiessandra and Barry EIchengreen, 1993, 'Halting Inflation in Italy and France After
World War II', in Michael Bordo and Forrest Capie (eds.), Monetary Reoimes in Transition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

De Cecco, Maccello. 1968, 'Sulla politica di stabiizzazione del 1947' In Sagai di politica
monetaña, Milano: Giuffre'.

De Cecco, Maccello and Francesco Giavazzi, 1993, 'Inflation and Stabilization in Italy: 1946-
1951'! in Rudiger Dombuscti, Wilhelm Nolling and Richard Layard (eds.), Post-War Economic
Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today. Cambridge, Mk MIT Press, pp.57-82.

Eberstadt, Nicholas, 1992, 'Wrongheaded Aid to Russia', Wall Street Journal. (1 September),
p.A14.

Eichengreen, Barry, 1990, 'The Capital Levy in Theory and Practice', in Masio Draghi and
Rudiger Dombusch (eds.), Public Debt Management: Theory and History. Cambndge:
Cambridge University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry, 1992, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and•the Great Depression. 1919-
J,QQ, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry and Macc Uzan, 1992, 'The Marshall Plan: Economic Effects and
Implications for Eastern Europe and the Former USSR", Economic Policy. 14.

Feldman, Gerald, 1993, The Great Disorder. New York: Oxford University Press.

Fernandez, Raquel and Jacob Glazer, 1991, Sthking for a Bargain Between Two Completely
Informed Agents', American Economic Review, March, pp.240-252.

Maier, Charles, 1975, Recasting Bourgeoise Europe. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Rothschild, Joseph, 1992, East Central Europe Between the Two World Wars. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.

Sacas, Jeffrey, 1994, 'Betrayal', New Republic. 31 January, pp.14.18.

Santaella, Julio, 1993, 'Stabilization Programs and External Enforcement", IMF Staff Papers, 40,
September, pp.584-621.
                                                                                             25


Sargent. Thomas, 1986, Rational Expectations arid Inflation. New York: Harper and Row.

Williamson, John, 1 983, IMF Conditionality. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International
Economics.
