                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MEASURING INDUSTRY SPECIFIC
                           PROTECTION: ANTIDUMPING IN
                               THE UNITED STATES




                                     Robert W. Staiger
                                      Frank A. Wolak




                                 Working Paper No. 4696



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1994


We gratefully acknowledge the research assistance provided by Phil Levy, Paul Liu, and
Kerry Pannell as well as financial support from the National Science Foundation. We an
also grateful to Añta Angadi for providing us with access to her compilation of data on
antidumping petitions. Finally, we thank Peter Reiss, John Pencavel and Cliff Winston for
extremely detailed and helpful comments on a previous draft. We are responsible for any
remaining errors. This paper is part of the NBER's research program in International Trade
and Investment Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER. Working Piper #4696
                                                                                   April 1994
                               MEASURING INDUSTRY SPECIFIC
                               PROTECTION: M4TIDUMPING IN
                                   THE UNITED STATES

                                          ABSTRACT


        This paper provides estimates of the trade impacts of U.S. antiduznping law and the

detemilnants of suit filing activity from 1980-1985. We study three possible channels through

which the threat or mere possibility of antidumping duties can restrict trade which we believe,

when combined with the direct effects of duties, capture most of the trade effects of antidumping

Jaw. We refer to these three non-duty effects as the Investigation effect, the suspension effect,

and the withdrawal effect. Investigation effects occur when an antiduinping investigation takes

place; suspension effects occur under so-called "suspension agreements"; and withdrawal effects

occur after a petition is simply withdrawn without a final detcm,ination. We find substantial

trade restrictions associated with the first two effects, but not with the third. Finally, we find

evidence suggesting that some firms inkinie antidumping procedures for the trade restricting

investigation effects alone.




Robert W. Staiger                                                  Frank A. Wolak
Department of Economics                                            Depamnent of Economics
The University of Wisconsin                                        Stanford University
Madison, WI 53706                                                  Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                                           and NBER
                                         1. Introduction

        Do antidumping laws have and-competitive consequences and restrict trade?' These

questions arise repeatedly in multilateral and bilateral trade talks. Although there are reasons to

suspect that antidumping laws do have such effects, there is little known about the size of these

effects in practice, and even less about the mechanism by which they occur. This paper provides

estimates of the trade impacts of U.S. antidumping law and the determinants of suit filing activity

from 1980-1985.

        A simple view of how antidumping law restricts trade is that trade flows are affected only

when antidumping duties are imposed. Several researchers have challenged this view, arguing

that the threat or mere possibility of duties can also restrict trade. We study three possible

channels through which these indirect effects may arise which we believe, when combined with

the direct effects of duties, capture most of the trade effects of antidumping law.2 We refer to

the three non-duty effects as the "investigation effect," the "suspension effect," and the

"withdrawal effect." Investigation effects occur when an antidumping investigation takes place;

suspension effects occur under so-called "suspension agreements" (where an investigation is

suspended in exchange for a promise by foreign firms to stop dumping); and withdrawal effects

occur after a petition is simply withdrawn without a final determination.




    'Dumped imports are defined under U.S. law to be foreign products that are exported to the
U.S. market at export prices below "fair value," i.e., either below the prices of comparable
products for sale in the domestic market of the exporting country or below costs of production.
    2
        There is a growing empirical literature concerned with the determinants and impacts of
antidumping petitions. See, for example, Finger (1981), Hernander and Schwartz (1986),
Salvatore (1987), Hartigan, Kamma and Perry (1989), Messerlin (1989, 1990), Lichtenberg and
Tan (1990), Harrison (1991) and Prusa (1991).

                                                 I
        Our empirical analysis gauges the effect of antidumping petitions by measuring the

response of imports and domestic output to the filing and resolution of suits. We use data on the

timing and outcome of every antidumping investigation in the United States over the period 1980-

1985 which covered a manufactured product. We focus on this period because U.S. antidumping

law was altered substantially in the Trade Agreement Act of 1979. Our empirical analysis makes

three contributions to the existing literature. First, we identi& separate trade effects for each

phase of the antiduinping investigation process, and distinguish among an exhaustive list of post-

investigation outcomes. Second, we address aggregation issues that arise when one attempts to

assess the impact of investigations covering multiple product categories. Third, we jointly

estimate filing, import, and output equations that allow for the joint determination of the decision

to file, the level of imports, and domestic output.3

       Our focus on the broader trade effects of antidumping law allows us to consider the

possibility that there are two distinct filing strategies being pursued by firms in our sample. In

modelling the determinants of suit filing activity, we allow for the coexistence of "outcome filers"

and "process filers." Outcome filers are firms who appear motivated by the expectation that they




       The two papers closest in spirit to our work are Lichtenberg and Tan (1990) and Harrison
(1991). Lichtenberg and Tan estimate filing, import, and output equations, but do not allow for
their joint determination. Moreover, they abstract from investigation effects entirely, focussing
instead on the implications of different post-investigation outcomes for import and output levels.
Harrison estimates import-price equations with a focus on investigation and duty effects, but
abstracts from the filing decision entirely. Neither paper makes an attempt to distinguish imong
the vanous phases of the investigation process, nor does either paper attempt to account
exhaustively for the various post-investigation outcomes. Finally, neither paper attempts to
account for the multiplicity of filings and/or duties that may arise in a given industry-year
observation.

                                                 2
can secure a finding of dumping. Alternatively, process filers file petitions largely for the trade-

restricting effects generated by the investigation process alone.

         Our results suggest that several of the non-duty effects of antidumping law are quite

substantial. First, suspension agreements lead to restricted import flows and expanded import-

competing domestic output, and these effects are similar in magnitude to the effects of

antidwnping duties in our sample. Second, we fmd that investigation effects are substantial,

reducing the flow of imports during the period of investigation by roughly half the reduction in

import flow that would be expected if duties were imposed. Finally, we do not fmd much

evidence of a strong withdrawal effect.

         Regarding filing activity, we fmd that variables used to determine injury in antidumping

proceedings are important predictors of filing activity by finns. This suggests that the prospect

of a dumping finding (which requires a detennination of injury) is an important ingredient in

the decision to file. However, we also fmd evidence of filing activity which appears to be driven

largely by a desire to secure the trade-restricting effects generated by the investigation process

itself. Coupled with our finding of a substantial investigation effect, we interpret this latter result

as suggesting that firms sometimes initiate antidumping procedures for the investigation effects

alone.

         The paper proceeds as follows. We first describe U.S. antidumping law. Next we

elaborate on the three non-duty effects that are the focus of our analysis, and describe two

alternative filing strategies which may be used by industries. Our empirical analysis first

examines the effect of antidumping duties. We thai generalize this model to incorporate our

three non-duty effects. Finally, we discuss the implications of our results.


                                                  3
                                  2. U.S. Antidumping Law

       We begin by providing a summary of the steps involved in a U.S. dumping investigation,

from initiating the investigation to the final determination and assessment of duties.4 This

description motivates our empirical specifications below.

       Before describing the actual investigation procedure, we make several preliminary

observations. First, there are two findings necessary for a determination of dumping under U.S.

law: (I) sales of imports at less-than-fair-value (LTFV); and (ii) material injury to the domestic

industry due to these imports. One government agency is assigned to each of these determina-

tions--the International Trade Commission (ITC) determines injury to the domesticindustry and

the Commerce Department's International Trade Administration (ITA) makes the LTFV

determination. Second, for each of these decisions, there is a preliminary and final decision

made by each agency. The statutory time allotted for the entire investigation ranges from 10

months to up to 14 months under special circumstances.

       We now describe the U.S. antidumping investigation process. Figure 1 summarizes the

timing of the various stages of the suit resolution process.

lnvestwation Procedure

       Once an antidwnping petition is filed with the Commerce Department's International

Trade Administration (ITA) and with the International Trade Commission (ITC), the ITA has 20




     The Trade Agreement Act of 1979 involved a major rewriting of U.S. antidumping laws.
The Trade and Tariff Act of 1984 contains several amendments to the antidumping law of the
1979 Act that, while substantive, are not relevant for the particular issues we consider here.

                                                4
daystomakea"petitiondetinalion"atowhetherthepeUtionisinorderand,ifso,
commence an investigation.'

       ITC Preliminary Injury Determination: If the petition determination is affirmative, the

ITC then has 45 days to make a preliminrny detenninationof whether the industry under review

is "materially injured," "threatened with material injuzy," or that the establishment of the industry

"is materially retarded" as a result of the imports under investigation. If the ITC's preliminary

determination is negative, the investigation is terminated as Figure 1 indicates. If the ITC' s

preliminary determination is affirmative, as it was for 86% of the products investigated over our

sample period of 1980-85, then the investigation will run its course unless the petitioner takes

action to terminate or suspend the case.

       ITA Preliminary LTFV Determination: Provided the ITC's preliminary determination

is affirmative, and within 160 days of the initial filing of the suit (or within 90 days if all

interested parties agree to a "waiver of verification"), the ITA must make a preliminary

determination of whether there is reasonable evidence that merchandise "is being sold, or is likely

to be sold at less than fair value."6 As Figure 1 depicts, a negative preliminary determination by

the ITA does not terminate the investigation. However, if the preliminary determination of the

ITA is affirmative, as it was on 93% of the products whose investigations made it past the

preliminary injury detennination over the period 1980-85, then the ITA must provide an estimate




       Petitions can be either "self4nitiated" by the ITA or initiated by an "intered party" on
behalf of the industry. The former is by far the exception, with the most prominent example
being the Trigger Price Mechanism.

    6 In "extraordinarily complicated" cases, the ITA may postpone maldng its preliminary
determination until the 210th dayafter filing.

                                                 5
of the "dumping margin," and is required to order the "suspension of liquidation" of the affected

imported goods and the posting by importers of a cash deposit orbond to cover the estimated

dumping duties payable, pending the final outcome of the investigation.

       At any point after the hA's preliminary determination, the investigation may be
terminated or suspended, or it may continue on to the final determination. Termination prior to

the final determination occurs if and only if the petition is withdrawn by the petitioner, an action

that was taken on 42% of the products whose investigations made it past the preliminary injury

deternilnation during the 1980-85 period, with a large portion taken in the steel industry.

Termination usually comes about as a result of price agreements reached by the domestic industry

and foreign firms named in the suit? Suspension occurs if the foreign firms that are the subject

of the dumping allegation reach an agreement with the ITA to (i) eliminate LTFV sales to the

U.S. market, (ii) cease exporting to the U.S. market completely, or (iii) under "extraordinary

circumstances," eliminate the "injurious effect" of their actions, including any margin of

"underselling" (i.e., undercutting the price of the domestic product), without necessarily raising

price so high as to eliminste the full margin of dumping. Such agreements were negotiated for

2% of the products whose investigations made it past the preliminary injury determination during

the 1980-85 period. In the case of suspension, any violation of the agreement will result in

automatic renewal of the investigation.




      Agreements between foreign firms and domestic petitioners are permitted under the Noerr-
   inzigton doctrine which exempts such parties from prosecution under U.S. antitrust law.
However, direct conversations between domestic and foreign firms concerning prices or quantities
would not be protected. Consequently, settlements are typically negotiated through the
Commerce Department (Horlick, 1989). See Prusa (1992) for a thorough analysis of this
exemption and its implications for the effects of antidumping law.

                                                 6
       ITA Final LTFV Determination: If the case is neither terminated nor suspended, then

the ITA must within 75 days of its preliminary determination make a final determination of

whether the merchandise under investigation "is being, or is likely to be" sold in the United States

at less than fair value.Z

       ITC Final Injury Determination: If the ITA's preliminary determination was
affirmative, then as depicted in Figure 1 the FFC must make its final determination of injury

within 45 days of the ITA's final determination (or within 120 days of the ITA's preliminary

determination, whichever is later). If the ITA's preliminary determination was negative, and its

final determination is affirmative, then the ITC has 75 days from the ITA's affirmative final

determination to make its final determination of injury. Lastly, if the final determinations of both

the ITA and ITC are affirmative, the hA has 7 days within which to instruct customs officers

to assess the appropriate antidumping duties. Assessment of dumping duties occurred for 35%

of the products whose investigations made it past the preliminary injury determination over the

period 1980-85. If either the ITC or the ITA final determination is negative, the investigation

is tenninated, an outcome which occurred for 21% of the products whose investigations made it

past the preliminary injury determination over the l98085 period.

        Assessment of Antidumping Duties: Provided that the final determinations of injury and

LTFV sales are both positive, the "definitive" dumping margins for purposes of assessing
antidumping duties must then be calculated; These calculations are made on the basis of the

prices of the imports to which they will apply (as opposed to the margins calculated for the


       The ITA may postpone its final determination until the 135th day after its preliminary
 determination if requested to do so by either the petitioner or the firms against which the
 dumping allegations were made.
                                                  7
LTFV determination, which are calculated based on a sample of imports over an historic period

which typically covers the six months preceding the initiation of the petition). The final

assessment of antidumping duties applies retroactively only if the preliminary LTFV determina-

tion was affirmative. In this case, antidumping duties would normally be assessed on the relevant

imports from the date of the preliminary LTFV determination forward. However, if the industry

alleges "critical circumstances" and the ITA and ITC find evidence both that there are "massive"

imports of the relevant product over a "relatively short period" which cause material injury, and

that there is either a history of dumping in the industry or that importers were or should have

been knowledgeable about ongoing dumping, the dumping duties can be applied retroactively 90

days prior to the preliminary LTFV finding?

       Thus, there are, in effect, three possible ranges of imports to which antidumping duties

may apply once an affirmative fmal determination is made. If the preliminary LTFV
determination was negative, duties equal to the actual dumping margins will be imposed on the

relevant imports entering the United States on or after the date of final determination. If,

alternatively, the preliminary LTFV determination was affirmative, antidumping duties reflecting

actual dumping margins will be imposed on imports entering the United States (1) on or after the

date of the preliminary LTFV determination, or (ii) in the case of critical circumstances, 91) days

prior to the date of the preliminary LTFV determination.

       Having described the antidumping investigation procedure and possible post-investigation

outcomes, we now describe the investigation, suspension, and withdrawal effects identified in the




     In practice, however, the conditions for critical circumstances are rarely met.

                                                8
Introduction, as welt as two distinct filing strategies. We also develop the research hypotheses

that guide our empirical investigation.'0

Investl2ation Effects

       Dale (1980, pp. 85-86) discusses two possible reasons for the existence of investigation

effects associated with antidumping petitions. The first focuses on the pricing behavior of

exporters. As discussed above, in cases where the final injury and dumping determinations are

positive and where the preliniinazy LTFV determination was also affirmative, duties are typically

imposed retroactively on imports that enter the United States after the date of the preliminary

LTFV finding. The "defmitive" margin on which these duties are based is recalculated to reflect

the actual dumping margins for imports entering after this date. Thus, an exporter who receives

an affinnative preliminary LTFV determination and expects the final determination also to be

affirmative can nonetheless reduce antidumping duties, or even avoid them altogether, by raising

its price on goods exported after the preliminary LTFV determination date. Under these

circumstances, we expect an affirmative preliminary LTFV finding would lead to a sharp drop

intherateofimportsandtoañnpdces,withtheseeffectslastingfortheremainderofthe
investigation. Moreover, the rate of imports might be expected to rise somewhat with the filing

of a petition in anticipation of its future fall." A second explanation for investigation effects


    '° In addition to these three non-duty effects, a number of papers, e.g., Prusa (1988),
Anderson (1992), and Staiger and Wolak (1992a), have suggested that the mere existence of
antidumping law can have trade effects even in periods when no petition is filed. We do not
attempt to capture such effects in what follows.

       However, as discussed above, a sufficiently large increase in the flow of imports between
thedateapetitionwasfiledandthedateofapreliminaiyLlFVdeterminationcouldtriggerthe
"critical circumstances" provisions of U.S. antidumping law which allow duties to be imposed
retroactively back to the date of filing.

                                                9
focuses on the importers of the products under investigation. U.S. law requires that antidumping

duties be imposed on the importer rather than on foreign exporters)2 As such, an affirmative

preliminary LTFV finding places the importer at considerable risk in terms of liability for future

duty payments on any imports purchased after that date. Again, this suggests that an affirmative

preliminary LTFV fmding, coupled with an expectation that there is a significant possibility that

the fmal determination will also be affirmafive, would lead to      a — drop in the rate of imports
and to a rise in prices, with these effects lasting for the remainder of the investigation.'3 Again,

the rate of imports might, if anything, rise when a petition is filed in anticipation of its future fall.

         A third alternative to the two interpretations of investigation effects put forward by Dale

(1980) is possible if domestic firms use the investigation of pricing and sales practices of foreign

firms to dampen competition during times when costly price wars might otherwise erupt (see

Staiger and Wolak, 1991, 1992b, and 1994).14 A formal treatment of the anti-competitive effects

    12
        Exporters are allowed to reimburse importers for duty payments only if the agreement
to purchase was made before the preliminary LTFV detennination and where the products are
exported before the final dumping determination (Dale, 1980, p. 105).
      Anecdotal support for the tnde-restricting effects of preliminnry dumping findings is
common. For example, in reference to a U.S. antidumping petition brought by the National
Knitwear & Sportswear Association against sweater producers in Hong Kong, South Korea, and
Taiwan, The New York Times observes:

         The [preliminary dumping] margins were announced as retailers are about to place orders
         for delivery next fall. Some industry officials said prospects of higher prices, or just the
         uncertainty over what the new price levels would be, could eause some retailers to switch
         to domestic suppliers (The New York Times, April 24, 1990, p. Cl).
        It is worth noting that the use of antiduinping law as a tool to avoid price wars with
foreign rivals has been explicitly documented in at least one instance. In January, 1938, the
South African Iron and Steel Corporation filed an antidumping petition against steel producers
in the Umted States for selling steel in the South African market at prices below those agreed
upon by the International Steel Cartel. Dumping duties were levied and the Cartel's pricing
arrangements restored (see Hexner, 1943). Less direct evidence of firms turning to antidwnping

                                                   10
of antidumping investigations centers on four features of antidumping law: (i) the preliminary

fmding of injury, which is both necessary and sufficient to ensure that the investigation will run

its year-long course unless the petitioner chooses to stop it, is relatively easy to secure since the

fTC typically relies on information provided by the petitioner at this preliminary stage of the

investigation; (ii) price-cutting during the investigation period by foreign firms named in the

petition will raise the likelihood that an affirmative dumping determination would result from the

investigation; (iii) the prospect that foreign firms will face antiduinping duties if they cut prices

during the investigation period will reduce their incentive to do so; and (iv) the competition-

dampening investigation effect noted in (iii) is only secured by filing the antidumping petition.'3

Under these four points, we have argued (Staiger and Wolak, 1991) that the filing of an
antidumping petition can dampen competition and lead to greater market share for domestic

firms--and in fact to a fall in imports and a rise in domestic output—during the entire period of

investigation. These investigation effects occur because by filing an antidumping petition, the

domestic industry is able to diminish the incentives of foreign firms to aggressively pursue




law to avert price wars is provided by Messerlin (1990) for the European Community chemical
industry.
        Of these four points, (ii) is the least self-evident, and requires some elaboration here. A
 crucial step in the fTC's injury determination is establishing a causal link between dumped
 imports and injury to the domestic industry. Here, the fTC relies heavily on evidence of
 "underselling," that is, sales of the imported good in the domestic market at a price below that
 of the domestically produced "like product," and of a relationship between such underselling and
 increases in foreign market share. Moreover, in its final determination of injury the ITC routinely
 considers data that become available during the period of investigation. Thus, were a foreign
 firm to cut its price in the domestic market during the period of investigation and steal market
 share, this would increase the likelihood of an ITC finding of increased foreign market share by
 reason of "underselling," and would consequently raise the likelihood of a final determination of
 injury and the prospect of antidumping duties.
                                                  11
domestic market share while the investigation is proceeding. Hence, with aggressive pricing

policies now relatively less attractive for foreign firms, higher domestic prices (and lower

imports) can be maintained even as domestic firms increase output

Susvension and Withdrawal Effects

        It should be clear from our discussion of investigation procedures at the beginning of this

section that the imposition of antidumping duties is not the only way that antidumping

proceedings can have a lasting effect on post-investigation import flows. Suspension agreements,

negotiated between the hA and foreign firms named in the antidumping.petition, are clearly

meant to have lasting impacts on import prices and volumcs, and are monitored and enforced by

the ITA to ensure that they do have such effects. Because the intent of a suspension agreement

is to provide a non-duty alternative by which previous dumping activities can be halted, it would

be surprising if there were not a "suspension effect" in the data. A prominent example involving

such a suspension agreement (though not falling in our sample period) was the 1986 U.S.-Japan

Semiconductor Trade Arrangement

        On the other hand, petitions which are withdrawn by the domestic industry prior to a final

determination are simply terminated, and it might seem a priori that a petition withdrawal should

allow import flows to continue at (or return to) pie-investigation levels just as in a negative

determination. Prusa (1992) has provided a bargaining model which overturns this a priori view.

According to Prusa, the antidumping investigation process provides the domestic firms with both

a threat of antidumping duties against their foreign rivals as well as cover from domestic antitrust

laws under the Noerr-Pennington doctrine (see also note 7), allowing them to coordinate on a

more trade-restrictive arrangement with foreign firms which is then implemented upon the


                                                12
withdrawal of the antiduxnping petition by the domestic finns. This implies that a withdrawn

petition could have lasting effects on imports if the investigation process allows foreign and

domestic finns to coordinate output or prices in subsequent periods.

FumE StrateRies

       It would be natural to think of filing activity as reflecting the desire to secure a finding

of dumping and the explicit remedies under the law that such a finding would bring forth, i.e.,

antidumping duties or a suspension agreement in lieu of duties. We wilt call finns that pursue

such a filing strategy "outcome filers." However, the potential for investigation and withdrawal

effects as described above leads to the possibility of another ffling strategy: Firms might

knowingly file "meritless" antidumping petitions just to trigger the process that leads to these

latter effects. We will call firms that pursue this second filing strategy "process filers.' For the

process filing strategy to make sense, two logical conditions must hold. First, the antidumping

investigation process itself must be obtainable even when a full investigation would not be

wananted on the merits of the case. And second, the significant possibility of a dumping finding

can not be a prerequisite for the sought-after investigation and/or withdrawal effects.

        Because the investigation process is secured once an affirmative preliminary injury

determination is made, the first condition above is likely to be met given the strict 45-day time

limit within which the ITC must make this determination, a time constraint which forces the ITC

to rely heavily at this stage of the investigation on information provided by petitioners. Thus,

firms that want the antidumping investigation process should find it relatively easy to obtain,

regardless of the merits of their dumping claims.




                                                 13
       However, what the process itself is worth when the case against foreign firms is weak is

less clear. Dale's (1980) interpretations of the investigation effect imply that petitions which

were known by the industry to have little chance of resulting in a finding of dumping would be

unlikely to have strong trade-restricting effects associated with the investigation process, since

the explanations underlying these interpretations presume a significant probability of a final

affirmative dumping determination. In contrast, the significant possibility of a dumping fmding

is not a prerequisite for the investigation effects under the third interpretation offered above. This

is because the investigation effect under this third interpretation comes in the form of a threat to

"punish" foreign firms with an antiduxnping duty jf they should "misbehave" and compete too

aggressively during the investigation period. Such a threat is made credible by filing the petition;

because it is credible the threatened duties need never be implemented.            Thus, under this

interpretation, domestic firms may value the price-competition-dampening effects of antidumping

investigations discussed above for their own sake. Hence, these firms may file such petitions

with no expectation that they would actually result in duties or other remedies, but only to ensure

that the foreign firms do not engage in aggressive pricing behavior during the investigation phase.

Finally, neither is the significant probability of a dumping finding necessarily a prerequisite for

the withdrawal effect, if domestic firms value Noerr-Pennington exemption from antitrust

sufficiently for its own sake, presumably because of the coordination benefits offered by such an

exemption.

       We will therefore consider the possibility of both outcome and process filers in our

empirical work. Outcome filers file antidumping petitions when their chances of securing a

dumping determination are sufficiently strong. The investigation effect associated with such filers



                                                  14
should correspond to the first two interpretations depicted above: the flow of imports should rise

upon filing and fall at the point of an affirmative preliminary LTFV determination, remaining low

until the conclusion of the investigation. Process filers file antidumping petitions without regard

to their chances of securing a dumping determination, but rather when the risks of competitive

price wars are sufficiently severe. In Staiger and Wolak (1991), we argued that this occurs when

capacity utilization falls below a critical level, and thus we will consider the role of capacity

utilization as a predictor of the filing activity of process filers. The investigation effects

associated with process filers should correspond to the third interpretation depicted above: the

flow of imports should fall upon filing and remain low until the conclusion of the investigation.

Finally, the withdrawal effect could be associated with either filing strategy, with no a priori

difference across outcome or process filers.

                        3. The Effects of Antidumping Duties Alone

       We begin our empirical investigation into the effects of antidumping law by focusing on

the duty effects alone. This is a natural starting point for assessing the impacts of antidumping

law, and it will provide a benchmark for results of the broader investigation that follows.

       To investigate the impact of the imposition of duties on the flow of imports and domestic

output, we must first describe the data sources used for all of the empirical work reported in this

paper. We then describe the econometric framework used to measure these impacts. Finally, we

present a model of industry-level antidumping suit filings and estimates of the import-restricting

effects and output-promoting effects of the imposition of antidumping duties.

Data Sources




                                                15
        The source of data for the industry-level economic magnitudes is the National Bureau of

Economic Research Trade Data File. Abowd (1990) gives a detailed description of this data set.

It contains domestic shipments, imports and exports information for 450 U.S. manufacturing

industries by 4-digit 1972 Standard Industry Code (SIC) from 1958 to 1985. It also contains

information on various industry-level economic aggregates such as the level of employment and

the size of the capitaJ stock, as well as an industry-level output price deflator. We use this price

deflator to convert all nominal dollar magnitudes to 1972 dollars.

        The data source for information on the filing date for all antidumping suits and the dates

for the subsequent stages of the suit resolution process is the National Technical Information

Service's Trade Action MonitorinR System (TAMS') Pending jnvesti2ation Report. This

publication is produced by the Department of Commerce and is issued on a monthly basis. It

tracks all petitions having to do with the 1974 Trade Act, such as escape clause (section 201),

antidumping (section 731), countervailing duties (section 303) and unfair practices in import trade

(section 337). Each month it lists the current disposition of each petition until its final

determination. Firms file antidumping petitions alleging dumping of specific imported products.

For purposes of the investigation, the ITC then links the products under investigation to Tariff

Schedules of the United States (TSUS) product codes. Thus, for each petition the TAMS dataset

records the TSUS codes for the products which are allegedly being dumped and the petition's

disposition in the current month. We explicitly account for filing sit the TSUS product code level

in our econometric model of the suit filing process and in our model of the impacts of

antidumping suits on imports and domestic output flows.




                                                16
       As noted above, our industry-level data is available at the 4-digit 1972 SIC level.

Consequently we must have a concordance between the TSUS codes and the 4-digit 1972 SICs

both to assign antidumping suits to SIC industries and to determine the total number of TSUS

product codes in each SIC industry. We obtain a year-by-year concordance between TSUS

product codes and 1972 SICs from the Commerce Department's Foreign Trade Division Imnorts

Extract Master Concordance. This concordance allows us to assign each antidumping suit filed

to a 4-digit SIC industry. Because TSUS codes are based on traded products and SIC code

assignments are based on a firm's principal productive activities, several SIC industries do not

have any TSUS codes associated with them during our sample. Consequently, a necessary

requirement for an SIC-industry to appear in our dataset is that it contains at least one TSIJS

product code for each year during our sample. Only four industries were deleted from the sample

because they had no TSUS code in them for only a portion of the sample time period. Most of

the industries omitted had no TSUS codes in them for all years. This concordance procedure left

a total of 338 industries for our time period of 1980-1985.

       Our empirical work focuses on 1980 to 1985, because major changes in the structure of

U.S. antidumping law occurred with the passage of The Trade Agreement Act of 1979.

Modifications of this act were made by The Trade and Tariff Act of 1984, but none of these are

directly relevant to the aspects of the administrative process we consider in our research.

Econometric Model

       There are several aspects of the economic environment we are modeling that our

econometric model should capture. The first is the joint determination of the decision to file an

antidumping suit with the level of imports and domestic output We model the contemporaneous


                                               17
correlation between the level of imports and domestic output and the decision to file an

antidumping suit by the presence of an unobservable industry characteristic which affects the

mean of each of these three variables. Our econometric model allows for contemporaneous

correlations among these three variables as well as correlation over time among these three

variables. Because our model uses functions of lagged values of the levels of imports and

domestic output as regressors to predict antidumping suit filing activity, we must account for the

correlation between these functions of lagged dependent variables and the autocorrelation in the

error terms of the suit filings model, or the resulting parameter estimates will be inconsistent.

       The suit filing process has several characteristics which we attempt to capture in our

econometric model. First is the fact that antidumping suits are filed at the TSUS code level

although all of our remaining data is at the 4-digit SIC level. Consequently, we must construct

a model which will allow us to recover information about the TSUS code-level filing process

using SIC industry-level data as regressors for the filing rate process. The number of filings in

a given TSUS code is a non-negative discrete-valued random variable which is zero for most time

periods, but in the periods in which it is nonzero, it can take on large values. We select a

discrete distribution for the TSUS code-level number of antidumping suit filings which allows

for this large positive skew in the distribution of filings for a given industry. There are both

observable and unobservable reasons for high levels of filihg activity which persist over time.

For this reason, we include an unobservable industry-specific propensity to file suits which also

affects the level of imports and output from the competing domestic industry. In addition, to

match the industry-level aggregation of our import and domestic output data, we need a




                                               18
distribution for TSUS level filings which can be aggregated to the 4-digit SIC level in an

empirically tractable manner.

       Although the suit filing equation is necessary to account for the correlation between suit

filing activity and both imports and domestic output, this equation is of independent interest. At

the most basic level, because several characteristics of the industry's health are used to detennine

injury in an antidumping proceeding, one would expect that these variables should also predict

whether or not a firm files a suit. Consequently, our first motivation for estimating the filing

equation is to determine if variables used to assess injury to an industry also predict filing by this

industry. A second motivation is the relative importance of each of these variables in the

decision to file an antidumping suit. A final motivation for estimating our ffling equation is the

potential existence, as outlined in the preceding section, of two distinct antidumping suit filing

strategies. These strategies each imply a different set of predictors of future filing activity and

different impacts of the various stages of the suit resolution process on domestic output and

imports. In Section 5 we investigate the plausibility to these two filing strategies by imposing

the appropriate exclusion restrictions on the two filing equations and allow for the impacts of the

suit resolution process on imports and domestic output to differ across the two filing strategies.

       As discussed earlier, we would like to measure the impacts of various stages of the

antidumping suit resolution process on the flow of imports and domestic output To do this in

a consiátent manner, several characteristics of the suit resolution process must be accounted for.

As is evident from our description of the investigation process in Section 2, a single antidumping

investigation can straddle more than a single year, while each of the various stages of the process

last only a fraction of a year. In addition, several antidumping suits can be simultaneously active



                                                 19
in a single TSUS code because of filing against the same product imported from different

countries. Finally, we face the difficulty that our data on imports and domestic output are only

available on an annual basis at the 4-digit SIC level. Consequently, we must speci a model

which will allow us to recover the TSUS code-level impacts on the flows of imports and

domestic output from stages of the suit resolution process which may run over adjacent years or

for a fraction of a year, accounting for the possibility of multiple filings from the same TSUS

code, using data which is time-aggregated to annual magnitudes and cross-sectionally aggregated

to the 4-digit SIC industry level. Our TSUS code-level, within-year flow model provides a

framework for us to recover within-year effects from annual import and domestic output levels

using indexes of suit activity in that year.

       Our SIC industry-level model of the filing rate process and the impacts of the suit

resolution process can be interpreted without reference to the underlying TSUS code-level

processes. However, our bottom-up approach, starting with a TSUS code-level model which has

not been time-aggregated to the annual magnitudes, specifies an econometric model at the level

of both time and product aggregation at which the true underlying processes are occurring. It is

then both time- and product-aggregated to an industry-level model. This modeling strategy

allows the recovery of both TSUS code and industry level impacts because the industry-level

model is obtained from the explicit aggregation of the TSUS code-level model.

       We now describe the details of our econometric model of dumping suit filing behavior

and its impacts on the level of imports and domestic output. Let L_ be the number of

antidumping suits filed in industry i for good g in period t, where g=l,...,Q., t1,...,T and




                                               20
il,...,N. Because antidumping suits are filed at the TSUS code level, for the purposes of this

paper a good is defmed to be TSUS product code.

        Let X.,, denote the rate at which suits are filed in industry i for good g in period t. We

assume that the distribution of f given A is Poisson (P(A)) with parameter A=A. We denote

this fact using the notation


                                       f, A      —
                                                      P(A).                                   (1)



These assumptions are consistent with f being a Poisson point process for the time interval t to

 + 1.

        We further assume that X., possesses a gsmma distribution FQs a), where Ift =exppçy

+ 0j. The vector X, contains the observable characteristics of industry i as of the beginning time

 which affect its filing rate; the vector y and the scalar a are parameters to be estimated. The

variable O is the unobservable propensity of firms in industry ito file antidumping suits. There

are many unobservable or non-quantifiable reasons why one industry may have a larger number

of filings than another industry. We account for this unobservable difference in behavior across

industries by O. We assume that O is independently and identically distributed across industries

and remains constant over time. Using our above notation we have:

                                            —
                                                r(expcKy      ÷
                                                                  0),a).                       (2)



Assumption (2) implies that each product class within industry i and in time period t has a

different mean rate of filing (AJ, although all of these filing rates are drawn from the same

gamma distribution.

                                                 21
        Combining assumptions (I) and (2), we have


                              4    X1,O —P(X) (3_      r(exp(47 + 8),a),                           (3)




                 denotes compounding or mixing the parameter          of the Poisson distribution with



a gamma distribution r(ex'y + 01),a). Results from Johnson and Kotz (1969, Chapter 5),

imply that f1 has a negative binomial distribution with parameters a and = expQ'y + 0j.

We abbreviate this as f — NB(a,pJ.           This discrete density takes the following form:


                            pr(f,,, =k] =                                                          (4)
                                            [a;k         ']uxt(1 +4)40').


We assume that conditional on 8, f is independent of             for all g h, i * j, and s * t.
        This distribution for f has the following properties. The mean is agk and the varance

is a(l+jsj. The parameter a effects shape the density of. If op1 <(1 + j.Q, then the mode
of f is zero. A sufficient condition for this inequality to hold isa< I. The smaller a becomes,

the greater the probability associated with the event         =0. Larger values of p, increase the

relative probability associated with larger values r The mode of the density is increasing in ap1,
- (1 + J.LJ   for ag   > (I + t.a). Because antiduinping filings are a relatively rare event, we expect
a to be substantially less than one, reflecting the fact that f = 0 is a highly probable event.

        Our data generation process captures the following logic. In each period t, X,1 the filing

rate for product class g in industry i is drawn from a f(exp(X1'y + 0J,a) distribution. Conditional


                                                    22
on this draw of X and the value of O, the actual filing behavior for an individual product class

evolves according to a Poisson process with rate ?. This compound distribution model allows

for differences in filing rates across product classes within an industry while at the same time

imposing the restriction that, on the average, all products within an industry file at the same rate.

From our estimation procedure we can recover estimates of the parameters of both the distribution

F(exp(X11'y + 81),a) and the filing Poisson process conditional on the realized value of A.gu.

       The filing of an antidumping suit is a rare event, but when it occurs there tends to be

clustering in the number of filings. For our sample of 2028 industry and year observations (338

industries times 6 years), only 122 have non-zero values of antidumping suit activity. However,

there can be large amounts of product-level filing activity, on the order of hundreds of TSUS

product codes, in a given industry and year. Within the context of our econometric model we

can think of this clustering of suits as caused by the positive skewness in the gamma distribution

for X1, so that most realizations of the rate of the Poisson process are very small. However, a

large realization occurs very rarely, which in turn implies a large number of observed filings.

In addition, the unobserved heterogeneity across industries represented by 0. allows for a much

larger (or smaller) level of filing activity from a given industry than is predicted by its observable

characteristics. Both the stoehastic nature of the mean filing rate and the unobservable industry-

level heterogeneity in the filing rate allow for a substantial amount of variability in the TSUS

code product-level filing rates across industries.

        To compute f, the total number of suits filed within industry i during period t, we sum

    from g1 to G, the total number of TSUS product codes within industry i in period t. This

summation yields


                                                 23
                                                                                                    (5)
                                                    g-I




This industry-level annual amount of filing activity is the observable dependent variable used to

estimate the parameters y and a and the across-industry distribution of heterogeneity go).

          To construct the conditional density of f. given 01, we utilize the fact that the sum of two

independent NB(a43) random variables is NB(2a,). This implies that fft possesses a negative

binomial distribution with parameters Ga and               = exp(X11'y + 0), conditional on the value of

0,.   Consequently, the conditional distribution of given 0 observation is


             prO] =                        exp(f,(Xjy      +   )) (I   + exp(X,'y   +               (6)




where    ['(a) is the gamma function F(a) =               - 'e "di.
                                                 tic1




We    have also made use of the relationship r(a+l) = a!. The joint density flmction of f =

(f19301,f1981,   f1915)' is

                                                   '9$,
                                    prQ0)          flpr[fJOJ,
                                                  i.1910
                                                                                                    (7)




                                                  24
where pr[f'ej is defmed in (6). Henceforth let &1,...,T6, denote the years 1980-1985.

       We now turn to our model of the impact of antidumping duties on industry-level imports

and output which is linked to the model of filing activity through the unobserved industry

propensity for filing, 0. We first specib' the product class import equation and output prediction

equations and then aggregate these to obtain the industry-level equations. Let IMP denote the

level of imports for product class g in industry i in time period t. Let OUTS denote the level of

output produced domestically in product class g in industry i in time period t. We treat time

period t as the interval of time [t, t + I).

       As discussed above, because our goal is to measure the within-year effects of the stages

of the antidumping suit resolution process from annual magnitudes, we first specify a model for

the rate of imports within any given year which incorporates how each of the stages of the suit

resolution process impacts the rate of imports and domestic output. We then aggregate these two

within-year flow equations to obtain the annual level of imports and domestic output. This

aggregation process produces indexes of annual suit activity consistent with our model of import

and domestic output flows. Aggregating these ThUS code-level annual level equations over all

products in each 4-digit SIC yields equations which can be estimated using our industry-level

data. This across-product aggregation process clarifies precisely how our industry-level annual

indexes of dumping suit activity are constructed from the product-level indexes.

        Our within-year model of the impacts of antidumping duties assumes that for any year (t)

and industry (I), the following linear differential equations characterize the instantaneous annual

rate of change in the real value of imports and domestic output at the Thus code-level:




                                                25
                          dJMF gil
                                     =     +     + ri + e(m)                                 (8)




                           ClOUT, = p ofl, +
                                                 + p 71g?'t) + e(o).                         (9)




where j3k, (k=m,o) are coefficients quantiing the impact of the unobservable industry

heterogeneity on the rate of change of the real value of imports and output in industry i for all

time and , (k=m,o) are fixed time effects for the two rates of change for year t. The variable
JOGD(5) counts the number of currently ongoing antidumping duties (001)) for all s E [t,t÷1)

in product class g in industry i and time period t. The coefficients p1k, (k=o,m) quantir the

impact of a one unit change in these count variables on the annual rate of imports and domestic

output for good g in industry i during time period t. The variables e,1(k), (leo,m) are

independent identically distributed shocks to the rate of imports and output for product class g,

in industry i, in period t. We assume that the disturbance vector e = ( e(m), e,(ofY possesses

a bivariate normal distribution with mean zero and covariance matrix I. We assume that e8 is

independently and identically distributed across goods, industries and over time.

       As discussed in the previous section, the hA must find sales at less than fair value and

the ITC must find injury due to dumped imports in order for a dumping duty to be imposed and,

hence, in order for l°°°(s) to take on a positive value. Both of these decisions are made by

established administrative procedures which do not depend on the specific domestic industry

under consideration. Consequently, we would not expect the treatment of individual firms by

                                               26
these administrative procedures to depend on O, the unobserved propensity of firms in industry

i to file antidumping suits. For the purposes of our econometric model this neutrality of the

resolution process with respect to the specific domestic industry under consideration implies that

6, industry i's unobserved filing propensity, is independent of J°°°(s), which reflects the joint

decision of the ITA and JTC to impose antidumping duties. Although the actual operation of the

suit resolution process favors this econometric assumption, to specify a model which allows for

the possible correlation between the decision of ITC and ITA to impose duties and O would

require specifying and estimating a model of the various stages of suit resolution process of these

two agencies. Such a model would have to predict both outcome and the duration of each stage

of the suit resolution process because both of these factors enter into the construction of the

annual indexes of industry-level antidumping suit activity used in our econometric model of

imports and domestic output. Given the complex nature of each of these administrative

processes, we leave this difficult task to future research.

       To clarify how the imposition of antidumping duties impacts the quantity of imports and

domestic output, consider the following example. Suppose that no antidumping duties are

currently imposed on imports from product class g in industry i during year t. In this case the

rate of imports in product class g in industry i is


                                  dIMFgs =           +   + e (m).                             (10)




Suppose that antidumping duties are imposed on imports in this product class sometime during

period t. The variable I°°°(s) will then take on the value 1 for all s e [t,t+l) such that

                                                27
antidumping duties are currently active. Consequently, the rate of imports will increase by the

value of f3 because duties are currently active for that product class. Should another set of

duties be imposed on imports within this product class during the same time interval, then

100D(5) wilt take on the value 2 for as long as both sets of duties are active; it will return to the

value of 1 when a single set of duties is again active and zero when no duties are active.'6

        Continuing with the derivation of our TSUS product code-level import and output

equations, we integrate (8) and (9) with respect to s from t to t + I to obtain


                            IMPS =          +    +
                                                     13TOGD,S
                                                                +
                                                                    eg(m)                       (II)


                                      =     +     + POGDM + e(o)                                (12)
                            O(JT,J,




           discussion in Section 2 characterized the impacts of the duties and other stages of the
suit resolution process in terms of the quantity of imports and domestic output at the 7-digit
TSUS level. Our data on imports, domestic output, and the industry-level output price deflator
are at the 4-digit SIC level. Thus, data limitations preclude us from deriving an index of the
quantity of output at the 4-digit SIC level. To do this would require prices and revenue shares
for all of the 7-digit TSUS products in each of the 4-digit SIC industries. As a result, our
estimates reflect real value effects as opposed to quantity effects. So long as the elasticity of
demand for each of these products is larger than one in absolute value, the quantity effects and
value effects should go in the same direction. The assumption of elastic demand for goods
produced by these domestic industries and their foreign competitors is consistent with available
empirical evidence. Consequently, our empirical results are useful to test the sign predictions of
our theories concerning impacts of the various stages of the suit resolution process on the quantity
of imports and domestic output in spite of our use of the real'value of imports and output data

                                                28
                     "I
where OGDg          = j !°7(s)dc.    In order to compute industry-level import and output equations




from these product-level equations, we must aggregate over all of the product classes g within

industry i in period t. Summing over all g yields:


                            IMP_ =           + Cd1 + 7OGD1 +                                  (13)




                                    =                    + PTOGDI   +                         (14)
                            OUT1              + EJS°G1




where

                                                             C,                       a,
   IMPS
          =   E IMPgü'               E OUT,, OdD1 = E OGD and ;(k) = E e,(k),
              g-I                    g1            g-l                                g—l




for Ic = m,o. This aggregation procedure implies that ib = ( 1(m),th(o))' is N(O,GkE) so that 1h

is heteroscedastic conditional on Oft. Dividing (13) and (14) by O yields a model more

amenable to estimation. This form of the model is analogous to the conventional fixed time-

effects, random individual effects panel data model. The model is


                    IMFJG1 =         + jm)/Q and O(J7'JQ1 =             + ;(o)/CI,,           (15)




                                                  29
where           =          +   + [37OGDJGfr and : = P°O,          +    + POGDJGk.              (16)
                    p'e,


The variables jib" and i? are the conditional means of the normalized annual imports and output

from industry i in period t. The normalized duty count variable can now be interpreted as an

intensity of suit activity. The normalized error vector JG11 is still heteroscedastic because of the

distribution for n given above. Consequently, we apply the appropriate weighting scheme in the

construction of the likelihood function.

        Several comments are in order about the structure of our econometric model. First, an

assumption implicit in equations (15) and (16) is that [3' and Is?, the coefficients measuring the

impact of the imposition of a duty on the flow of imports and domestic output, are the same

across all products and industries. We experimented with random coefficient assumptions for

these impact coefficients, where the coefficient for each industry is assumed to be a drawn from

an unknown distribution. However, we did not find that this modeling strategy resulted in

statistically superior description of the data. An alternative strategy to constructing OGD, our

index of dumping duty activity within an industry, would be to weight OGD by the share of

industry level imports or domestic output which is made up of each specific TSUS code product

However, value weighting in this manner is inconsistent with our underlying TSUS code within-

year model of the impacts of antidumping duties. We would be weighting each 000II by a

function of either IMPS or OUTS, both of which are functions of O and er Hence, within the

context of our model, this would imply contemporaneous correlation between the regressors, the




                                                 30
import- or output-weighted indexes of duty activity, and the error terms in the import and output

equations thus rendering our coefficient estimates inconsistent.'7

       Because we assume that G is known at the beginning of each year. aggregating over the

number of TSUS codes within a given 4-digit SIC does not impart any correlation between OOD

and 0 or OGDk and Cr So long as we assume that the probability that duties are imposed given

that a suit has been filed does not depend on 81, our estimation procedure will yield consistent

estimates of 137 and 1?•

       Using our distributional assumptions we can construct the joint density of IMP? =

(IMP/G11,...,WW1G)' and OUT' = (OUT411G11,...,OUTfl/Gff)' conditional on              as follows.

Conditional on the value of 01, the joint density of the two-dimensional vector
(IMPJG,,,OUT1/Gj is


               4(IMF JO, OUTJG,01 ) = .J_:a;'z exp(—l/2(v,(GEv1)),                           (17)




where v        ((IMP,,/0   - i.t), (OUTJG1 - j4))'.      This implies that the joint density of



(IMP1*,OUT1*)? conditional on 8 is




           have also estimated normalized import and output equations analogous to (15) but with
the import-penetration ratio and the capacity utilization rate on the left-hand-side rather than
imports and output Although there is no consistent method of aggregation from the product-code
level that would generate such models, the results from their estimation are qualitatively similar
to the results we report here.
                                                31
                                                 7
                       h(JMP,O(J7'      0,) = H +(JMPJGU, OUTJG, 8,).                                  (18)




Combining this joint density with the joint density of filings over the sample period yields the

following joint density of filings, output and imports over our sample period conditional on

                                             =   h(JMF,'OUT, O)prg 0,).
                      g(f,JMP,OUT, 0)                                                                  (19)




To complete the construction of the unconditional         joint density of filings,   output, and   imports

over our sample period for any industry we must integrate this conditional density with respect

to   the density of the of 0. We choose a discrete factor approximation to this unknown density.

Recent Monte Carlo work by Mroz and (luilkey (1991) has found these discrete factor structures

are able to model a wide-variety of potential heterogeneity distributions. For many models

involving discrete and continuous endogenous variables the parameters of the conditional

distribution of interest estimated from these models were found to dominate those obtained from

the maximum likelihood estimator in terms of mean squared error loss for sample sizes

considered. Integrating with respect to this discrete density of 8, (it1,0J k=1,...,K, where K is the

number of points of support of the discrete density and k the probability associated with the

point of support 0k' yields


                                            =
                                                     if,IMP,,our,1 0).                                 (20)




                                                     32
Taking the log of p(fj,IMP1*,OUT1*) and slimming from 1=1 to N yields the log-likelihood

function for our model. For all of our estimation results we found that past K =2, the parameter

estimates   of the three conditional mean functions and their standard error estimates did not

change appreciably. Consequently, all results reported in this paper are conditional on the value

K = 2 for the number of points of support of the assumed discrete distribution for e. In their

Monte Carlo study, Mroz and Guilkey (1991) also found that only a small number of points of

support are necessary to adequately estimate the parameters of economic interest.

       We summarize by describing the essential features of the joint density of 1MP1, and

OUT1' captured by our econometric modeling framework. This model allows correlation over

time between all six elements of each these three vectors and between any element of these three

vectors and all other elements in the remaining two vectors. Consequently, a fairly rich class of

correlation structures between these 18 variables (3 vectors of 6 elements) can be accounted for

in estimating the parameters of the conditional mean functions of these three variables using our

modeling framework.

        We now discuss the variables entering X1, the vector of observable industry characteristics

shifting the conditional mean of the filing rate of industry i and time period t. Our main

objective in selecting variables for inclusion inX follows from the logic that if a variable is used

to determine injury in an antidumping suit proceeding and industries are aware of this, then these

 variables should be predictors of future dumping suit activity. As discussed in Section 2,

 although the domestic industry must concern itself with the establishment of iiury, a determina-

 tion of LTFV sales by the foreign firm is also necessary for dumping to be found. Moreover,

 the margin by which the Commerce Department finds that final sales to the domestic market are



                                                 33
made at less than fair value determines the magnitude of the antidumping duties that the

petitioning industry can expect. Nevertheless, the Commerce Department's final LTFV margin

is extremely unpredictable and there are biases inherent in the process used to determine its level

which favor finding a positive margim This uncertainty is due in part to the different
methodologies, sometimes for a single suit, that can be used to determine this margin. Boltuck

and Litan (1991) contains several papers which discuss the large amount of uncertainty inherent

in the dumping margin determination process. In addition, a conclusion which is fairly consistent

throughout most of the papers in this volume is that there are strong biases in the process towards

fmding a positive dumping margin. The two papers by Francois, Palmeter, and Anspacher and

Boltuck, Francois, and Kaplan in the Boltuck and Litan (1991) volume are particularly persuasive

in this regard. For all of these reasons, we hypothesize that firms file primarily based on the

observable industry characteristics that determine injury, and allow for a sufficiently rich

stochastic structure for our model to account for unobservable differences in filing behavior

across industries.

       A major indicator of injury to the petitioning firms is the import penetration ratio IMPENE

= !MPJ(IMP, + OUTa. A large value of IMPEN is indicative of a large foreign presence in the

domestic market which may be injurious to the domestic firms. A second variable which is used

to assess injury is the domestic firm's capacity utilization rate, which we represent at the industry

level by CAPUk = OUT1JCAP1 (where °1"M is real shipments and CAPft is real capital stock).

We compute OIJTh as the nominal value of annual shipments divided by the industry specific

shipments price index. All real magnitudes are in 1972 dollars. We include IMPEN11.1 and

CAPU.1 in        because they are both predetermined as of the beginning of year t. We also


                                                 34
include time fixed effects in ; to account for any trends in filing activity not accounted by

changes in observable or unobservable industry characteristics.

       Finally, we include several additional variables to account for the fact that the magnitude

of IMPEN and CAPU necessary to fmd harmful dumping may vary with the size and the

structure of the domestic industry. We measure the size of an industry by EMP aggregate

employment for industry i in period t, and expect that a given level of IMPEN and CAPU is

more likely to be associated with a fmding of injury the larger the size of the industry. We

attempt to proxy for the (vertical) structhre of an industry by value-added per dollar of output

in the industry, VADD.JOUT., and expect that a given level of IMPEN and CAPU is more likely

to be associated with a fmding of injury to the domestic industry the lower is VADD/OUT, i.e.,

the farther downstream the domestic industry is located, and thus the smaller the share of primary

factor payments in total industry cost and the more sensitive those factor payments will be to

industry price changes. Because they are predetermined at the beginning of year t, lagged values

of VADD/OUT and EMP (their values for period t -1) are included in Xft.

       Before describing our results, we should note some properties of our econometric model.

Three of the variables in X are functions of lagged values of IMP1 and OUTW The presence of

O in the IMP.1 and OUT1 equations implies that IMPENM, CAPUIkI and

VADD.1/OUT which are elements of; in jift = expQCjy +              Oa,   are each functions of 8.

However, the Jacobian of the transformation from the vector of composite disturbances to the 4

IMP, and OUT1t equations (each of which contain 0) to the vector (41MP1,OUT1) is
triangular with l's along the diagonal, its determinant is equal to one. Consequently, our

likelihood function correctly accounts for this correlation between the regressors and error term


                                               35
in the filing rate equations, so that the maximum likelihood estimates are consistent estimates of

the true parameter values.

          Table 1 contains the sample means and standard errors for all of the variables used in our

analysis. The most noticeable aspect of this table is the large, relative to their means, standard

errors associated with the number of filings and the various indexes of suit activity given in the

lower rows of the table. This is consistent with the "rare event" nature of antidumping suit

activity. Mother aspect of note is the large amount of across-industry variability in the number

of TSUS codes per industry. Although the mean number of TSUS codes in 33.63, the standard

error indicates a substantial amount of variability in this number across industries and over time.

As mentioned above, all dollar magnitudes are in real 1972 dollars.

Results

          The first column of Table 2 presents estimates of the parameters of the filing rate

equation. The first column of Tables 3 and 4 presents estimates of the parameters of the

conditional mean functions given in (16) which are used assess the impact of duties on the flow

of both imports and domestic output. Consistent with our "outcome filer" strategy, we fmd that

the conditional mean of filings changes in the predicted manner due to changes in any of the four

regressors. For example, higher filing rates are associated with industries that exhibit higher

import penetration ratios, lower capacity utilization, higher employment and lower shares of
primary factor payments in total costs. As indicated by the very small value of a, the density of

filing implied by our model is extremely positively skewed. Recall that in our mixture model

interpretation of the density of filings, the filing rate X is drawn from a flexp(X'y + O),a)

distribution. The estimated value of a implies a very positively skewed distribution of filing


                                                 36
rates, where for most goods and time periods, the filing rate is very small, but with a small

probability a very large , can be drawn which results in a high level of filing activity during
that period. Because E(f&J = exppç'y)E(exp(e))a implies ln(E(çj) =             + ln(E(exp(e)) +

Ln(a), the elements of y, when multiplied by the corresponding element of X, have the interpreta-

tion of elasticities of the expected number of filings with respect to that element of X.

Evaluating these elasticities for IMPEN and CAPU at the sample means given in Table I yields

values of 0.43 and -0.98. In other words, if the value of IMPEN is 1 percent higher for one

industry relative to another, then expected number of filings in the current year should be 0.43

percent higher for this industry, assuming the value of IMPENS, for other industry is the sample

mean of IMPEN. This same elasticity calculation for EMP and VADD/OUT yields 0.38 and -

1.53.

        Turning to the effects of antidumping duties on imports and domestic output, the

coefficient associated with COD in Table 3 implies that the imposition of an antidumping duty

on a single TSUS code predicts a reduction of 10.55 million 1972 dollars in the annual rate of

imports. This same antidumping duty predicts an increase of 7.13 million 1972 dollars in the

annual rate of domestic output in this import-competing product, although this output effect is

too imprecisely estimated to place much confidence in this value.



                   4. Investigation, Suspension, and Withdrawal Effects

        While the results reported in Tables 2-4 provide estimates of the import and domestic

output effects of antiduinping duties, we have argued above that this yields an understanding of




                                               37
the trade effects of antidumping law which is incomplete at best. We now develop an expanded

econometric framework which will allow us to analyze the broader effects of antiduinping law.

Econometric Model

          To quantify the magnitudes of the effects on imports and domestic output of the various

stages of the antidumping suit filing process we characterize the jointdistribution of f, IMP1' and

OUT with the same framework used to assess the impact of duties only. However, the

conditional mean functions for the industry level imports and outputs now include accumulated

index variables similar to OGD1 for the other stages of the antidumping suit filing process. In

light of the discussion in Section 2 we quantify the impacts of (1) filing an antidumping suit,

(ii) an affirmative preliminary LTFV determination, and (lii) the various post-investigation

outcomes. In particular, we attempt to quantify the differential impact on imports and domestic

output from suits ending in (a) duties, (b) suspension, and (c) withdrawal. Suits ending in a

negative determination are taken to have no lasting impact on subsequent imports and domestic

Qutput.

          In this case the conditional mean of our industry level output and import equations are

based on the additional indicator variables 1(s), (k=OGP, OGPLFV, OGSUS, and OGWD)

which count, respectively, the number of currently ongoing antidumping petitions (OGP), ongoing

affirmative preliminary LTFV determinations (OGPLFV), ongoing suspended suits (OUSUS), and

ongoing withdrawn suits (OGWD) for all a E [t,t+l) in product class g in industry i and time

period t. The indicator variable j00E'(5) turns on at the filing date of the suit and remains on

until the suit's final disposition date. The indicator variable I&100P12v(s) remains on from the date

of the affirmative preliminary LTFV decision until the suit's final disposition date. The final


                                                 38
disposition of the suit is detennined by one of the following four events: (I) a negative final

determination, (2) the imposition of duties, (3) the suspension of the investigation, or (4) the

withdrawal of the suit by the petitioner. Using this variable we can construct the integrated,

industry-aggregate indexes of activity in each of these portions of the suit filing process for year

t. For the same reasons given for Io0)(s) in Section 3, we maintain the assumption that O,

industry i's unobserved filing propensity, is independent of I'(s) for the additional indicator

variables (k=OGP, OGPLFV, OGSUS, and OGWD) as well.

        In terms of this new notation the normalized conditional mean import and output functions

become:

                 =    p"$ +    + 137001'S/GM      + PrOGPLF   J1 + I3TOGSUSJG
                                                                                               (21)
                                    +13'OGWDJG,, + 1370GDJG




                  =   Poe +    + POGPJG           +
                                                      P°OGPLFVJG1 + 13OGSUSJGI
                                     +                                                         (22)
                                          13:0GwDJG1 + I3OGDJG,J




                                   I.!
                               =         1'(s)è, OGPLFV,J, = Ir'"(s)ds,
                       0GP11       J                        J
where                                    1+1                       ttl
                       OGSUS = j I,°9s)dc 0GWD                 =




                                                  39
Each of these four variables without the g subscript given in (21) and (22) is the sum of that

variable over the G, TSUS products in industry i for yeart. The coefficients , (j=l,2...5 and
k=o,m) quantify the impact of a one unit change in these count variables on the rate of imports

and output in industry i during time period t. Assuming the same distribution for rj defined

earlier, the likelihood function for this model is identical to the one given in (20) except for the

expanded set of regressors in the conditional mean function for the normalized level of imports

and domestic output.

Results

       The estimates of the parameters of the filing equation obtained from jointly estimating this

equation with our expanded model for the conditional mean of imports and domestic output do

not differ very much from the estimates in the first column of Table 2 in terms of their signs and

magnitudes or the precision with which they are estimated. Consequently, we omit these results,

and simply note that they are again consistent with our "outcome filer" interpretation of filing

behavior. The elasticities of the expected number of filings with respect to changes in any of the

four variables evaluated at the sample mean of the vector of regressors are: IMPEN, 0.455;

CAPU, -0.876; EMP, 0.376, and VADD/OUT, -1.66.

       The results in the second column of Tables 3 and 4 shed some light on the importance

of the non-duty impacts of antidumping law discussed earlier. In particular, in the second column

of Table 3, we find fairly precisely estimated import effects for the stages of the investigation

process included in our estimation. Consistent with the "outcome filer" interpretation of

investigation effects, we fmd a slight acceleration of imports with the filing of an antidumping

petition. The major reduction in the flow of imports occurs with the finding of a positive


                                                40
preliminary LTFV determination. This affirmative determination is predicted to reduce the

annual flow of imports relative to the pre-suit base rate of imports by 25.36 million 1972 dollars

(33.81 - 8.45). If the petition is suspended, then the annual rate of imports as a result of the

suspension agreement is predicted to be 29.57 million 1972 dollars below the pre-petition base

rate. The imposition of duties predicts a similar reduction in the annual rate of imports (24.95

million 1972 dollars) to that accompanying a suspension agreement. However, a suit ending in

withdrawal predicts no statistically significant change in the flow of imports relative to the base

level of imports for that industry and time period. The output effects in the second column of

Table 4 are largely opposite in sign and smaller in absolute value, but less precisely estimated

than those for the import equation. Together, these results are consistent with the view that

temporary protection from imports and a proportionately smaller increase in domestic output is

a typical outcome of an affirmative preliminary LTFV determination, even if the suit does not

end in duties. The first column of Figure 5 reports the point estimate of this net (sum of imports

and domestic output) effect obtained by adding analogous suit activity coefficients in the second
                                                                         -
column of Tables 3 and 4.

       Figures 2 through 5 provide depictions of the import, output, and the sum of imports and

output effects of various hypothetical petitions according to our estimation results. The figures,

which are meant only to be suggestive of the kind of import and output effects that might

accompany an antidumping investigation, are constructed under the assumption that the

preliminary LTFV determination occurs 5 months into the investigation, suspensions (if they

occur at all) occur 10 months into the investigation, and final determinations (if they occur at all)

occur at the end of the 12th month of the investigation. These timing assumptions approximate


                                                41
the statutory limits imposed on the different phases of the investigation process in the absence

of "extraordinary complications" (see note 6). We use the coefficient estimates given in the

second columns Tables 3,4, and 5 to compute the cumulative impact on imports, output and the

sum of imports and domestic output. Because the coefficient estimates for OGWD1/G were

never significantly different from zero, we do not use our point estimates to illustrate theeffects

of a withdrawn petition. All hypothetical petitions depicted in the figures are filed in month 6

and, if they run the full course of the investigation, have a fmal determination 1 year later in

month 18. All import and output effects are measured as deviations from zero.

       Figure 2 depicts the case of an investigation which had an affirmative preliminary LTFV

determination and a duty imposed after the final determination. According to our estimates in

Table 3, filing would lead imports to rise above their baseline until the date of preliminary LTFV

determination, at which point imports begin falling. By the seventh month of the investigation,

the import level is back down to its baseline level, and continues to drop below baseline for the

remaining 5 months of the investigation. Duty imposition at the end of 12 months then leads

essentially to a continuation of the level of protection afforded over the last seven months of the

investigation. Thus, as Figure 2 makes clear, our point estimates suggest that the investigation

effects restrict trade from the date of an affirmative preliminary LTFV determination forward as

if the expected antidumping duties were put in place on that date. Given that this accounts for

a bit more than half of the statutory investigation period, and that the first five months of the

investigation see a small rise in imports, we conclude that a petitioning firm can expect to receive

roughly half the import relief during the period of investigation that it would have received if

 antidumping duties had been imposed from the date of filing. This is illustrated by comparing


                                                 42
Figure 3, which depicts the import effects of a petition whose preliminary LTFV determination

is affirmative but whose final determination is negative, with Figure 4, which depicts the effect

on the level of imports if an antidumping duty had been imposed on the date of filing. Figure

5 depicts the import effects of a suspension agreement. As noted above, our point estimates

suggest that suspension agreements are at least as restrictive of imports as would be the

imposition of antidumping duties. These same figures paint qualitatively the exact opposite

picture with respect to domestic output.

       For the sum of both imports and domestic output, Figures 2-5 all show that although the

domestic output is enhanced by the same stages of the suit resolution process that restrict imports

and is restricted by those stages that enhance imports, the net effect on the sum of imports and

domestic output is, for the most part, dominated by the import effect. For example, in Figure

2, the net effect of the filing of a petition is a slight acceleration in the sum of imports and

domestic output, because the surge in imports is larger in absolute value than the drop in

domestic output, although the standard error estimates in the second column of Table 5 shown

that this net effect is imprecisely estimated. However, the net effects of both an affirmative

preliminary LTFV decision and the imposition of a dumping duty are fairly precisely estimated

to be negative, with the trade restricting effect dominating the domestic output enhancing effect

in both cases. The net effect of a suspension agreement is also precisely estimated to be negative.

Consequently, the net effect of the various stages of the suit resolution process and suit outcomes

in Figures 2-5 is a reduction in the sum of imports and domestic output. These net results are

consistent with the view that the suit resolution process, the presence of suspension agreements,

and the imposition of duties all result in net losses in domestic consumer welfare.



                                               43
               5. Investigation Effects with Both Process and Outcome Filers

        The results of the previous section appear to tvor the outcome filing strategy over the

process filing strategy. However, one would expect the process filing strategy to be the far less

common strategy which, if used, should be used by industries which are able to maintain "orderly

competition" in their domestic market and can coordinate (either through a strong industry

association or small numbers) to agree to file antidumping suits in periods of sufficiently low

capacity utilization. We would expect this filing strategy to be more difficult to pursue by

industries characterized by large numbers of firms without a strong industry association. Such

necessary conditions for the use of the process filing strategy imply that if this strategy is used

by any industries in our sample, it is likely to be a small number of them. Consequently, we

would expect the outcome filing effects to dominate in a model that does not simultaneously

allow for the possibility of outcome and process ifiers.

        In this section we examine whether it is possible to find evidence consistent with the use

of the process filing strategy by a subset of industries in our sample. Because the filing strategy

used by a firm is unobservable, we must account for this possibility in our econometric model

of filings, imports, and output. However, for the reasons just discussed there are also observable

variables that we believe should increase the probability a given industry is using the process

filing strategy rather than the outcome filing strategy.

       Our general modeling approach is to specifr the filing strategy used by an industry for

our entire sample time period as a latent indicator (04) random variable y, where y =       1   if the

industry uses the process filing strategy and y1 =0 if the industry uses the outcome filing strategy.

The probability that y takes on the value 1 is assumed to depend on observable and unobservable


                                                44
industry characteristics at the beginning of our sample period. Conditional on each one of these

filing strategies we hypothesize a conditional distribution of filings, imports and output for our

sample period for each industry which embodies the restrictions on the mean function of industry-

level filings implied by each of the filing strategies.

        The unrestricted form of our two-strategy model allows for the existence of two separate

joint distributions of filings, imports, and domestic output, conditional on the unobservable latent

variable y. It places no restrictions on which variables enter the filing rate function for either

strategy. It also places no restrictions on signs and relative magnitudes of the coefficients on the

five indicator variables in the mean function for imports and domestic output for either strategy.

Finally, our unrestricted model places no restrictions on how observable characteristics of the

industry affect the probability it is using either of the two filing strategies. If certain restrictions

can be imposed on this unrestricted two-strategy model, then we can conclude that there is

evidence for the simultaneous existence of both outcome and process filers.

       The restrictions on our econometric model are guided by the theoretical results discussed

in Section 2. These results imply that process filers decide to initiate antiduinping suits based

purely on the level of capacity utilization in their industry. Consequently, the filing rate function

for the joint distribution of filings, imports, and output for the process filing strategy should

contain only capacity utilization. The theory gives no guidance concerning the dynamics of the

impact of capacity utilization on filing. We included lags of capacity utilization up to the point

where the null hypothesis of excluding further lags could not be rejected. This lead to the

inclusion of CAPU.1 and CAPU. On the other band, according to our discussion in Section

2, the filing rate function for outcome filers should contain all the variables used to determine


                                                  45
 injury described in Section 3--IMPEN.1, CAPU1, EMP, and VADDJOUT111. Although the

 same five indicator variables--OOP, OGPLFV, OUSUS, OGWD, OOD—enter the mean functions

 for imports and output for both filing strategies, the coefficients associated with these variables

 should differ across the two filing strategies in the manner predicted in our discussion of the

 outcome and process filing strategies in Section 2. Evidence consistent with the co-existence of

outcome and process filers is that: (1) the restrictions on which variables enter into the process

and outcome filing equations are not rejected by the data; and (2) the sign.restrictions on the

coefficients associated without five petition-stage variables are not rejected for the import and

domestic output equations.

       Although the true filing strategy used by an industry is unobservable, there are several

observable industry characteristics which may increase the probability that it is using this strategy.

We account for this by specif'ing the probability an industry is using theprocess filing strategy

as a function of observable industry characteristics. Several of these characteristics are meant to

reflect variation in the cost of using antidumping law across industries andcapture the notion that

the process filing strategy—whose benefits are relatively short-lived--is less likely to be chosen

by industries with high filing costs. The first characteristic is the beginning of the sample degree

of unionization in the industry. All firms in an industry benefit from theprotection provided by

an antidumping suit, but only those firms filing the suit bear the costs. We expect more highly

unionized industries to have higher probabilities of being process filers because a strong union

presence in an industry provides an additional across-firm organization to assist in overcoming

the coordination and cost-sharing problems associated with filing an antidumping suit on behalf

of the industry. The second factor is the size of industry, which we measure by the beginning


                                                 46
of the sample level of employment. Because there is a substantial fixed cost component to filing

an antidumping suit, a large industry can share these fixed costs over a greater number of firms

and employees and therefore reduce the per firm and per employee suit filing cost. This in turn

means that less per firm expected benefits are necessary to trigger an antidumping suit petition,

making process filing more likely. The final variable is the beginning of sample import

penetration ratio. We expect larger values of this variable to be associated with higher

probabilities of process filing, for the reason that unless firms are faced with substantial import

competition there is very little reduction in domestic output due to these imports and therefore

only a small benefit to reducing the flow of these imports. Consequently, the firms in the

industry will have little incentive to concern themselves with pursuing temporary protection

through antidumping law.

Econometric Model

       The econometric model which we use to estimate the impacts of antidumping law on

imports and output while allowing for the possibility of both process and outcome filers extends

the basic econometric model of the joint distribution of filings, imports, and output developed and

utilized in previous sections. We wiLl outline the additions to this framework necessary to

construct the likelihood function in this case.

       First, we speci& a distribution for the filing strategy regime indicator y. In this case we

hypothesize that

                                 pr(,yj= 1 01)C'(;'a+p01),                                    (23)

where C(t) is the standard normal distribution function, ; is a vector of beginning-of-the-sample

observable industry characteristics which predict the filing strategy used by an industry, and 01


                                                  47
is the unobservable industry characteristic defined earlier, which also influences the filing strategy

used by an industry.

         The conditional mean of the filing rate for the outcome strategy is

                                     + 73°CAPU1a,.i +
          exp(y1, +   y°,1MPEN111                     y?EMP,1 + y,°(VADD1IOUT1) + 0,)           (24)



where m denotes the set of fixed time-effects. The conditional mean for the process strategy is

                               =
                                   exp(y1
                                            +             + IçCAPUJ,..2 + Se,)                  (25)



where 6 is a parameter which accounts for how O impacts the filing rate under the process filing

strategy. Following the procedure to derive the density of t given in (7), one can derive the

density of f1 conditional on y1 and 0, by substituting the strategy-specific conditional mean

function into pr(f 0). This yields pi(f 01,yj for j0,P.
         Let the conditional mean function for IMP1G and OUTJG for the outcome (0) and

process (P) strategies be defmed as:


              4I =         +       + 14'QGPJG + 13'OGFLFVJGI,          +
                                                                           PrOGSUSJGI            2
                                     +                +
                                         Iit'OGWDJG       P'OGDJG,,




where k—m,o (for imports and output) and j=O,P (for outcome and process filers), so that we

allow for different -coefficients for each filing regime. We assume that the disturbances to the

conditional mean function for the process filing regime (1k') and for the outcome regime (ti,°)
each   possess the N(0,GI) distribution defmed earlier. By substituting the process strategy or

                                                 48
outcome strategy conditional mean vector for imports and output into (18), we can derive

bj(IMP*,OUT1*181,y1), the density of imports and output conditional on y (the filing strategy j

being followed by the industry) and 81.

          Following the logic used to derive the joint density of filings, imports, and output for the

sample period given in (19) we can derive this same joint distribution condition on the filing

regime and 8. Let


                   gjj,JMP,OUT,' 8,.y) = h/IMP,0U'r,fl 8,.y,)prfj                                (27)



where jr0 or P. Then the density of (f,IMP*,OUT*), conditional on O only, can be derived

by "integrating" with respect to the density of the indicator variable y1:


              g0f,,IMP1OTJT,    8,) = g,(f,IMF,OUT, 8,, y, = 1)CD(z,'a            +
                                                                                      p6)
                        +                                                                        (28)
                          g0JMP,'OUT,' 8,, y, = 0)(1 — 'D(z/a + p8)).



To obtain the unconditional distribution of filings, imports and output, we integrate with respect

to the discrete factor approximation for       in the same manner as is done to derive (20). This

yields:



                       p0,(f,,IMF, 'OUT,) =        ig0f,IMF,,OUT,1 6).                          (29)




                                                 49
Taking the log of p0,(f1,IMP1*,OUT1*) yields the likelihood function which we maximize to

compute the estimates of the parameters of the three conditional mean functions for the two filing

strategies and the parameters of the filing strategy probability function.

Results

        Table 6 presents the coefficient estimates for the Probability of Process Filer equation

given in (23). Because we assume that pr(y1 = 1) = (b(z1ta + ej the elements of a have the same

interpretation as those from a probit model. They are proportional to the increase in the
probability of the event y1 =   I (the industry is a process filer) brought about by a one unit
increase in the variable associated with that coefficient Consequently, these estimates imply that

the probability an industry is a process filer is increasing in the percentage of all workers in the

industry that are unionized in 1979, the level of industry-wide employment in 1979, and the

import penetration ratio for this industry in 1979. To provide magnitudes which are more

amenable to interpretation we compute the average, over all 338 industries in our sample,

percentage increase in the probability that industry i is a process filer brought about by a one

percent increase in that element of;. These average probability elasticities are reported in the

second column in Table 6. For example, a one percent increase in the number of employees in

the industry predicts a 0.43 percent average increase in the probability that the industry is a
process filer.

       The second and third columns of Table 2 present the filing equation estimates for the

outcome and process filing strategies. The outcome filing results are consistent with the earlier

two filing equation estimations. All of the variables enter in qualitatively the same manner as

for the two models estimated above. The filing equation for the process filing strategy excludes


                                               50
all variables but two lags of CAPU. According to our discussion of the process filing strategy,

only capacity utilization should enter this filing equation. The addition of the remaining three

regressors, IMPEN, flAP, and VADD/OUT, to this equation does not add any statistically

significant explanatory power to the model (the likelihood ratio test does not reject the null

hypothesis that these three coefficients are jointly zero), which lends some support to the presence

of two distinct filing strategies.

       The third and fourth columns of Tables 3-4 present the import and output equations for

the outcome and process filing strategies, respectively. For the outcome filing strategy, the third

column of Tables 3 and 4 yield investigation effects similar to the effects estimated for the single

filing strategy import and output equations presented in the previous section. The major
difference between these two sets of results is the slightly decreased estimated precision for the

estimates in the third column of Tables 3 and Table 4. The results in the fourth column of

Tables 3 and 4 present a different story of the impacts of antidumping suits on imports and

output All of the investigation effects beyond simply the filing of an antidumping suit are

considerably smaller in absolute value and quite imprecisely estimated. The only investigation

effect which seems present under the process filing strategy is the suit filing impact Under this

strategy, the filing of antidumping suit predicts an immediate reduction in the rate of imports and

an increase in the rate of domestic output. The remaining stages of the process appear to have

little impact on the rate of imports or domestic output Even the impact of antidumping duties,

although estimated to be trade-restricting, is not very precisely estimated.

        To provide a comparative view of the accumulated trade restricting effects of these

different filing strategies we present figures depicting the estimated accumulated trade distortions



                                                51
from a hypothetical suit filing, analogous to Figures 2 through 5. Figure 6 depicts the effect on

the levels of imports, output, and the sum of imports and output of a petition that is filed by an

outcome filer in month 6, receives an affirmative preliminsty LTFV determination in month 11,

and a negative final determination in month 18. Figure 7 depicts the import, output and net

import and output effect for the same investigation history when filed by a process filer. As the

figures depict, there appears to be a striking difference in the pattern of import, output and net

response to the various phases of the investigation process across the two filing strategies in a

way that is consistent with our outcome and process filer interpretations.

       The net effect results for outcome filers, presented in column 3 of Table 5, are consistent

with those obtained for the single filing strategy model. Although all but the OGPLFVjt/Gft and

OGD/G net coefficients are essentially zero, these two coefficients indicate significant net

import and output reductions from these stages of the suit resolution process under the outcome

filing strategy, and hence net domestic consumer welfare losses. The net effect results for

process filers, presented in column 4 of Table 5, imply that the only nonzero net effect is the

large OGPJG effect. This effect indicates substantial net import and output reductions from the

filing of a petition under the process filing strategy. Consequently, there are also welfare losses

to domestic consumers under the process filing strategy. More importsntly these welfare losses

result from the filing of an antidumping petition which is evidently motivated by a desire to

secure the trade restiicting effects of the investigation alone.

       Although as emphasized at the beginning of this section, the filing strategy pursued by

a given industry is a unobservable, our model does allow the computation of the probability that




                                                52
an industry is a process filer given the estimated parameters of our econometric model and the

vector; from the equation:


                              pr(y, = I   z,)   =             + e').                          (30)




The sample average of these probabilities gives an estimate of the proportion of industries

pursuing the process filing strategy. For our parameter estimates, the sample avenge of the

probability that an industry is a process filer is 3.5 percent Assuming the validity of our two

strategy model, this implies that approximately 10 industries are process filers, with the vast

majority being outcome ifiers. This is consistent with our initial view that outcome filing is

major use of antidumping law.

       To further investigate the implications of our two filing strategy model we computed the

value of (30) for all observations in our sample and ranked industries by the probability of being

a process filer. The three highest probability process filer industries are: SIC-3312, Blast

Furnaces, steel works, and rolling mills; SIC-3714, Motor vehicle parts and accessories; and SIC-

3711, Motor vehicles and passenger car bodies. Other notable industries in the top ten highest

probability process filer category are: SIC-3721, Aircraft; and SIC-3662, Radio and television




                                                    53
transmitting, signaling and detection equipment and appaiatus.'t Once we move outside the ten

highest probability process filer industries, the probability that any of the remaining industries is

a process filer falls rapidly from less than 10 percent to 0.7 percent. Consequently, all of the

remaining industries have a very low estimated probability of following the process filing

strategy.

       Finally, recall that as we have defmed them, outcome filers initiate suits primarily to

obtain the protection that comes with a fmding of dumping and the explicit remedies that follow

(duties or suspension agreements). On the other hand, process filers are primarily interested in

the temporary protection afforded by the antidumping suit resolution process, and do not file with

the intent of eventually obtaining explicit remedies. Thus, a final implication of the process filing

strategy is that the rate of duties per suit flied should be substantially lower for the process filers

relative to the outcome filers. To investigate this hypothesis we took the ten highest probability

process filer industries and computed the sum of OGD over these industries for all six years in

our sample. We then divided this sum by the sum of f. over these same industries for all six

years in our sample. This ratio gives the per-suit level of duty activity for this process filer

sample. We repeated this same calculation for the remaining observations in our sample to


     "Although we would like to caution that these probabilities are conditional on the validity
of both our underlying process filer theory and our econometric model, anecdotal evidence seems
to supports the plausibility of these results. For example, concerning the filing behavior of the
steel industry (the industry most likely according to our results to be a process filer) The
Economist writes:

       One lawyer who specializes in international trade says that, for a struggling mill,
       $400,000 to bring an antidumping suit is money well-spent, even without a fmal
       ruling; the process gums up the trade gears sufficiently to steer buyers back to
       domestic steel (The Economist, May 16, 1992, p. 98).


                                                 54
compute the per-suit level of duty activity for this outcome filer sample. Dividing the process

filer ratio by the outcome filer ratio yields 5.5. This indicates that, for oursample, a product

level antidumping suit is 5.5 times more likely to end in duties for an outcome filer than for one

of our ten highest probability process filers. This result is consistent with the view thatprocess

filers file less for the eventual protection provided by duties than do outcome filers.



                                           6. Conclusion

        We summarize our empirical findings as follows. First, we fmd strong evidence that

antidumping law effects imports and import-competing output in important ways other than

through the imposition of duties. In particular, we fmd that suspension agreements lead to

outcomes which are comparable in their restrictiveness to the imposition of antidumping duties.

Moreover, there appear to be important investigation effects associated with antidumping

petitions: our results suggest that petitioning firms may enjoy import relief during the

investigation period which amounts to about half of what they might expect from a positive final

determination and duty imposition. We also find evidence of two kinds of filing strategies:

"outcome" filers who file petitions for the possibility of seeing duties imposed, and "process"

filers who file for the trade-restrictive effects of the investigation process alone. Finally, we fmd

little evidence that withdrawn petitions lead to restricted trade.

       To provide some idea of the magnitude of these within-investigation and post-investigation

effects of antidumping suits we have made some rough calculations of the trade distorting effects

of all of the antidumping suits that occur over our sample period using our single strategy




                                                55
parameter estimates given in the second column of Tables 3 and 4. To compute the total sample

distortions to imports and output from the suit resolution process we compute:

            NT                                                      NT
         = E E F3TOGP.             +
                                       'OGPLFV           and D, = E E I37OGPk + 13;0GPLFvk.
           I—I    "1                                               i—i I—i




To compute the entire sample distortions to imports and output from the post-investigation

effects, we compute:

                 NT                                                NT
           =                 13'OGSUSJ,
                                          +
                                              P,'OGDJ,   and D = S S s;oasus,,   + f3OGD1.
                 1—I   i—I                                         I—I s—I




We   exclude the effects due to withdrawn suits because the coefficients associated with

OGWDit/Ga in both the import and output equations are never statistically different from zero.

We then compute IMPTOT and OiJTrOT, which are the sum of total imports and output over

all indusizies and years in our sample, and express Dm and D' as a percentage of IMPTOT,

and D° and D°D as a percentage of OUTFOT. We find that over our sample of industries
for the six years of available data, the total amount of import reductions due to all investigation

effects is approximately -0.26 percent of total imports over the sample period. On the other

hand, the total distortions due to post-investigation effects is -4.37 percent of IMPTOT. Both the

total investigation and post-investigation effects are a very small percentage of OUTFOT, 0.0008

percent and 0.42 percent respectively. To compute the net import and output effects for our

sample period we compute D' +                  D° as a percentage of OUTFOT + IMPTOT, and D'

                                                         56
+ D° as a percentage of OUflOT+IMPTOT. The investigation and post-investigation net
distortions percentages are -0.03 and -0.14.

       An obvious question that arises if one takes seriously the investigation effects we have

found is: Why don't more industries file antidumping suits? There are two factors which work

against more industries pursuing this form of protection. The first has to do with the design of

antidumping law. As mentioned earlier, suits must be filed by either an interested party on behalf

of the industry, or are self-initiated by the ITA. Although the interested party is usually an

industry association or a large fraction of firms in the industry, there still is a cost of organizing

and coordinating to take the necessary action to file a suit. The second factor is the explicit

economic cost of hiring the necessary legal and administrative expertise to file an antidumping

suit. This cost can easily amount to a half-miffion dollars or more, and the protection provided,

assuming neither duties nor a suspension agreement is eventually imposed, lasts roughly one year.

Consequently, the expected annual benefits to the petitioning party should at least exceed these

costs in order for filing to be rational. This circumstance does not seem likely for most of the

industries in our sample.




                                                57
                                         References

       Abowd, John M., "The NBER Immigration, Trade, and Labor Markets Data Files,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 3351, May 1990.

      Anderson, James E., "Domino Dwnping, I: Competitive Exporters," American Economic
Review 82, (March 1992): pp. 65-83.

      Boltuck, R. and RE. Litan, Down in the Dumps: Administration of the Unfair Trade
Laws, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1991.

       Dale, Richard, Anti-dumping Law in a Liberal Trade Order, St Martin's Press, New
York, (1980).

       Finger, J.M., "The Industry-Country Incidence of "Less than Fair Value Cases in U.S.
Import Trade," Quarterly Review of Economics and Business, 21(2), 1981, 260-279.

       Harrison, Ann, "The New Trade Protection: Price Effects of Anti-Dumping and
Countervailing Measures in the United States," World Bank working paper, April 1991.

       Hartigan, J., S. Kaznma, and P. Perry, "The Injury Determination, Category and the Value
of Relief from Dumping," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1989, 183-186.

       Hernander, M. and J.B. Schwartz, "An Empirical Test of the Impact of the Threat of U.S.
Trade Policy: The Case of Antidumping Duties," Southern Economic Journal, July 1984, 59-
79.

      Hexner, Ervin, The International Steel Cartel, The University of North Carolina Press,
Durham, NC, (1943).

       Horlick, Gary, Personal communication, 1989.

       Johnson, N.L., and S. Kotz, Distributions in Statistics: Discrete Distributions, John
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1969.

       Lichtenberg, F. and H. Tan, "An Industry Level Analysis of Import Relief Petitions Filed
by U.S. Manufacturers, 1958-85," unpublished manuscript, April 1990.

      Messerlin, Patrick A., "The EC Anfidumping Regulations: A First Economic Appraisal,
1980-1985," Weltwirtschaftlicbes Archly, 125, 1989.




                                               58
       Messerlin, Patrick A., "Anti-dumping Regulations or Pro-Cartel Law? The EC Chemical
Cases," The World Economy, (December 1990): pp. 465-492.

       Mm; Tom and P. Guilkey, "Discrete Factor Approximations for Use in Simultaneous
Equations Models with Both Continuous and Discrete Endogenous Variables," Department of
Economics, University of North Carolina, November 1991.

      Prusa, Thomas I., "The Selection of Antidumping Cases for ITC Determination," (in) RE.
Baldwin (ed) Empirical Studies in Commercial Policy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1991.

       Prusa, Thomas .J., "Why are so many antidumping petitions withdrawn?' Journal of
International Economics, August 1992, pp. 1-20.

         Salvatore, D. "Import Penetration, Exchange Rates and Protection in the United States,"
Journal of Policy Modeling, 9(1), 1987.
        Staiger, Robert W., and Frank L Wolak, "Strategic Use of Antidumping Law to Enforce
Tacit International Collusion," unpublished manuscript, (March 1991).

         Staiger, Robert W., and Frank A. Wolak, "The Effect of Antidumping Law in the
Presence of Foreign Monopoly," Journal of International Economics, May 1992a, pp. 265-287.

       Staiger, Robert W., and Frank A. Wolak, "Collusive Pricing with Capacity Constraints in
the Presence of Demand Uncertainty," Rand Journal of Economics, Summer 1992b, pp. 203-
220.

        Staiger, Robert W., and Frank A. Wolak, "The Trade Effects of Antidumping Law:
Theory and Evidence," in Alan Deardorif and Robert Stem (eds.) Analytical and Negotiating
Issues in the Global Trading System, The University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor, 1994, pp.
231-261.

         "America's Steel Industry: Protection's Stepchild," The Economist, (May 16, 1992) pp.
97-98.

         "Imported Sweaters Face Duty," The New York Times, (April 24, 1990) p. Cl.




                                               59
                   Table 1: Means and Standard Errors of Variables

    2028_Year-Industry_Observations (i1,...,N=338 industries and t1,...,T=6 years)
  Variable               Definition                   Mean              Standard Error
     f                  Total Filings                 0.928                  13.69
    Git              Total TSUS Codes                 33.63                 131.86
   IMP               Real Imports in 10'
                                                      291.14                1151.19
                        19Th dollars

   OUTS              Real Output in 10'
                                                   2168.61                 4161.81
                       1912 dollars

   EMPft             Industry Level Em-
                       ploymentxlO'               .   136                   62.18

VADD1/OUT,1         Value-Added
                   Dollar of Real Output              0.482                 0.134

  CAPU,,             Capacity Utilization
                           Rate                       2.799                 1.899

  IMPENk             Import Penetration
                           Ratio                      0.119                 0.149

   00MM            Ongoing Antidumping
                         Petition                     0.547                 8.556

 OGPLFVM           Ongoing Preliminary                0.159                 2.711
                   Less Than Fair Value
 OGSUSh             Ongoing Suspension                0.177                 3.418
  OGWD1,            Ongoing Withdrawal                0.558                 12.047
  OGDU                Ongoing Duties                  0.300                 3.3 12

 UNION791          Percent of Industry's
                   Workers Unionized in               32.47                 12.43
                           1979




                                            60
                 Table 2: Filing Rate Equations Estimates
                    N = 338 Industries for T =6 Years
      Variable                       Coefficient Estimate
                                       (Standard Error)

                   Single Filing             Two Filing Strategy Model
                  Strategy Model
                 Duties only Model      Outcome Filing       Process Filing
                                          Strategy              Strategy
      Constant         3.538                 3.510
                      (1.157)               (1.102)
  IMPEN                3.659                 1.700
                      (1.599)               (0.534)
      CAPUWI          -0.349                 -0.425                 -0.250
  .

                      (0.086)               (0.139)                (0.117)
      CAPU                                                          -0.140
                                                                   (0.063)
      EMP111          0.009                  0.009
                     (0.003)                (0.003)
VADD,1 /OUT           -3.171                 -2.404
                     (1.806)                (1.723)
      a x l0          8.213                  8.959
                     (1.173)                (2.045)            .



  YEARS!              -0.472                 -0.518
                     (0.092)                (0.221)
  YEAR82              -0.019                 0.041
                     (0.033)                (0.213)
  YEARS3              0.594                  0.406
                     (0.234)                (0.192)
  YEAR84              0.28 1                 0.271
                     (0.262)                (0.093)
  YEARSS              0.802                  0.805
                     (0.394)                (0.285)




                                       61
                    Table 3: Import Equations Estimates
                        N = 338 Industries for T = 6 Years
 Vaziable                               Coefficient Estimate
                                         (Standard Error)
              Single Filing Strategy Models              Two Filing Strategy Model
             Duties Only        Full Investigation   Outcome Filer      Process Filer
               Model              Effects Model         Model              Model
 OGPJG11                              8.45                12.58            -32.58
                                     (4.23)              (6.973)           (12.39)
OGPLFV1O                             -33.81              -48.59            -3.25
                                     (10.32)             (20.39)           (2.29)
OGSUSI/Gfl                           -29.57                  1.33          -1.93
                                     (8.93)              (4.03)            (3.09)
OGWDIS/Gk                             -17.06              -0.04             -3.22
                                     (11.89)             (2.14)            (2.98)
 OGDdG         -10.55                -24.95              -24.69            -14.94
               (4.43)                (9.32)             (11.20)            (9.03)
 YEAR8I        -0.052                 0.090              0.065
              (0.184)                (0.123)            (0.012)
 YEAR82        -0.060                0.970               0.823
              (0.238)               (0.632)             (0.603)
 ThAR83        2.3 10                2.988               2.483
              (1.032)               (1.323)             (0.948
 YEAR84        6,023                 7.673               5.707
              (1.843)               (2.232)             (2.394)
 YEAR8S        9.056                 11.53               8.783
              (4.493)               (4.393)             (4.203)




                                      62
                   Table 4: Output Equations Estimates

                       N338lndustiiesforT=6years
 Variable                            Coefficient Estimate
                                      (Standard Error)

             Single Filing StrategyModels            Two Filing Strategy Model
            Duties Only      Full Investigation   Outcome Filer      Process Filer
              Model           Effects Model          Model              Model
 OGPJG                             -730               -3.25             16.94
                                  (4.23)              (430)            (1038)
OGPLFVJGh                          24.95               9.74              3.69
                                  (10.92)             (4.23)            (6.39)
OGSUSdG                            25.57              21.44              3.02
                                  (12.93)             (9.49)            (7.83)
OGWDJGft                           1432               10.09              -4.47
                                  (11.46)            (11.44)            (4.81)
 OGDJGft       7.13                15.97              15.55             12.46
              (5.31)              (6.32)              (9.49)            (8.32)
 YEAR8I       -2.04                -7.04               1.27
             (2.794)              (711)               (2.10)
 YEARZ2        -7.32              -13.50              -6.43
              (5.84)              (6.20)             (8.20)
 YEAR83       -6.03               -7.42               -8.29
              (3.04)              (8.23)             (10.93)
 YEAR84        6.32                6.23               7.85
              (7.50)              (8.02)             (4.74)
 YEAR85        7.93                4.76               8.19
              (8.94)              (5.94)             (5.75)




                                   63
                          Table 5: Output and Import Net Eflcts
         Sum of Suit Activity Index Coefficient Estimates Given in Tables 3 and 4
  Variable                                        Coefficient Estimate
                                                   (Standard Error)
                    Single Filing Strategy Models                  Two Filing Strategy Model
                  Duties Only         Full investigation       Outcome Filer        Process Filer
                    Model              Effects Model              Model                Model
 OGPhIGk                                        1.15                9.33               -15.63
                                               (0.85)              (6.14)              (6.38)
OGPLFVk/Gi                                     4.86                -38.85               0.45
                                               (3.45)              (1537)              (3.29)
OGSUSIGS                                        -4.00               22.77               1.09
                                               (1.28)              (17.82)             (3.84)
°GWD1/01                                        -2.74               10.05               116
                                               (2.81)             (12.03)              (4.32)
 OGD.JGft             -3.42                     -8.98              -9.14                -2.49
                     (1.02)                    (3.17)              (436)               (2.13)



                        Table 6: Probability of Process Filer Model
                                (Two Filing Strategy Model)
                                     N = 338 industries
             Variable         Coefficient Estimate           Sample Average
                               (Standard Error)            Probability Elasticity
                                                             (Standard_Error)
             UN1ON79                 0.012                         0.85
                                    (0.006)                       (032)
              EMP79                  0.004                         0.36
                                    (0.001)                       (0.05)
             IMPEN79                 1.297                         0.27
                                    (0.53 1)                      (0.08)




                                                64
                       Investigation Commences
            a.
            Cli
            a.
           'C
                   Prebminary Inju           Determination




           I                                       1

                                 .ff
                          Preliminary LTFV Determination
      -4
     'C

                            z0                         >
     2                      c0
Co ,       0.
           w
                                                       —
                                                       0
22.>
-s   C
                  Final          LTFV Determination
     Co



                  CD                5          a              S
           a
           (11    =                 DI
                                               C
           'C                       0
           a                                                  CD




                          Final        Injury Determination




                                                                   I
                           Figure 2
                        Single Strategy
                       File/PItfvp/Duty
$ Million (197




            20




                                                              Output
            10




            0




                                                              Sum
          —10




          —20
                                                              Import



          —30




                     File     Pit I vp            Duty
          —40
                 0           10                          20            30
                                         Months
                           Figure 3
                        Single Strategy
                      File/PltIvp/NoDuty
$ Million (1972




            20




             10


                                                         Output


             0

                                                         Sum


           —10
                                                         Import



           —20




           -30



                      File    Pltfvp       NoDuty
           —40
                  0           10                    20            30
                                       Months
                            Figure 4
                        SingleStrotegy
                         Outy/NoDuty
$ Million (197




            20


                                                         Output


            10




            0




          —10                                            Sum




          —20



                                                         Import

          -30



                     Duty                  NoDuty
          —40
                 0            10                    20            30
                                       Months
                              Figure 5
                           Single Strategy
                      FiIe/Pltfvp/Suspend
$ Million (1972




            20
                                                                 / Output


            10
                                                       /
             0          c--———-'.r'                                      —
                       •
                       •
                       •
                             ——••
                                         . 'I.
                                     ———•t
                                       •1
                                                 ''.
                                                 '•%
                                                  .'
                                        •
                                        •         .'   -.
                                                            —•
                       •                •
                                                  •\
           —10
                                                  :\               Sum




           —20




                                                                   Import
          30


                      File          PIt(vp Suspend
          —40
                  0                 10                            20         30
                                                 Months
                         Figure 6
                     Outcome Strategy
                     File/Pltfvp/NoDuty
$ Million (197




           20




           10-




                                —
                           ——
            0
                                                                Output


                      •               •
                      •               •


          -10
                                      :

                                                                Sum
                                                                Import

          —20        :




         -30



                    File            PItfvp      • NoDuty
         —40-
                0               10                         20            30
                                             Months
                          Figure 7
                      Process Strategy
                     FiIe/PItfvp/NoDuty
$ Million (197




            20
                                                                      Output



            10




            0


                                 S..
                                   .5.
                                   .5. S.
          —10
                                             S.

                                                  .5
                                                       5.
                                                            .5

                                                                      Sum

          —20




          -30


                                                                      Import
                     File   Pltfvp                NoDuty
          —40
                 0          10                                   20            30
                                            Months
