                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         SHOCKS




                                     John H. Cochrane




                                 Working Paper No. 4698




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1994




This research is partially supported by a grant from the NSF. I thank Alexander Reyfman for
outstanding research assistance, participants at the Fall 1993 Carnegie-RocheSter conference.
Olivier Blanchard, Charles Plosser. Julio Rotemberg. and Michael Woodford for many helpful
comments, and Charlie Evans for comments and several data series. This paper is part of the
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed arc those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4698
                                                                                 April 1994

                                            SHOCKS

                                          AB&IRACF


       What are the shocks that drive economic fluctuations? I examine technology and money

shocks in some detail, and briefly review the evidence on oil price and credit shocks. I conclude

that none of these popular candidates accounts for the bulk of economic fluctuations. I then

examine whether consumption shocks." news that agents see but we do not, can account for

fluctuations. I find that it may be possible to conswuct models with this feature, though it is

more difficult than is commonly realized, If this view is correct, we will forever remain ignorant

of the fundamental causes of economic fluctuations.




John H. Cochrane
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
1. Introduction
What shocks are responsible for economic fluctuations? Despite at least two hundred years
in which economists have observed fluctuations in economic activity, we still are not sure.
   For example, a session of prominent macroeconomists at the 1993 AEA meetings ad-
dressed the question "what caused the 1990 recession?" (Blanchard (1993), Hall (1993),
and Hansen and Prescott (1993).) They examined a long list of candidates—factor prices,
especially oil, monetary policy, government purchases, tax increases, technology shocks,
bank regulation, international factors, and sectoral shifts. They came up empty-handed.
Prescott and Hansen claimed technology shocks, but interpreted these so broadly to en-
compass any of the above and more (see below). Blanchard and Hall favored "consumption
shocks." Since consumption is an endogenous variable, the ultimate source of variability
must be news about future values of any of the above. But what news and about what
future event is not identified.
   It is tempting to offer up a mixture of shocks in a spirit of compromise, so that
recessions are sums of many small negative impulses, or to speculate that different shocks
caued different historical episodes. However, there are good reasons to try to limit
ourselves to a small number of recurring shocks. Business cycles are "all alike" in many
ways (Lucas 1977). Investment and durables fall by more than output, hours fall by
about as much as output, nondurable consumption by much less than output. Different
shocks are unlikely to produce such similar responses. For example, if a shock (say
a credit crunch) is temporary, it should cause a small reduction in consumption, and
a big decline in investment, If it is permanent (say a tax increase) it should cause a
much larger decline in consumption, and may not change investment at all. The need to
produce roughly similar dynamics severely constrains the dynamic structure of the shocks,
and hence argues for a common sourc& Similarly, shocks in different places—preferences,
technology, money, government spending, etc.—yield different correlations between series.
In explicitly dynamic models, it is no longer true that any source of aggregate demand
decline is as good as another, and kicks off the same dynamic pattern.
    After an extensive review of technology and money shocks, and a brief review of
oil and credit shocks, I conclude that we havcnt found large, identifiable, exogenous
shocks to account for the bulk of output fluctuations. Monetary policy shock account

                                             1
for at most 20% of the variation in output. Statistics that focus on predictability find
almost no contribution of technology shocks to business-cycle output variation. Shocks
to consumption and output—endogenous variables—explain a robust 50-70% of output
variation. Specification uncertainty, choice of statistic, and sampling variation are as
much of the story as point estimates. Plausible variations can generate numbers from 0
to 100% for both money and technology shocks.
    I then ask whether we can account for fluctuations by "consumption shocks," news
consumers see but we do not see. This is an attractive view, and at least explains our
persistent ignorance of the underlying shocks. But it is not as easy as it seems to specify
a consistent dynamic model in which such consumption shocks generate business cycle
fluctuations.
   My review of the evidence for various shocks stresses four themes:
    Theme 1: Despite the fact that empirical work assessing the contribution of shocks is
often conducted in an atheoretical context, one's view of the propagation mechanism, or
economic theory, is crucially important for identifying shocks and evaluating their effect
on output. The results can change drastically as one views the data in the perspective of
more or different theoretical views.
     Theme 2: The statistic one chooses is crucially important as well. Variance decompo-
sitions, variance of Hodrick-Prescott filtered output, variance of Beveridge-Nelson filtered
output, etc. all can give drastically different results.
    Theme 8: Economic agents have a lot more information than we do. What is a shock
to us may be known by them.
    Theme 4: There are 'level' variables, including the consumption/output ratio, M2
velocity, term spreads, and hours, that indicate the state of the economy, and hence can
forecast long-horizon output with huge (60% or more) ft2.

2. Some Warnings

1) Exogeneity. We traditionally search for exogenous shocks. Any VAR mechanically
accounts for 100% of the variance of output by unforecastable movements in endogenous
variables. To say that such a shock causes fluctuations just leads to the question, "why
did the endogenous variable move?" and a search for a deeper, exogenous shock. There is
also an econometric reason to search for exogenous shocks: only responses to an exogenous


                                            2
variable can measure the effects of policy-induced changes in that variable.
    But exogenous shocks are rare, and the imperialistic march of economics makes events
truly outside the economic system rarer every day. We are used to thinking of govern-
ment policy as exogenous, but a glance at the newspaper shows that policy-makers watch
the economy and economic forecasts obsessively. Monetary VARs recognize that policy
responds to the economy, and try to isolate the exogenous shocks as residuals to a policy
rule. But why should a policy-maker deliberately introduce a random component to its
decisions? Any maximization objective in a nonstrategic environment leads to detenriin-
istir rules for setting controls as a function of state. The Fed always describes its actions
as responses to events, not randomized experiments.'
   Technology shocks sound nicely exogenous. However, the growth literature is working
hard to make technology endogenous, and the real business cycle literature seems to have
abandoned the technology interpretation of the residual anyway. Prices are of course
endogenous economic variables. Only the weather remains exogenous2, but business cycles
seem to have nothing to do with the weather.
    It would be nice to point to recognizable events, of the type that are reported in news-
papers, as the source of economic fluctuations, rather than residuals from some equation.
This search has been even more fruitless. Of course, Monday morning quarterbacks al-
ways attribute fluctuations to a long list of events, typically an undigested summary of
business section headlines. But the fingers pointed at these events are seldom attached
to a serious explanation how the headline events are quantitatively capable of producing
a large and protracted decline in output, or why similar headlines often do not have any
effects. Finally, in expectational models, times when the Fed does nothing but it was
expected to are just as mudi a shock as times in which it did something unexpected; but
these times rarely wind up in the newspaper. In the context of these models, it is not
embarrassing that residuals to a forecasting equation are the underlying shocks -

    2) Propagation Many papers try to study "shocks" without specifying much about
the "propagation mechanism." But the study of shocks and propagation mechanisms are
   Of course, neither we nor economic agents have enough information to forecast policy perfectly.
Residuals to agent's forcasting model can count as exogenous shocks if only unanticipated money matters.
Unfortunately, we have even less inkrmation than agents, so the innovation measured by our forecasting
model is not likely to be the same as the innovation measured by agents' models. Furthermore, if
                                                                                      that really reflect
anticipated money matters, or in investigating other shocks, then rponses to "shocks"
superior information may not be meaningful.
   2For the moment. Advocates of economic policy to affect globaL warming and chaos theonste are
trying hard to make the weather endogenous as welt!


                                                    3
 of course not separate enterprises. Shocks are only visible if we specify something about
 how they propagate to observable variables. More importantly, we can't really believe
 that a shock affects the economy unless we understand how it does so.
    Real business cycle models produce artificial time series, so we can use a lot of infor-
mation about the propagation mechanism to identify and quantify the importance of its
shocks. Dynamic monetary economics is at a much more primitive stage. The response
patterns of cash-in-advance models are so far from the data that they are not much used
in the empirical analysis of monetary shocks. Many other monetary models do not give
any explicit dynamic predictions. Therefore, empirical researchers typically fish for VAR
specifications to produce impulse-responses that capture qualitative monetary dynamics,
for example as described in Friedman (1968). Other shocks, such as oil price, credit, etc.
are not associated with well spelled out dynamic theories of their effects on the economy,
so identification and evaluation is even more tenuous. For this reason, shock identification
is often based on simplified stylized features rather than the predictions of explicit models
—"demand" shocks have no long-run effect on output, "monetary" shocks are represented
by unforecastable movements in the federal funds rate, and so forth3

    3) Who cares? The answer to question, "what exogenous shocks account for output
fluctuations?" has more limited implications than is usually recognized.
    First, it may not have immediate policy implications. For example, suppose that
oil prices have small direct effects on the economy, but they induce monetary policy-
makers to cause recessions. (Darby 1982 argues for this view.) In this case, oil prices are
the exogenous shock, and the Federal Reserve is just part of the propagation mechanism.
However, to say "oil shocks account for fluctuations" is a misleading description; monetary
policy caused the recessions. We don't have to worry about middle east politics to insulate
the economy from fluctuations, we have to worry about the Fed.
    Second, the point of most shock accounting papers is really a comparison of broad
classes of as-yet-incomplete models of the propagation mechanism. They want to answer
questions such as "can any competitive equilibrium model account for fluctuations in
output, or will we need monetary, sticky price, or noncompetitive models?" But it's hard
to come up with some behavior that a whole class of models, as yet not investigated,
is incapable of producing. Furthermore, most classes of model are not, in fact, tied to
specific shocks. Technology shocks could account for all of the fluctuations in output, yet
   3 don't mean to sound criticaLThese identif'ing procedures are the state of the art.


                                            4
do so through channels specified by imperfectly competitive models. Monetary shocks
could account for fluctuations, through a intertemporal market clearing mechanism (say
a real business cycle model with a cash-in-advance constraint), as well as through a sticky
price mechanism.
    Thus shock accounting does not really say that much about the plausibility of broad
classes of economic model. They say even less about modeling methodologies, which is
really at stake. I don't think Prescott would feel vindicated if the profession converged
on the view that technology shocks account for 80% (or all) of output fluctuations, yet
do so through fluctuations in the aggregate supply curve of an IS-LM model!

    4) Information advantages. Shock identification procedures are sensitive to the fact
that economic agents and policy makers base their forecasts on more variables than we
include in our VARs. The weather forecast Cranger-causes the weather, but shooting the
weatherman won't produce a sunny weekend.
   5) Linearity. The central question in this paper is whether each candidate shock
can explain a large fraction of output variance (either variance of growth rates or forecast
error variance). A lot of assumptions go even into this statement of the question.
   First, are recessions any different from other times? In virtually all economic models
and in VAR representations, booms and busts are just different draws from the same dis-
tribution. Recessions may represent an interesting combination of large negative shocks,
but they are not draws from a different process. But in thinking qualitatively about the
economy, we often study recessions as if they are a distinct phenomenon. The above cited
AEA session was not organized around "What accounts for the forecast error variance of
output?" but "What caused the last recession?"
   Second, does the economy respond to shocks in an importantly nonlinear way? Most
qualitative discussions reflect such a belief, for example, the need for a "booster shot" to
keep the economy from "sliding into a recession." But real business cycle models and VAR
techniques are decidedly linear, and there is little lolid evidence for important nonlinear
structure in the data.
   With these warnings and the themes they motivate in mind, I turn to a quantitative
examination of the evidence for some shocks.




                                             5
3. Monetary shocks
Shock-s to the quantity of money or other measures of Federal Reserve policy have long
been suspected to influence output. The central question for us is: how much output
variation is due to monetary shocks? Even if the Fed can influence output, it does not
follow that most fluctuations in output are in fact due to monetary policy shocks.
    Ideally, we would address this question by using a well-specified model that identifies
monetary shocks and predicts the economy's response, as real business cycle models do
for technology shocks. However, we don't have any empirically successful models of this
sort, so most evidence for the effects of monetary shocks comes via vector autoregressions
(VARs). Three issues guide our evaluation of these VARs.
    1) Shape of impulse-responses. In the absence of an empirically useful dynamic mon-
etary theory, at least we can require the impulse-response functions to conform to qual-
itative theory such as Friedman (1968). Most VARs do not conform to this standard.
Prices may go down, real interest rates up, and output may be permanently affected by
an expansionary shock. It is not very convincing to claim that money accounts for x%
of the variance of output in such a VAR, since we have no idea how money produces its
alleged effect.
    2) Shock identification. This is obviously a crucial decision, but theory offers little help.
First, one has to pick which variable to use as an indicator of money supply disturbances.
I will examine the popular choices, Ml, M2, the federal funds rate, and nonborrowed
reserves.
    Second, one must specify the ordering, or which variables are contemporaneously un-
affected by shocks to other variables. The monetary variable often goes first—it is assumed
not to be contemporaneously affected by any of the other variables. This is sometimes
justified by the (false) assumption that the Fed and the money supply process do not
respond to within-period values of the other variables. Of course, the opposite assump-
 ion that monetary aggregates do not contemporaneously affect economic variables is even
worse! Nonrecursive identification schemes are also possible. The true shocks may linear
combinations of the innovations, to any single variable. These schemes take linear combi-
nations of the impulse-response functions, so they can have a major effect on the results,
even when the error varjance-covariance matrix is diagonal.
   The results often depend on the identification scheme. In practice, researchers clearly
experiment with orderings, and present the scheme that gives the "best" results. If "best"

                                               6
•   means "responses that most closely correspond to the predictions of monetary theory"
    this is not so bad, and can almost be defended as a theory-based identification procedure.
       3) Specification. Much VAR evidence also turns out not to be robust to variable
    definitions, lags, unit root structure, trends, variables included in the VAR, at what
    horizon variance decompositions are calculated, and sampling error. (See Todd 1993.)
    My baseline VARs use log-levels, quarterly data and one year of lags. I have corroborated
    most results in monthly data and with two years of lags. Most but not all results are
    robust.
        A preview of the results. I examine M2, Ml, federal funds and nonborrowed reserve
    shocks in turn. A common pattern emerges. In simple VARs, each shock seems to account
    for a large fraction of output variation. When more variables are introduced and as the
    specification is refined (fished) so that the responses are broadly consistent with monetary
    theory, we find that monetary shocks explain lower and lower fractions of output variance.
    In the end, I find evidence that monetary policy can affect the economy roughly the way
    Friedman said it would, though with suspiciously long lags, but I do not find evidence
    that monetary policy shocks did account for more than at most 20% of the variance of
    output, and likely much less.


    3.1. M2

    3.1.1. A simple M2, y, p VAR

    I start with a simple VAR consisting of the logs of M2, output, and the price level, in the
    spirit of the first VARs run by Sims (1980). In the impulse-response functions, Figure
    3.1, M2 shocks are persistent, and lead to substantial rises in output and then prices.
    However, the output response is surprisingly drawn out. It peaks two to three yearsafter
    the shock, and output seems to be permanent. The price response is also very sluggish.4
        Table 3.1 shows variance decompositions for this VAR, and Table 3.2 summarizes
    output variance decompositions for all of the M2 VARs. The M2 shock accounts for
    dramatic fractions of the variance of output at long horizons, increasing from 32% at a
    one year horizon to 82% (!) at a 3 year horizon. The M2 shock also accounts for 21%
       40f course, one should be cautious in evaluating estimated long-horizon responses in this (any) VAR.
    Since the VAR is run in levels1 and I happened not to estimate explosive roots in this VAR, the estimated
    responses to all shocks are transitory, but take 100-200 years to die out. Many of theVARs I estimate
    below have impulse-responses that oscillate with periods of 20-40 years. For this reason, the graphs stop
    at a 5 year response.

                                                       7
                         ml—).*2                   n2—)%                    I,




                    T2 3TVTTt"T
Figure 3.1: Response to 1 a m2 shocks, m2 y p VAR. Horizontal axis in years, vertical
axis in %.

of quarterly output growth, and 45% annually. Note how sensitive the results are to the
horizon. This is far from an innocuous choice! This VAR is not sensitive to the order of
orthogonalization (as long as one maintains some recursive scheme), and to the inclusion
of trends.
                                             Shock and horizon
                           1 Qtr.          lYear            2Year           3 Year
             Var.of     m2 y p1m2 y pjm2 y p1m2 y p
                m2 100    0  0 99   0 98 0 2 941  5                              1
                  y 1         99 0 32 68 0 70 30 0 82 17 1
                  p 1         3 96 0 7 92 1 17 83 3 24 73
Table 3.1: Variance decomposition from rn2-y-p VAR. Table entries are percent of horizon
step ahead forecast error variance of the row variable explained by the column shock.
VARs in log.levels with 4 lags, orthogonalized in the given order (m2, y, p). Quarterly
data 1959:1-1992:4.

    However, we obtain very small output effects if we view this VAR through the eyes of
a simple rational expectations or cash.in-advance model in which money can have only
one-period effects5, or if non-neutral effects of money must come through price shocks as
in Lucas (1972). M2 shocks account for 1% of one-quarter ahead output variance, and
price shocks for less than 0.5%; price shocks account for less than 10% of output variance
at any horizon, in any orthogonalization.
    Also in line with a traditional monetarist view,virtually all M2 variance (94-99%) is
due to M2 shocks. However, M2 shocks explain tiny fractions of price variance (0-3%);
virtually all of the variance of prices is due to price shocks. Since price shocks do not have
large effects on M2, we cannot understand this feature as Fed accommodation. Inflation
is certainly not always and everywhere a monetary phenoknenon in this VAR! These facts
are common to most of the VARs that follow, so I concentrate on the central question of
  '"Simple" here means that agents can find out the value of aggregates with a one quarter lag.

                                                   8
this paper, output variance decompositions.

                  VAR
                                                   Forecast error 2
                                                  1Q 1Y 2Y 3Y 1Q 1Y
                                                                             Var   y
                  m2yp                             1    32 70        82      21    45
                  cyp                             18 60 78           77      29 47
                  m2ffcyp                          1    20 39        41      11    21
                  m2ffcyp;e.c.                    0     16 28        25      11    21
                  (s. e. of above)                      (8)         (11)
                  ffcypm2            0                   5    12     14      4     6
                  m2ffch/popyp,trend 0                   8    11      7      7     5

Table 3.2: Summary of output variance decompositions in M2 VARs. All VARS run
log-levels with 4 lags, unless otherwise indicated.


3.1.2. Level variables

VARs are all about forecasting. The best long-horizon output forecasting variables are
'level' variables; stationary variables that tell you if output is 'below trend' and hence
must grow over several quarters. M2 velocity is such a level variable. It is stable over
time (real M2 and output are cointegrated). Hence, if velocity is high, output must grow
or M2 must decline to reestablish velocity. As it turns out, real output does the adjusting.
    Figure 3.2 plots M2 velocity to make this point. In the left hand panel, we see that
M2 velocity is stable over time. Its fluctuations are surprisingly correlated with the level
of the federal funds rate. Thus, M2 velocity will forecast output much as the funds rate
does. However, variations in M2 velocity are tiny (note the vertical scale)6. The right
hand panel plots real M2 and output. As you can see, the level of real M2 does not stray
far from that of output and M2 leads output, especially in the late 1970's and 1980's.
   But there are many other level variables, including the consumption/output ratio,
hours or unemployment rate, and term spreads. Figure 3.3 presents several of these level
variables. As the Figure shows, they are all highly correlated, and any one seems to pick
out NBER peaks and troughs as well as the others.
   6The interest elasticity of m2/(py) is only about -0.03. Here is an OLS regression, 1059:1-1992:4:

                             ln(rn2) = —5.07 + 1.002 ln(pp) — 0.025 ln(ff)
Since most of m2 pays interest, and since m2 velocity seems not to respond to the trend in interest rates,
it is probably not wise to interpret the correlation between m2 velocity and interest rates in traditional
money demand terms.



                                                    9
                     Ifl .•iacity and I.d.r, ('s.d. rol•
     it.
     u-I                  —flI"—'

     'U..

     'U..

     11.0

     I"                                                                                 — ln(n3/p)
     It,
     It.
     •4.
            'a   o   Us      II      75     Ia      IS     IC   U                  10       US       00   IS




       Figure 3.2: (Left) m2 velocity and federal funds rate. (Right) m2 and output.




                                                                                   *00



                                           Figure 3.3: Several 'level' variables

    In particular, consumption and output are cointegrated, and consumption tends to
lead output over the cycle. Figure 3.4 presents the impulse response function of a c y p
VAR, and Table 3.2 includes the output variance decomposition. The response is almost
identical to that of the M2 VAR; Consumption also explains dramatic (60-78%) fractions
of output forecast error variance, and essentially the same fractions of output growth!7
Thus, it seems that the level variable feature, rather than anything deep about money,
explains the dramatic output forecast error variance decomposition.
   The natural response is to include other variables, apecially level variables, in the
   tThe rest of the variance decomposition, not shown, is also similar. Consumption shocks account (or
87-99% of consumption variance, and prices account only for prices.)


                                                                •lo
                    c—c                           c—)y               c—Ip




                Figure 3.4: Responses to consumption shock, c y p VAR

VAR, and see whether money retains marginal forecast power.


3.1.3. A 5 variable VAR

I first run a five-variable VAR with M2, federal funds, consumption, output and prices.
Figure 3.5 presents the impulse-response function, and Table 3.2 includes the output
variance decomposition.

                                      m2—).              m2—)v    n'Z—p
                               0.I

                               0.
                                U.,
                                UI

                                U-U           •



                           Figure 3.5: Responses to m2 shock

   This impulse-response function starts to look more like a monetary VAR should. M2
shocks have an initial liquidity effect on nominal interest rates, and then an inflation
effect. They have a hump-shaped effect on output and send prices upward. The implied
real interest rate response also shows a transitory liquidity effect. However, the responses
are still surprisingly drawn out, and money still seems to have a permanent effect on
output and certainly on consumption.
   As the impulse-responses start to look more reasonable, the output variance decom-
position starts to fall. At every horizon and in differences, M2 shocks account for about
half of the variance of output that they did in the M2 y p VAR.. This is still a sizable
fraction, however, 20-40% rather than 40-80%.




                                                  U
3.1.4. Imposing velocity and c/y stability

Next, I impose the fact that M2 velocity and the consumption/output ratios are stable.
To do this, I run the VAR in error-correction form, i.e. I run growth rates of all variables
except federal funds on their lags and the lagged log c/y and log M2/(py) ratios8. Figure
3.6 presents the impulse-response function and Table 3.2 includes the output variance
decomposition. The responses look even more like monetary responses should. We now
get transitory responses of consumption, output and interest rates (the long-run output
and consumption responses are less than one standard error from zero) along with the
right signs on all the other variables.
   The variance decompositions, reported in Table 3.2, show that the fractions of output
variance explained have dropped by another half to a third. The forecast error variances
due to M2 are 16%, 18% and 25% at 1, 2, and 3 year horizons, and 11%, 21% of one
quarter and one year output variance. Furthermore, standard errors are large; a 2 a
confidence interval extends to nearly zero percent of output variance explained.

          w.3—)m2         m2—)V          m2—>ca.        ,2—)                         m2—)R.oir




Figure 3.6: Responses to m2 shocks, error-correction VAR using c/y and m2/py as fore-
casting variables.


3.1.5. Using long-run restrictions to identify monetary policy shocks

A further refinement: perhaps one should identify a money supply shock as a combination
of federal funds and money innovations rather than one or the other. A money supply
shock should work back up the money demand curve. To this end, and in order to impose
the desirable feature that money supply shocks should have transitory effects on real
variables, I identify a money supply shock as that combination of M2 and federal funds
shocks that has exactly no long-run effect on output (and hence consumption, since they
   51t is important that the imposed cointegrating vectors m —y — p and c — y really are stationary, or
one estimates explosive roots. For this reason, the error-correction VAR uses total GDP for output, and
consumption + 0.65 times government purchases for consumption.


                                                   12
are assumed cointegrated). Since the long-run effect of a M2 shock on output is small and
statistically insignificant in the previous VAR, this should be a small refinement to the
results.9
   It is. The money supply responses plotted in Figure 3.7 subtract some of the if
responses from the M2 responses. Hence the liquidity effect on interest rates is deeper
and more prolonged, and the output effects somewhat larger. By the orthogonalization
assumption, money supply (ms) shocks now have exactly zero long run effect on output,
and hence consumption.
                                           lYear              2Years 3Years
                                           m2 ms m2 ms m2 ins
                           point est.      16        14 28 46 25 46
                           mean            17        15 27 26 23 26
                           std.err.        8         7        10    17      11   17

Table 3.3: Fraction of output forecast error variance due to m2 and money supply shocks.
"Mean" and "standard error" are calculated from a 1000 draw bootstrap.


        no .) m2       Ins —, II                                   me — y             me —) p
                                   0.50
                                   0.45
                                   0.40
                                   0.35
                                   0.30
                                   0.20
                                   5.20
                                   0.i2
                                   0.50
                                     02
                                   0.505   5    55       Is




Figure 3.7: Responses to money supply shocks. Ms shocks are the linear combination of
m2 and if shocks that have no long-nm effect on output.

   Table 3.3 presents the output variance decomposition, along with its mean and stan-
dard error in a 1000 replication bootstrap using the estimated VAR and reshuffling resid-
uals. At a one year horizon, the variance decomposition is essentially the same as before.
14% of output variance is explained by ma shocks rather than 16% by M2 shocks; the
standard error is about the same (7%), and the mean variance decomposition in the boot-
strap is about the same as the point estimate. However, at 2 and 3 year horizons, we
obtain a very different result. In the point estimate, ma explains a whopping 42 and 46%
of output variance, compared with 28 and 25% for M2. However, the large estimates are
associated with large standard errors (17%). Worse, the Mean (across replications) 2 and
   9Money demand shocks may reveal pennanent changes in output, and so induce output responses
                                                                                              that
 do not die out.


                                                          13
3 year variance decomposition is only about 26%, about the same as M2. Similarly, the
mean response of output to the money supply shock peaks at 0.5, about the same value
as the M2 shock, while the point estimate shown in Figure 3.7 peaks at 0.8. One can
take the means as easily as the point estimates a consistent estimates of the true variance
decomposition.
  There are two reasons for this strange sampling behavior. First, the if responses are
much less precisely estimated than the M2 responses. The ms responses are a linear com-
bination of the M2 and if responses, and so inherit some of the larger sampling variation of
the if responses. Second, long-run responses are notoriously hard to estimate, since they
involve sums of coefficients or an estimate of the spectral density at frequency zero. Even
if the true long-run response is zero, the unconstrained estimate will not be zero in every
sample. Forcing it to be equal to zero in each sample is the heart of the sampling problem.
(Canova, Faust and Leeper (1993) discuss the difficulties of long-run VAR identification
in detail.)
    In summary, though the long-run restrictions are an attractive refinement, the sam-
pling distribution is substantially worse when they are imposed. When we take this fact
into account, the VAR with long run restrictions does not provide solid evidence for an
effect of monetary shocks larger than the 15-25 %, with 7.12% standard errors, provided
by the M2 VAR.


3.1.6. But.. More variables and orthogonalization

Plausible variations can destroy the pretty pattern of the impulse response functions
and bring the variance decomposition down below 10%. This specification uncertainty
is perhaps a reason even stronger than sampling uncertainty to doubt the 15-25% figure
given above.
    For example, I also include hours per capita and a trend in the VAR. Detrended
hours are also a business cycle 'level' variable: output is high when hours are high. (See
Rotemberg and Woodford 1993.) Figure 3.8 shows the output response. M2 shocks now
die out after 5 years, and have a transitory and much shorter effect on output. But prices
go off in the wrong direction. Table 3.2 includes the output variance decomposition. M2
shocks now account for less than 10% of the variance of output at any horizon.
    The five-variable VAR is sensitive to the order of orthogonali2ation. Figure 3.9 presents
the response of output when M2 is orthogonaflzed last (all shocks can affect M2 within

                                             14
        m2 —, ml                      "2 —) C           m2—-In         m2—),           ml —) •          ml —) r.cIr
  04
  0.7
  0.I
  0.1
  0.4
  0.3
  0.I
  0.t
  0.0




               Figure 3.8: Responses to m2 shocks, VAR with hours/per capita

a quarter), and Table 3.2 again presents the output variance decomposition. The liq-
uidity/inflation effects disappear, M2 has permanent output effects, and no price effect.
M2 shocks again account for less than 10% of the variance of output. My procedure of
choosing the ordering to produce the "right" pattern of responses is not innocuous.

                                                ml —}            s'2 ) p           m3 —, ml            ml — r.&,
                                                                                                 02
                                      0.'                                  0.40                  0.6
                                      I.                                   046
                                                                           0.-SO                 0.4
                                      0.8                  t4
                                      04



                                      O.8V L
                                                           04              0.11                  O2
                                                                           0.10
                                      0.I                                  0.06
                                      00 IS                      •3                I                   IS

              Figure 3.9: Responses to m2 shocks, when m2 is orthogonalized last



3.2. Ml
Ml corresponds more closely to the idea of a non- interest paying transactions balance.
Figure 3.10 presents Ml velocity and the federal funds rate. In contrast to M2, Ml
velocity responds sensibly to the rise in the federal funds rate. The interest elasticity is
between1° -0.15 and -0.35 depending on specification, compared to -0.03 for M2. However,
Ml velocity does not respond to cyclical variations in the federal funds rate, at least until
the mid-1980's. Ml does not lead output, either directly or via an interest elasticity and
  101   estimated the following regressions from 1959:1-1992:4:

                                ln(vnl) = —3.71 + 0.81 ln(.-py) — 0.151n(ff)
ajid, imposing a unit income elasticity,
                                      ln(ml/ptj) = —5.69— 0.34 ln(ff)




                                                          15
 the fact that interest rates lead output. As a result, it is less useful than M2 for forecasting
 output, and contributes less to output variance, as we will see.
    However, these facts do not mean we should throw Ml out. The theory of money
demand refers to a transactions balance for which one pays at least an interest spread; if
Ml shocks explain less output variance than M2 shocks, so much the worse for M2. One
can simply read this fact as another case in which imposing theory sharpens (lowers) our
estimates.

                                                   hil   nIociI, and l.d.r. lund.
                            •0




                                           — —I'—'
                                           — It
                        I,
                        5
                            S                                                                 -




                                 'S   SO      55          10        15   SO - 95    5*   55




                      Figure 3.10: ml velocity and federal funds rate




3.2.1. A simple Ml y p VAR

Figure 3.11 presents the responses to an Ml shock in a Ml y p VAR. The pattern looks
broadly similar to M2. Money shocks are less persistent and may even have transitory,
though still drawn out, effects on output. Prices are if anything even more sluggish. The
responses are smaller. (For visual clarity, each graph has its own vertical scale.) Output
rises to a peak of 0.7 after 1-2 years instead of 1.4 after 2-3 years.
    Table 3.4 presents output variance decompositions for Ml VARs. Since the responses
are smaller, the variance decompositions are smaller. Ml shocks explain less than 20%
of output variance, compared to up to 80% for M2 in the same specification. In other
respect, the decomposition is similar to M2: Ml shocks are still largely exogenous, price
shocks account for essentially none of output variance and all price variance.
   Unlike the simple M2 y p VAR, this VAR is sensitive to ordering and trends. Table

                                                               16
                      mi—Omi                         m1—07                                  mi—Op
             .2                                                            0.22
             .0
                                                                           t II

                                                                            LOS
                                                                            L01
            0.2                                                            -0.02
                                                     2        3    4                    I




                   Figure 3.11: Response to ml shocks in ml y p VAR
                                                          Forecast error a2                 Var y
                  VAR                                    IQ 1,1 2Y 3Y 1Q 1Y
                  mlyp                                    3       16   20          20       11    19
                  ymip                                    3       1    1           1        9         9
                  mlyp;trend                              2       8    7           8        10    16
                  rnlffcyp                                3       2    3           8        S     10
                  rnlffcyp,errorcorr.                     2       6    5           4
                  mlffcyp;e.c.;msshocks                   5       7    5           4

            Table 3.4: Percent of output variance explained by ml shocks.

3.4 presents variance decompositions with Ml ordered last, and when a trend is included.
Now less than 10% of output variance is explained by Ml shocks at any horizon. These
changes destroy the pretty impulse-response pattern as well.

3.2.2. A five variable VAR

 Figure 3.12 presents the responses in a Ml if c y p VAR, the same specification that
provided such nicely shaped responses for M2. Here, the responses look nothing like what
we expect of a monetary shock. As shown in Table 3.4, the fractions of output variance
explained are tiny.

       ml —)ml          mi—OfF               mI—)c                 mi—Op                    ml —> P       mi)r.,lt
                                  0.12
                                  0.06
                                  0.04
                                  •00
                                 —0.04
                                 -0.04
                                 .0.12
                                 —0.,.
                                 —0.20   i    1 3 45


                           Figure 3.12: Responses to ml shocks.




                                                         17
 3.2.3. Imposing cointegrating vectors and long run restrictions

As with M2, we thay get better looking response functions by imposing long run restric-
tions. Though the level of interest rates is probably stable in the long-enough run, it has
moved slowly in our sample. Thus, Mi velocity does not appear stationary. Rather, Mi
demand, Mi — p — y — off, is a better candidate for a stationary variable. I also include
c — y as a stationary variable. Also as a result of the slow movement of federal funds, the

specification with stationary levels of interest rates leads to explosive responses. There-
fore, I run a VAR of differences of Mi, ff, c, y, p on their lags and the lagged value
of c — y and Mi — p — y — 0.75ff. I use -0.75 for the interest elasticity of Mi demand,
rather than -0.35 as suggested by the OLS regression presented above; -0.35 minimizes
the sum of squared residuals, but the resulting Mi —p — y — 0.35ff series still has a
trend in our sample. The higher interest elasticity produces a series without a trend, and
hence non-explosive responses".
    The top panel of Figure 3.13 presents responses to Ml shocks from this VAR. The
bottom panel presents responses to money supply shocks, identified as above as the combi.
nation of Mi and if shocks that leave output unchanged in the long run. These responses
are consistent with what we expect for monetary shocks. Mi or ins shocks lead to a
short liquidity effect, and then a permanent rise in federal funds. (The level of ff is
not stationary in this specification, so there is no reason for this response to return to
zero.) Mi or ms shocks lead to brief, transitory output and consumption responses, and
to increases in prices. The real rate shows a short liquidity effect as well. Since inflation
eventually stops, the nonstationarity of ff is accounted for by a long-run increase in the
real interest rate. The brevity of Ml shocks' non-neutral effects is noteworthy, since it
more closely corresponds with theory.
    Table 3.4 includes the variance decomposition. Despite (or maybe because of) the
attractive pattern of impulse responses, Ml or Mi money supply shocks account for
trivial fractions of output variance, around 5% at all horizons.

3.3. Federal Funds

Bernanke and Blinder (1991) and Sims (1988), following a suggestion of McCallum (1982),
argue that federal funds rate forecast errors measure monetary policy shocks better than
  If all of this seems a little strained, it i5. The point is to find aspecilication that produces teh "right"
pattern of Impulse-responses, not to follow the dicta of atheoretical time-series specification.


                                                     18
                                    el—)ca.             TiI—)y       mI—)p
                                                 tic
                                                 t'I
                                                 0.fl
                                                 tI•
                                                 0.11
                                                 tic
                                                 to.
                                                 Sn
                                                —cal
                                                                 -
                                                -Ca.
                                                —tic •,,,, ' ,
      .i,t —, nil     in —, If     on. — CO.                         — —) p    _—s



                                                ..cc




Figure 3.13: Responses to ml (top) and money supply (bottom) shocks in a VAR that
imposes stable c/y and money demand. Ms shocks are identified to produce no long run
output response.

monetary aggregates. Strongin (1992) and Christiano and Eichenbaum (1991) use non-
borrowed reserves with much the same effect, which I examine in the next section.
    The idea is that there are shocks to money demand, observed by the Fed but not by
us (or we could produce a monetary aggregate supply shock directly). The Fed accommo-
dates such shocks by smoothing interest rates and allowing borrowed reserves to increase,
as they do in accommodating seasonal demand shocks. The resulting demand-driven in-
creases in monetary aggregates do not affect output or prices. Fed policy changes can
be seen when there is a change in the Fed Funds rate, nonborrowed reserves (Christiano
and Eichenbaum) or the nonborrowed reserve ratio (Strongin). Furthermore, the Fed has
closer control of the Federal funds rate and reserves, where Ml and M2 are controlled
more indirectly.
   This search for policy shocks is not as innocuous as it may seem. To inonetarist,
shocks to the right aggregate are all that mater, no matter how that shock is produced.
Friedman and Schwartz do not blame the great depression on a policy shock that lowered
monetary aggregates, but on the Fed's failure to expand the base as the money multiplier
collapsed.
   On a practical level, the federal funds rate is also a 'level' variable that is likely to
forecast long term output, as seen in Figure 33 above. We might expect it to do well in
a VAR.




                                               19
3.3.1. Simple if y p VARs

The top panel of Figure 3.14 presents the responses to if shocks in a simple if y p VAR.
Federal funds shocks are persistent. A rise in federal funds gives rise to an initial six
month rise in output, and then a permanent decline. Last, there is a "price puzzle". In
response to a contractionary federal funds shock, prices increase for 2 years, and only
come back to where they started after 5 years.

                       It   .10




                            —) F
                                   .&        1111




                                             II —, p
                                                                  It—I.




                                                                  Ii —I It




                       It—,,                 It—,.




Figure 3.14: Responses to federal funds rate shocks. Top panel: ify p VAR. Middle panel:
y p if VAR (if orthogonalized last). Bottom panel: y p if VAR with trend.

    Table 3.5 presents output variance decompositions. Federal funds shocks explain be-
tween 6 and 32% of output forecast error variance, as the horizon lengthens, and 24-28%
of output growth variance at iquarter and 1 year horizon.
    This VAR turns out to be somewhat sensitive to ordering and trends. The middle panel
of Figure 3.14 presents the response to federal funds shocks when they are orthogonalized
last. This deepens the output response, removes the troublesome initial rise in output, and
reduces the price puzzle somewhat. Summing and squaring the larger output response, we
find a much larger output variance decomposition. 50% of the 3 year output forecast error
is due to the if shock, though somewhat more modest fractions at shorter horizons—14%
and 30% at 1 and 2 year horizons, and 20-27% in growth rates.
   The bottom panel of Figure 3.14 includes a trend in the VAR. Now the price puzzle is


                                           20
                     Forecast error a2   Var iy VAR
                    IQ 1Y 2Y 3Y 1Q 1Y
                     6  6   20 32 24 28 flyp
                     0  15 37 50 21 31 ypif
                     0  14 30 38 20 27 ypff;trend
                     7  4   25 38 20 27 tblsyp
                     0  11 41 54 20 39 yptbls;trend
                     o  13 26   20 12 16 cypcpmlff
                     o   11    21   16   11    15 cypcpmlff;trend
                     0    3    3     2    3    3 ch/popypcpznlff
Table 3.5: Percentage of output variance explained by federal funds rate shocks. All VARs
in log levels with 4 lags.

reduced even more, to a 2 year pauSe before prices start to decline. However, the output
response is not as deep. This improvement in the shape of the VAR lowers the variance
decomposition by about a third, as shown in Table 3.5.
   Nothing is particularly special about the federal funds rate in this VAR. The second
block of Table 3.5 includes results that use the one month t.bill rate in place of the federal
funds rate. The variance decomposition and response functions (not shown) are almost
identical to those of federal funds.


3.3.2. Larger VARs
We need to put the federal funds shock in competition with other level variables as
above. I follow Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1993) in adding an index of sensitive
commodity prices to the VAR and orthogonalizing federal funds last. The price puzzle
may be due to the fact that the Fed watches commodity prices and contracts on news of
future inflation. As a result, part of the contractionary if shock reflects news of rises in
prices. By including commodity prices, we may control for an important part of the Fed's
information set. (The warning about left out variables and information sets is clearly at
work here!) More practically, these modifications reduce the price puzzle and so produce
better looking pictures; this alone may be enough justification. I also include Ml to see
how a monetary aggregate responds to the federal funds shock.
    The top panel of Figure 3.15 presents the responses to federal funds shocks from this six
variable VAR. The responses are fairly sensible: there is :transitory output effect. Prices
as measured by the GDP deflator still go slightly the wrong way for a year; however the
commodity price index falls immediately and attains its permanent valueafter only two

                                              21
years. The funds shock produces a large, though transitory, decline in Ml. The real rate
response has a single peak in the wrong direction, as a result of the small remaining price
puzzle. A real rate calculated from the commodity price index would show a pure short
run liquidity effect.
    The variance decomposition, Table 3.5, produces about the same numbers as the five-
variable M2 VAR. 13-20% of output forecast error variance and 12-16% of output growth
is due to the federal funds shock. The figures are only slightly lower if a trend is included
in the VAR.

                            ff—)y          ll—)p                         tJ—)ep            Jt—)n,I                  ff_)ff        It—)reoI,
                                                            —0.0                                         1.0,                  0.7.
 —0.02                                                                              —0.051                                     0.61
 —0.06                                                       o
                                                            —0.2k
                                                                                    —oo • T                                    0.5K
                                                                                                                               0.411
 —0.10                                                                              -.020•                      I              9-IIA
 —0.16
  O-02V
 —0.22
                                                            —Os
                                                            —'.0
                                                            :Q:I
                                                               2
                                                                             °0R /
                                                                            °•35ItJ
                                                                                    —0.251 /
                                                                                          —0.0 ---'.c__.___
                                                                                                             °L 'v             O.flfl
 —0.26                                                      :,:,
                                                             1
                                                                 __________ —0.401,
                                                                                    , , 0.2 ijs,s0.2 __________
                                                                                 _________ O.III
                                                                                              __________    —0.I__________


         ,,—c                             U)                                                        II—)','            ff)tt
                -
 0.101 / °°b 7 0.151I /
 00•I I       ,
                        fl—)h/c
                    0.081
                              -   0.201
                                           /   -
                                                        F\
                                                   —0.0.!
                                                            If—)p
                                                                          —0.00
                                                                          .0osR
                                                                                  Il—Sop
                                                                                            0.02.
                                                                                       / —0.02
                                                                          :j040Ik#t/ —0.0.1
                                                                                                                0.7l
                                                                                                                o.
                                                                                                                                0.5.
                                                                                                                                       Vl—)r.ol,


 002                              _::..7                I\                                 —0.1•              OSj               0.211A — —


—0.10_______
                    o.o. /
                    ::i v         :j 0.08
                                  —-'
                                  0J0 r
          23.5—030 ,2J—2—50.25 ..0.121     o.I
                               l2j450.l6 12J45-0.'O  0.24w
                                                    I33.50.30
                                                                 '...d
                                                                          -045
                                                                           0.45
                                                                           ________
                                                              Ira—.—,—°' ,z.p0.6 'gj
                                                                                           —o.,.
                                                                                           _0.221,K
                                                                                                              02
                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                              0.41
                                                                                                                       -



Figure 3.15: Responses to federal funds shocks, larger VARs. Real interest rate response
is inferred from ff and p responses.

    This VAR is also sensitive to other variables. The bottom panel of Figure 3.15 shows
what happens when log hours per capita are included. In this case, the shape of the
response functions is still interpretable as monetary policy. In fact, as with the Ml VAR,
the brevity of the output response is attractive. But the variance decompositions (table
3.5) now drop precipitously, to less than 5% at any horizon.

3.4. Nonborrowed reserves.

Christiano and Eichenbaum (1993) use nonborrowed reserves to identify a monetary policy
shock. Strongin (1993) uses the ratio of nonborrowed to total reserves. Strongin presents
a detailed analysis of Fed operating procedures to suggest that this variable separates
policy shocks from accommodated money demand fiuct4ations. Since the nonborrowed
reserve ratio is highly correlated with the federal funds rate (see Figure 3.3), we might
expect similar results.

                                                                     22
   In fact, the results using the nonborrowed reserve ratio are almost identical to the
federal funds results. Figure 3.16 presents responses to nbr/tr shocks in three variable
VARs. The pattern is almost identical to federal funds, Figure 3.16. With nbr/tr first,
there is a small output movement in the wrong direction followed by a sustained decline
and a big price puzzle. With nbr/tr last, the output decline is continuous, and the price
puzzle is reduced.

                  nbr/tr—.lnbt/t(                itt/It —) y                    nbc/ti —, p




         I           nIt/U -)                    ct/ti —) p                  nbc/It —, nbc/ti
                                     U,
                                     -to




Figure 3.16: Responses to nonborrowed reserve/total reserve ratio shocks. Top panel:
nbr/tr y p VAR; bottom panel: y p nbr/tr VAR. Both VARs in levels without trends

    The output variance decompositions sinnmarized in Table 3.6 axe also almost identical
to their federal funds counterparts. With nbr/tr orthogonalized       its shocks explain
up to 52% of output variance at a three year horizon, and a substantial 32% of annual
output growth.
                                                    Forecast error 2 Var Ay
                   VAR                             1Q          1Y 2Y 3Y 1Q 1Y
                   nbr/tryp                         7          4 20 34 23 34
                   ypnbr/tr                         0          9 36 52 16 32
                   cypcpmlnbr/tr                    0          10 28 28 11 18
                     c y p cp ml nbr/tr; trend      0          10 27 27 11 18
                     ch/popypcpmlnbr/tr 0                      4   8    5   4        6

Table 3.6: Percent of output variance explained by nonborroweed/total reserve shocks.
AU VAR.s in log levels with 4 lags.

    Figure 3.17presents responses from the usual five varible VAR. The pattern is almost
exactly the same as ttie federal funds pattern, and conforms roughly to
                                                                         the pattern we
expect of a monetary shock. As before, the output variance decomposition declines, to
a maximum of 28% at two and three          year horizons,          and 18% of annual output growth.

                                                   23
Adding hours has the same effect as with federal funds. The impulse-response pattern is
not that badly affected, but nbr/tr shocks now account for less than 8% of the variance
of output.

         nbr/tr   —) C       flbt/tr —) y            nbr/tr   —> p        nbr/tr   —) cp      nbr/tr —>     ml        nbr/tf —) nbr/t




                                                                                                                       ___________
 2.23k'C'T. 07N4C"T5
         nb./Ir —, C     nbrIIr —) h/c      nb./it   —) v       nbt/tt —) P        nbr/it —) co        abt/tt —) ni     nOr/It .—) nbt/t
                                                                                                   0.01
                                                                                                  —0.03
                                                                                                  —0.0*
                                                                                                  —0.10
                                                                                                  —tie


 :Li :Btj/
                                                                                                  —0.i*
                                                                                                  .0.Z2
 —0-Ia
                                  E°gl':N\J
           •jt.0•2I TsJ.i•. i4345—O.' lA3S0
                                                                                                    0.3.
                                                                                                  —0.20    ____        0.2




Figure 3.17: Responses to nonborrowed reserve/total reserve shocks. Vars in log levels
without trends.


3.5. Long horizon output forecasts

In each of the above VARs, adding consumption substantially reduced the fraction of
output variance explained by the monetary shocks. Here I look at the relative forecast
power of consumption and monetary variables directly, to see if consumption drives the
monetary variables out.
   Table 3.7 compares forecasts of 3 year output growth using federal funds, the real
M2/output ratio, and the consumption /output ratio.'2 The top panel starts with single
variable regressions. All variables significantly forecast output growth, The R2 are high,
as often happens in multi-period forecasts with serially correlated right hand variables.
The consumption / output ratio has the highest t-statistic and, more importantly, R2,
0.63.
   The second panel of Table 3.7 presents multiple regressions, which are the horse race.
The first row compares federal funds and M2, out of curiosity over which is the "better"
monetary variable. Recalling the correlation of federal funds and M2, the fact that both
  13A11 the regressions contain a trend. This significantly improves the krecast performance of the
interest rate variables. There is a secular decline in output growth, visible in figure 3.18. The interest
rate spreads have no trend, so are not significant and have tiny H2 in regressions with no trend, while the
interest rate levels do better simply becaazae they have some trend.

                                                                     24
                                        I. Single regressions
                                 if      if-by m2/py c/y
                        cod. -0.35        -0.95    0.43     1.70
                           t.   -2.08     -4.76    2.38     8.40
                          k2    0.26       0.34    0.31     0.63

                                      II. Multiple regressions
                                 if      if-bOy m2/py c/y           A2
                        coef.   0.19               0.54            0.31
                           t.   0.43                1.42
                        coef.             -0.73     0.20           0.35
                           t.             -5.40     1.04
                        coef.   -0.01                       1.70 0.63
                           t. -0.06                         7.32
                        cot               -0.14             1.64 0.63
                           t.             -0.45             6.23
                        cod.                        0.16    L62 0.64
                           t.                       0.87    6.45

Table 3.7: Ols forecasting regressions of three-year log output growth. All regressions
include a time trend, Yt+3 — = a        + i + $g + Cg.f 3. Standard errors corrected for error
overlap and heteroskedasticity.

are individually insignificant suggests that they capture the same information about out-
put growth. But the second row, which compares the fed funds spread and M2 suggests
that the spread does have significant information beyond that contained in M2. (In a
VAR, the spread gives a very similar results as the leveh)
   The third and fourth rows run a horse race between federal funds and the consump-
tion/output ratio. The fed funds variables are insignificant, and the coefficients are sub-
stantially lower than in the single variable regressions. The consumption coefficient and
significance is hardly affected by the inclusion of either fed funds variable. Thus, consump-
tion drives out federal funds as a forecaster of output. The fifth row runs a similar race
between the real M2/output and consumption /output ratios. Again, whether measured
by the coefficient or the t-statistics, consumption drives out M2.
   Figure 3.18 also suggests that consumption does a better job of forecasting output
growth than the monetary variables. Not only is the 112 higher, but the consumption
forecasts seem contemporaneous with output growth, where the Fed funds rate forecast
lags.




                                                  25
                           dy                    rn2/py                     I.d funds
           0.22                          0.22                     0.22




           010




          .-o.oe   ______________
                    -
                    6.4 #4
                            -
                            #14
                                -CC ..._0.06
                   _________________ VC              Q I.-•mi..I95OO6 64   72   60
                                                                                     Zttal
                                                                      ___________________
                                                                                    06   96




Figure 3.18: Actual 3-year output growth and fitted values from forecasting regressions.
All regressions contain a trend.

3.6. Summary of VAR results

In each case, I started with a simple system, and the monetary shock seemed to explain
large fractions of output variation at long horizons, up to 82% for M2. However, the
response functions of these simple VAR did not conform to even qualitative monetary
theory.
    By adding more variables, playing with orthogonalization and imposing cointegration
structure, I was able to find specifications in which point estimates did capture reason-
able monetary dynamics. In each case, the fractions of output variance declined as the
responses started to look better. The largest credible point estimates were in the 20-25%
range at two to three year horizons. Even this result is tenuous; adding hours to the VARs
drove the explained fractions of output variance down to less than 10% by making the
output responses briefer, consistent with monetary theory. Consumption seems to drive
out all of the monetary variables in a long-horizon forecasting horse race.
    Furthermore, all the VAR.s explained very little output variance at horizons less than
a year, where we a short-rim non-neutrality is most likely to show up. Viewing the results
through the majority of current explicit monetary models, which do not predict protracted
non-neutralities, we again obtain less than 10% of output variance explained by monetary
shocks.
   Thus these VARs do provide evidence that monetary shocks can temporarily raise
output, lower interest rates, and eventually raise prices. However, they do not reliably
indicate that a large fraction of postwar US output variance is in fact due to monetary
policy shocks.



                                                26
    Even the largest figures are certainly an overstatement, for several reasons. 1) Other
real variables can help forecast output and drive down the contribution of monetary
variables. 2) The Fed and private agents are likely to have information advantages, so
that M2 or federal funds move in anticipation of news about the economy that we do
not include in a VAR'3. In addition, monetary aggregates and the economy undoubtedly
react to each other within a period. For both reasons, the identification of a money
supply shock is tenuous. 3) Very little theory is used to restrict the form of the VAR.
Believing that money even accounts for 15-25% of output variation at a 2-3 year horizon
(and virtually zero at a 1 quarter horizon) requires us to understand how it produces
such a response. 4) Once we recognize sampling uncertainty and (more importantly)
specification uncertainty (the reader can easily see how much fishing went into producing
good-looking impulse responses), the range of estimates consistent with the data is very
large.


3.7. Systematic Monetary Policy
Variance decompositions can answer the question "how much output variance is due to
monetary policy shocks?" This is a different question than "how much output variance
is due to monetary policy?" unless one imposes the view that systematic policy has no
         C
effect whatsoever.

    For example, many economists believe that postwar output is more stable than prewar
output because the Fed learned to systematically offset real shocks. Similarly, output
might be much more variable if the Fed stopped accommodating seasonal and other shifts
in money demand (such as after the 1987 stock market crash). If so, a negative fraction
of output variance is due to monetary policy.
   These examples presume that systematic or anticipated monetary policy can have
real effects. But variance decompositions and impulse-responses are poorly suited to
addressing these issues; Variance decompositions cannot be negative! When we read
impulse-response function as a measure of the effects of a monetary shock, we implicitly
  '3Sims (1992) puts it nicely: ...becuase interest rates and money are closely linked to investment
portfolio decisions, they tend to react quicliy to new information, as other asset market variables do.
Money and interest rates have strong predictive value for aggregate activity for the same reason that
stock prices do...One can imagine, in other words, that the historical pattern of monetary tightness
preceding recessions is misleading. High interest rates might 'produce' contractions in activity the way
the cock's crow produces the sunrise." This is at heart the same point made by King and Flosser (1984)
as well as Tobin (1970): money that really responds to output can look like it causes output.



                                                  27
assume that anticipated money has no real effect.14 If anticipated money has real effects,
then the response function measures the response of y to the current in shock, and the
path of future m's that the shock sets in motion.'5
    Does anticipated money matter? It is hard to. swallow the persistent responses of
output to monetary shocks found above as delayed responses to unanticipated money.
However, since the monetary variables also have protracted responses to the shocks, the
output responses are consistent with a view that money has short-lived effects on output,
if anticipated money does matter.
    If we accept this view, then the study of systematic monetary policy (accommodation
of seasonal and other shifts in money demand, systematic stabilization of other shocks),
or monetary institutions (deposit insurance, lender of last resort) may be more important
to macroeconomics than an assessment of how much output can be further stabilized by
making monetary policy more predictable. It may not be the answers that are wrong; We
may simply be asking the wrong question.

4. Technology shocks
The real business cycle literature is dominated by the assumption that "technology
shocks" drive economic fluctuations. A typical production function is

                                             Z=
  "And that the VAR has isolated shocks to agents' information sets.
  '5To make this point explicitly, suppose that the "structural" model is
                                 = a,(L)(rn — E,_1(mt)) + czpnrn(L)m. + n
                                                  = anq,(L)yt + Cmt
inverting this model to find the moving average representation, the y response to the mshock is

                                —'
                            lit —
                                     .   +   a,nnt(L)amn.(L) + aijma(L)      Lint.
                                                           — apms(L)amy(L)

As you can see, the parameters a,,rn.(L) and a,,,,,(L) affect this response. In the special case that p does
not respond to anticipated m,          = 0, so the true rponse is the same as the impulse.response,


                                                  a,,(L)
which is independent of the money supply rule.




                                                    28
and A is the shock'6. Of course, the models are capable of producing responses to many
shocks, including government spending, financing and monetary shocks (when appropriate
frictions are introduced.) However, technology shocks—shocks to current period marginal
productivity—are centrally important for obtaining realistic artificial time-series in cur-
rent models. Other shocks have not been found to contribute much to output variation
or cyclical co-movement in the real business cycle paradigm.
    Obviously, technology contains some stochastic element, so the crucial question is
"how much variation in output can technology shocks explain?" Prescott (1986) presents
a famous calculation that 70% of the volatility of GNP is due to technology shocks. This
calculation is made by calibrating a model economy, i-c. choosing values for preference and
technology parameters and for the variance and autocorrelation of the technology shock.
Then, "70%" refers to the variance of Hodrick-Prescott filtered model output divided by
Hodrick -Prescott filtered actual output.
    This calculation is obviously sensitive to the calibrated value of the variance of the
technology shock, and possibly other parameters as well. Double the standard deviation
of the technology shock, and you double the predicted standard deviation of output. The
fraction can come out over 100% if you're not careful! It is not a variance decomposition.
   Eichenbaum (1991) uses (3MM to quantify the sampling uncertainty of the calibration
procedure, and finds that the estimate of var(ymoijej)/var(y.g.,gs) is 0.78 with a standard
error of 0.64! Sensibly enough, virtually all of this uncertainty comes from uncertainty
in the calibrated variance and autocorrelation of the technology shock.
    I will concentrate on a different source of "whimsy" (Eichenbaum's terminology), how
the point estimates are affected by the choice of statistic.
    To start with, Eichenbaum only considers sampling variation given a set of moments
that we pick model parameters to match. The figure is also obviously sensitive to the
calibration procedure: if one included only var(y) in the list of moments to be matched,
then the calibration procedure will "explain" 100% of the variance of output, by picking
a suitable variance of the technology shock.
     Furthermore, consider the effect of correlation between output and productivity. Real
business cycle models have one shock and many series. They are stochastically singular,
i.e. functions of each series are perfectly correlated. In tl4e data, they are not. Instead of
  '6Up until now, we have been using the word "shock" for "innovation", all "shocks" were unpredictable.
The real business cycle literature uses the word "shock" to describe the Solow residual $AS$ even if it is
predictable. I'll conform to this unfortunate terminology.


                                                   29
just counting model variance / data variance, we could insist that the model only explains
the variance of a single dynamic factor of output, Solow residuals, labor, consumption,
investment, etc., or the projection of output on Solow residuals. These calculation will
yield smaller numbers.
   As an extreme example, Gordon (1993) argues that when one accounts for measure-
ment error in capital and hours, there is no correlation left between productivity and
output. He exploits the model's prediction of an almost perfect correlation (see below) to
conclude that productivity shocks explain 0% of the variance of output. Note that Gor-
don's productivity series still has plenty of variance, and so might still produce a high
number using Prescott's statistic.
   The next section shows how statistics that focus on the predictability of output can
give numbers much smaller than Prescott's.


4.1. Forecastability and calculations that technology shocks explain very little.

4-1.1. A simple VAR.

£ start with a simple characterization of the data. Blanchard and Quah (1989), Shapiro
and Watson (1988) and Cochrane (1994) present VARs that decompose output into per-
manent and transitory shocks. Figure 4.1 presents the impulse-response function of a
consumption . output VAR in this spirit (it is closest, obviously, to Cochrane (1994),
but the message of other specifications is similar). I regress log conswnption and output
growth on the log consumption/output ratio and two lagged growths17. In the left hand
panel of Figure 4.1 the shocks are identified by forcing the long-run output response of
the transitory shock to zero, following Blanchard and Quah. It happens that this or-
thogonalization is almost exactly the same as the conventional y-first orthogonalization.
Orthogonalizing with consumption first, shown in the right hand panel of 4.1 produces a
similar picture.
    The impulse-response functions reveal a large transitory component to output. As
shown in Table 4.1, the transitory shock accounts for 89% of the variance of output growth
and 89%, 73%, 63% of the 1, 2, and 3 year output forecast error variance respectively.
  '7The VAR uses log nondurable plus services consumption and. log private GDP —GDP less gov-
ernment purchases — for output. The use of private GDP is a minor refinement, suggested by King
Plosser Stock and Watson (1991). the consumption/private GOP ratio is more stable than the con-
sumption/GD? ratio, and hence better forecasts business-cycle variation in output. Also, models are
designed to explain private sector GDP.


                                                30
                                                          .2

       1.2                         è—fll*.—14             '.0

        .0
                               ___________             1 •••        1' 'N                    _________
                                                          fl
       a..

       "            _:.,_                                 04    £




             O24SSIQU
                 Q,,,i.a I.IIoaq a
                                   IS I
                                   ubaak
                                                         02                 O..a,W. Ia0..I.q a   nk



Figure 4.1: Impulse-response function from nondurable + services consumption—private
output VAR. Right hand panel is orthgonalized with consumption first (y shock does not
affect c contemporaneously). Left hand panel is orthogonalized so that the transitory
shock ha
                                                  Shock and horizon
                              lYear             2 Years       3 Years                    Differences
                    Var of perm trans penn trans perm trans petit trans
              consumption     78           22   86       15          90         10          77        23
                   output     12           89   27       73          37        63           11        89

Table 4.1: Variance decomposition. Table entries give the percent of the forecast error
variance of the row variable due to the column shock at the indicated horizon. The VAR
consists of a regression of zXc and y on c — y and two laggs of & and Ay. The shocks
are orthogonalized so that the transitory shock has no long-run effect on output.

   We can compare the implied c-y VAR representation predicted by models to Figure 4.1
and Table 4.1 to see how well the models reproduce the second moments of consumption
and output. This use of the VAR does not require us to find structural interpretations
of the shocks, which is a contentious issue. (See Hansen and Sargent (1991), Lippi and
Reichlin (1993), Blanchard and Quah (1993), Cassou and Mittnik (1990) and Coclirane
(1994) for some of the debate.)


4.1.2. A model, and Blanchard and Quali's small number.

Now, let;s see what impulse-response function a standard model does predict. Figure 4.2
shows the response to a 1% technology shock of the King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988)
model with linear utility for leisure as in Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988). The model




                                                  31
is
                                       max EE$t(ln(Cg) +8(1 — Ne))                            .5.2.
                                                   nO

                                               Z = (AN)°K° = C + I
                                                             = (1 — J)JI + It
                                                   lnA =g+InA_i +ft
Parameters are calibrated as in Campbell (1992) to produce a nonstochastic steady state
with growth g = 2% and rate of return = 6%. a = 2/3, 6 = 0.1, N = 1/3.

                            S40oj0t.d Iim. n.j.,                                       Raoo.n all I.ct.aoS 4040*
          32

          I.
                                                                             10


          l0
      I                                                                  I
                                                                             •5   cz   111
                                                                                             11111111 11111
                                                                                                              11111   11111 :
               $ 0 II 20 3$ 2$ 24 40      40 40    4$ N 2)     40
                                 Q*..dn                                                               0-n-s


Figure 4.2: Artificial time series and response to 1% technology shock in King Plosser
Rebelo model.

     It turns out that consumption and output are invertible functions of the technology
shock, so a c-y VAR should recover the technology shock, and should find no other shock.
Thus, the responses to a technology shock are also the model's predictions for the VAR
impulse-response function.
   Comparing Figure 4.2 with Figure 4.1, this standard real business cycle model produces
time series that look something like the permanent shock in the data. The transitory shock
and its response are absent from the model's impulse-response function. In this way, we
reproduce Blanchard and Quali's result:

       Small fractions of the variance of output are due to technology (permanent)
       shocks.

    From the above variance decomposition, about 12% 27% and 37% at 1, 2, and 3 year
horizons, and 11% in annual growth rates. (Mechanically, the number rises to 100% as
the horizon increases.)

                                                                    32
4.1.3. Predictability and a small number inspired by R.otemberg and Wood-
       ford.

The essential message of the VAR is that output contains a large predictable component.
This is good news. If a recession is a period in which output is "below trend", we must
expect output to grow more in the future, and vice-versa in a boom. The predictability
of long-run output growth verifies that there are such periods. The left hand panel of
Table 4.2 makes this predictability point directly: regressions of output growth on the
consumption/output ratio yield R2 values up to 0.4 at a two year horizon. R2 above 0.6
can be obtained by adding a trend, as in Figure 3.7, interest rates, unemployment, hours,
or other variables.
                                    Output                    Solow Residual
               Horizon       1Q    1Y 2Y 3Y              1Q     1Y 2Y 3Y
               coeffficient 0.15 0.85 1.37 1.53 0.23 0.83 1.07                 1.07
               t-statistic   3.76 6.64 6.71 5.62 7.93 9.95 8.55 6.61
                             0.06 0.31 0.45 0.48 0.27 0.60 0.53 0.45
Table 4.2: Regressions of output growth and Solow residual on consumption/output ratio,
     —     = /I(c — y) + cj+,i. c=log nondurable plus services consumption. y = log (gdp-
government purchases). Solow residual = y - 1/3*ln(k) - 2/Stln(hours), k inferred from
gross fixed investment with 6 = 0.1. Coefficients estimated by OLS; t-statistics corrected
for serial correlation due to overlapping data, and for conditional heteroskedsticity.

   This observation suggests another calculation: Define the "business cycle" component
of output as the forecastable or transitory component of output. Since model output
is basically unforecastable, we expect to find that the model explains small fractions of
the variance of the business cycle component of output. This point is emphasized by
Rotemberg and Woodford (1993); it can also be seen in the flat model spectral densities
reported by Watson (1994).
   One such calculation is the ratio of k-period forecastable output growth to that pre-
dicted by the model,
                                  var(Etyg+ —
                                   var(Eiyt+4 —   y)     -

If we divide both numerator and denominator by var(yg+k — y) and calibrate the model
(variance of technology shock) so that var(yg+I, — vt),,wda: = var(ys+k — ydut4,, the above
statistic is the same as the ratio of long-horizon 112
                                                  —
                                  02 — var(Etyt+k Vt)
                                  ALE —
                                                 —
                                        var(y(+k Vt)

                                             33
in the data and in the model Table 4.3 presents forecasting J?2 in the data (from Table
4.2) and in several models. The Table just presents the B2; the results of division are
pretty obvious.
 Model                                  IQ       1Y          2Y      3Y        var(BN)/var(Ay)
                                       0.06     0.31         0.45    0.48            17.0
 Data (c-y VAR)
 std. model: at = at_i + c   3.5E.06           1.IE-05 1.7E-05 2.OE-05              0.0007
 differenced estimate         0.997             0.45         0.14    0.09             2.6
 trend estimate                0.74             0.42         0.39    0.44            19.2
 random walk a + smooth news   0.12             0.36         0.51    0.58            20.6
 news from a, y, c, hrs VAR    0.76             0.57         0.46    0.44            70.6

Table 4.3: Long-horiozon output growth forecast W and ratio of Beveridge-Nelson de.
trended output variance to variance of output growth.

    For the standard model (identified by the technology process Ug =        a_ +et in the table),
output forecasting P2 is pitifully small. In the data, we see the subflantial forecast B2
Dividing the two, we obtain:

      Technology shocks explain 0.002% or less of business cycle variation in output!


4.1.4. Beveridge Nelson detrending in place of the Hodrick Prescott Filter.

What if Prescott had detrended output using the Beveridge-Nelson detrending method in
place of the Hodrick-Prescott filter? The Beveridge-Nelson (1981) trend is defined as the
level output will reach when all dynamics have worked themselves out'8. It formalizes the
idea that the cyclical compoient is the part that is forecast to die out. The Beveridge-
Nelson trend is visually indistinguishable from the Hodrick-Prescott trend in the plots of
data and trend used to justify Hodrick-Prescott detrending (see Cochrane 1994 for a plot
of the B-N trend, and Prescott (1986) for the HP filtered trend.)
    The variance of Beveridge-Nelson detrended data is var(yt — limk_,a. Etyt÷k) and so is
the limit of the numerator of the long-horizon R. The denominator of long-horizon R
explodes as k — , however. For that reason, the last column of Table 4.3 presents the
variance of Beveridge-Nelson detrended output divided by the variance of output growth.
   '8Formally, the Beveridge-Nelson trend is

                   4rend = lim(E,y,÷b — icE(Ay)) = y,   ÷   L
                                                            j=1
                                                                          — E(Ay)


 I work from VARs and ignore the constants, so I ignore the E(y) terms.

                                                34
Dividing the "model" number by the "data" number, we obtain the fraction of Beveridge-
Nelson detrended output due to technology shocks. (This calculation is still a little
generous to technology shocks. I allow the calibrator to freely assume counterfactually
large variation of Solow residuals to match output growth variance. It's devastating
enough; but one can divide by another third or so by scaling to the variance of Solow
residuals rather than output.)
    For the standard model, the Beveridge Nelson detrended output has a variance 0.07%
that of output growth. In the data, Beveridge-Nelson detrended output variance is 17
times the variance of output growth. Dividing the two, we find again that

      Technology shocks explain 0.009% or less of Beveridge-Nelson detrended output
      variance!

    A seemingly minor change in the detrending method produces a dramatic change in
the result. The standard model, while a useful stochastic growth model, does not seem
to produce any business cycles!


4.1.5. Endogenous dynamics; a small number inspired by Christiano

Output and technology are so close in Figure 4.2 that they are barely distinguishable.
All the dynamics of output come from the assumed dynamics of the shock. (Christiano
(1988) and Eichenbauzn (1993) emphasize this point.) This observation suggests that we
define the fraction of output variance explained by the model as the variation generated
by the propagation mechanism, rather than simply assumed in the external shocks.
    To quantify this point, Table 4.4 presents the correlation of long run output growth
with Solow residual growth and the ratio of the variance of output growth to the variance
of the Solow residual, in the data and several models. As the Table shows, the correlation
between output and Solow residual is nearly perfect in this standard model, and there is
essentially no amplification of shocks.

      The model explains essentially 0% of output fluctuations.


4.2. Forecastable technology shocks

Of course, all of the above calculations depend on the structure and parameterization
of the real business cycle model, as well as the nature of its shocks. A first repair is

                                           35
                                          1Q         if          2Y           3Y
       Model                              Correlation: corr(y — y,     at÷k — at)
                  -
       Data                               0.85       0.79       0.75         0.74
       Std. model aj = ti + Et         1-(2E-06)   l-(6E-06) 1-(9E-06) 1-(1E-05)
       Differenced estimate              0.95        0.99       0.99         0.99
       Trend estiamte                    0.69        0.93       0.97         0.98
       Random walk a + smooth news       0.90        0.91       0.92         0.92
       News from a, y, c, hrs VAR        0.97         0.96      0.97         0.98
                                                                   /
                                       Amplification: var(yt+k — yt) vaz(at+k — at)
       Data                              1.68         2.01       1.96       1.91
       Std. model at = at_i +            0.98         0.98       0.99       0.99
       Differenced estimate              1.30        1.27       1.13         1.07
       Trend estimate                    1.89        2.17       2.20         2.21
       Random walk a + smooth news       1.40        1.44       1.40         1.33
       News from a, y, c, hrs VAR        2.46        2.20       2.05         1.92

Table 4.4: Correlation of long-na output growth with solow residual, and ratio of output
growth variance to solow residual variance

obvious enough that it is worth pursuing here: Since output dynamics look a lot like
shock dynamics, put in some interesting technology shock dynamics.
   This path isn't as innocuous as it seems. Hall (1988) and Evans (1992) attack the idea
that Solow residuals represent technology shocks by showing that they are forecastable by
a number of variables, including military spending, government purchases, and monetary
aggregates. Table 4.2 shows that Solow residuals are about as predictable as output from
the c/y ratio. Rotemberg and Woodford (1993) argue that changes in technology should
not be forecastable. On a priori grounds, then, these authors argue that we shouldn't try
to repair the technology shock view by allowing forecastable technology shocks.

   Of course, some components of government spending (infrastructure, military R&D,
NASA, etc.) may actually cause increases in technology. Proponents of such spending cer-
tainly advocate this view loudly enough! Also, government spending, even in wars, must
respond to forecasted tax revenues, and monetary policy may accommodate predicted
expansions in real activity. Since policy-makers and private agents have more informa-
tion than our VAR, spurious (hanger-causality is likely. Finally, many real business cycle
advocates have abandoned the pure technology shock view of the Solow residual (see be-
low), in which case forecastable movements are more plausible. I take a pragmatic view
and investigate the consequences of forecastable technology shocks; purists are free to
disregard the results.

   What dynamic structure should we put in for the technology shock? A natural idea is


                                           36
to use the structure found in the data. To this end, I ran two autoregressions of Solow
residuals on lagged Solow residuals:

                         Differences: & = p +     E f)Aa_ + ct
and
                     Levels with trend: at = a0 + bt +   E $a_ + c.
(As one would expect, a specification in levels without a trend produced almost exactly the
same result as with differences. Below, I consider multivariate Solow residual forecasts.)
    Figure 4.3 presents the estimated impulse-responses for the Solow residuals, together
with the responses of output, consumption, and labor when technology shocks with the
estimated dynamics are fed through the RBC model. The differenced specification pro-
duces a very persistent shock, while the trend specification produces, a transitory shock.
You still get out what you put in: the shape of both output responses is essentially that
of the shock response. The stationary shock is amplified somewhat as investment rises
to smooth the transitory shock forward and labor supply increases to take advantage of
transitorily higher wages. The transitory shock produces a transitory output response,
like the response to the transitory shock in the data; the permanent shock produces a
permanent output response like that of the permanent shock in the data.
    Tables 4.3 and 4.4 include forecastability and correlation/amplification statistics for
these models, marked "Differenced estimate" and "Trend estimate". As we might suspect
from the graph, the permanent technology shock produces low output 112 once the initial
rise in output has passed, high correlation of output and technology shock, and small
amplification. It only explains about 2.6/17 = 15% of Beveridge-Neison detrended output
variance. The stationary shock does much better: the forecast W are similar to those
found in the data, and shocks are amplified. It explains a little more than all of Beveridge-
Nelson detrended output variance. Thus, we can get transitory output variation and
athplification out of a real business cycle model, by assuming a transitory technology
shock.
   The data will not be helpful in determining which shock process is correct, however.
The stationary shock process has a very slowly declining response function, so no test
could tell it from the unit root shock process. Conveisely, the examples warn us to
beware empiricists who make seemingly innocuous detrending assumptions; they have
major effects on the properties of the real business cycle model.

                                             37
             .3                                             __.._ _.

            U


            S.                           I
            52




                                                     S.. — 1* I—..—e —




                                                                         It
                                                           0s n     I.        It




Figure 4.3: Estimated impulse-response function for Solow residuals and KPR model
responses to technology shocks with the estimated structure.

   The transitory shock model still predicts far too much correlation, so almost all output
dynamics are due to the assumed shock dynamics. Most importantly, there is now no
stochastic growth, no permanent shock as found in the data. Making the assumed shock
process have a response that does not go to zero doesn't help much. The series are
still correlated, output has the same response as the shock, and correspondingly less
forecastability and amplification.
     The real business cycle model needs more shocks. The problem we are having is that
it is hard to match a single shock model to a multiple shock world. To decide how much of
the variance of output is due to technology shocks, it would help a lot to have somemodel
of the other shocks. Real business cycle modelers have tended to ignore the stochastic
singularity in their model's predictions, citing measurement error. However, it seems that
one of the babies — either transitory, business cycle dynamics or stochastic growth —
get thrown out with the bath water by doing so. Below, I examine whether news about
future technology shocks can account for the extra shock.




                                             38
 4.3. Production function, labor hoarding

The estimated teéhnology shock depends crucially on the assumed form of the production
function. Labor and capital hoarding have recently been examined, in part to explain the
lorecastability of Solow residuals. (Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo 1993, Eichenbaum
1993, Sbordone 1993). For example, suppose the production function is

                                Y2 = (441NE)°(KU1)'°

where E represents effort and U represents capital utilization. The Solow residual is
     (AE)°u1, so variables that Changer-cause endogenous effort and capital utiliza-
tion will Granger-cause the residual, even maintaining the assumption that they do not
Granger-cause the true technology shock A1.
    Indeed, Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo find that when variable effort is added,
the model predicts forecastable Solow residuals. They also find that adding labor effort
drops the Prescott-style calculation of the explained variance of output from 80% to 31%.
Eichenbaum (1993) finds even stronger results when capital hoarding is introduced.
   These calculations suggest that variations on the structure and parazneterization of the
RBC model will also have important effects on the estimated importance of technology
shocks.

                                                                  -
4.4. Interpreting technology shocks
Much of the controversy over real business cycles stems from common-sense resistance
to the idea that variations in the state of knowledge drive fluctuations. In particular, it
is hard to interpret declines, and some authors argue against forecastability or dynamic
structure in technology;
    From the point of view of measurement, anyihing that causes output to vary given
capital and labor will result in a Solow residual, and hence will be identified as a "tech-
nology shock." Labor or capital hoarding, money, taxes or any other friction that causes
output to be less then N°K1 will have the same effect. Plosser (1989) argues for this
interpretation of technology shocks. Recently, Hansen and Prescott (1993) seem to have
adopted the latter interpretation.

     Every nation has a set of rules and regulations that govern the conduct of
     business. These have consequences for the incentives to adopt more advanced

                                           39
      technologies and for the resources required to operate existing ones. ...Systerns
      that divert entrepreneurial talent from improving technologies to rent-seeking
      activities...[andj changes in the legal and regulatory system within a country
      often induce negative as well as positive changes in technology.

   In a separate discussion, they liken technology shocks to small perturbations in all the
factors that make the US a better place to do business than India. In short, technology
shock3 are changes in the inefficiencies induced by policy!
    In cataloguing views on the source of fluctuations, real business cycle theorists are
now fishing in the same pond as all other macroeconomists, though with a well-specified
rod consisting of explicit dynamic models. Any of the items in the list on the first page
of this paper would cause a measured "technology shock." In fact, the thrust of much
recent real business cycle research has been to explicitly include tax and other stochastic,
real distortions. This is good news for the real business cycle methodology, since it now
can produce explicit dynamic models with the kind of distortions economists have been
interested in for generations. Eventually, we should be able to make calculations like
the above to quantify the impact of government spending, taxation, monetary and credit
shocks in the context of explicit dynamic models. However, it is obviously bad news for
the view that technology shocks, narrowly defined, are the source of fluctuations: it says
that the calculations we have made do not bear on the issue.


4.5. Summary

Table 4.5 summarizes a few calculations of the importance of technology shocks. We
started with Prescott's calculation that 70% of the variance of output is explained by
technology shocks. However, this calculation turns out to be subject to enormous sam-
pling error. Perhaps more importantly, the statistic one uses turns out to matter very
much. The fact that standard stochastic growth models produce little output forecasta-
bility and output dynamics very dose to shock dynamics, suggest numbers as low as 0%.
Modifications to the production function can have a similar effect. Mean-reverting (i.e.
forecastable) technology shocks can give rise to mean-reverting and hence forecastable
output, but this fix is controversial, and puts us in danger of losing stochastic growth.
Finally, the concept of technology shocks seems to have melted away. It is now inter-
preted so broadly that it can stand for essentially any distortion that causes a measured
Solow residual. With this interpretation, it is vacuous to say that technology shocks cause

                                            40
                  Author               Statistic or observation         Fraction

                                                 fihlered vmoaei)
                 i rescott                                                  70 %
                                          e3(HP filtered vt. )
                Eichenbaum          Sampling error (&.4k, Pahock )    78%   +1- 64%

           Blanchard-Quah              a2(y) from perm. shock
                                                                     12% 27% 37%
        Rotemberg-Woodford                                              0.002 %

                Christiano
                                        '2t771 1—corr(y, a)                 tiny
          Beveridge-Nelson             B-N trend not HF filter         0.003 %
                 Gordon                  corr(shock,output)                  0

    Burnside, Eichenbaum, Itebelo          Labor hoarding                   31 %

Table 4.5: Summary of calculations of the contribution of technology shocks to output
variability. Author column gives the inspiration for the calculation. Numbers are my
calculations, not theirs.

fluctuations.


5. Some new contenders
Sd. Oil Prices and reallocation

Hamilton (1983) suggested that oil price shocks account for postwar recessions. Every
postwar recession was preceded by an oil price increase. VARs suggest that oil prices are
econometrically exogenous, and, since the big increases are due to OPEC or the Texas
Raihoad Commission, exogeneity rings true. However, big technology, monetary and
federal funds shocks also occur around the beginning of every postwar recession, and can
appear exogenous in VARs.
    I run two simple VARs using the producer price index for crude petroleum. The first
just includes output, the second includes both output and consumption, in the style of
the monetary VARs examined above. Figure 5.1 presents the responses of output to
the oil price shocks, and Table 5.1 presents the output variance decompositions. As the
figure shows, innovations in oil prices do produce sustaiped output declines. However,
the magnitude of the declines is much smaller than the declines produced by output or
consumption shocks. Summing and squaring, less than 10% of the variance of output is


                                            41
explained by oil price shocks. (Oil prices account for 80% or more, and usually 99%, of
oil price variance, confirming Hamilton's exogeneity tests.) The problem is simple. There
are only a few large oil price changes. Yes, they were followed by recessions, but the rest
of the fluctuations in output are not accounted for by oil price changes, and the severity
of the recessions does not occur in strict proportion to the oil price innovation. Given
this evidence, it does not seem worth the space required to sort out whether this small
contribution remains when put into competition with monetary variables or technology
shocks.




                          S...,
                                  TI F                             , —, ,




                                                         rr3

Figure 5.1: Output responses in oil price VARs. Top: oil price output VAR. Bottom: oil
price, consumption, output VAR. VARs in log levels, 4 lags.

                                        Horizon
                        VAR       1Q 1Y 2Y 3Y Differences
                        Oil,y      1    4     7    8           4
                        Oil,y,c    0     0    2    5           1

Table 5.1: Output variance decomposition, oil price VARs. Table entries give the per-
centage of output variance accounted for by oil price shocks.

    The biggest sticking point for oil price advocates is the propagation mechanism. Im-
ported oil is a small fraction of GDP, so traditional production theory suggests that even
large increases in its price should have small effects on output. A general equilibrium
model might generate a larger response, for example if labor supply declines when there
is an oil shock. But Kim and Lougani (1992) construct such a model, and find that oil
shocks only account for 18% of the variance of output with a CES production function.
 Finn (1993) constructs a real business cycle model witlf varying capital utilization that
explains the forecastability of Solow residuals from energy price increases. She also finds


                                             42
 7-19% of output variance explained. Furthermore, standard models predict symmetric
 effects, so that real oil price declines should cause booms.
    Of course, the small input problem applies to money as well. The cost of holding
reserves plus cash (the money "imported" into the economy) is the interest cost, on the
order of 1/10% of GDP. Thus, viewing money services as an input to production, the same
classical theory says that variations in the money stock should have tiny effects on output.
In response to this problem, theorists are working hard on models with frictions in which
variations in this small money stock can have large effects. Similarly, work is underway
on models in which oil price changes can have large and possibly asymmetric effects on
output. Hamilton (1988) examines a two period multi-sector model with fixed costs to
reallocating labor across sectors. Atkeson and Kehoe (1993) add putty-clay capital whose
energy usage built in forever once installed. Rotemberg and Woodford (1993) advocate
imperfectly competitive models.
   An emerging empirical literature supports some of these stories. Bresnahan and Ramey
(1992) show that when oil prices rise, plants that produce small cars operate at capacity;
plants that produce large cars are idle. Over the long run, more small car plants are
created, but a short run decline in output and employment results. Davis and Haltiwanger
(1990) show that job churning is countercyclical.

5.2. Credit Shocks

There is much descriptive evidence that problems in credit allocation are a part of eco-
nomic fluctuations. Bernanke (1983) argued that the disappearance of bank intermedi-
aries, rather than a scarcity of the medium of exchange, accounted for falling output in
the great depression. Wojnilower (1980) (1985) argues that the beginning of recessions,
like pre-wa.r financial panics, were often accompanied by "credit crunches" in which there
was much nonpirce rationing of credit.
    However, credit shocks do not seem to explain a large part of postwar US output
fluctuations. As Bernanke's (1994) review makes clear, most credit research is aimed at
demonstrating a credit channel or amplification mechanism for open market operations or
other shocks. Credit shocks may have been important in pre-war recessions accompanied
by banking panics, and it is perhaps a success story of postwar macroeconomic policy
that such shocks have been avoided or that the economy has been insulated from their
effects.


                                           43
    Current empirical work on credit imperfections (for example, Fazzari Hubbard and
Peterson 1988, Geytler and Gilchrist 1992 or Kashyap, Stein and Wilcox 1991) essentially
documents a small firm residual in investment. The smallest of firms either pay a few
percent more for credit than estimated betas or q predict, or they face constraints whose
shadow values are of the same order of magnitude. This evidence mirrors evidence in
finance that small firm stocks pay a few percentage points more risk premium than the
static CAPM and regression beta estimates predict. Since small firms are small, it is
hard to imagine that these effects are central reasons why large firm or aggregate output
goes down in recessions. In a nice survey, Ramey (1993) shows that monetary aggregates
drive credit indicators out of VARs similar to those discussed above. (However, Bernanke
(1994) responds by arguing that wide monetary aggregates may be good indicators of
credit conditions.)

6. Consumption or news shocks
We have examined popular candidates for shocks, and found little solid evidence that
they account for the bulk of business cycle fluctuations. Shocks to consumption, output,
or other endogenous variables dominate most calculations. Other contenders, such as
government spending or financing shocks are not quantitatively plausible.
   One response to this observation is to advocate models with nonlinear dynamics,
chaos, etc. Such models can enormously amplify small shocks, or display dynamics with
no external shocks at all. However, standard economic models seem very resistant to
chaos. So far, either very stylized environments or extreme parameter values must be
invoked (see Boldrin and Woodford 1990 for a survey).
   Since we can't seem to find observable exogenous shocks, how about unobservable
shocks? Surely agents have much more information than we do. Suppose they get
bad news about the future. Then, consumption declines and sets off a recession. We
economists, like Hall (1993) and Blanchard (1993), conclude that consumption shocks or
declines in consumer confidence "caused" the recession.
   One might doubt that agents in the economy can forecast so much better than
economists. We too are consumers, and we spend more time reading the paper and
poring over the data than most. But thi8 argument fotgts aggregation. Each person
has information about his own prospects, most of which is idiosyncratic. Total consump-
tion aggregates all this information about aggregate activity. Ask a consumer about next

                                           44
year's CDP and he will answer "I don't know." But he may know that his factory is
closing, and hence he is consuming less. This idiosyncratic shock is correlated with future
CDP. Summing over consumers, aggregate consumption can reveal information about
future aggregate activity, although neither consumers in the economy nor economists who
study it can name what the crucial pieces of information are.


6.1. Response to a simple news shock

To make consumption shocks more than an exercise in residual-naming, we need to specify
what news is about and verify that the series we see behave as they do. Unfortunately,
standard intertemporal models do not produce consumption-led recessions. One might
think that good news about the future would increase cOnsumption through the wealth
effect, and set off a surge in investment to build up the capital stock to the new higher
desired level. (See Fazna 1992 for an articulation of this view.) But increasing both
consumption and investment requires an increase in output. In standard equilibrium
models, output does not respond to such shifts in "demand." if consumption increases,
investment must go down; if the rate of return rises enough to make investment increase,
it must come at the expense of consumption.
  To be specific, Figure 6.1 plots the response of the King Plosser Rebelo model to
news that a 1% permanent technology shock will happen in one year. Consumption rises
instantly, and then varies slowly due to intertempora.l substitution effects. Labor declines.
There is no current technology shock, and capital has not changed, so there is no wage rate
increase to induce more labor supply. At higher consumption levels, consumers choose
to work less. Since labor diminishes, and technology and capital are unchanged, current
output (Y = (AN)°K'°) also goes down. Investment, the residual between declining
output and rising consumption, declines so much I couldn't fit it on the graph. The boom
only comes when the technology shock actually happens.
   Thus, news of a future improvement in technology sets off a recession (or, perhaps
more appropriately, a binge and a vacation) in the standard real business cycle model.
This behavior is robust to parameterization and to variations on the model, including
adjustment costs to investment, varying labor effort, and varying capital utilization (I
tried all three). In the remainder of this section, I explore several ways of getting around
this problem, and implementing the consumption shock view.




                                            45
                                 R••po.fl4 to a..s 01 IX i.chnoloty 01.0th
                          l.2




                      I
                      C
                      &




                          .1.2                                       '8
                                                   O,jofl.r•




Figure 6.1: Response of King Plosser Rebelo model to news of a 1 percent technology
shock.

6.2. Smooth news + technology shocks
Recall that the data show more than one shock. Large fractions of the variance of out-
put are attributed to shocks that are orthogonal to consumption. Perhaps we don't need
"consumption1ed" recessions after all. Perhaps a model with a news shock and a tech-
nology shock can mimic the consumption-output VAR of Figure 4.1.
   To pursue this idea, I modify the standard real business cycle model to include a
random walk technology shock as well as a shock that carries news of a small but very
persistent long-term rise in technology. Letting ag denote the log technology shock and
z the news variable, the shock process is

                            [ae][l           0(L)1{ati1+[Ct
                                                      flzt_ij 8t
                            lztilO             p

                                                       =
 with parameter values 0(L) = 1+L+L2+..+L'2, p = 0.8, c 1, co                0.05, E(qfit) = 0.

     The left panel of Figure 6.2 presents responses to the news shock ö. The shock
 is constructed to forecast a long slow increase in technology, which can be seen in the
                                                           smoothed versions of the news
 Figure. Output, labor supply and consumption behave as
 shock discussed above.
                                                                    function of the
   The right hand panel of Figure 6.2 presents the impulse-response
 implied consumption-output VAR. The VAR shocks are orthogonalized so that a transi-
 tory shock has no permanent effect on output. As in the estimated c-y VAR, Figure 4.1,
                                                                               little to
 there is a strong transitory component to output. Consumption responds very

                                                    46
this transitory shock. The permanent shock causes a delayed rise in output, as in the
data, though the rise here is slower. Consumption rises more slowly in response to the
permanent shock than in the data.

                               — t_.., _a                —-— —


             I
             I


                             0
Figure 6.2: Left panel: Response of King-Plosser-Rebelo model to news shock. Right
panel: Impluse-response of implied consumption-output VAR, with transitory shock de-
fined to have no permanent effect on output.

    The VAR successfully hides the fact that consumption and output move in opposite
directions in response to the news shock. Consumption and output both rise in response
to both permanent and transitory VAR shocks. (The VAR shocks do not recover the
original news and technology innovations, but linear combinations of them.) In fact, model
consumption and output innovations have a 0.61 correlation coefficient, which is higher
than 0.41 found in the data.
    Table 6.1 presents the variance decomposition of the implied c-y VAR. As in the data,
transitory shocks account for the vast majority of output fluctuations at one to three year
horizons, while the variance of consumption is mostly due to the permanent shock. Table
6.2 presents the implied coefficients and 112 in long-horizon output forecasting regressions,
based on the c/p ratio. As in the data, Table 4.2, the coefficients are positive (low output
relative to consumption means high future output growth). The coefficients rise with
horizon, as does the 112, up to a maximum of about 0.4. The rise is a little slower in this
example than in the data, but the pattern is the same. As shown in Table 4.3, the entire
time-t information set (not just c/y) gives even higher long-horizon 112, up to 0.6, and a
Beveridge-Nelson detrended output variance almost exactly that of the data. And this
model does display stochastic growth.




                                            47
                                             Shock and horizon
                                   1 Year         2 Years      3 Years
                   - Var   of perm trans penn trans perm trans
                            c      74       26      70        30       71       29
                           y        5       95      10        90       25       75

Table 6.1: Decomposition of variance from c-y var implied by real business cycle model
with smooth news about future technology shocks. The VAR shocks are orthogonalized
so that the transitory shock has no long-nm effect on output.
                            Horizon      1/4       1      2        5        7
                                  b   0.03 0.23 0.65 1.98 2.68
                                  R2 0.001 0.02 0.08 0.28 0.39
Table 6.2: Coefficients and R2 in regression of horizon output growth on consump-
tion/output ratio, Yt+k — = a + ,3(ct — Vt) + 6+k. implied by King Plosser Rebelo
model with smooth news and random walk technology shocks.

6.3. News from a VAR

Instead of dreaming up joint processes for news and technology, an alternative procedure
(suggested by King and Watson 1993) is to send the RBCmodel technology shock forecasts
from a VAR. One VAR that gives plausible results (not all do) uses Solow residuals,
output, consuruption, and hours, estimated in log levels. The top panel of Figure 6.3
presents the response of Solow residuals to each shock in the VAR. As you can see, there
are permanent and transitory components and an interesting dynamic structure.
    Now, feed this shock structure through the real business cycle model'9, and what comes
 out? The bottom panel of Figure 6.3 presents the response to the technology innovation
 (remember, there are four more shocks in this model!) and the response function of the
 consumption-output VAR implied by the model. That VAR has a pattern similar to that
 found in the data, Figure 4.1.

 6.4. Comments on the approach.

 These models are obviously not the last word. Certainly, the number and dynamic spec-
 ification of the news shocks and the paraxneterization and structure of the real business
 cycle model can be varied to make the model's implied c-y VAR fit more closely to that
  '9Consumption, output and hours in the VAR are not held the same as the model's predictions in
 making the simulation. They act inearely as information variables, like the variable z in the smooth news
 model above.



                                                    48
                    sob. —, sob.                                        •1 •It                        Ivo — Ia




                                   I.   It aoI.v .0.40                    •i'ipIOsl_'llplliIi ti.1iso loll"
                                                                                 a OAk Ia'llld 00


           a..
                                                               'A
           a..

           GA

                                                               .3
         Jo-a
                                                         -    .oa
          —00


          -0-2
                         lias 50        0                14
                                                              .0.'   0111211 14                           1   14   0




Figure 6.3: Top: response function from estimated VAR of solow residual, y, c, hours.
Bottom: response to technology shock and implied c-y impulse response from RBC model.

seen in the data.
   One hungers for a theorem, which I don't know how to prove or disprove: given a
particular real stochastic growth model, can one always dream up a model for information
about technology shocks to generate an arbitrary c-y VAR? Or is there some discipline in
                                                                                               -


the exercise?
   On the other hand, (or if not) one can imagine changes to the structure of the model
that would make it easier to generate business cycle dynamics from consumption shocks.
The proportional technology shock in the real business cycle model is carefully crafted to
give a wealth effect, raising consumption, and a transitorily higher wage, to induce higher
labor supply. It is not necessary that news be of such a variable; in fact, as we have seen,
it hurts the model for it to be so. Thus, news about, say government spending shocks,
that have wealth effects but no interetemporal substitution effects, may much more easily
generate business cycle type dynamics.
   However, there are differences between model and data that news shocks cannot repair.
News shocks cannot remove the stochastic singularity from every VAR. For example, with
a production function Z = (ANt)"K1'" and utility u(Cg) + v(1 — Ne), one first order



                                                              49
condition states that
                                  '
                                 V tL — , — ___________
                                            —
                                                 ax.;
Given two of output, labor and consumption, this equation determines the third exactly.
Hence, a VAR with consumption, output and labor will have two shocks, not three.


6.5. Summary
News shocks can repair some of the defects of the technology shock view discussed above.
The model with news shocks predicts a substantial transitory movement in output; it
captures both growth and cycles, and it removes the stochastic singularity in the c-y
VAR. Since output moves on news with no contemporaneous change in the technology
shock, output and technology are no longer perfectly correlated. An econometrician faced
with data from this economy would conclude that "consumption shocks" are an important
source of transitory variation in output.
   Of course, "technology shocks" still axe the driving variable in a fundamental sense.
However, as before, one can interpret these shocks broadly. News that taxes are likely to
be raised, or some other long-lasting distortion is likely to come about, will function as
well as news of true productivity.


7. Conclusions
I find that none of the popular candidates for observable shocks robustly accounts for the
bulk of business cycle fluctuations in output. What does this mean?
    One of the new candidates, such as oil-reallocation, credit shocks, or nonlinear dy-
 narnics may be fleshed out and deliver an explanation for fluctuations. New propagation
 mechanisms, such as noncompetitive models or a lending channel may help us to see that
 traditional technology money or other shocks do in fact have large and frequent effects.
 Since these models are in their infancy, it is hard to speculate what they will produce.
    On the other hand, real business cycle theorists may refine their models to produce
 more business-cycle type (forecastable) dynamics and more amplification of technology
 shocks. Dynamic monetary theory and shock identification may improve so that monetary
 policy shocks can credibly account for a large fraction of utpt4 variation.
    The other possibility is that consumption and output move on news that we do not
 see. This view at least explains our persistent ignorance, but it means that we may forever

                                            50
be ignorant of the true shocks that drive fluctuations. The surprise is that this view is
not true by construction. Models that explain business cycle dynamics with news shocks
must be construcbed and matched to data just like other models. And real business cycle
models do not easily generate business cycle dynamics with shocks that do not affect
current period marginal productivity.




                                         51
8. References
Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick Kehoe (1993) "Notes for a Model of Putty-Clay Capital
    and The Effect of Energy Price Shocks on the Economy" Manuscript, University of
    Pennsylvania.

Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson, "A New Approach to Decomposition of
   Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular
   Attention to Measurement of the 'Business Cycle'," Journal of Monetary Economics
    VII (1981), 151-174.

Bak, Per, Kan Chen, José Scheinkman and Michael Woodford (1993), "Aggregate Fluc-
    tuations from Independent Sectoral Shocks: Self-Organized Criticality in a Model
    of Production and Inventory Dynamics" Richerche Economiche 47, 3-30.

Bernanke, Ben S. (1983) "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
    of the Creat Depression" American Economic Review 73 257-276.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Alan S. Blinder (1988) "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels
    of Monetary Transmission" American Economic Review 82, 901-921.

Bernanke, Ben S. (1994) "Credit in the Macroeconomy" Federal Reserve Bank of New
     York Quarterly Review Forthcoming.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean (1993) "Consumption and the Recession of 1990-91" American
    Economic Review 83, 270-74.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Danny Quah (1989), "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate
    Demand and Supply Disturbances," The American Economic Review, 79, 655-673.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Danny Quah (1993), "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate
    Demand and Supply Disturbances: Reply," The American Economic Review, 83,
    653-658.

Boidrin, Michele and Michael Woodford, (1990) "Endogenous Fluctuations and Chaos:
    a Survey" Journal of Monetary Economics 25, 182-222-

Bresnahan, T. and Valerie Rainey (1992), "Output Fluctuations at the Plant Level"
    NBER Working Paper 4105.


                                          52
 Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (1993) "Labor Hoarding and
     the Business Cycle" Journal of Political Economy" 101 245273.

 Campbell, John Y. (1992), "Inspecting the Mechanism: An Analytical Approach to the
    Stochastic Growth Model." NBER Working Paper 4188

 Canova, Fabio, Jon Faust and Eric M. Leeper (1993), "Do Long-Run Identifying Re-
     strictions Identify Anything?"Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board.

 Cassou, Steven P and Stefan Mittinik (1990) "Causal Relationships in Real Business
     Cycle Models" Manuscript, Department of Economics, SUNY Stony Brook.

 Christiano, Lawrence J. (1988) "Why Does Inventory Investment Fluctuate so Much?"
     Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 247-280.

 Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbauin (1992), "Current Real Business Cy-
     cle Theories and Aggregate Labor-Market Fluctuations," The American Economic
     Review, 82, 431-450.

Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1991), "Identification and theLiquid-
     ity Effect of a Monetary Policy Shock," NBER Working Paper No. 3920.

Cochrane, John II. (1991) "Volatility Tests and Efficient Markets: A Review Essay"
     Journal of Monetary Economics 27 463-485.

Cochrane, John H. (1994), "Permanent and Transitory Components of GNP and Stock
    Prices." Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics

Darby Michael (1982), "The Price of Oil and World Inflation and Depression" American
    Economic Review 72, 738-751.

Davis, Steven J. (1987) "Allocative Disturbances and Specific Capital in Real Business
    Cycle Theories" American Economic Review 77, 326-332.

Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger (1990) "Gross Job Creation and Destruction:
    Microeconomic Evidence and Macroeconomic Implications" in Blanchard, Olivier
   and Stanley Fisher, Edt NBER Macroeconomics Annual (Cambridge: MIT Press)
    123-168.

Eichenbaum, Martin 5. (1991) "Real Business Cycle Theory; Wisdom of Whimsy?"
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 15, 607-626.

                                        53
Eichenbaum, Martin 5. (1993) "Some Comments on the Role of Econometrics in Theory"
    Manuscript, Northwestern University.

Evans, Charles L. (1992), "Productivity Shocks and Real Business Cycles," Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 29.

Evans, George and Lucrezia Reichuin (1993), "Information, Forecasts and Measurement
    of the Business Cycle," Discussion Paper Series No. 756, Centrefor Economic Policy
    Research.

Fama, Eugene F. (1992), "Transitory Variation in Investment and Output," Journal of
   Monetary Economics, 30, 467-480.

Fay, Jon A. and James L. Medoff (1985), "Labor and Output Over the Business Cycle:
     Some Direct Evidence," The American Economic Review, 75, 638-655.

Fa2zari, S. Hubbard, It. and B. Peterson (1988) "Financing Constraints and COrporate
    Investment" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 141-195

Fisher, Mark E. and John J. Seater (1993) "Long Run Neutrality and Superneutrality
     in an ARIMA Framework" American Economic Review 83, 402-414.

 Finn, Mary G. (1993), "Variance Properties of Solow's Productivity Residual," Manuscript,
     Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

 Gordon, David B. and Eric M. Leeper, (1993) "The Dynamic Impactsof Monetary Policy:
     An Exercise in Tentative Identification" Working Paper 93-5, Federal Reserve Bank
     of Atlanta
 Gordon, Robert J. (1993) "Are Procydlical Productivity Fluctuations a Figment of Mea-
     surement Error?" Manuscript, Northwestern University.

 Hall, Robert E., (1988) "The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry"
      Journal of Politico) Economy 96, 921-947.

 Hall, Robert E. (1993) "Macroeconomic Theory and the Recession of 1990-91" American
      Economic Review 83, 275-279.

 Hall, Robert E. "Invariance Properties of Solow Residuals"

 Hamilton, James D. (1983) "Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II," Journal
      of Political Economy 91, 228-248.

                                           54
Hamilton, James D. (1988) "A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Business
    Cycle" Journal of Political Economy 96, 593-617.

Hamilton, James D. (1989) "A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary
   Time Series and the Business Cycle" Econometrica 57, 357-384.

Hansen, Gary D. (1985) "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle" Journal of Monetary
    Economics 16, 309-328.

Hansen, Gary D. and Edward C. Prescott (1990), "Recursive Methods for Computing
    Equilibria of Business Cycle Models."

Hansen, Gary D. and Edward C. Prescott (1993), "Did Technology Shocks Cause the
    1990-1991 Recession?" The American Economic Review, 83, 280-6.

Hansen, Gary D. and Thomas J. Sargent (1988), "Straight Time and Overtime in Equi-
    librium," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21, 281-308.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent (1991), "Two Difficulties in Interpreting
   Vector Autoregressions" Ch. 4 of Rational Expectations Econometrics. Westview
    Press.

Ingram, Beth Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and N. E. Savin, (1993) "Explaining Busi-
     ness Cycles: a Multiple Shock Approach," Manuscript, Department of Economics,
     University of Iowa.

Kashyap, Anil, and Jeremy C. Stein (1993) "Monetary Policy and Bank Lending" NBER
    Working Paper 4317

Ka.shyap, Anil, Jeremy C. Stein and David Wilcox, (1992) "Monetary Policy and Credit
    Conditions:Evidence from the composition of External Finance" Forthcoming, Amer-
    ican Economic Review

Kennan, John (1988), "An Econometric Analysis of Fluctuations in Aggregate Labor
    Supply and Demand," Econometrica, 56, 317-333.

Kim, In-Moo and Prakash Loungani (1992) "The role of energy in real business cycle
   models" Journal of Monetary Economics 29 173-189.

King, Robert G. and Charles I. Plosser (1984), "Money, Credit, and Prices in a Real
    Business Cycle," The American Review, 74, 363-80.

                                            55
King, Robert C., Charles I. Plosser and Sergio T. Rebelo (1988), "Real Business Cycles:
    I. Introduction," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21.

King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser and Sergio T. Rebelo (1983), "Real Business Cycles:
     II. New Directions," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21.

King, Robert C. Charles I. Plosser, James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (1991)
     "Stochastic Trends and Economic Fluctuations" American Economic Review 81
    81 9-840.

King, Robert C., and Mark W. Watson (1992) "Testing Long-Run Neutrality" Working
    Paper.

Kydla.nd, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott (1988), "The Workweek of Capital and Its
   Cyclical Implications," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21, 343- 360.

Lippi, Marco and Reichuin Lucrezia (1993), "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand
    and Supply Disturbances: Comment," American Economic Review, 83, 644-652.

Lippi, Marco and Reichlin Lucrezia (1993), "Diffusion of Technical Change and the
    Decomposition of Output into Trend and Cycle."

Litterman, Robert and Lawrence Weiss (1985) "Money, Real Interest Rates and Output:
     A Reinterpretation of Postwar US Data" Econometrica 53, 129-156.

Long, John B. Jr. and Charles I. Plosser (1983) "Real Business Cycles" Journal of
    Political Economy 91 39-69.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., (1977) "Understanding Business Cycles"

McCailum, Bennett (1983), "A Reconsideration of Sims' Evidence Concerning Mone-
   tarism" Economics Letters 13, 167-71.

Meek, Paul (1982), "U.S. Monetary Policy and Financial Markets," Federal Reserve
    Bank of New York.

Mork, Knut (1987), "Oil and the Macroeconomy When Prices Go Up and Down: an
   Extension of Hamilton's Results" Journal of Political Economy 97 740-744.

Plosser, Charles I (1990) "Understanding Real Business Cycles" Journal of Economic
    Perspectives Summer 1990

                                         56
Prescott, Edward C. (1986), "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement," Carnegie
    Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy

Ramey, Valerie, (1993) "How Important is the Credit Channel in the Transmission of
   Monetary Policy?" 1992 Carnegie Rochester Conference Series and NBER Working
   Paper 4285 1993.

Rogerson, Richard, (1988) "Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium" Journal of
     Monetary Economics 21 3-17.

Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1993) "Can the Real Business Cycle Model
    Explain Forecastable Movements in GNP?" Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Rudebusch, Glenn, D. (1988), "Are Productivity Fluctuations Due to Real Supply
    Shocks?" Economics Letters, 27, 327-331.

Sbordone, Argia M. (1993), "Is Procyclical Productivity Due to Externalities?" Manuscript,
    Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Sbordone, Argia M. (1993), "A Dynamic Model of Labor Hoarding." Manuscript, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Shapiro, Matthew and Mark Watson (1988) "Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations"
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual 111-148.

Shiller, Robert "The Ultimate Sources of Aggregate Shocks."

Sims, Christopher A. (1980) "Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles:
    Monetarism Reconsidered," American Economic Review 70, 250-257.

Sims, Christopher A. (1980), "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica 48, 1-48.

Sims, Christopher A. (1988) "Identifying Policy Effects" in Bryant R.C., D.W. Hender-
    son, C. Holthaxn, P. Hooper, S.A. Symansky, eds., Empirical Macroeconomics for
    Interdependent Economies (Washington DC: The Brookings Institution), 305-21.

Sims, Christopher A. (1992) "Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts" Euro-
    pean Economic Review 36, 975-1011.

Strongin, Steven (1992), "The Identification of Mouciary Policy Disturbances: Ex-
    plaining the Liquidity Puzzle," Working Paper wp-92-27, Federal Reserve Bank
    of Chicago.

                                         57
Todd, Richard M. (1990) "Vector Autoregression Evidence on Monetarism: Another
   Look at the Robustness Debate," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
                              -
    Review Spring 19-27.

Williamson, Stephen D. (1987), "Financial Intermediation, Business Failures, and Real
    Business Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 95, 1196- 1216.

Wojnilower, Albert M. (1980) "The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent Financial
    History" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2 277-339.

Wojnilower, Albert M. (1985) "Private Credit Demand, Supply and Crunches—How
   Different are the 1980's?" American Economic Review 75 351-356.




                                        58
