                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE EFFECTS OF MONETARY
                          POLICY SHOCKS: SOME EVIDENCE
                            FROM THE FLOW OF FUNDS




                                  Lawrence J. Christiano
                                   Martin Eichenbaum
                                     Charles Evans




                                  Working Paper No. 4699




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1994

We would like to acknowledge helpful conversations with Rochelle Antoniewicz, V.V. Chari,
Jonas Fisher, Mark Gertler, Simon Gilchrist, Christian Gilles, Vittorio Grilli, Anil Kashyap,
Leonardo Leiderman, Glen Rudebusch and Steven Strongin. In addition, we would like to
acknowledge Greg Parekh for his research assistance. Christiano and Eichenbaum
acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation. This paper is part of
the NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #499
                                                                                  April 1994

                              THE EFFECTS OF MONETARY
                            POLICY SHOCKS: SOME EVIDENCE
                              FROM THE FLOW OF FUNDS

                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper uses the Flow of Funds accounts to assess the impact of a monetary policy
shock on the borrowing and lending activities of different sectors of the economy. Our measures
of contractionary monetary policy shocks have the following properties: (i) they are associated
with a fall in nonborrowed reserves, total reserves, Ml, the Federal Reserves' holdings of
government securities and a rise in the federal funds rate, (ii) they lead to persistent declines in
real GNP, employment, retail sales and nonfinancial corporate profits as well as increases in
unemployment and manufacturing inventories, (iii) they generate sharp, persistent declines in
commodity prices and (iv) the GDP price deflator does not respond to them for roughly a year.
After that the GDP price deflator declines.
       Our major findings regarding the borrowing activities of different sectors can be
summarized as follows. First, following a contractionary shock to monetary policy, net funds
raised by the business sector increases for roughly a year. Thereafter, as the recession induced
by the policy shock gains momentum, net funds raised by the business sector begins to fall. This
pattern is not captured by existing monetary business cycle models. Second, we cannot reject
the view that households do not adjust their financial assets and liabilities for several quarters
after a monetary shock. This is consistent with a key assumption of several recent monetary
business cycle models.




Lawrence J. Christiano                 Martin Eichenbaum                     Charles Evans
Department of Economics                Department of Economics               Research Department
2003 Sheridan Road                     2003 Sheridan Road                    Federal Reserve Bank
Northwestern University                Northwestern University                of Chicago
Evanston, IL 60208                     Evanston, IL 60208                    P.O. Box 834
and NBER                               and NBER                              Chicago, IL 60690
1. Introduction
In recent years there has been a great deal of work on developing monetary models of
business cycles. There has also been substantial progress in constructing empirical measures
of exogenous shocks to monetary policy. This paper uses variants of these new measures in
conjunction with the Flow of Funds data to assess the impact of a monetary policy shock
on the borrowing and lending activities of different sectors of the economy. In so doing, we
hope to characterize some of the salient features of the financial data that a successful model
of the monetary transmission mechanism ought to account for.
   We use two measures of exogenous shocks to monetary policy: orthogonalized shocks to
the federal funds rate and orthogonalized shocks to nonborrowed reserves. To build confi-
dence that we have identified shocks to monetary policy we display the dynamic response
of two types of variables to these policy shock measures. The first are variables that are
directly affected by monetary policy actions. We show that our measures of contractionary
policy shocks lead to a fall in the Federal Reserve's holdings of government securities, in total
reserves and in Ml. In addition, we find evidence of a strong liquidity effect, i.e. a contrac-
tionary policy shock is associated with a rise in the federal funds rate and a fall in various
measures of money. The second class of variables that we consider are standard macroeco-
nomic aggregates. We show that our measures of contractionary monetary policy shocks are
associated with persistent declines in real GNP, employment, retail sales and nonfinancial
corporate profits as well as increases in unemployment and manufacturing inventories. In
addition, our measures of contractionary monetary policy shocks are associated with sharp,
persistent declines in commodity prices. The GDP price deflator does not respond to the
policy shock for roughly a year. After that, it declines. This response pattern is qualitatively
different from that obtained by other authors who work with policy shock measures that are
similar to ours (see for example Eichenbaum (1992) and Sims (1992)). They obtain the
anomalous result that the price level rises for over two years after a contractionary monetary
policy shock. Following Sms aiid Zhou (1993) we avoid this implication in our analysis by
assuming that the moneta autliorty responds to commodity prices (in addition to other

                                                2
variables) in setting monetary policy. Viewed overall, these results lend credence to the
idea that our shocks measure exogenous disturbances to monetary policy, rather than, for
example, shocks to the demand for reserves.
    Given these results, we turn to th Flow of Funds data. Our first major finding can
be summarized as follows. Following a (Atntractiorlary shock to monetary policy, net funds
raised in financial markets by the business sector increases for roughly a year. Thereafter,
as the recession induced by the policy shock gains momentum, net funds raised by the
business sector begins to fall. This pattern is not captured by existing monetary business
cycle models. According to these models, business borrowing falls after a contractionary
monetary policy shock. For example, this is the case in the 'limited participation' models
of Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992,1992a) and Fuerst (1992). It is also true of recent
models of the monetary transmission mechanism which stress the importance of imperfect
information and the special role of bank credit.' Finally, according to Bernanke (1993) and
Kashyap and Stein (1993), standard IS-.LM models also predict that business loans fall after
a monetary contraction.
    The fact that net funds raised by the business sector initially rise after a contractionary
monetary policy shock does not mean that the frictions embodied in existing monetary
business cycle models are not important. But it does imply that these models have abstracted
from important other frictions which cause net funds raised by the business sector to rise for
a substantial period of time after a contractionary monetary policy shock. In this sense these
models provide at best an incomplete explanation of the monetary transmission mechanism.
One possible explanation for the observed response pattern of net funds raised by the business
sector is that it is difficult for firms to quickly alter their nominal expenditures.2 Under these
circumstances, if a contractionary monetary policy shock leads to fall in firms' receipts at the
beginning of a recession, then we would expect their net demand for funds to rise. According
to this scenario, the observed eventual decline in net funds raised by firms reflects their ability
to eventually reduce their nominal expenditures. Investigating the empirical plausibility of
   'See for example Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke and Blinder (1988), Fisher (1993), Fuerst (1993)
and Gertler and Gilchrist (1991, 1993).
   2This conjecture is closely related to conjectures made by Gertler and Gilchrist (1993a) about the factors
underliag the moverrnts in short term borrowing by large and small firms.



                                                     3
this conjecture in a formal model is an important task that we leave to future research.
   The second major finding of this paper is that one cannot reject the view that net funds
raised by the household sector remains unchanged for several quarters after a monetary
policy shock. A key assumption of 'limited participation' monetary business cycle models
is that households do not adjust their financial assets and liabilities immediately after a
monetary shock. \Vhile the Flow of Funds data for the household sector are noisy, they are
consistent with this assumption.
   The third major finding of this paper is that, according to our federal funds based measure
of monetary policy shocks, the increase in net funds raised by firms after a contractionary
policy shock coincides with a temporary reduction in net funds raised by the government. We
find this result puzzling and attempt to find what aspect of the government's expenditures
and receipts can account for it. For the federal funds based measure of policy shocks, this
reduction can be traced to a temporary increase in personal tax receipts. After about a
year, though, as the recession takes hold and net funds raised by the business and household
sectors falls, net funds raised by the government sector increases (i.e., the government budget
deficit goes up.)
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the identify-
ing assumptions underlying our two monetary policy shock measures and presents evidence
regarding their plausibility. Section 3 discusses the Flow of Funds accounts and defines pre-
cisely the concept of net funds raised by a sector of the economy. Section 4 presents our
results for the business sector. The focus of our analysis there contrasts with that of the
existing literature which investigates the impact of a contractionary monetary policy shock
on specific assets and liabilities of various types of businesses. This literature leaves open
the question of what happens to the net amount of funds raised by the business sector as
whole.3 Section 5 studies the response to a monetary policy shock of the net funds raised
    3See, for example, Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Gertler and Gilchrist (1991,1993,1993a), Kashyap, Stein
and Wilcox (1993), Oliner and Rudebusch (1992), R.a.mey (1993,1993a) and R.omer and Romer (1991). This
literature shows that various firm liabilities increase after a monetary contraction. For example, Gertler and
Gilchrist (1993, Fig.4) show that short-term bank loans to the manufacturing sector rise. The literature also
reports evidence that some firms may be acquiring more assets after a monetary contraction. For example,
Bernanke and Blinder (1992) and Gertler and Gilchrist (1993, Fig,1) show that banks sell securities and
issue large certificates of deposit after a monetary contraction, and leave open the possibility that these are
acquired by the business sector (see also Romer and Romer (1991).) Given this evidence, one cannot deduce
the sign or the magnitude of the response to a contractionary monetary policy shock of net funds raised by

                                                      4
by the other sectors of the economy, particularly the household and government sectors.
Concluding remarks are contained in section 6.

2. Our Measures of Shocks to Monetary Policy
Isolating the economic effects of monetary pulicy actions is not straightforward. This is
because, to some extent, policy actions depend on the state of the economy. The response of
economic variables to reactive Fed actions reflects the combined effects of the policy action
and of the variables which policy is responding to. To isolate the effects of Fed policy actions
per Se, we need to identify the component of Fed policy that is not reactive to other variables,
i.e., that is exogenous. Solving this identification problem requires assumptions. Ours are
discussed below.


2.1. Identification Assumptions

We identify a monetary policy shock with the disturbance term in a regression equation of
the form:
                                           S = t'(ll) + oe.                                           (2.1)

Here St is the policy instrument,        is a linear function, lij is the information set available to
the monetary authority when S is set, is a positive number, and e, is a serially uncorre-
lated shock that is orthogonal to the elements of fZ and has variance unity. To rationalize
interpreting e as an exogenous policy shock, (2.1) must be viewed as the monetary author-
ity's rule for setting S. In addition, the orthogonality conditions on e, correspond to the
assumption that date t policy shocks do not affect the elements of li.' Our two measures of
policy shocks correspond to different specifications of S and Il,. Conditional on this spec-
ification, the dynamic response of a variable to a monetary policy shock can be measured
by the coefficients in the regression of the variable on current and lagged values of the fitted
residuals in equation (2.1).
the business sector. This is the issue that we focus on.
   4A different class of schemes for identifying monetary policy shocks does not involve the assumption that
    is orthogonal to 1,. See, for example, Bemnanke (1986), Gali (1992), King and Watson (1992) and Sims
(1986).




                                                    5
   This procedure is asymptotically equivalent to one based on fitting a particular Vector
Autoregression (VAR):

                        Z = A0 + A1Z-1 + A2ZL-2 + ... + AqZtq + Ug.                    (2.2)

The VAR disturbance vector, Ut, IS assumed to be serially uncorrelated and to have variance-
covariance matrix V. The VAR disturbances are assumed to be related to the underlying
economic shocks, e, by
                                                   = Ce,                               (2.3)

where C is lower triangular and Et has covariance matrix equal to the identity matrix. To
relate this to (2.1), suppose that S is the kg" element in Z. Then, e is the k" element
of e. In addition, 1l includes Zg...j,...,Zt_q. If k > 1 then lit also includes Z1. for i =
1,..., k— i. We estimate the Ak'S and C in (2.2) and (2.3) by applying ordinary least squares
equation by equation to (2.2), and then exploiting the fact that C is uniquely determined by
the relationship V = CC'. Using these estimated parameters, the impulse response of any
variable in Z to      may be computed by using (2.2) and (2.3) to calculate the response of
that variable to a unit impulse in e.
   Our first measure of the policy instrument, S, is the log level of nonborrowed reserves.
Our decision to work with nonborrowed reserves rather than broad monetary aggregates is
motivated by arguments in Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992) that innovations to nonbor-
rowed reserves primarily reflect exogenous shocks to monetary policy, while innovations to
broader monetary aggregates primarily reflect shocks to money demand. Our second mea-
sure of the policy instrument is the federal funds rate and is motivated by arguments in
McCallum (1983), Bernanke and Blinder (1992) and Sims (1986, 1992).
    In deciding which variables to include in our empirical analysis (i.e. how to specify Z)
we must deal with the following trade-off. On the one hand, we would like, in principle, to
include all of the variables in our analysis in one large unconstrained VAR and report the
implied system of dynamic response functions. However, this strategy is not feasible because
of the large number of variables which we wish to analyze. In particular, if we include q
lags of n variables in the VAR, then we would have to estimate (qn + 1)n free parameters.
   5Equaion (2.1) is proportional to the k   + l' equation of C—' times (2.2).

                                                     6
For even moderate values of n, inference and estimation would be impossible. On the other
hand, if we include too few variables in the VAR then we would encounter significant omitted
variable bias.
    With the above considerations in mind, we chose the following intermediate strategy.
The vector Z always includes at least the following variables: the log of real GDP (Y), the
log of the GDP deflator (F), the log of an index of sensitive commodity prices (PCOM),
minus the log of nonborrowed reserves (NBRD), the federal funds rate (FF), and the log of
total reserves (TR). When we want to assess the effect of a monetary shock on some other
variable, D, that variable too is included in Z. The reason we work with NBRD rather
than with the log of nonborrowed reserves is to facilitate comparisons between our two policy
shock measures. Positive FF and NBRD policy shocks both correspond to contractionary
monetary policy shocks.
   The reason that we include a measure of commodity prices in our analysis is to avoid
the well known 'price puzzle' associated with simple federal funds and nonborrowed reserve
based policy shock measures. This is the result that positive orthgonalized innovations to
the federal funds rate and nonborrowed reserves are associated with a prolonged rise in the
price level (see Eichenbaum (1992) and Sims (1992)). Sims (1992) conjectured that this
response reflects the fact that the Fed has some indicator of inflation in its reaction function
that is missing from the VAR underlying the policy shocks measure. Consistent with this
conjecture, we find that when PCOM is included in the VAR, the response of the price level
to measured monetary policy shocks is no longer anomalous. Sims and Zhou (1993) also
discuss this resolution of the price puzzle.
   When the federal funds rate was specified as the policy instrument, we estimated 6st
using the following ordering of the variables in Zt: (Ye, P, PCOM, FF, NBRD, TR, Di).
We refer to this measure of a monetary policy shock as an FF policy shock. When NBRD
was specified as the policy instrument, we estimated e using the following ordering of
the variables in Zt: (ii, p, PCQM, NBRD, FF, TR, Di). We refer to this measure of a
monetary policy shock as an NBRD policy shock.6 On two occasions in our analysis below,
   6While our procedure deals with the problem of parameter profligacy it has one drawback: the implied
FF and NBRD policy shocks can depend on the variable D that is included in the VAR. This means that
the shock measures can be slightly different across VARS. This is because the measured innovations to FF


                                                  7
the variable D is an indicator of aggregate production activity: the unemployment rate
and the log of employment. In those cases, we place D just before the policy variable in
the VAR. This is consistent with our basic identifying assumption that policy shocks have
no contemporaneous impact on aggregate output. Put differently, any contemporaneous
correlation between the VAR disturbance to the policy variable and the indicator of aggregate
production is assumed to reflect causation from production to the policy variable, and not
the other way around.

2.2. Assessing Our Monetary Policy Shock Measures
To help assess the properties of our monetary policy shocks, it is useful to consider the
benchmark FF and NBRD policy shocks that emerge from six variable VARs that include
only the price level, commodity prices, output, nonborrowed reserves, the federal funds rate
and total reserves in the vector Z. In both cases, the VAR was estimated using quarterly
data over the period 1960:Q1-l92:Q4, using 4 lags of the variables in the system (i.e., q =

4.)
      The solid lines in Figure 2.1 depict the estimated time series of our benchmark FF and
NBRD policy shocks. The dotted lines are the analog estimates obtained when PCOM
is not included in the analysis. Since all of the policy shock measures are by construction
serially uncorrelated, they tend to be somewhat noisy. For ease of interpretation we report
the centered, three quarter moving average of the shocks, i.e., we report U(Ej,i+i + e +
E,,t_i)/3. Also, for convenience we include shaded regions, which begin at aNational Bureau
of Economic Research (NBER) business cycle peak, and end at a trough. The estimated
standard deviation, o, of the FF policy shocks is 0.79 percent, at an annual rate, while the
standard deviation of the NBRD policy shock is 1.61 percent. The two monetary policy
 shock measures have a correlation of 0.49. As Figure 2.1 suggests, the estimated standard
 deviation of the FF policy shocks is influenced by the high variance of those shocks in the
 early 1980's. For example, excluding the period 1979Q4 - 1982Q4, the standard deviation of
 the FF and NBRD shocks is 0.58 and 1.56, respectively.
     In describing our results, we find it useful to characterize monetary policy as 'tight' or
 and NBR depend, in principle on lagged value8 of D.


                                                 8
'contractionary', when the smoothed policy shock is positive, and 'loose' or 'expansionary'
when it is negative. According to the FF policy shock measure, policy was relatively tight
before each recession, and became easier around the time of the trough.7 A similar pattern
is observed for NBRD shocks, except that in the 1981-1982 period, policy was loose at the
start, very tight in the middle, and loose at the end of the recession.
    Notice that including PCOM in the analysis leads to some substantial differences in
the estimated policy shocks. For concreteness, we concentrate on the federal funds based
measures. First, absent PCOM, it appears that monetary policy was very tight at the outset
and during the middle of the 1973-74 recession, and then eased at the end of that episode.
With PCOM, policy appears less tight at the onset of the recession. Since, inflation was
quite high (and rising) during and after this recession, omitting PCOM from the analysis
could contribute to the inference that tight monetary policy leads to a high price level (i.e.
the price puzzle). Second, with PCOM, we find that policy was relatively tight towards the
end of 1966. This corresponds to the episode commonly referred to as the 'credit crunch'.
Without PCOM, we do not find that policy was tight during this period. Third, with
PCOM, we find that policy was relatively tight around the end of 1985. This is not the
case when PCOM is excluded from the analysis. Since this was a period in which inflation
was dropping, this result too helps explain why the presence of PCOM in the VAR used to
measure policy shocks helps resolve the price puzzle.
    We now consider the effects of monetary policy shocks on various economic aggregates.
Figure 2.2 displays the dynamic response of several variables (such as Total Reserves, Ml
and the Fed's holdings of government securities) which are closely related to monetary policy
actions. The two rows pertain to the effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks, respectively.
Solid lines represent our point estimates, while dashed lines denote plus and minus one
standard deviation bands.8 Table 2.1 reports point estimates and standard errors of time
averages of the impulse responses in Figure 2.2. Results are reported for averages over the
   7j Figure 2.1, the beginning of the 1973-74 recession appears to be an exception to the general pattern.
To some extent this reflects the effects of averaging since there was a 210 basis point FF policy shock in
1973Q3.
   8These were computed using the Monte Carlo method described in Doan (1990), example 10.11 using 500
draws from the estimated asymptotic distribution of the VAR coefficients and the covariance matrix of the
innovations, u,, in (2.2). The point estimates and standard errors of our coefficients are the average and
standard deviation across draws of the simulated impulse responses.

                                                    9
first and second half of the first year following a shock, and for the second and third years
after a shock. These tables also report, for each variable, the percentage of the 24-quarter
ahead forecast error variance attributable to our policy shock measures. As in Eichenbaum
and Evans (1993), standard errors were computed using a suitably modified version of the
method described in footnote 7.
   To begin with, consider our results for FF policy shocks. Several observations are worth
emphasizing. First, the effect of a FF policy shock on the federal funds rate is persistent, with
the funds rate staying up about 6 quarters after a shock. Second, a positive FF policy shock
generates statistically significant declines in the Fed's holdings of U.S. government securities,
as well as in nonborrowed reserves (i.e., NBRD goes up). These findings are consistent with
the presence of a strong liquidity effect and with the view that the Fed raises interest rates
by selling U.S. government securities. Third, the fall in total reserves is negligible initially
(actually, our point estimates show a small, statistically insignificant rise). Eventually they
fall by around 0.4 percent. So, according to this policy shock measure, the Fed insulates total
reserves in the short run from the full impact of a contraction in nonborrowed reserves by
increasing borrowed reserves.9 (See Strongin (1992) for a discussion of this point). Fourth,
consistent with the interpretation of a positive FF shock as reflecting a contractionary
monetary policy shock, Ml declines in a statistically significant way.
    Consider next the effect of an NBRD policy shock. As can be seen, with one exception,
inference is qualitatively robust to which of the two policy measures is used. The exception
has to do with the degree to which total reserves are initially insulated from policy shocks.
The FF measure implies that total reserves are insulated, contemporaneously, from mone-
tary policy shocks. The NBRD measure implies that roughly one third of the policy shock
is contemporaneously transmitted to total reserves.
    We now discuss the effect of our monetary policy shock measures on broader economic
 aggregates. The first two rows of Figure 2.3 display the response of aggregate output, em-
 ployment, unemployment, the commodity price index, retail sales, corporate profits in retail
 trade, nonfinancial corporate profits, and manufacturing inventories to an FF policy shock.
    9A given percent change in total reserves and in nonborrowed reserves corresponds roughly to an equal
 dollar change in these variables. Historically nonborrowed reserves are roughly 95 percent of total reserves.
 Since 1986, that ratio has moved UP, being above 98 percent most of the time.


                                                      10
The corresponding dynamic response functions for an NBRD policy shock are displayed li-i
rows three and four. To begin with, consider our results for an FF policy shock. First,
after a delay of about two quarters, a contractionary monetary policy shock leads to a sus-
tained, statistically significant drop in GDP. These findings are consistent with results in
Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Eichenbaum (1992) and Sims (1992). Second, with a similar
delay, an FF policy shock leads to a significant, persistent decline in employment, and a
significant increase in the unemployment rate. Third, in contrast to the delayed response of
aggregate output, employment and unemployment, there is some evidence of an immediate
reduction in economic activity. Specifically, retail sales, corporate profits in retail trade and
nonfinancial corporate profits immediately fall while manufacturing inventories immediately
rise in response to an FF policy shock.1° From rows 3 and 4 of this figure, we see that the
dynamic response functions are qualitatively similar whether we work with FF or NBRD
policy shocks. However, table 2.2 indicates that the response functions are less precisely
estimated when we work with NBRD policy shocks.
   We now consider the implications of our policy measures for two price indices: the index
of commodity prices and the GDP price deflator. According to Figure 2.3, both of our policy
shock measures lead to sharp, persistent declines in the commodity price index. Figure 2.4
shows that the GDP deflator is roughly flat for a year after a monetary policy shock, after
which it declines (see the left column of Figuer 2.4.) Notice that when PCOM is excluded
from the VAR, the GDP deflator rises for over two years in response to either an FF or
an NBRD policy shock (see the right column of Figure 2.4.) This last result is consistent
with the findings on the 'price puzzle' reported by Eichenbaum (1992) and Sims (1992).
Evidently, including PCOM in the analysis is important for resolving the price puzzle (see
Sims and Zhou (1993) for corroborating evidence on this point).11
   We conclude this section by briefly discussing the contribution of monetary policy shocks
to the variability of the different economic aggregates under consideration. From Table 2.2 we
see that FF policy shocks account for 30, 17, 5 and 35 percent of the 24 quarter ahead forecast
   °In results not reported here we also found that contrationary monetary policy shocks drive down stock
prices (measured as the ratio of the S&P 500 stock price index relative to the GNP deflator.)
   "Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1994) document that our resolution of the price puzzle is robust to
using different commodity price indices. In addition they show that including PCOM has small effects on
the dynamic response functions of the other variables considered.


                                                   11
error variance of real GDP, employment, unemployment and retail sales, respectively. The
corresponding numbers for NBRD policy shocks are 11, 4, 4, and 13 percent, respectively.'2
So, monetary policy shocks seem to be an important contributor to aggregate fluctuations.
The effects associated with FF shocks are larger than those associated with NBRD shocks.
   In summary, the results in this section support the view that FFand NBRDshocks are
reasonable measures of exogenous money supply shocks. The alternative interpretations that
we can think of seem implausible. For example, the view that a positive FFpolicy shock
really reflects a positive shock to money demand (rather than supply) seems hard to square
with our finding that total reserves and Ml fall after an FFpolicy shock. The view that a
positive NBRDshock reflects a negative money demand shock is difficult to reconcilewith
the fact that it is followed by a rise in the interest rate and the unemployment rate, as well
as a fall in output, employment, and retail sales. The view that a positive FFpolicy shock
reflects an increase in household and/or business optimism (due, say to an increase in the
marginal product of capital) seems hard to reconcile with the fall in aggregate economic
activity that follows an FF shock. Finally, a rise in interest rates due to a shock generating
a sectoral reallocation of resources could, in principle, lead to an initial fall in aggregate
economic activity. The obvious candidate for this type of shock is the oil. To invetisgate
this possibility we redid our analysis including a measure of the price pur empiricval But oil
pirces are included in PCOM.we include for a sectoral But, this scenario seems implausible
given the persistence of the fall in aggregate economic activity that occurs after FFand
NBRDpolicy shocks.

3. The Flow of Funds Data
 In our analysis we make extensive use of data from the Flow of Funds accounts (FOFA). We
 pay particular attention to net funds raised by different sectors in the economy. To describe
 this concept, it is useful to display its link to the National Income and Product Accounts
 (NIPA). For any given sector, this link is characterized by the identity:
                                 Tangible Investment - Saving =                                      3 1
                            Net Funds Raised in Financial Markets
   "Point estimates and standard errors were computed using a suitably modified version of the procedure
 underlying our point estimates and standard errors for the impulse response coefficients. See footnote 7.

                                                    12
Here, tangible investment corresponds to expenditures on nonfinancial assets, while saving
corresponds to income net of expenses. For example, in the case of the business sector, tan-
gible investment includes fixed and inventory investment, while saving corresponds roughly
to after-tax profits net of dividends (dividends are treated as a cost, symmetrically with debt
service expenses.) In the case of households, tangible investment includes residential con-
struction and purchases of consumer durables, while saving corresponds roughly to after-tax
income net of consumption of nondurables and services. If there is an imbalance between
tangible investment and saving, this automatically results in an accumulation of financial
assets and/or financial liabilities to ensure that (3.1) holds. Since one sector's assets repre-
sents some other sector's liabilities, it follows that the sum of net funds raised in financial
markets must be zero across all sectors. Another way of saying this is that aggregate saving
must equal aggregate investment.
   For our analysis, we divided the economy into six sectors: (nonfinancial) business, house-
hold, (federal, state and local) government, financial business, foreign and the monetary
authority. Data for the year 1991 on the variables iii equation (3.1) are reported in Table
3.1. In addition, that table breaks down net funds raised into funds raised by issuing lia-
bilities ('financial sources of funds') and funds raised by acquiring assets ('financial uses of
funds'). The data are in billions of current dollars. We use the numbers in this table to
make concrete the concepts just discussed, and to illustrate some of the measurement error
issues that arise with the data.
   According to Table 3.1, in 1991 the business sector generated $541.3 billion internally.
Of this, $452.2 billion was allocated to tangible investment.13 So, the NIPA data imply that
net funds raised in financial markets was -$89.1 billion. According to the FOFA accounts,
in 1991 the business sector used $76 billion to purchase financial assets and acquired $3
billion by issuing financial liabilities. So, according to this measure, net funds raised in
financial markets equaled -$73 billion. The difference between FOFA and NIPA measures,
$16.1 billion, is a statistical discrepancy which indicates the presence of measurement error
in one or both data sources. Another indication of measurement error is that, for both the
FOFA and NIPA measures, the sum of net funds raised across all sectors is not equal zero. It
  '31n this respect, 1991 was an unusual year, since the business sector typically invests more than it saves.


                                                     13
is difficult to know, a priori, which is the better measure of net funds raised for any sector.
Because of this, all calculations concerning net funds raised were done using both measures.
In practice, we found that this made no difference for the business and government sector,
but made a marginal difference for the household, foreign and financial intermediary sectors.
We will return to this point later.
  Our baseline data source is the FOFA. In addition to looking at net funds raised, we use
the FOFA data to decompose net funds raised into gross funds raised by issuing liabilities
and funds used by acquiring assets. We further subdivided liabilities into its long and short
term components.'4

4. The Response of Firms' Financial Assets and Liabilities to a
   Monetary Policy Shock
This section investigates the response of firms' financial assets and liabilities to a monetary
policy shock. Our primary findings can be summarized as follows: after a contractionary
monetary policy shock, net funds raised by the business sector rises for two to four quarters.
By the end of the first year, net funds raised by this sector begins to decline. These move-
ments primarily reflect changes in the short-term liabilities of the business sector. Moreover,
the increase in short-term liabilities is concentrated in large firms and corporations. This
last result is based on an analysis of FOFA data on corporate and non corporate business,
as well as Gertler and Gilchrist's (1991) data on large and small manufacturing firms.
    Let BNET denote real, net funds raised in the business sector as measured by the FOFA
 data. As noted in the previous section, BNET equals the amount of funds raised by issuing
 financial liabilities (BLIAB), net of funds spent acquiring financial assets (BASSETS),

                                  BNET = BLIAB — BASSETS.                                  (4.1)

 The liabilities issued to raise funds can be divided into two categories, long and .short term.
 Long term liabilities, BLONC, equal funds raised by issuing equity (BEQUITY) plus funds
 raised by issuing long term debt (BDEBT). The latter is composed of tax-exempt debt,
 corporate bonds, and mortgages. Short term debt, BSHORT, is composed of funds raised by
   '4For further details on the FOFA, see Board of Governors (1993).


                                                   14
issuing commercial paper, bank and other loans. We denote net funds raised by the corporate
sector, CNET. The NIPA measures of net funds raised by the business and corporate sectors
are denoted by BNETand CNET. The data, which are expressed in annual rates, are
displayed in Figure 4.1. A notable feature of the data are the differences between the NIPA
and FOFA measures of net borrowing by the business and corporate sectors. In particular,
the FOFA measures contain an important high frequency component that is not present in
the NIPA data. This is consistent with the notion that there is measurment error in one or
both of these series.
   Subsection 4.1 analyzes the impact of monetary policy shocks on BNET, BNET, CNET,
and CNET. Subsection 4.2 studies the impact on the components of BNET. Finally,
subsection 4.3 considers the impact of monetary policy shocks on the short-term financial
liabilities of different sub sectors of the business sector.


4.1. Net Funds Raised By the Business Sector
Figure 4.2 presents the dynamic response of BNET, BNET, CNET, and CNET to a
contractionary monetary policy shock. Table 4.1 presents results pertaining to time averages
of impulse responses, as well as variance decompositions.
   A number of key results emerge here. First, according to our point estimates, the net
amount of funds raised by the business sector rises for between two and four quarters after
a contractionary shock to monetary policy. These responses are more persistent for FF
policy shocks and NIPA measures of net funds raised. The rise in BNET averages roughly
6.1 billion 1987 dollars in the first two quarters after a FF policy shock. This is equal to
about 16.6% of the quarterly average of BNET* (36.8 billion 1987 dollars) over our sample
period (1960Q1 - 1992Q4). The response of BNETS to an NBRD policy shock averages
about 3.5 billion 1987 dollars per quarter over the first two quarters after a shock. Second,
for both policy shock measures, the rise in BNET, BNET,and CNET is statistically
significant for about one-half year. Third, for both policy shocks, the different measures of
net borrowing eventually fall after initially rising. Fourth, in these baseline VAR.s which
include a commodity price index (PCOM) commodity prices, FF policy shocks account
for only about 10-13% of the 24-quarter-ahead variance in net funds raised by the business

                                                15
sector; NBRD policy shocks account for less of this variance. In light of our discussion in
section 2, it is interesting to contrast these results with those that emerge when commodity
prices are not included in the analysis. In that case, FF policy shocks account for about
18-22% of the forecast error variance in BNET and BNET*. Furthermore, the initial
effects of contractionary monetary policy shocks on BNET, BNET, CNET,and CNET
are larger, more persistent, and more precisely estimated (see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (1994) for a more detailed comparison).
   The 1969-70 recession illustrates the VAR results summarized in the previous paragraph.
According to the NBER, this recession started in 1969Q4 and ended in 1970Q4.15 Both
policy shock measures indicate that the start of the recession was associated with very tight
monetary policy (see Figure 2.1). The end of the recession was associated with a sharp
reversal of policy, which became expansionary. Coincident with this reversal, BNET and
CNET went from being high when monetary policy was tight, to low when policy became
loose (see Figure 4.1).
    The initial rise of net funds raised by the business sector in response to a contractionary
monetary policy shock is one of the key results of the paper. Christiano, Eichenbaum and
Evans (1994) explores the robustness of this finding along several dimensions. First, we redo
the analysis for different sample periods and for alternative measures of net funds raised.
 Second, we report results for the case in which a quadratic time trend is included in the
 VAR. Finally, we redo our analysis using alternative schemes for identifying monetary policy
 shocks that have been used in the literature. For example, we consider the identification
 schemes of Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Gertler and Gilchrist (1991,193,1993a), Romer
 and Romer (1989), Sims (1992) and Strongin (1992). With one exception, we find that our
 results are robust. The exception is that there is little information in the data about the
 response of BNET, BNET, CNET or CNET to a Romer and Romer policy shock.16
   '5Romer and Romer (1089) identify 1968Q4 as the beginning of a monetary contraction.
   '6The Romer and Romer measure of policy is a dummy variable that equals one in quarters when in the
 view of the Romers, the Fed initiated a period of tight monetary policy, and zero otherwise. Sincethere are
 only five such periods in our sample, it is not surprising that standard errors are large.




                                                     16
4.2. Factors Underlying the Response of Net Funds Raised to a Policy Shock.

We now analyze the response of the components of BNET to a contractionary monetary
policy shock. Figure 4.3 displays the response of total assets (BASSETS), total liabili-
ties (BLIAB), short term liabilities (BSHORT), and long term liabilities (BLONG) to a
monetary policy shock. Table 4.2 presents results pertaining to time averages of impulse
responses, as well as variance decompositions.
    Our results indicate that the initial rise in BNET primarily reflects an increase in li-
abilities. In particular, BLIAB rises by about 4.5 billion 1982 dollars per quarter in the
first two quarters after a contractionary monetary policy shock. As the recession deepens,
BLIAB falls substantially. Both the initial rise and the eventual decline in BLIAB are sta-
tistically significant. In contrast, the initial rise in BASSETS is small and not statistically
significant.
    Figure 4.3 and Table 4.2 reveal that virtually all of the response in liabilities reflects
movements in short-term liabilities. Total short-term liabilities rise for between one and
three quarters after a contractionary monetary policy shock, and then fall. These movements
are quite substantial. To see this, note that the first quarter response of short term liabilities
to a contractionary monetary policy shock is about 10 billion 1987 dollars. This represents
roughly an 17% increase, relative to the postwar average of BSHORT (58.9 billion 1987
dollars.)

4.3. Short Term Borrowing By Subsets of the Business Sector
We now investigate the extent to which the rise in short-term financial liabilities is experi-
enced by different subsets of the aggregate business sector. Let Corp and N Corp denote the
log of the stock of corporate and noncorporate short term liabilities. Let Small and Large
denote the log of the stock of short term liabilities of small and large manufacturing firms.'7
These data are expressed in current dollars.'8 Impulse response functions are graphed in
Figure 4.4, while time averages of impulse responses, as well as variance decompositions are
   'TWe are grateful to Simon Gilchrist for providing us with these data.
   '8The results do not depend on whether the stock of short-term liabilities is expressed in real or nominal
terms, since the price level does not respond strongly to a monetary policy shock (see section 2.)



                                                     17
reported in Tables 4.3 and 4.4.
   A number of key results emerge here. First, consistent with our previous findings, total
short term business and manufacturing liabilities rise for roughly one year after a mone-
tary contraction. In the case of an FF policy shock, both liabilities increase significantly
for the first year. An NBRD shock generates a significant increase in total manufactur-
ing liabilities for two quarters. However, the rise in total business loans is not significant.
Second, the response of corporate business and large manufacturing firms is stronger than
the corresponding sector aggregate. This reflects in part the weaker rise in the short term
financial liabilities of noncorporate firms and small manufacturing firms. Consistent with
this, the difference between corporate and noncorporate, and large and small manufacturing
firms, rises. Fourth, inference about the difference between the corporate and noncorporate
responses is sensitive to which measure of monetary policy we use. Specifically, with NBRD
policy shocks there is little evidence of any significant difference. However, with FF policy
shocks, the difference appears to be quite significant.
   The results in this subsection are complementary to those of Gertler and Gilchrist (1991)
and Fisher (1993), who also analyze the response of the short term financial liabilities of large
and small manufacturing firms to an innovation in the federal funds rate and nonborrowed
reserves, respectively. Their policy shock measures are related to, but not identical with,
what we call FF and NBRD policy shocks. Even though they use different identifying
assumptions, their results are quite similar to ours.
    In sum, we find that, regardless of whether we work with the FOFA data, or Certler
and Gilchrist's manufacturing data, short term business borrowing rises for a substantial
period of time after a contractionary monetary shock, and then declines. This pattern is
particularly pronounced for corporations and for large manufacturing firms.

5. The Rest of The Economy
In section 4 we analyzed the response of net funds raised by the business sector to a contrac-
tionary monetary policy shock. In this section we study the corresponding responses of the
other sectors of the economy. We find that, consistent with 'limited participation' theories,
the data show little evidence that net funds raised by households responds significantly in

                                               18
the first few quarters after a monetary policy shock.

5.1. The Household Sector

In this subsection we study the real, net amount of funds raised by the household sector,
H NET. This variable equals the amount of funds that households raise by issuing financial
liabilities (HLIAB), net of funds spent acquiring financial assets (HASSETS). We also
consider the NIPA-based measure of net funds raised by the household sector, HNET. The
data are displayed in Figure 5.1. Note the difference at high frequencies between HNET
and HNET. These differences, which are analogous to what we found for the buisness
sector data, are an indication of measurement error in one or both of the FOFA and NIPA
data.
   The impulse response functions of these variables to a contractionary monetary policy
shock are displayed in Figure 5.2. Table 5.1 reports results pertaining to time averages of
impulse responses, as well as variance decompositions. According to our results, there is
little evidence against the view that net funds raised by the household sector initially remain
unchanged after a monetary policy shock. In the case of an FF policy shock, HNET
and HNET do not respond in a statistically significant way for the first four and two
quarters, respectively. In the case of an NBRD policy shock, HNET does not display a
statistically significant response in the first two quarters, while the entire HNET response
is insignificantly different from zero.
   We now consider the dynamic response of the components of HNET to a contractionary
monetary policy shock. According to our point estimates, a contractionary FF policy shock
generates a fall both in funds used to acquire assets (HASSET) and in funds raised by
issuing liabilities (HLIAB). The fall in assets is not statistically significant for the first
year, while the fall in liabilities is insignificant for the first two quarters. In the case of a
contractionary NBRD policy shock, our point estimates also indicate an overall decline in
both JIASSET and HLIAB. The change in HASSET is not statistically significant at any
of the reported horizons. However, the change in HLIAB is significant in the first two half
years after an NBRD policy shock.
   It is difficult to draw strong conclusions from the household data, because of possible prob-

                                              19
lems with measurement error. Still, viewed overall, our results are consistent with the class
of 'limited participation' models considered by Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992,1992a),
Fuerst (1992), Fisher (1993), Lucas (1990), GijIli and Roubini (1991), and Schiagenhauf and
Wrase (1993). This is because a key a.ssuinption in those models is that households do not
adjust their financial assets, liabilities, or net funds raised in financial markets immediately
after a monetary policy shock.

5.2. The Other Sectors of the Economy
In the previous subsection we showed that the initial increase in net funds raised by the
business sector does not coincide with a decrease in net funds raised by the household sector.
In this subsection we briefly analyze the remaining sectors of the economy to assess whose
funds decline in the initial wake of a contractionary monetary policy shock.
   Let FINET, FONET, and GNET denote the FOFA measures of net funds raised by
the financial, foreign and government sectors, respectively. We denote the corresponding
NIPA measures by FINET, FONET, and GNET. The impulse response functions of
these variables to a contractionary monetary policy shock are displayed in Figure 5.3. Table
5.2 reports results pertaining to time averages of impulse responses, as well as variance
decompositions.
   According to our results, the rise in net funds raised by firms does not coincide with a
decline in net funds raised by either the financial or foreign sector during the first two to
four quarters of a monetary contraction. The financial sector does not display robust initial
responses across the four cases considered in Figure 5.3: in the first two quarters, FINET
falls insignificantly while FINET rises (insignificantly for an NBRD shock). The foreign
sector response is also not statistically significant in the first two quarters. Interestingly,
both FONET and FONET rise in a statistically significant manner in the second half
year after either an FF or an NBRD policy shock. The size of this response ranges from
2.5 to 6.8 billion 1987 dollars. This evidence indicates that the foreign sector is raising net
funds three to four quarters after a policy shock just as the domestic business and household
sectors seem to be reducing their net funds raised. This may reflect the dynamic response of
foreign central banks to a contractionary US monetary policy shock. For example, if foreign

                                               20
central banks react with a delay, so that foreign economies begin their recession later than
the US, then the demand for funds by the foreign business sector could be rising just as the
domestic demand for funds falls (see Eichenbaum and Evans (1992) and Grilli and Roubini
(1993)).
   The dynamic response pattern of net funds raised by the government is also interesting.
Both CNET and CNET fall in a statistically significant manner in the first two quarters
after a FF policy shock. After that, as the economy begins to move into a recession (see
section 2), net funds raised by the government rises. For the NBRD policy shocks, the
initial responses of GNET and GNET are smaller and not statistically significant from
zero. So there is some disagreement between the two policy shock measures on this dimen-
sion. Interestingly, for the FF policy shock, the initial decline in net funds raised by the
government is of the same order of magnitude as the initial rise in net funds raised by firms.
In this case, according to Table 4.1, net funds raised by firms jumps around 4.5 to 6 billion
1987 dollars per quarter in the first two quarters after a policy shock, while net funds raised
by the government falls by between 6 and 8 billion 1987 dollars over the same period (see
Table 5.2). To put the initial response of the government sector into perspective, it is useful
to make two observations. First, our results do not imply that the government deficit goes
down in a recession. In section 2 we showed that the decline in real GDP precipitated by
a contractionary monetary policy shock begins in earnest only a year or so after the shock.
According to Figure 5.3, it is at that time that net funds raised by the government goes up.
Second, the magnitude of the initial fall in net funds raised is not large relative to either
total government receipts, or to the average value of net funds raised by the government.
For example, total government receipts in 1982 is 960.5 billion dollars (see 1993 Economic
Report of the President, page 440.) Also, net funds raised by the government averages 106.7
billion 1987 dollars in our data sample.

5.3. A Closer Look at Government

While the initial decline in government borrowing after a contractionary FF policy shock
is small, we find it puzzling. To shed light on this result, we now investigate the source
of the decline. We begin by looking at NIPA data on the government deficit, as well as

                                              21
data on government expenditures and receipts. We measure expenditures and receipts net
of government transfer payments and net of net interest paid by government. Figure 5.4
displays the dynamic response functions of the government deficit, government expenditures
and government receipts, to contractionary FF and NBRD policy shocks. Even though the
effect of NBRD shocks on GNET and GNET was insignificant, we continue to investigate
their impacts here for symmetry. Table 5.3 reports results pertaining to the time average of
impulse responses, as well as variance decompositions.
    Consider first the case of FF policy shocks. Consistent with the results in the previous
subsection, in the two quarters after a contractionary monetary policy shock, the NIPA
government deficit falls by about 5 billion 1987 dollars per quarter.'9 The fall in the deficit
is primarily due to a significant increase in government tax receipts, which rise by about
5 billion 1987 dollars per quarter in the first year after a policy shock. Second, although
GDEFICIT falls after an NBRD policy shock, the decline is statistically insignificant, as
are the responses of the other variables.
    To see which component of government receipts is responsible for the rise in GDEFICIT
following an FF policy shock, we computed the dynamic response functions of federal per-
sonal income taxes (net of transfer plus interest payments), corporate income taxes, indirect
business taxes, social security taxes, and transfer plus net interest payments. These are
reported in Figure 5.5. Time averages of impulse response functions, as well as variance de-
compositions appear in Table 5.4. Our results indicate that the rise in government receipts
primarily reflects a rise in government personal income taxes net of transfers. These rise by
an average of about 4.7 billion 1987 dollars in the first year after an FF policy shock. This
rise primarily reflects an increase in personal income taxes gross of transfers. This suggests
the possibility that some aspect of the tax system is responsible for the temporary decrease
in government borrowing after an FF contractionary monetary policy shock.
  '9The NIPA measure of net government borrowing corresponding to GNE that is used in Figure 5.3
and Table 5.2 differs slightly from the NIPA measure used in Figure 5.4 and Table 5.3 for two reasons. First,
differences reflect data revisions, since they come from different sources. Second, the concepts are slightly
different. For example, the NIPA-based measure of the federal government surplus provided in Board of
Governors (various issues) is the official NIPA measure minus insurance credits to households (11.9), plus
mineral rights sales (7.8). The numbers in parentheses are values of these variables in 1982, in current dollars.




                                                       22
6. Conclusion
This paper characterized the response of the flow of funds between different sectors of the
economy to a monetary shock. To do this, we constructed empirical measures of shocks
to monetary policy and displayed the response of various non-FOFA economic aggregates
to these measures. With one exception, these responses accord to a striking degree with
conventional views about how monetary policy shocks affect the economy. The exception
is that prices hardly change for three years after our measure of a contractionary monetary
policy shock. An important task for future research is understanding this response pattern.
   In our analysis of the FOFA data, we found that net funds raised by the business sector
rises for roughly a year after a. contractionary monetary policy shock. Thereafter, as the
recession induced by the policy shock takes hold, net funds raised by the business sector
declines. We conjecture that the initial rise in net funds raised reflects a deterioration in
firms' cash flow due to a fall in sales. While beyond the scope of this paper, it would
be interesting to investigate the empirical plausibility of this conjecture. To the extent
that this conjecture is true, an important task facing modelers of the monetary transmission
mechanism is to identify the frictions which inhibit firms from quickly adjusting their nominal
expenses after a contractionary monetary policy shock.




                                              23
7. References
 1. Bernanke, Ben (1986), 'Alternative Explanations of the Money Income Correlation', in
   Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer, eds., Carnegie Rochester Conference on Public Policy,
   Real Business Cycles, Real Exchange Rates and Actual Policies, Vol. 25, Autumn, 49-
    100.

 2. Bernanke, Ben (1993), 'Credit in the Macroeconomy', Federal Reserve Bank of New
    York Quarterly Review, Vol. 18, Number 1, Spring, 50 - 70.

 3. Bernanke, Ben and Alan Blinder (1988), 'Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand',
    American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 2, 435 - 39.

 4. Bernanke, Ben and Alan Blinder (1992), 'The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels
   of Monetary Transmission', American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 4, 901-921.

 5. Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1989), 'Agency Cost, Net Worth, and Business
   Fluctuations', American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 1, 14-31.

 6. Board of Governors (1993), Guide to the Flow of Funds Accounts, Federal Reserve,
   Washington, D.C.

 7. Board of Governors (various issues), 'Flow of Funds Accounts, Flows and Outstandings,
    Z.1 Statistical Release', Federal Reserve, Washington, D.C.

 8. Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1992), 'Liquidity Effects, Monetary
    Policy and the Business Cycle', NBER Working Paper No. 4129.

 9. Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1992a), 'Liquidity Effects, and the
    Monetary Transmission Mechanism', American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 2,
    346-53.




                                             24
10. Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1993), 'The Impact
   of Monetary Policy Shocks on Net Funds Raised by the Business Sector: Robustness
    Results', manuscript, Northwestern University.

11. Cho, Jang-Ok   and Thomas F. Cooley (1990), 'The Business Cycle with Nominal Con-
   tracts', 1990, manuscript, University of Rochester.

12. Doan, Thomas, Users Manual, RATS Version 3.10, 1990, VAR Econometrics, Evanston,
   Ii.

13. Eichenbaum, Martin (1992), 'Comment on Interpreting The Macroeconomic Time Se-
   ries Facts: The Effects of Monetary Policy', European Economic Review, 36, June,
   1001- 1011.

14. Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles Evans (1992), 'Some Empirical Evidence on the
   Effects of Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates', NBER Working Paper No.
   4271.

15. Fisher, Jonas (1993), 'Credit Market Imperfections and the Monetary Transmission
   Mechanism', manuscript, Northwestern University.

16. Fuerst, Timothy (1992), 'Liquidity, Loanable Funds, and Real Activity', Journal of
   Monetary Economics, Vol. 29, No. 1, 3-24.

17. Fuerst, Timothy (1993), 'The Availability Doctrine', manuscript, Northwestern Uni-
   versity.

18. Gali, Jordi (1992), 'How Well Does the IS-LM Model Fit Postwar U.S. Data?', Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, Vol. CVII, May, 709-73&

19. Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist (1991), 'Monetary Policy, Business Cycles and
   the Behavior of Small Manufacturing Firms', National Bureau of Economic Research
   working paper #3892.




                                          25
20. Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist (1993), 'The Role of Credit Market Imperfections
    in the Monetary Transmission Mechanism: Arguments and Evidence', Federal Reserve
    Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 93-5.

21. Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist (1993a), 'The Cyclical Behavior of Short Term
    Business Lending: Implications for Financial Propagation Mechanisms', Federal Re-
    serve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 93-6.

22. Grilli, Vittorio, and Nouriel Roubini (1991), 'Liquidity and Exchange Rates', Journal
    of International Economics, Vol. 32, 339-352.

23. Grilli, Vittorio, and Nouriel Roubini (1993) 'Liquidity and Exchange Rates: Puzzling
    Evidence from the G7 Countries', manuscript, Yale University.

24. Kashyap, Anil K. and Jeremy Stein (1993), 'Monetary Policy and Bank Lending',
    NBER Working Paper No. 4317.

25. Kashyap, Anil K., Jer'my C. Stein and David W. Wilcox (1993), 'Monetary Policy and
    Credit Conditions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance,' American
    Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 1, 78-98.

26. King, Robert and Mark Watson (1992), 'Comparing the Fit of Alternative Dynamic
    Models', manuscript, Northwestern University.

27. Lucas, Robert E., Jr, (1990), 'Liquidity and Interest Rates', Journal of Economic
    Theory, April, 50, 237-264.

28. McCallum, Bennett T. (1983), 'A Reconsideration of Sims' Evidence Regarding Mon-
   etarism,' Economic Letters, Vol. 13, Numbers 2 - 3, 167-171.

29. Oliner Stephen D. and Glenn D. Rudebusch (1992), 'The Transmission of Monetary
    Policy to Small and Large Firms', manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal
    Reserve System.




                                          26
30. Ramey, Valerie (1993), 'How Important is the Credit Channel of Monetary Trans-
    mission?', manuscript, University of California at San Diego, forthcoming, Carnegie
    Rochester Conference on Public Policy.

31. Ramey, Valerie (1993a), 'The Sources of Fluctuations in Money: Evidence from Trade
   Credit', Jottrnal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 30, 171-194.

32. Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer (1989), 'Does Monetary Policy Matter? A
    New Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz', in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley
    Fischer, eds., NBER Macroeconomic Annual 1989, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 121-
    170.

33. Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer (1991), 'New Evidence on the Monetary
   Transmission Mechanism' Brookings Papers on Economic Activit!,r. 1991, Brookings
    Institution, pp. 149-213.

34. Schlagenhauf, Don, and Jeffrey Wrase (1993), 'Liquidity and Real Activity in a Simple
    Open Economy Model', unpublished manuscript, Arizona State University.

35. Sims, Christopher A. (1986), 'Are Forecasting Models Usable for Policy Analysis?',
    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Quarterly Review Winter.

36. Sims, Christopher A. (1992), 'Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The
    Effects of Monetary Policy', European Economic Review, 36: 975-1000.

37. Strongin, Steve (1992), 'The Identification of Monetary Policy Disturbances: Explain-
    ing the Liquidity Puzzle', Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, WP-92-27.




                                          27
8. Appendix
In this appendix we describe our data sources. The data are described in the same order
that they appear in the text. Unless indicated otherwise, all line and table numbers refer to
the Board of Governors' Guide to the Flow of Funds Accounts (1993). The Flow of Funds
data used in this paper are from the initial release of the third quarter of 1993 (December
8, 1993).20 The data were seasonally adjusted by the reporting agency. Flow data from this
source were converted to 1987 dollars using the seasonally adjusted GDP price deflator.

   1. Data on the Fed's holdings of government securities were taken from line 7 plus line 9,
      Table L.1l0.

  2. Data on nonborrowed reserves plus extended credit are from the Federal Reserve's
      macroeconomic data base.

   3. The data for the federal funds rate, total reserves, Ml, real GDP, the GDP price
      deflator, manufacturing inventories, corporate profits in the trade sector and corporate
      profits in the nonfinancial sector were taken from the Federal Reserve's macroeconomic
      data base. Employment, unemployment and retail sales were taken from CITIBASE.
      Employment has mnemonic LP, and is total employees on nonagricultural payrolls. The
      mnemonic for unemployment is LHUR, and is the unemployment rate for all workers
       16 years of age and older. The mnemonic for total retail sales is RTRR. These data
      are seasonally adjusted.

   4. Nominal net funds raised by nonfinancial business, are the negative of line 10, Table
       F.101. The real analog is denoted by BNET.

   5. Funds spent by nonfinancial business acquiring financial assets is given by line 11,
      Table F.101. The real analog is denoted by BASSETS.
  20As more data is included in the Z.1 Statistical Release, the line numbers of the tables will not correspond
exactly to the line numbers referred to in Guide o the Flow of Funds Accounts (1993). Since the Guide also
contains the original data sources for the Flow of Funds Accounts, we selected its line numbering convention.




                                                     28
 6. Funds raised by nonfinancial business issuing financial liabilities is given by line 12,
    Table FbI. The real analog is denoted by BLIAB.

 7. Funds raised by nonfinancial business issuing long term financial liabilities, BLONG,
    is the sum of lines 13, 15, 16 and 17 in Table F.101. The real analog is denoted by
    B LONG.

 8. Funds raised by nonfinancial business issuing equity BEQUITY is line 13 in Table
    F.b01. The real analog is denoted by BEQUITY

 9. Funds raised by nonfinancial business issuing long term debt, BDEBT, is the sum of
   lines 15, 16 and 17 in Table F.101. The real analog is denoted by BDEBT.

10. Funds raised by nonfinancial business issuing short term debt, BSHORT, is the sum
   of lines 18, 19 and 20 in Table F.b01. The real analog is denoted by BSHORT.

11. Net funds raised by corporations, CNET, is given by the minus of line 18, Table F.104.
   The real analog is denoted by CNET.

12. The stock of corporate short term liabilities, is measured by the sum of lines 27 ('bank
   loans, n.e.c.), 28 ('commercial paper'), and 29 ('other loans') in Table L.104. The log
   of this variable is denoted by Corp.

13. The stcck of noncorporate short term liabilities is measured by the sum of lines 18
   ('bank loans, n.e.c') and 19 ('other loans') in Table L.103. The log of this variable is
   denoted by NCorp.

14. The data on large and small manufacturing firms were kindly provided to us by Simon
   Gilchrist. The data are in flow form. We converted them to stocks by summing the
   flows and arbitrarily fixing the initial stock in 1959Q1.

15. The FOFA data on net funds raised by the household sector HNET corresponds to
   the 'Net Funds Raised' row in the Household column of Table 3.1 in the text. The
   corresponding NIPA data HNET corresponds to the 'I-S' row in that Table.



                                           29
16. FOFA data on net funds raised by the financial sector equals net funds raised by
   'Sponsored Agencies and Mortgage Pools' plus 'Commercial Banking' plus 'Private
   Nonbank Finance'. These correspond to minus {line3, Table F.107 plus line 1,Table
   F.108 minus line 19, Table F.107 plus line 5, Table F.108} minus {line 3, Table F.111
   minus line 23, Table F.111} minus {line 4, Table F116 minus line 23, Table Fl 16}. The
   real analog to this series is denoted by FINET. The NIPA data on net funds raised by
   the financial sector equals FINET minus 'Statistical Discrepancy'. The latter equals
   line 24, Table F.107 plus line 41, Table F.111 plus line 41, Table F116. The real analog
    to this time series is denoted by FINET*.

17. FOFA data on net funds raised by the foreign sector equals minus line 10, Table 109.
    The real analog to this series is denoted by FONET. The NIPA data on net funds
    raised by the foreign sector equals FONET minus 'Statistical Discrepancy'. The latter
    equals line 56, Table F.109 after converting to 1987 dollars.

18. The FOFA measure of net funds raised by the government (local, state and federal) is
    minus line 11, Table F.105 minus line 14, Table F.106. The real analog to this time
    series is denoted by GNET. The NIPA measure of net funds raised by the government
    sector equals GNET- 'Statistical Discrepancy'. The latter equals line 30, Table F.105
    plus line 35, Table F.106 after converting to 1987 dollars.

19. The government deficit is -(GGFNET+GGSNET). These are the CITIBASE data
    mnemonics for the seasonally adjusted federal surplus, and state and local govern-
    ment surpluses. For our purposes, Federal government expenditures (net of transfers)
    are defined as GGFEX-GGFT -GGFINT- GGAID. These are, respectively, the NIPA
    definition of Federal expenditures, transfer payments (to persons and net payments
    to the rest of the world), net interest paid, and grants-in-aid to state and local gov-
    ernments. The result is total federal purchases plus subsidies less current surplus of
    government enterprises. Our definition of state and local government (net of transfers)
    expenditures is the same as the above, except 'F' in the mnemonics is replaced by 'S',
    and OGAID does not appear. Total government expenditures is federal expenditures
    plus state and local government expenditures, as defined above. Our definition of fed-

                                            30
   era! government receipts (net of transfers) is GGFR-GGFT-GGFINT-GGAID, where
   GGFR denotes total federal government receipts. State and local government receipts
   net of transfers is as above, except 'F' is replaced by 'S' in the mnemonics, and GGAID
   does not appear. Total government receipts is the sum of the federal and state and
   local government receipts. The data were converted into billions of 1987 dollars using
   the GDP deflator.

20. The CITIBASE mnemonics for Federal personal income taxes, corporate income taxes,
   indirect business taxes and social security taxes are, respectively, GGFPT, GGFCA,
   CGFTX, and GGFSIN. The measure of Federal personal income taxes we work with
   is net of transfers and interest, i.e., GGFPT-GGFT-CGFINT. The corresponding
   mnemonics for state and local government replace the 'F' by an 'S'. For personal
   interest income, the mnemonic is GPINT. The data were converted to billions of 1987
   dollars using the GDP deflator.




                                           31
                                          Figure 2.1

                      Three Quarter, Centered Average of FF Policy Shocks
                              With and Without Commodity Prices




    a
         •0•
    cc




    C

    a
    0. Is
         00'

         00.         iNr .!                                          ____

         'I I

         4°
                so       00      Na       7       aa       so   so   so   so   a so   so


                                          Quasterly Data


                     Three Quarter, Centered Average of NBRD Policy Shocks
                               With and Without Commodity Prices




    a




    C

    a
    0.




                                          Quaiteily Data




For the solid lines, the policy shocks are estimated as the orthogonalized innovations from the 6-
variable VARs which include Y, F, PCOM, FF, NBRD, and TR; for the dashed lines,, the policy
shocks are estimated as the orthogonalized innovations from the 5-variable VARs which include
Y, F, FF, NBRD, and TR. In each case, the three-quarter, centered averages are computed with
equal weights applied to the time t-1, t, and t+1 orthogonalized innovations.




                                               32
         Variables




                     H   ' ::
                         0




                             :
                             :
                                 2
                                 2

                                     1;it;
                                         :
                                         2
                                         2

                                                              !
                                                              !!
                                                                      ::
                                                                           The
                                                                           FF.
                                                                           and
                                                                           variables




                                                                                       Row
                                                                                       in
                                                                                       VARs:
                                                                                       following
                                                                                        the




                                                                                                     VAR
                                                                                                     6-variable
                                                                                                     single
                                                                                                       a




                                                                                                                  functions
                                                                                                                    response
                                                                                                                   impulse




                                                                                                                               TR,
                                                                                                                               NBRD,
                                                                                                                               FF.
                                                                                                                                  is
                                                                                                                               PCOM,
                                                                                                                               F, (2)
                                                                                                                               Y,




                                                                                                                                            (1)
                                                                                                                                            Row
                                                                                                                                            as
                                                                                                                                            same
                                                                                                                                            the




                                                                                                                                                       bands.
                                                                                                                                                          error
                                                                                                                                                       one-standard
                                                                                                                                                              are
                                                                      I
                                                                                                     from
                                                                            monetary                                                        Row
                                                                                                                   other
                                                                                        from                                                            lines
                         'Ai
                                                                                                                   the
                                                                                                                               include
2.2
         Monetary
                     ri                                            ;I))    selected
                                                      I
                                                                                                      estimated    TR;                                  dashed
           on
                                                  'I,hi                      on                                                which
                                                                                                                                                                       33
                     r
                                                                                        computed
                                                                                                                   and
                                                                                                        were
                                                                                                                                                        The
                                                                                                                                            (respectively);
Figure                                                                                    were
                                                                            shocks                    TR                       VARS
         Shocks
                                                          —                                                         NBRD,
                                                                                                                                            Ml
                                                                                                      and                                               NBRD.
                                              0
                                         LJ
                                                                           policy                                   FF,                     and
                                                                                                                                                        is
                                                                                        functions
         Policy
                                                                                                                               7-variable
         of                                                                 NBRD
                                                                                                      NBRD,
                                                                                                                                                        shock
                                                                                                                   PCOM,        two
                                                                                                      FF,           P.                      GOVSEC
                                                                            and
                                                                                          response
                                                                                                                    Y, from
                                                                                                                                            is          policy
                                                                                                        on
         Effect
                                                                            FF                                                              D
                                                                            of                                                                            the
                                                                                        impulse
                                                                                                      effects                               where       that
                                                                                                                   includes
                                                                                                                                            D,
                                                                                                                               estimated
                                                                           effects
                                                                                                      the
                                                                            The         estimated     (1) which                  were       and               except
                                    Table 2.1
          Properties of Impulse Response Functions: Monetary Variables


                  Eftes of Fedal Fixbds
                  Pof icy S1cls on:


                  l-2Ojwts
                                         if
                                       0.821
                                               BQGOVSC
                                               0.751     -0.779
                                                                     18
                                                                  0.014
                                                                              Ii
                                                                           -0.166
                  Sat. Eucx            0.068   0.162     0.194    0.126     0.068
                  Sigrificace          0.00)   0.00)     0.000    0.911     0.015

                  3.4Quaflers          0271    0276      -0711    -0232    -0.336
                  Sat. E,ror           0.122   0276      0.222     0213     0.132
                  Signi1tcace          0.002   0.317     0.001     0277     0.011

                  5-8C)jaflers         0.130   0.234     -0.707   -0.314   -0316
                  Sat. Err             0.140   0397       0.230   0205      0.176
                  Sigriflcanc          0352    0.556      0.003   0304      0.073

                  9-12 O.jales        -0054    0.168     -0.662   .0.254   .0.307
                  Sat. En              0.167   0.551     0316     0.463     0243
                  Sigrcan              0.746   0.761     0.036    0.583     0207

                  Var. Den.           23.070   6.375    15.126    5.738    14.566
                  Sat. Ei              7.912   5.891     8.176    6.273     9377
                  Sigaticwica          0.004   0279      0.064    0360      0.120


                  Etfts of Negative Ncn-&.rmwed
                  Raseiva Poliy Shcs on:

                  1-2Q.iarts
                                      BL
                                       1.665
                                                  if GOVSEC
                                               0.443    -0.576
                                                                     18
                                                                  -0.795
                                                                              MI
                                                                           -0.338
                  Sat. Err             0.123   0.075     0.130    0.112     0.067
                  SigriItceiice        0.000   0.000     0.002    0.000    0.300

                  3-4 Ojarters         0.992   0.075     -0.442   -0.872   .0.493
                  Sat. Enu             0235    0.119      0.220   0215      0.135
                  Sigr6carice          0.00)   0.530     0.045    0.000    0300

                  5-8 t)iafl&s         0.459   -0.000   -0353     04S3     -0326
                  Sat Erru             0.331    0.141    0256     0.301    0.189
                  Sr1tca-              0.165   0.950     0.168    0.124    0.005

                  9-l2Ojaleis         0.195    -0.019   -0.20)    .0.128   .0.189
                  Sat. Err            0.412    0.132     0.304    0206      0.227
                  Sigrs6ca,ca         0.636    0.885     0.512    0746      0.404

                  Va,. Oeo)n.         10.655   7344      5.790    7.505    10.106
                  Sat. Esru            5.232   3280      4.910    4.717    6286
                  SigtdCanCe          0042     0.025     0.238    0.112    0.114




Time averages of the impulse response functions from policy shocks to FF, NBRD, GOVSEC, TR,
and Ml. The top and bottom panels refer to FF and NBRD policy shocks, respectively. For each
panel, rows (1) through (4) report the average response of the column variable over the first half
year, second half year, second full year, and third full year, respectively, after a policy shock.
Row (5) reports the percentage of the variance of the column variables 24-quarter-ahead forecast
error attributable to the policy shock. The underlying estimated impulse response functions and
variance decompositions were computed as described in the note to Figure 22.



                                                        34
                                                             Figure 2.3
                                        Effect of Policy Shocks on Macroeconomic Variables

                      C/Isa of FF of, V                   EIf.f of FFon EMPV..                 EM.c$ o/FF on UNEMP                  EI/.aolFFonPOM
                              P5,0.10                                                                              Porn
              o 50j                                    0.50

                                                       0.25




             •075
             -bC
                          2        5        tO                                                        2        5        10                 2       $       tO


                Effect of FFoo RSALES                  E/1c8 of FFon TRADE PROF                Eft.d oIFF onNF PROF                 Eft..doIFFo,, MFGINV
                          Bihons OF 87$                            Sd01ns of 87$                          onS of 97$                      BSós. d57$
                                                                                           2

                                                                                           0



                                                                                                                               .4

                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                               4
                                                               2       1       I    II                                                 2       5       $

                    EM.a of N8RD on V                    C/l.a of NBRD on EMPL                F/l.a of N8RD on UNEMP            EIf.cto/NBRDon PCQM
                              p5,0.,'                                                             P.f $595 Poà,
              050                                       050                                0.50

              025                                       0.2$
                                                                                           01$
                                                        0.00
                                                                       —
                                                       025                                 000
                                                       050
                                                                                          01$
              -0 75                                    -0.75

              -1.00                                    .1.00                              4.10
                          2        $        tO                     2       S       II                 2        S        to                 2       5       10


              C/fed of NB/IC on RSALES                Eff.d of NB/ID on TRADE PROF Eff.d ci NB/ID on NF PROF                   Ell.d of NB/ID on MFG WV
                          B5on. of 57$                             Bj.ons of 975                      &Sopm of 97$                         9tn. d$7$




                      2        5        I        II            3       1       I    It            2        6        $     II           35              $    II




The effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks on selected macroeconomic variables. The estimated impulse response
functions were computed from the following VARs: in Rows (1) and (2) the effects on Y and PCOM were
estimated from a single 6-variable VAR which includes Y, P. PCOM, FF, NERD, and TR; the other impulse
response functions were estimated from six 7-variable VARS which include Y, P, PCOM, FF, NBRD, TR, and D,
where D is EMPL, UNEMP, RSALES, TRADE PROF. NF PROF, and MFG INV (respectively); Rows (3) and
(4) are the same as Rows (1) and (2) except that the policy shock is NBRD. The dashed lines are one-standard error
bands.

                                                                                         35
                                   Table 2.2
      Properties of Impulse Response Functions: Macroeconomic Variables


         Efls of FaJ Frgids
         PofcyShodcson:

                                    EMEI. LI1EE        SX2M FALES TRADE P NF PRCF &FG NV
         1-2Oja,1s        -0.022    -0310     0009     -0.024   -0215    -0.840   -1.645    0.604
         Std. Ecr          0.051    0.013     0.009     0.815    0.097   0262      0.767    0.160
         Siifcare          0.476    0.434     0359      0.100    0.027   0.001    0.052 0.
         3.4 ()ja,Iers    -0.437    -0.149    0.087    -0.144   -0.844 -1. -6361            0.604
         Std. Err          0.105     0.057    0.050     0.049    0.160   0.347     1.450 0.
         Signifkare        0.000     0.008    0.004     0.003    0.080   0.008    0.090     0.054

         5-8 Quajlers     -0.621    -0324     0.089    -0.119   -0.920   -0.770   -5.360   -0610
         Std. Error        0.137    0.080     0.052     0.043    0.217    0.327   1J17      0.455
         S4ifIcare         0.000    0.000     0.052     0.806    0.000    0.018   0.002     0.180

         9-12 Ouarlers    -0.575    .0371     0.060     0.008   -0.682   -0209    -3.222   -2.001
         SId. Error        0.205     0.117    0.040     0.045    0287    0.372     1.976    0.597
         Siificance        0.005    0.002     0.137     0.857    0.017   0.42.3   0.105     0.001

         Var. Dap. 29.744           16.819    5.324    14.974   35.565   18.382   19.075   27.482
         Sfd. Error       13.176     7.851    3.063     6.482   10.826    7.703    7.584   10.762
         Siifane           0.024     0.002    0.082     0.019    0.001    0.017    0.012    0.011



         Eflts of Negave Non-8orowsd
         Reserve Pofcy Sh4x4s on:


         1-2 Ojarters
         SId. Error
         Si9nIfare
                               x
                          -0.051
                           0.029
                           0.277
                                    .
                                    -0.008
                                     0.013
                                     0.552
                                             £ltll
                                              0.011
                                              0.010
                                              0.272
                                                       f RSALES TRADE P NF PRCE PFG INV
                                                       -0.019
                                                        0.016
                                                        0215
                                                                -0.137
                                                                 0.101
                                                                 0.173
                                                                         -0.751
                                                                         0294
                                                                         0.011
                                                                                  -1.646 0.
                                                                                   0.829 0.153
                                                                                   0.047 0.
         3-4 Oa,ters      -0.297    -0.088    0.050    -0.095   -0.568   -0.504   -5372     0.524
         Std. Error        0.007     0.058    0.057     0.051    0.164    0.370   1.528     0.297
         Si00ifkare        0.002     0.125    0.176     0.064    0.001    0.173   0080      0.078

         5-8 Djarters     -0.366    -0.126    0.806    -0.020   -0.538   -0246    .4.181   -0.160
         Std. Error        0.14,3    0.085    0.045     0.042    0208    0.338     1.790    0.437
         Signifcance       0.010    0.136     0.426     0.632    0.010   0.466     0.020    0.700

         9-12Car1&s       -0.269    -0.071    -0.005    0.026   -0.265   .0,056   -0.937   -1.026
         Sid. Error        0.180     0.112     0.049    0.040    0229     0296    1.929     0.505
         Snitcare          0.135     0.525    0.921     0.495    0213    0.851    0.627     0.042

         Var. Dep.        11340     4247      (100      6.084   13.051   7192     12341    9.960
         Std. Error        7.858    3261      3.149     4.202    7.955   4,724     6.410    6.523
         S4gnifcarce       0.149    0.193     0.193     0.148    0.101   0.126     0.054    0.127




Time averages of the impulse response functions from policy shocks to Y, EMPL, UNEMP,
PCOM, RSALES, TRADE PROF. NF PROF. and MFG INV. The top and bottom panels refer
to FF and NBRD policy shocks, respectively. For each panel, rows (1) through (4) report the
average response of the column variable over the first half year, second half year. second full year,
and third full year, respectively, after a policy shock. Row (5) reports the percentage of the
variance of the colwnn variable's 24-quarter-ahead forecast error attributable to the policy shock.
The underlying estimated impulse response functions and variance decompositions were computed
as described in the note to Figure 2.3


                                                        36
                                         Figure 2.4
                         Effect of Policy Shocks on the Price Level

           Effect of FF on P (PCOM IncIudeo)                 Effect of FF on P (POOM Excluded)
                        Pemaqit
   050                                               050


                                                                              —
   025                                               050



                                                     050



                                                     450


                                                     -030



   -G75                                              -075




            1     3     5         7   8    ¶1                  I    S     5       7        0   II


          Effect of NBRD on P (PCOM Included)               Effect of NBRD on P (PCOM Excluded)
                        P.cst
   010                                               050




                                                                   ::—--
                                                                                      ——
   025                                               050



                                                     000



                                                     -025



   -050                                              -030



   -075                                              -075




             1    3     5         7                            i    8     s                .   i

The effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks on the price level. The estimated impulse response
functions were computed from the following VARs: in Column (1) the effects on P were
estimated from a single 6-variable VAR which includes Y, P. PCOM, FF, NBRD, and TR; in
Column (2), the effects on P were estimated from a single 5-variable VAR which includes Y, P.
FF, NBRD, and TR. The dashed lines are one-standard error bands.


                                                37
                                Table 3.1 Savings, Investment and Net Funds Raised,
                                              Billions of Dollars, 1991
                               Business        Household         Government         Financial        Foreign       Monetary        Total

Investment (I)                   452.2            655.6              -2.8              62.0              0             .2         1167.20


Saving (S)                       541.3            849.6             -275.6             40.8            -8.9           -1.8        1145.40
1-S                              -89.1            -194.0             272.8             21.2             8.9            2.0          21.80
Net Funds Raised                 -73.0            -209.6             304.7              8.5            .4.8             0           25.80
Financial
 Sources of Funds                 3.0             178.5              353.1             751.3           45.7           22.3        1353.90
Financial
 Uses of Funds                   76.0             388.1              48.4              742.8           50.5           22.3        1328.10

      Notes:

      (i)    Source: Table 1, pages 10.11, "Guide to the Flow of Funds Accounts," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1993.
             Investment: line 4; saving: line 1; 1-S: investment minus saving; net funds raised: negative of line 11.

      (ii)   Households: includes personal trusts and nonprofit organizations; business: farm, nonfarm noncorporate, and nonfarm nonfinancial
             corporate; Government: state and local government; Financial: sponsored agencies and mortgage pools plus commercial banking
             plus private nonbank finance; Monetary: monetary authority.



                                                                      38
                                           Figure 4.1
                            Flow of Funds Time Series: Business Sector




Time series plots of FOFA data from the Business Sector, billions of 1987$. With the exception of CNET and
CNET, all data pertains to the total nonfinancial business sector. BNET is net funds raised, CNET is net funds
raised by the corporate sector, BASSETS is net funds spent acquiring financial assets, BLIAB is amount of funds
raised by issuing liabilities, BSHORT is funds raised by issuing short-term liabilities, BLONG is funds raised by
issuing long-term liabilities, BEQUITY is funds raised by issuing equity, and BDEBT is funds raised by issuing
long-term debt, and BNETt and CNET are the NIPA measures of BNET and CNET. For a precise definition of
these variables see the data appendix.


                                                      39
              I
                  -10.0




                   100
                   75
                   50
                   25



                   Ei
                  -70.0
                          ,
                          I




                          2-''


                          I
                                    4




                                    4
                                           7

                          Effect of FF on BNETS
                           I'



                                           7
                                                 10




                                                 70


                              Effect of FF on CNET
                                                   Figure 4.2
                              Effect of Policy Shocks on Net Funds Raised by the
                                         Business and Corporate Sectors

                              Effect of FF on BNET
                                                            10.0



                                                             :
                                                           -ian




                                                             7.5
                                                             50
                                                            25


                                                            -6.0
                                                            .7.5
                                                           -70.0
                                                                   1




                                                                   1
                                                                       Effect of NBRD on BNET




                                                                          3




                                                                          3
                                                                                   5




                                                                                   6
                                                                                       7

                                                                   Effect of NBRD on BNETS




                                                                                       7

                                                                   Effect of NBRD on CNET
                                                                                             9




                                                                                             9
                                                                                                   71




                                                                                                   II


                   7-5                                       7-5
                                                            5.0
                                                                              ——
                                                            2.6                            ___5S
                                                            -2.5
                                                            -5.0
                   -75                                      -7.5
                  -700
                          7         4      7     10                1      3        5   7     9     II
                          Effect of FF on CNETS                    Effect of NBRD on CNETS
                  10.0
                   7.5         S                            75
                   5.0
                          —
                   2.5                                      2.5

                                                            -2.5
                                                            -5.0
                    -                                       -7.5

                          I        4      7      10                I      3        5   7     9     II



The effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks on net funds raised by the nonfmancial business sector (BNET and
BNET*) and on net funds raised by the nonfinancial business corporate sector (CNET and CNET*). Column (1)
pertains to an FF policy shock and is generated from four 7-variable VARS which include Y. P, PCOM, FF. NBRD,
TR, and D, where D is BNET, BNET*, CNET, and CNET*, respectively. Column (2) pertains to an NBRD policy
shock and the underlying VARs are the same as those underlying Row (1). The data are in billions of 1987$. The
dashed lines are one-standard error bands.

                                                      40
                                           Table 4.1
               Properties of Impulse Response Functions: Net Funds Raised in the
                                 Business and Corporate Sectors


                 Effects of Fed Fikis
                           od.s:
                                             BNETS .Et.          CNETS BASSET BLIABIL BSHORT BLONG
                 1-2Qai1ers         4.612      6.150    3.141     4.971     2.078    5.235   6.617    -2.866
                 Std.Errcr          1.814      1209     1.554     1.075     1600     2.909   2.176     1.818
                 Sufcara            0.011      0.000    0.043     0.000     0.424    0.072   0.002     0.115

                 3-4 Ouaslers        1.840     2382     2.449     2.456 .11.430     -9.873   -0.730   -2.958
                 Sid. Error          2.026     1974     1.808     1.486     3.488    4.044    2.906   1.874
                 Sifcarxe            0.338     0.227    0.176     0.098     0.001    0.015    0.802   0.114

                 5-80.jailers       -4.576    -4.075    -2.846    -2.337   -6.962 -12383     -5.515   -1.732
                 Std. Error          2.023     2149      1.570     1.582    2.681    3330     2.873   1.545
                 Sçri4karse          0.024     0.058     0.070     0.140    0.009    0.002    0.055   0.262

                 9-l2Qua,lers       -3.655    -4.012    -1.852    -2.186   -2.623   -6.876   -2.863   -1.166
                 Ski. Error          2.174     2.309     1.614     1.582    2.658    4.516    2.880   1.501
                 S4gnifcarEe         0.093     0.093    0251      0.167     0224     0.138   0220     0.488

                 Vat. Dip.          10.138    14.491    7285     12.205    16.101   17.067   12.095   5335
                 Ski. Error          4269      7362     3.000     5.738     5.593 7. 5.562            3.523
                 S4Qnifcanc.         0.018     0.049    0.017     0.033     0.004    0.015   0.930    0.002


                  Effects of Negative Non-Borrowed
                  Reserve Poley Stioirs on
                                    8NE1. BNETS EL ENETS BASSET BIJABIL BSHORT ONG
                  1-21).iasl&s       4.678     3.473    3.083      2.722   -1.050    4.537    4.198   -1.415
                  Std. Error         1.668     1220      1.619     1.138    2.592    2.941    2.195    1176
                  SignifGarte        0.005     0.005    0.967      0.016    0.685    0.123    0.056   0.426

                  3-4Qua,lers       -2.132     0.105    -1.950     0.643   -6.746   -&106    -5.043    2.046
                  Ski. Error         2.006     2.011     1.881     1297     3353     4.166    2.738    1.909
                  Siifcance          0288      0.958    0.300      0.645    0.044    0.052    0.065   0284

                  5-8 Ouwlers       -1.825     -1.076   -0.760    -0.148   -1.653   -3.698   -3.506    2.746
                  Ski. Error         1.795     2.012     1.460     1.537    1668     3.872    2.714    1251
                  Srgnifcance        0209      0.593    0.603      0923     0.536    0340     0.196 0.
                  9-12 Qianers      -0.266     -0.888   0.430     -0385     0870     0.508    0.017    1.421
                  Ski. Error         1.745      1.920    1.386     1.366    2280     4.043    2.388    1.113
                  SiiiarEe           0.879     0.644    0.757      0.778    0.715    0.900    0334     0.202

                  Vat. Daixenp.      6.011     4.809     6204      4.838    7.415    7234     8.729    5.261
                  Std. Error         2.509     3050      2.791     2.918    3.550    3.883    4115     2A05
                  S4rilcaae          0.017     0.115     0.026     0.098    0337     0.062    0.034    0.029




Time averages of the impulse response functions from policy shocks to BNET, BNEr, CNET, CNET*, B ASSETS.
BLIAB, BSHORT, and BLONG. The top and bottom panels refer to FF and NBRD policy shocks, respectively.
For each panel, rows (1) through (4) report the average response of the column variable over the first half year,
second half yea!, second full year, and third full year, respectively, after a policy shock. Row (5) reports the
percentage of the variance of the column variable's 24-quarter-ahead forecast error attributable to the policy shock.
The underlying estimated impulse response functions and variance decompositions were computed as described in
the notes to Figures 4.2 and 43.



                                                                   41
                                             Figure 4.3
                    Effect of Policy Shocks on Components of Net Funds Raised
                                       by the Business Sector

                        Effect of FF on BASSETS                     Effect of NBRD on BASSETS
                   - _______________________________           Is
                                                               10
                                                               5
                   -                                           0—
                                                               -6



                  -20--
                  -10                                         .10
                  -15                                         -15
                                                              20
                        1      3    5    7   9      II              1      3    5    7    9      II
                            Effect of FFon BLIAB                        Effect of NBRD onBLIAB



              C


              I
                        1      3    6    7   9      II
                        Effect of FF on BSHQRT                      Effect of NBRD on BSHORT




                            Effect of FF on BLONG                    Effect of NBRD on BLONG
                   15                                          IS
                   SO                                          10
                   5                                           5
                   0                                           0        -- -.                    -—
                                                               -6
                  -ID                                         -10
                  -I5                                         -15
                  -20                                         2O
                        I      3    5    7   9      II              1      3    5    7    9      II



The effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks on the composition of the nonfinancial business sector's balance sheet.
Column (1) pertains to an FF policy shock and is generated from four 7-variable VARS which include Y, P. PCOM,
FF. NBRD, TR, and D, where D is BASSETS, BLIAB, BSHORT, and BLONG, respectively. Column (2) pertains
to an NBRD policy shock and the underlying VARs are the same as those underlying Column (1). The data are
in billions of 1987$. The dashed lines are one-standard error bands,



                                                         42
                                                          Figure 4.4
                                          Effect of Policy Shifts on Business Sector
                                                     Short-term Liabilities

                                                    E#actofFFcrt NCoip




                            3       8

                     Effect of NBRD on Co-p
                      2
                                               :z
                                                Effect of NBRO o-i NCop
                                                2



                                                o
                                               -l           '.       ——


                      -2                       -2

                                               -3
                            3       8                 2      6      tO

                      Eft,ct ci FEot,   La.         Enact of FF , Small
                                                2




                    EM.iofRDanLa,p.             Eff.a of N8RD n, Smat          E .o-oiNBRO , TOTAL
                      2                         2                              3




                      -2                       -2
                      .3                       .3                              4
                            3       8                 2      6      JO             2    6     tO




The effect, of FF and NBRD policy shock, on borrowing by ,elected subset, of the nonfinanciai busincu sec*og Row (I) pertains to an FF
policy shock and u generaLed from four 7.vasiablc VARS whicli include Y. P, PCOM. FF. NBRD, 'ER. and D, where D is the Logarithm of the
stock of short-temi liabilities of the corporate sector (Corp), norscorpora&e sector (NCorp). corporate plus noncorporaic sectors (BUSLOAN). and
the logarithm of the ratio of corporate to noncorporate short-tenn liabibtie (Corp-NCorp). respectively. Row (2) pertains to an NBRD policy
shock and the underlying VAR., are the same as those underlying Row (I). Rows (3) and (4) arc the same as Rows (1) and (2) except that the
corporate data is replaced by large manufacturing frito data, arid the noncorporate data ii replaced by the small manufacturing finn data All data
arc iii current doUars. The dashed lines are one-standard error band,.




                                                                          43
                                                     Table 4.2
                            Properties of Impulse Response Functions: Business Sector
                                               Short-term Liabilities



                                      Fis
                                               __
                    E583s ol FaciwI
                    Pv6cy Sl n:

                     1-2 Ojwl..s
                    S3. Es
                                       0.583
                                       0.136
                                                0028
                                                0.173
                                                         0438
                                                         0.118
                                                                  0363
                                                                  0.119
                                                                            L   0.884
                                                                                0.201
                                                                                        sL
                                                                                        -O 037
                                                                                         0.548
                                                                                                  1 i0.
                                                                                                   0.495
                                                                                                   0.143
                                                                                                            0304
                                                                                                            0213
                    Sqdc&c.            0320     0.874    0030     0.001         0003     0.805     0031     0.030

                    34Q.e1.r           0.731   .0227     0.505    0.996         0.893   .0.191     0.436    1.168
                    S. Ej'i            0.262    0316     022.4    0363          0.261    0.260     0216     0211
                    Sãgidx.            0.0)5    0.472    0213     0.006         0.003    0.462     0.043    0.030

                    5-8Csjan,ri        0.498   -5283     0.0)9    1.798         0.142   -1.177    -0331     1.181
                    SiS. Error         0.436    0.4.48   0373     0.536         0334     0303      0278     0 406
                    SQ'4rcarc.         0253     0214     0.791    0.031         0.610    0.006     0284     0304

                    9-12 Q,srl.rs      0216 .1 -0.568             2230         -0.898   -1.4-40   -0.953    0.451
                    Sti. Enor          0.563    0.635    0.477    0.757         0.441    0.396    0218      0302
                    S9rrdc8rc.         5.624 0. 0.725 0.                        0.011    0.006    0035      0369




                                                                                                           i
                    V.O.n,np.          6.548   21335     4864    21.792        14.263   30.951    16.124   17.737
                    Si Error           4880    13.526    3860    5200) ? 10.162                    1.661    7289
                    Sçn4wc.            0203     0.042    0222     0321          0.043    0.002    0035      0.016


                    EII.css c4 N.ga8. Oa7uw
                    Res.rvs Poky Shodri or


                     I-2Qj.lers
                    SC.En
                                       0306
                                       0.146
                                                0323
                                                0.160
                                                         ___
                                                         0244
                                                         0.132
                                                                  0.248
                                                                  0.116
                                                                                0.794
                                                                               0.19?
                                                                                         0.169
                                                                                         0.158
                                                                                                  1t
                                                                                                  0.495
                                                                                                  0.147
                                                                                                            0.670
                                                                                                            0218
                    Sçare.             0.027    0.605    0.984    0.158         0.00) 0. 0.031              0.035

                    3-4Qjalivs         0.161    0.982    0.538    0.095        0.749    -0596     0337      1.131
                    S. &,or            0281     0318     0247     0.359        0203      0253     0335      0211
                    Sçr4cana           0.516    0365     0316     0806          0.014    0.434    0.533     0031

                    5-8.1s.s          -0.266   -0.505    -0220    0286         0.256    -0495     0.112     0304
                    S. Error           0.461    0.483    0283     0.535        0.380     0398     0287      0280
                    SQrdcarca          0.652    0285     0.565    0.393        0.501     0.112    0956      0.020

                    9.12Q,wws         -0318    -0.561    -0218    0216         -0325    -0.262    -0.115   -0.049
                    S. Error           0.552    0.583    0.481    0.684        0.403     0338     0.316     0.451
                    Sqr4arcu           0.566    0344     0.605    0.622        0.459     0.404    0.728     0813

                    V.D.s,mp.          3.67?    4.167    3.735    3.198         5814     5843     3.788    11.460
                    St5. Error         3.496    4.195    3.794    3.698        3.596     4.165    2.414     5.881
                    Sqcarc.            0. 0.321          0325     0397         003?      0.554    0.517     0.044




Time averages of the impulse response functions from policy shocks to Corp. Ncorp, BUSLOAN, Corp-Ncorp. LARGE, SMALL
TOTAL and LARGE-SMALL The top and bottom panels refer to FF and NBRD policy thockt, respectively. For each panel.
rows (I) through (4) report the average response of the column variable over the first half year, second half year. second full year.
and third full year, respectively, after a policy shock. Row (5) reports the percentage of the variance of the colunus variable', 24-
quarter-ahead forecast error attributable to the policy shock. The underlying estimated impulse response functions and variance
decompositions were computed from four 7-variable VAR, which include Y, P. PCOM, FF, NBRD. TR, and I), where D is Corp.
Ncorp, BUSLOAN, Corp-Ncorp. LARGE, SMALL TOTAL, and LARGE-SMALL (respectively).




                                                                          44
                              Figure 5.1
              Flow of Funds Time Series: Household Sector


                 HNET                                     HNET*




                HASSET                                     HLIAB




Time series plots of FOFA data from the Household Sector, billions of 1987$.




                                        45
                                                 Figure 5.2
                              Effect of Policy Shocks on the Household Sector

                            Effect of FF on HNET                            Effect of NBRD on HNET
                  IS                                               15
                  10                                               IC




                            Effect of FF on HNET                         Effect of NBRD on HNE
                  IS
                  10                                               tO
                   5
                   C
                       •'                         -.    .—
                                                                   5
                                                                   C    '
                                                                   4
                 -10                                              -10
                 -PS                                              -IS
                 -20                                              -X
                       1       3    5    7    9        II               1      3     5    7    9      II

                       Effect of FF on HASSETS                          Effect of NBRD on HASSETS
                  15                                               IS
                  10                                               10




                            Effect of FF on HLJAB                           Effect of NBRD on HLIAB
                  15                                               IS
                  10                                               10




The effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks on the composition of the household sectors balance sheet. Column
(I) pertains to an FF policy shock and is generated from four 7-variable VARS which include Y, P. PCOM, FF.
NBRD, TR, and D, where D is net funds raised by households according to the FOFA definitions (HNET). net funds
raised by households according to the NIPA definitions (HNET*), funds spent acquiring financial assets (HASSET),
and funds raised by issuing financial liabilities (1-ILIAB), respectively. Column (2) pertains to an NBRD policy
shock and the underlying VARs are the same as those underlying Column (1). The data are in billions of 1987$.
The dashed lines are one-standard error bands.


                                                             46
                                           Table 5.1
                   Pmperties of Impulse Response Functions: Household Sector


                                    Eflectso4FerieratFt,ds
                                    Po1ySodson:
                                                                            RASSET
                                    1-20ja,ters        2.191    -2i62        -3644     -3.504
                                   Std.Err                                              2.112
                                   S8e                 3.105
                                                       0.480
                                                                 1.877
                                                                 0249
                                                                              3.386
                                                                              0.382    0.C
                                   3-4 OjwW.rs        -6.261    -4.707       -3.340   .10.794
                                   Std. EIT
                                    Si9ri6cte
                                                       3.186
                                                       0.049
                                                                 1919
                                                                 0.014
                                                                              3.417
                                                                              0.338     0.
                                                                                        2.602


                                    5-8 Cajailers     -4.584    -4.290       -5.290 -10.452
                                    S*d.ErT            1707      1367         2.439     2.866
                                    Sgnikarce          0.007     0.015        0.900     0.000

                                    9-12 Qjarlers     -1 501    -0.641       -2.657    -6.640
                                    Sld. Erru          1824      2.025        2.504     3.460
                                    Sgni4cance         0.380     0.752        0.389     0.055

                                    Var. Deccenp.      8394 10.               8.677   24.068
                                    Sad. Etru          3.585     5.395        4.296    8.105
                                    SiQniIcarEe        0.013     0.057        0.043    0.090



                                    Eflects & NaQave Non-Bonwed
                                    Reserve Po1ky Shcs on:

                                                     .UtIEI. tINETS         HASSET JjIJ.
                                    1-2Oaflers        -0.688    -3.311       -2.879    -4.573
                                    Sad. Error         3.320        1.762     3.901     2.906
                                    S9iiicarce         0.836        0.060     0.342     0.025

                                    3-4Oja,ters       -3.437    -3.951       -1.182    4.988
                                    Std. Error         3.292        2.024     3.680     2.501
                                    Sãiiñce            0.297        0.051     0.748     0.046

                                    5-8 C3iwtws       -1.910    -1.886        0.144    -3.887
                                    Sad. Error         1.705        1357      2.252     2.661
                                    S49r8re            0.263        0.310     0349      0.143

                                    9-12(ja,1ers       0.379        0.783     1.177     0.321
                                    Sad. Error         1.680        1326      2.139     2.802
                                    S8carse            0322         0.668     0.582     0.902

                                    Var. Onp.          5.512        6.893     6.906     8.075
                                    SId. Error         2.743        4.150     3.073     4.102
                                    Signi6casxa        0.044        0.007     0.049     0.053




Time averages of the impulse response functions from policy shocks to HNET, HNET*, HASSET, and I-ll..IAB.
The top and bottom panels refer to FF and NBR.D policy shocks, respectively. For each panel, rows (1) through (4)
report the average response of the column variable over the first half year, second half year, second full year, and
third full year, respectively, after a policy shock. Row (5) reports the percentage of the variance of the column
variable's 24-quarter-ahead forecast error attributable to the policy shock. The underlying estimated impulse
response functions and variance decompositions were computed from four 7-variable VARs which include Y, F,
PCOM, FF, NBRD, TR, and D, where D is l{NET, HNET*, HASSET, and HLIAB (respectively).


                                                               47
                                              Figure 5.3
                        Effect of Policy Shocks on the Government, Financial,
                                          and Foreign Sectors

                            Effect of FF on GNET                        Effect of NBRD on GNET
                  12
                   8               —                            8
                              /;___----_____                    4



                  -     13 S               7   9    11
                                                               .4
                                                               -8

                                                                    I      3    5    7     9
                            Effect of FF on FINET                       Effect of NBRD on FINET
                   12                                          12
                                                                8




              I
                        1      3       5   7   9
                                                              I
                            Effect of FF on FONET                   Effect of NBRD on FONET

                   8                                           8
                   4                                            4

                   -4                                          -4
              I    -8                                          4
                        I      3       S   7   9    II              1      3    5    7    9       II
                            Effect of FF on GNE                         Effect of N8AD on GNE
                   12
                   8
                   4
                               -----------
                                   —                           a
                                                               4
                                                                    -:;- -
                   -8 --
                  -12
                                                               .4
                                                               -8

                        I      3       5   7   9                    1      3    6    7    9
                            Effect of FF on FINE                    Effect of NBRO on FINE
                  12
                   8                                           8
              C    4                                           4
                   o                                           C


                                                              -
                   -4                                          .4
              I    -6
                  -12
                        I      3       5   7   9
                                                               8
                                                                    I      3    6    7    9
                        Effect of FF on FONE                        Effect of NBRD on FONE
                  11                                           12
                   8                                           8
                   4
                   -4                                          .4
                   -8                                          -8
                                                              -12
                        1      3       5   7   9    II              I      3    5    7    9       II



The effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks on the FOFA measures of net funds raised by the government (GNET),
financial (FINE1'), and foreign (FONEl) sectors, as well as the corresponding NIPA measures (GNET6, FJNET4.
and FONET*). Column (1) pertains to an FF policy shock and is generated from six 7-variable VARS which
include Y, F, PCOM, FF, NBRD. TR, and D, where D is GNET, FINET, FONET, GNET, FINEr, and FONET8.
respectively. Column (2) pertains to an NBRD policy shock and the underlying VARs are the same as those
underlying Column (1). The sector data are in billions of 1987$. The dashed lines are one-standard error bands.


                                                         48
                                              Table 5.2
                  Properties of Impulse Response Functions: Government, Financial,
                                         and Foreign Sectors


                        Effects of    Feder Furwis
                        Polcy Ss on:
                                             J1EL .EIIEI. FONET GNES F1NETS FONETS
                        1-2 Ojale(s           -7336    -1.586   2.248   -5.974   0.806    -0.527
                        SL Error              2.209     1.112   1.721    1.559   0251      1.109
                        Siri6cwce             O.(X)    0.154    0.192    0.000   0.001     0.635

                        3-4 Ojarlers           1.767   2.141    4.564   .0.183   1.346    2.405
                        Ski. Error             2.606 1 2.171             2.091   0.385    1.468
                                                                                          0.109
                        Sgni6cwrc.             0.498   0.061    0.606    0.930   0.000

                        5-8 Q.j1srs           4.620     1.638   3.264    5.338   1.017    2.924
                        S6J. Error             2.359   0.807    2.121    2276    0.544    1.664
                        S4çri6caice            0.050    0.042   0.124    0.019   0.061    0.079

                        9-12 Ojarl&s           3330     0.854   0.647    3235    0.675    1.110
                        S6i. Error             2.546    0.784   2.628    2.468   0.598    1.978
                        Sçrificarce            0.160    0276    0.806    0.190   0259     0.575

                        Var.   Dep.           11330     8.385   8.765   13338    15255    5.766
                                                                                          5.604
                        SILL Error             4.764    4.013   4314     5.671   8.434
                        Sçrvifcartce           0.012    0.607   0.074    0.019   0.070    0.118


                        Effects o Ne9ave n-6arowed
                        Resarve Policy Slncks on:

                                              GNEL .EthEI. FONET GNETS FINETS FONETS
                        1-2(ja1ers            -3.100 .0.971   2.341 -1.526 0249  1385
                        SILL Error             2.209    1.148   1.678    1.734   0.242     1.062
                        Sgri6carrce            0.172    0337    0.163    0.379   0.360     0.307

                        3-4 Catars             1.215   -0.802   6.861    1.592   0.055     3.801
                        SILi. Error            2.511    1351    2.338    1927    0.390     1339
                        Sçre6Cwce              0.628    0.553   0.001    0.409   0.885     0.007

                        5.8 O.jarters          3.594    0.406   1315     4.053    0258     1.785
                        Ssi. Error             2.350    0.763   2.131    2.066    0.509    1.677
                        SigrcarC.              0.126    0.596   0.537    0.050    0.613    0237

                        9-12 ()j1ers           0600     0.383   -1324    0.773    0.606   -1.048
                        SId. Error             2.065    0.581   2.182    2.028    0A60     1.792
                        Sir4Itcace             0.771    0510    0.544    5.738    0.188    0.550

                        Var. Deccmp.           5.928    5193    8379     6.467    6.796    7.364
                        SILi. Error            3.164    2.452   3.773    3.668    5.028    4.252
                        Srffcace               0.061    0.604   0.026    0.078    0.177    0.382




Time averages of the impulse response functions from policy shocks to GNET, FINET, FONET, GNET4, FTNE'f*,
and FONET'e. The top and bottom panels refer to FF and NBRD policy shocks, respectively. For each panel, rows
(1) through (4) report the average response of the column variable over the first half year, second half year, second
full year. and third full year, respectively, after a policy shock. Row (5) reports the percentage of the variance of
the column variable's 24-quarter-ahead forecast error attributable to the policy shock. The underlying estimated
impulse response functions and variance decompositions were computed from six 7-variable VARs which include
Y, P. PCOM, FF, NBRD, TR, and I), where D is GNET, FINET, FONET, GNET, FINET, and FONET*
(respectively).

                                                                49
                                                      Figure 5.4
                                    Effect of Policy Shocks on Components of the
                                                  Government Budget

                          Effect of FF on GOEFICIT                    Effect of NBRD on GDEF!CIT
                  10.0                                        10.0

                                                               7.5




              I

                  -100                                        -b.c
                            I         4    7     10                     1       3   5   7   9   II

                          Effect of FF on GEXPEND                     Effect of NBRD on GEXPEND
                                                              10.0

                   7.5                                         7.5

                   50                                          5.0

                   25
                   0.0
                                                               2.5

                                                               00
                                                                                                —
                  -2.5                                         -25
                  -50                                          -60
                  .75                                          -7.5

                  -100                                        -10.0
                            1         4     7    10                     I       3   5   7   9   II

                          Effect of FF on GRECEIPTS                   Effect of NBRD on GRECEIPTS
                  100                                          10.0

                    7.5                                         7.6
                            I
                   50           I                               5.0

                                                               2.5




                  -101:
                            1         4     7    IC                         I   3   5   7   9   II



The effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks on the government budget deficit (GDEFICIT), government expenditures
(GEXPEND), and government receipts (GRECEIPTS). Column (1) pertains to an FF policy shock and is generated
from three 7-variable VARS which include Y, P. PCOM, FF, NBRD, TR, and D, where D is GDEFICIT.
GEXPEND, and GRECEIPTS, respectively. Column (2) pertains to an NBRD policy shock and the underlying
VARs are the same as those underlying Column (1). The government data are in billions of 1 987$. The dashed lines
are one-standard error bands.


                                                         50
                                                        Table 5.3
                              Properties ot Impulse Response Functions: Components of the
                                              Government Budget and Tax Receipts



                        E6 Cl FSdS.N Fiz.is
                        Pobcy ShaAs


                        1-2(...i
                                      _ FcFI RT A INAT
                                        -5361    1.129    5.554    4634     .0.181     0.181     0204
                                                                                                          1BE
                                                                                                           .1.115
                        Si. Eao         1.440    0.660    1383 IZ 0263                 0264      0313       0360
                        $.9r61arc.      0        0.297 0. 0. 0.617                     0.483     0332       0.046

                        3-4             0850     2.156    0718     33(0     -2893      -0850     -0317      .0.031
                        Sd. To          2.29*    0280     1.774    1.596    0.544      0.476     0286        0.734
                        S1c.wa          0883     0.025    0.886    0.028    0.002      0.046     0.411      0287

                        5.SOjWua        6274     2.290    -2.036   .028*    •2399      -0.729    .1371      0281
                        $sj. En         1287     1.129    1.501     1354    0.528       0.597     0262      0.707
                        Sã,(carc.       0282     0285     0.181     0349    0.0CC      0222 0 0.190
                        9-12 a1s't      3.5*4    2157     0303     02(0     -1.488     -0.437    -1.449     -0129
                        Sd. Etvr        2254     1266     1.755    1.646     0.711     0693       0.456      0849
                        Sq4canc.        0.116    0.114    0.774    0384      0.036     0538      0.031      0.875

                        V.D.cur        17216     15289    8.298    11329    20806      6843 294             92)4
                        Sd. 0.701       6255     10(04    3314      5.022    6280      6810 11.290          6.104
                        Scl4-c.         0.036    0.112    002*      0.022   0.001      0.306     0.011      0.071



                        E0.c Cl Naa6. Oad
                        R.s.r. Poècy Slcdu 01


                        I-20j1s15
                                      EEil
                                       -1.729
                                              Ed  .iaECl
                                               -0852  0.744        0042     .0.024
                                                                                     INrIRTAX
                                                                                        -0.931
                                                                                                  i..
                                                                                                 0.118      -0.368
                        Sd. B           1353     0.650    1.400     1.171   0288       0266      0323       0361
                        Sir8cwcs        0.247    0387     0395     0.912    0248       03(8      0.714      0317

                        3-4(3JXIIII     2.557    0.020    -2.610   -0864    -2.082     -0737     0.186      -0.483
                        Set. E,vor      1.96$    0.964    1854      1310    0571       0.496     0.363      0.720
                        Sq1t&ts         0.193    0284     0.159     0361    0.000      0.131     0.604       0320

                        5-8a1sl1        3250     0.249    -1.719   -1.644   -0858      -0.4.42   -0.612     -0.122
                        $61. &           1.782    1.199    1.623    1.461    0350       0.865    0.385       0.756
                        Sq,4ca.         0.069    0286     0389      0261    0.081       0.5W     0.294       0572

                        9-12 Owt.,s     -0.126   0.476    0.569     0842    -0.076     -0.138    -0866      -0.935
                        S81.E11U        1.868     1233    1.621     1.411    0.786      0.674    0.462       0.726
                        Sqidcarc.       0246     0.700    0.726     0.551   0922        0.838    0281        0.24*

                        Va O'g.         6.194    4237     4.564     5.297   7.6.49      4856     12.751      6.617
                        Sd.             3376     4251     2.647     3336    2.738       6.006    6.143       4815
                        S9ndcarc,       0297     0.320    0.295     0.127   0.040       0.322    0.117       0.115




Time averages of the impulse response functions from policy shocks to ODEFICIT. GEXPEND, GRECEIPTS. PERTAX. CORPTAX.
INDBTAX. SSTAX. and TRANSFERS. The top and bottom panels refer to FF and NBRJ) policy shocks, respectively. For each
panel, rows (I) through (4) report the average response of the column variable over the first half year, second halt year. second full
year. and third fUll year. respectively, after a policy shock. Row (5) reports the percentage of the variance of the column variable's
24-quarter-ahead forecast error attributable to the policy shock. The underlying estimated impUlse response functions and variance
decompositions were computed from three 7-variable VARs which include Y. P. PCOM. FF, NBRD, TR.. and D, where D is
GDEF1CIT. GEXPEND. GRECEIPTS. PERTAX. CORPTAX. [NDBTAX, SSTAX. and TRANSFERS (respectively).




                                                                       51
                                                       Figure 5.5
                            Effects of Policy Shocks on Government Tax Receipts

                            Effect of FF on PER TAX                      Effect of NBRD on PERTAX
                                                                10.0
                    75                                           7.5
                    5.0                                          5,0
                    2.5                                          2.5                                     -
                                                                                              —

                   -25
                   -50                                          -50
                   -7,5                                         -75
                                                               -10.0
                            I      4      7       10                      1   3       8   7   9
                           Effect of FF on CORPTAX                      Effect of NBRD on CQRPTAX
                   100                                          10.0
                    75                                           7.5
                    5.0                                         5.0
                    25                                          2.5

                   -50                                          4.0
                   -75                                           -75
                  -100                                         -10.0
                            1      4      7       10                      1   3       5   7   9
                           Effect of FF on INOBTAX                      Effect of NBRD on INOBTAX
                   IC                                           b.c
                    7.5                                          7.5
                    5.0                                          5.0
                   25                                            2.8
                                                                 0.0
                                                                                  -
                                              —                                                         —.
                                                                -2
                                                                4.0
                                                                -75
                  -10.0                                        -10.0
                            I      4      7       10                      I   3       5   7   9
                            Effect of FF on SSTAX                        Effect of NBRD on SSTAX
                   1CC                                          10.0
                    75                                          75
                   50                                           80
                   25                                           25
                   cc
              I    -5.0
                   -75
                                                                4.0
                                                                -75
                  -100                                         -10.0
                            I      4      7       10                      I   3       8   7   9    II
                          Effect 01FF on TRANSFERS                     Effect of NBRD on TRANSFERS
                                                               1Q.Q
                    75                                          7.5
                   50                                           5.0
                   2.5
                   - —_._..l_.___.I
                   -50
                                                                -2.5
                                                               -5.0
                   -75                                         -7-5
                  -10.0                                        -100
                            1     4       7       10                     I    3       5   7   9    II




The effects of FF and NBRD policy shocks on federal personal income taxes (PERTAX), corporate income taxes
(CORPTAX), indirect business taxes (INDBTAX), social security taxes (SSTAX). and transfer paymens
(TRANSFERS). Column (1) pertains to an FF policy shock and is generated from five 7-variable VARS which
include Y, P, PCOM, FF, NBRD, TR, and D, where D is PERTAX, CORPTAX, INDBTAX, SSTAX, and
TRANSFERS, respectively. Column (2) pertains to an NBRD policy shock and the underlying VARs are the same
as those underlying Column (1). The government data are in billions of 1987$. The dashed lines are one-standard
error bands.


                                                          52
