NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE U-SHAPED FEMALE
LABOR FORCE FUNCL1ON IN
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND
ECONOMIC HISTORY

Claudia Goldin

Working Paper No. 4707

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1994

I thank Robert Barro for providing me with his educational attainment data, and Anne Hill for
generously giving me her personal data files. Boris Simkovich and Linda Tuch served as
very able research assistants on this project. The Brookings Institution provided funding for
both my leave and the research assistance of Linda Tuck Lawrence Katz and t Paul Schultz
provided valuable criticism and insights. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
the Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4707
April 1994
THE U-SHAPED FEMALE
LABOR FORCE FUNCTION IN
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND
ECONOMIC HISTORY

ABSTRACF

The labor force participation rate of married women first declines and then rises as
countries develop. Its U-shape is revealed both across the process of economic development and

through the histories of currently advanced economies. The initial decline in the participation
rate is due to the movement of production from the household, tmily farm, and small business

to the wider market, and to a strong income effect But the income effect weakens and the
substitution effect strengthens at some point. This paper explores why the change takes place

and why the U-shape is traced ouL When women are poorly educated their only wage labor
outside the home and family farm is in manual work, against which a strong social stigma exists.

But when women are educated, particularly at the secondary level, they enter white-collar work,

against which no social stigma exists. Data for more than one hundred countries and for United
States history are used to explore the hypothesis of the U-shaped female labor force function.

Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

'It is open to men to debate whether economic progress is good br men or not
but for women to debate the desirability of economic growth is to debate whether
women should have the chance to cease to be beasts of burden and to join the
human race.'
W. Arthur Lewis, The Theory of Economic Growth (1955)

Gender equality and economic development share a synchronous existence, Gender

equality is a spur to economic development, particularly where the well-being of children is
concerned, and economic development, as the headnote graphically suggests, fosters gender
equality.
It is the relationship from economic development to greater gender equality that Is explored

here. I examine the roles played by education and the emergence of a white-collar sector In
fostering the paid employment of married women. The movement of women from the home to the

work piÈce promotes various types of gender equality both in society at large and in the home,

although the process has been protracted in a number of countries. Women's changing status
across economic development can be studied in the histOries of developed economies and through

a cross-section of the world's economies. The historical case used here is the United States over

the past century, and the cross section is a data set of more than one-hundred countries.
Across the process of economic development adult women's labor force participation rate
is u-shaped. When incomes are extremely low and when certain types of agriculture dominate (for
example, poultry, dairy, rice, cotton, peanuts; generally not grains, livestock, tree crops, sugarcane),

women are in the labor force to a great extent. They are sometimes paid laborers but more often

unpaid workers on family farms and in household businesses, often doing home workshop
production. As incomes rise in most societies, often because of an expansion of the market or the
introduction of new technology, women's labor torte participation rates fall. Women's work Is often
implicitly bought by the family, and women then retreat into the home, although their hours of work

may not materially change. The decline In female labor force participation rates owes; In part to

an income effect but it may be reinforced by a reduction ki the relative price of home produced

1

goods and by a decrease in the demand for women's labor in agriculture. Even when women's

relative wage rises, married women may be barred from manufacturing employment by social
J
custom or by employer preference.

But as female education improves and as the value of women's time in the market
increases still further, relative to the price of goods, they move back into the paid labor force, as

reflected in the move along the rising portion of the U-shaped curve. The process suggests an

initially strong income effect combined with a small own-substitution effect.' At some point the
substitution effect increases while the income effect may decline. During the falling portion of the

U the income effect dominates, but during the rising portion of the U the substitution effect
dominates. I will address how the substitution effect comes to dominate and what relationship
exists between the income and the substitution effects.

The notion that economic development enhances gender equality is not, I know, shared
by all (see, for example, Norris 1992 for a model of immiseration). Nor is it universally agreed that

a movement toward gender equality, as expressed for example in greater female schooling,
causally enhances economic development. But I believe both notions are valid for the vast majority

of countries and economies at least in certain ranges of economic development. In many cases

the reason for the controversy regarding the first line of causality - running from economic
development to greater gender equality -- concerns the U-shaped relationship between economic

development and female labor force participation. Movements along the declining portion of the

U may lead to the imniiseration of women. But those along the rising portion generally do not.

Central to understanding the relationship between the economic status of women and
economic development is isolating the factors that cause the u-shaped function to change direction

and rise with economic developrnent rather than fall A further issue is what meaning increased
labor force participation outside the home has in the lives of the world's women. Factors will vary
from country to country, but there is considerable evidence that as women's work moves out from

the home and family, even if such work was previously market-oriented, women gain freedoms in

2

the polity, in the society, and in their own households.2 The relationship is far from perfect, and
in some cases political freedoms actually occurred decades before economic change was apparent

But the relationship does appear to exist There is also the issue of decision-making in the
household. We know little about how resources are divided within the home, particularly among
households in the richer nations of the world. We do know, however, that when women have the
capacity for economic independence, they generally make more decisions within the household and

control more resources (see, for example. Thomas 1990).

The first issue to address is the general u-shaped relationship between economic
development and women's labor force participation. An uncomplicated graphical model of
household and market production guides the discussion of the factors accountIng for the u shape.

Data on about a hundred countries are examined to establish the relationship between women's

labor force participation and economic development, and among female education, the clerical
sector, and economic development in cross.section, The historical record for thØ United States

since 1890 provides evidence concerning the transition to the upward portion on the U. Finally,
I return to the large cross section of countries to explore the relationship between economic history

and economic development in terms of women's economic role and status.

1. Economic development and the U-shaped female participation ra function
1.1 The u in cross section

Several students of economic development have made reference to a U-shaped
relationship between women's labor force participation rate and economic development (for
example, Durand 1975, Psacharopoulus and Tzannatos 1989, although see Schultz 1991, on the

distinction between wage and non-wage labor). The association between the two can be seen In
Figure 1, which graphs the participation rate of women 45 to 59 years old against (log) per capita

GDP (1985 $), where all variables are for c. 198O. Per capita GDP may not be the best variable
to proxy economic development, and the relationship also graphed in Figure 2 using the number

3

of years schooling of the male population over 25 years old, also For c. 1980. Each graph contains

the regression line from a simple quadratic equalion,'
I should acknowledge at the outset that the data come from the work ol many other

researchers, The education data are.from Barro and Lee (1993), the GDP/capita (1985 $) data
are from Summers and Heston (1991), and the female labor force participation rates are from the

extensive United Nations WISTAT collection (United Nations 1992), as are additional data, used

below, on sectoral or occupational shares.' It should also be noted that the definition of
employment varies across the countries but it generally includes unpaid family farm workers, those

In family businesses, and own-account traders.'
The general contours of the diagrams are not decidedly different when one of the younger

age groups —25 to 44 years old -- is graphed? The lower-aged group, however, contains many

unmarried women, particularly at the younger ages, and women whose fertility decisions also
impact their labor Force decisions. The older age group is preferred for various reasons, although

it, too, presents problems. The older group will contain widows and abandoned women, and thus

not fully reflect the determinants of female labor force participation I would like to isolate. There
is yet an add ibonal problem presented by the older age group. I would like to see if educational
advances and structural change in the economy are later reflected in the female participation rates.

But these changes would first impact young, single women. For the employment decisions of the
older age group to reveal changes in schooling levels would mean that the educational advances

would have had to occur some twenty to thirty years before. Many of the countries of the world,

even those in the poorer category, have witnessed substantial advances in education (see the
essays in King and Hill 1993a, for example). But these advances have been somewhat recent in
origin for the developing world.

One final point about the participation rate data concerns the differentiation among the
labor force by employment status and by sector. Various researchers have noted inconsistencies

in the definition of the labor force across the world's countries arid have emphasized the need to

4

separate employment into wage, unpaid family, and self-emplOYed Workers (see, for example,
Schultz 1990, 1991). Most of the countries reporting labor force data in WISTAT Include all three
sectors, although there are some inconsistencies (see notes to Figures 1 and 2). Schultz (1991)
reports that the U cannot be observed for any one sector. Employment in unpaid family work and

among the self-employed decreases with economic development, and the percentage In wage
labor is fairly constant until much later stages of economic development when it rises. Thus the
U is traced out by changes in the sectoral composition of the labor force.0
Few regions of thø world have incomes and educational attainment that span a very wide

range. The u-shaped function in Figures 1 and 2 is generally traced out by the regions, rather by

the countries within them. Beginning at the upper left of each of the graphs and stretching
somewhat down the function are East, Middle1 and West Africa. Below them and somewhat to
their left are North Africa and South Asia. Just to the right of arid somewhat below East Middle,
and West Africa are South Africa and South East Asia. These seven poorer regions comprise most

of the downward portion of the graph. At the bottom and into the beginning of the rising portion
are South America and Central America. The upward bend starts with southern Europe, somewhat

above it is East Asia, then western Europe, northern Europe, Noilli America, and parts 01 the
Pacific. There are outhers in various regions, but most the groUpings are. fairly tight. The outliers

Include countries In the Caribbean, whose female labor force participation rates are higher than
predicted by the regression line, possibly because women often work as Servants for foreigners
and tourists.

The downward pOrtion of the U has been interpreted In several complementary ways.
When incomes are very low, wOmen often work with other household members on family farms,

in home workshop production and as own-account workers. As Incomes rise, various parallel
changes occur that affectwomen's labor force participation Economic development generally

shifts the locus of productiori from the family farm and business to the factory; rm, and other
places of wage labor, These shifts often occur because of increased relative productivity outside

5

family enterprises. Rather than working for the family, there is now the option o. wage labor in
agriculture and manufacturing at increased remuneration. But a general increase in income could

serve to decrease women's paid work and unpaid labor in family enterprises through a simple

income effect. Much depends on the existence of a social norm or stigma against married
women's working at manual labor in agriculture, industry, construction, and transportation.
Boserup, for example, maintains that factory work is almost universally abhorred by married women

in many parts of the developing world (1970, p. 115), and there is considerable evidence that the

social norm is widely held.9 There is also the much-debated Issue of how new technologies in
agriculture impact women's work. It is often claimed that various technologies, while increasing
income, also displace female workers through a reduction in female-specific tasks and an increase

in machinery operated by men. Both an income and a complex demand effect are implied.t0

As development proceeds education levels increase particularly for the males in the
population. Only much later, in many countries, do they increase for women. Incomes, therefore,

will continue to rise but women's relative productivity might not for some time, all of which could
serve to reduce women's labor forte participation levels further.
The rise in the U comes at a considerably more advanced stage of economic development,

and in most countries it surfaces only as female education levels have Increased beyond
elementary school. As women gain education at the secondary school level and can obtain
positions in the white-collar sector their labor force participation rates increase.

1.2Theu intheory
The previous discussion contained an implicit framework to interpret changes in women's

employment across the process of economic development A simple version of the framework is

diagrammed in Figure 3. There will be two variants of the framework. One is termed the nonstigma equilibria and the other the stigma equilibria. Although it is possible to obtain a u-shaped
labor force function with economic development (e.g., increases in per capita income) in the nonstigma case, the quantitative and narrative evidence appears more consistent with the stigma case.

6

I begin with the non-stigma case. The difference between the two is that, in the Stigmatized

equilibrium, lamiHes compare the difference in their utility when the wife is working In the
manufacturing sector and when she is not to their loss in utility from the Stigma imposed by her
labor. The stigma is a11 or non& (that is, it does not depend on the number of hours worked for
the lirm). Therefore whether or not the stigma-equilibrium is binding depends solely on the utility

comparison.

The model contains one good (3) that can be produced by the family or by a
manufacturing concern (the firm).1' Women (meaning wives) can work for the mantrfactiring
concern as operatives (manual1 blue-collar workers) or, if they are sufflcientiy educated, as white-

collar workers, Other family members work either at home production or outside the home for the
manufacturing concern. There are three uses of the time of women: production of G by the family,

production of G by the firm, and child care (C).'2 Total time In hours (per unit time, say a year)
is given by T. Production of G within the family is governed by a production possibilities frontier

(PPF) given here by gaT. Increased income from other family members lifts the production
possibilities frontier upward by 613. The initial level of other family income is normalized to O
Decisions regarding the woman's time allocation are made by the woman who also considers the

impact of her work on the social status of her family. Her utility function is given by: U —
t.J(GC) - oS, where S is the utility value of the stigma and 5 is a 0 or 1 ndicator variable.13 It is
1 if the wife produces G in the (manual or blue-collar) wage sector, even If for a few hours a week.

I consider three periods, in the first there is no firm employment In the second period a
finn offers a wage and income for families rises because other family members work for the firm.
Women have the option of working for the firm as operatives. In the third period wages (or women

rise further, because women's education advances and they. are offered Jobs In the white-collar

sector of the firm. I will assume that there is a relationship between labor force participation and
the number of hours the representative woman (wife) works and that hours worked is total hours

spend in the production of 0, independent of its source.'4

7

Figure 3 depicts a time allocation choice for a representative woman (wife) who chooses
point a and works AT hours in home production of (3 and OA hours at child care in period 1. With

increased income of G, but no change in their productivity, the woman moves to point b and
reduces her time in the home production of (310 BT. This change reflects the operation of the pure

income effect. But the appearance ot the firm also means that the woman is offered a wage to
work outside the home. Assume that the wage, relative to the price of G, exceeds the slope of the
PPF at b and that it is given by line V2. With line v2 a non-stigma or unfettered equilibrium has the
property that the woman would choose either to work for the firm and do child care or just do child

care alone. With wage given by line v2, there will be no home production of (3."
Thus in period 2 if the increase in family income comes first, the woman would reduce her

time in 0 production by AB (that is. by choosing point b). If the change in her wage occurs
together with the rise in family income, she could increase her total hours in 0 production (say by

CA) over that in period 1 (that is, by choosing point c).1' Note, however, that at point a the wife
spends AT hours producing (3 in the home, but at point c she spends CT hours producing 0 in the

firm. The non-stigma equilibrium holds open the possibility of a u-shaped labor force function, but
not necessarily if economic development increases family income and women's wages at the same

time.'7
In period 3 the woman's wage increases somewhat more, as given by line v3, through an

increase in her education and her employment in the white-collar sector of the firm. The change

in labor supply is now determined by the usual (uncompensated) wage effect. For the sake of
completeness, assume that the woman chooses point d.'8
A norm that stigmatizes families, particularly husbands, for having their wives work at wage
labor in manufacturing (or other manual jobs) wUI alter the equilibrium, particularly the change from

period 1 to 2 and from 2 to 3. The equilibrium in period I is unchanged, but the response to the
Increase in the wage with the appearance of the firm in period 2 could be.

Each family has a value S giving the utility that would be lost from the social stigma of

B

having a wife work for wages as a manufacturing operative or manual laborer. The stigma is not
a (unction of the number of hours at work but is 'all or none.' The wife Can do no better than point

c, ghien the option of working along v2, She can do no better than point b in the absence of that
option. The question, then, is simply whether (112 - U2) >1< S. If the utility value of the stigma is
greater than the gain from being at point c compared with point b, the family will choose to remain

at point b. The utility the family loses horn having the wife work in the manufacturing sector Is
more than offset by the gain in utility from an expanded choice set. The probability the stigma wilt

be binding is likely to be greater the lower the family income and will be greater the lower the
woman's wage.19

The social stigma against wives working in paid manual labor outside the home is
apparently widespread and strong. It almost always attaches to the work of women in maleintensive industries (e.g., mining, iron and steel), but also exists In female-intensive (e.g., clothing,
textiles) arid mixed industries (e.g.. food processing). The prohibition is so ubiquItous that it seems
likely to be connected with many of the most basic norms in society — those which bind the family

together as a productive unit. The stigma is a simple message. Only a husband who Is lazy,
indolent, and entirely negligent ol his family would allow his wife to do such labor, The same
stigma does not appear to attach to widows and to female children doing the same wont The
shame, therefore, attaches to the husband and serves to enforce a powerful social norm that
obliges men to provide for their families. For various reasons, discussed below, the stigma does
not generally attach to women working in the white-collar sector.
If the stigma equilibrium Is binding the woman will choose point b in perIod 2, but she wilt
select point d when offered a white-collar job. Thus the movement across the three periods is from

a to b to d, tracing out a U-shaped labor force participation function.Z Note that when the stigma

effect is binding on at least some families, the econometrician will incorrectly measure the true,
underlying wage effect It will be measured as 0 between periods 1 and 2, and will be considerably

larger than the true underlying wage effect between periods 2 and sY' The response to a change

9

in wages is first underestimated and then overestimated by the family's fettered equilibrium. As
more families make the move from a point like b to a point like d, the measured wage effect will

decreasa Therefore, the econometrician will observe first a negligible wage effect; then a very
large one, and then one of some moderate (and more accurate) proportion. The same effects
can be produced by a model with fixed costa As the wage rises, the fixed cost effect of entering
work outside the home binds fewer families.
The income effect is also biased. At higher levels of income there is a greater probability

of having the stigma effect bind? Thus if the only wage work for women is in the manufacturing
sector, their participation will decrease more as income increases. Some of the decrease will be

due to a decrease in home production (as in the movement from a to b). But some will be
because more and more farnSs reach the point where (U - U2) c S.
Thus, one explanation for the u-shaped function is that we initially observe the impact of

an income effect when women's educational levels have not yet advanced and when their only
employment opportunities outside home production are manual labor jobs in manufacturing and
agriculture, for which there is often a social stigma. Women's labor force participation will fall as
incomes rise and even as their own wage rises. Only when women are enabled to enter jobs in

non-manuai work through their increased education will their labor force participation rate rise
again.
1.3 Evidence on the rising portion of the U-shaped function
The downward portion of the u has been explained by several related changes, only some

of which are directly captured in the framework just outhned. Women's labor force participation
decreases with economic development because their household production declines as economic

development progresses while their wage labor does not immediately increase. A simple income
effect may be operating. Household-produced goods may become unprofitable to make and sell
relative to factory production. Similarly, changes in agricultural technology may reduce the demand

for women workers.2' A central issue is why women do not follow production into the factory

10

Their reluctance can explained by the existence of a stigma or by any fixed expense of entering
the paid labor market outside the home, such as travel costs.

Understanding why the female labor force function begins to rise, is the next topic and
leads to an exploration of the relationships among economic development, female education, and

white-collar employment. The first issue to address Is when female schooling levels Increase.

At relatively low Incomes and low male schooling levels, the ratio of male to female
education is extremely high. As resource constraints are reduced both male education and female

education rise, but female education rates rise faster and begin to converge on those of males.
The sources of reduced resource constraints can be found at the household and governmental
levels.

Figure 4 shows the relationship between the ratio of male to female secondary schooling

gross enrollment rates and years of education among the male adult population. Wth Increased
male education the ratio of male to female gross enrollment in secondary school declines, rapidly
becoming one and often less.26 Increased income1 as reflected In the Increase in education levels

for the male adult population, at some point leads families to endow their girls with relatively more

education and also aids in the extension of publicly-provided education.

Increased income fuels schooling and expands the supply of educated workers to the
white-collar sector. Figure 5 showS the positive association between whW-collar employment and

GOP/capita? But increased GDP/capita is also an indicator that the economy has undergone
a structural transformation that decreases the agricultural sector and increases that in services.
Both demand and supply effects work in tandem to increase the share of the labor force In white-

collar employment. At higher income levels the demand for educated workers is greater and with

greater incomes the supply of educated workers expands.
But increased GOP/capita, or its general correLate years of schooling for the adult male
population, alone is insufficient to raise the fraction of all employed women who are clerical workers

or to raise the proportion of all clerical workers who are Women. Figure 6 graphs the relationship

11

between the ratio of female to male clerical workers and the log difference between adult male and

female years of education (see also the discussion of this relationship Itt Boserup 1970, chapter

8). A line has been drawn at the 15% difference mark in terms of male and female educational
levels and at equality in their employment in the clerical sector.

Most of the countries to the southwest of the crossing point have very low levels of both
female and male education. They have few women relative to men in clerical work despite equality

of education. Those countries to the northeast, and there are only three, have a high ratio of
women in clerical work although their educational levels are less equaL Two of these countries

are Singapore and Hong Kong. All of the test of the countries lie along what appears to be a
hyperbola, with the very highest ratios of women to men in the clerical sector found for those
countries with the most equality of education between the sexes (note that severaJ countries,
including the United States, having a sex ratio in the clerical sector above 3 have been omitted
1mm the graph). As long as males receive considerably more education than do females, the ratio

of women to men in the clerical sector is low.

But the relationship graphed in Figure 6 might be caused by the fact that women's
education levels are low, not just relative to men, when the difference in the education is highest
Their absence as clerical workers, then, would stem then from their lack of education in absolute

temis. In a regression context we can hold both constant and observe that the ratio of the male
to female educational attainment matters, to some degree, even when the percentage of women
in the adult population who attended any secondary school is included:
Dependent variable: (Female/Male) Clerical Workers

-0.375 (1.84)

Log(male/female years of education)
% females with secondary education
Constant

0.0315 (6.23)

0.523 (3.03)

adjusted A2 - 0.47; number of observations - 83
Ordinary least squares estimation; t-statistics in parentheses.

Sources: Occupational distribution and labor force participation rates c. 1980: United Nations
(1992); years of school for the adult (> 25 years) female and populations In 1980: Barro and Lee
(1993).

12

The ratio of female to male clencal workers rises with female secondary schooling and falls as the

ratio of male to female total years of education for the adult population rises. As Boserup
observes, competition from men serves to force women out of clerical employment
Both effects -- increased education and increased white-collar employment-- Impact the
labor force participation of women, particularly those who are married and older. The social stigma

against a wife's working generally does not exist for occupations in office work and sales, even
when it is very strong in manual laborP Thus increased education of women, particularly at the

secondary school level, will increase the female share of office and sales employment. The
increase will be almost immediate, since these women often take such positions directly after their

school years. But the impact on the labor force participation of married women could take several

decades more. The young women whose educational levels increase and who become office
workers upon graduation will marry, have children, exit from the labor force, and then return to the

work force later in their lives. Thus part of the rising portion of the U-shaped function may trace
out the increase in women's secondary schooling and their employment in the clerical and sales
sectors of the various economies.
Strong evidence for the theory just proposed is difficult to muster In large measure because

the data available are not appropriate to it. The theory is one Of generational change, but thC data

sets are generally cross sectional or have limited historical Information for the countries. One
suggestive regression is:
Dependent variable: Female labor force participation rate of 45 to 59 year olds

% male labor force in white-collar sector
-0.793 (2,16)
% of female labor force in clerical sector (%FC LEA) -1.25 (2.16)
Years of schooling of adult women (FSCHL)
0.0153 (0.63)

%FCLER FSCHL

0.168 (2.25)
0.514 (6.59)

Constant

adjusted A2 0.18; number of observations — 82
Ordinary least squares estimation; t-statistics in parentheses.

Sources: Occupational distribution and labor force participation rates c. 1980: United Nations
(1992); years of school hr the idult (>25 years) female population in 1980: Barro and Lee (1993).
13

The labor tome participation rate of women 45 to 59 years old decreases with increases in the
white-collar fraction of all employed men, a likely consequence of an income effect. It decreases
with increases in percent of the female labor force in the clerical sector when female education is
below about 7 years, but it rises with the proportion of female workers in the clerical sector when
female education levels are above 7 years, that is at the secondary school level. It also rises with

female schooling, although not significantly. It is most important that the female labor force
participation rate rises with female schooling in relation to the proportion of the female labor force

in the clerical sector. The interaction between female schooling and the proportion of the female

labor force in the clerical sector is the most telling result. Neither in isolation is sufflcient.
The rising portion of the u-shaped function has suggested to many that the (negative)
income effect eventually becomes swamped by the (positive) substitution effect. I have suggested

that this effect Is either caused by or reinforced by the existence of a fettered equihbrium. The
fettered equilibrium can be driven by a stigma regarding woman's work in the manufacturing sector

or by fixed costs of working outside the home.
One may wonder why the social norm against married women's working in manual labor

generally does not exist for white-collar labor. The social stigma against a wife's working in the
white-collar sector may be low because highly educated women across many cultures are ghtn
license to work for pay. The women thus employed are often teachers and nurses, but are also
in a variety of white-collar occupations such as sales and office work. If higher-class women are

given the privilege of working for pay in these sectors, then, the argument goes, lower income
women can as well. The point is that when a woman takes a job in manual labor she Is signalling

that her husband is neglectful and thus the norm — one protecting the family — can take effect.
No educated, higher income man would allow his wife to work in the manufacturing sector, thus
the wife must come from a lower-income household. But the signal is mixed when a woman takes

a white-collar job, She could be an educated woman manied to a hard-working man or she could

be an educated woman married to a slothful man. The norm cannot take effect.
14

I am suggesting that one reason for the existence of the U -shaped female labor force
participation rate function is the relationship between female education and economic development

At low levels of development education increases for males far more than for females. Incomes

rise and the income effect on female labor supply serves to lower female participation. A norm

against women's working in manufacturing serves to reinforce the income effect, because the
higher is income the greater the probability of a binding stigma effect. As incomes rise even more,

educational resources are freed and females receive more education. As women take jobs in the

white-collar sector the stigma effect is eliminated, and the substitution effect increases. With
greater education for women and a larger white-collar sector, the Income effect falls because more

families no longer face the stigma effect of manufacturing work. The U is thereby traced out

2. The origins of manied women's labor lorce participation In the United States
2.1 The u-shaped female participation rate function in U.S. economic history
The labor forceconstructs that lie behind the various data in Figures 1 arid 2 are vaguely
consistent from country to country but not ideal. The constructs that are readily available to trace
one country through its history are often far worse. In the United States, for instance, the modem

concept of the labor force was first embodied in the 1940 census The concept previously used
was that of 'gainful employment,' for which having an occupation was equivalent to being In the

labor force, Most adult men listed an occupation, but the vast majority of adult women did not
Without careful archival research our knowledge of women's employment In the past would

be woefully lacking. In 1890, for example, less than 3% of all married, white women gave the

census taker an occupation (see Table 1). But we now know that a far greater percentage
worked for pay or produced for the market sector either in their own homes on the family farm,

or in the family business. Still others worked intermittently or for few hours a week and never
reported their occupation to the census taker. Given the social stigma against their working, it is
not surprising that the reported labor force participation of married women was extremely low when

15

women's work was primarily in domestic service and manufacturing.
The historical record on women's work in the United States Is now sufficiently complete that

a u-shaped functional relationship can be found there as well. Rather than a participation rate of

2.5% for all married, white women an adjusted figure is probably Just under 15% in 1890. The

adjustments add in a fraction of boardinghouse keepers, unpaid family farm workers, and
uncounted female workers in manufacturing.3'

The more inclusive measure of the participation rate of married, white women probably
exceeded 15% earlier in the nineteenth century, arid it may have been considerably higher. We
now know, for example, that urban women in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries

took part in their husband's trades when the businesses were operated in the family's domicile

(Goldin 1968) and that women contributed to market production on farms in a myriad at ways.
Thus it is likely that married women's labor force participation rate first fell before beginning its
steady climb upward sometime in the twentieth century.
By 1940, when the procedures used by the census established the labor force construct,

the labor force participation rate of all manied, white women was just 12.5%. The adjusted
estimate for 1890 is a bit below15%. Thus even though we do not know the precise dimensions

of the u-shaped function for U.S history, it seems clear that It existed. I believe that the bottom
was reached sometime in the 19205.
lt is not surprising that most of the discussion of women's labor force participation in U.S.
history has ignored the falling portion 01 the U, for it became apparent only as researchers scoured

sources other than the U.S. federal population census. It also became more obvious as scholars

looked to the development literature for guidance on studying the histories of industrialized
countries (Durand 1975). Their reasoning was quite sknple. If all countries taken together trace
out a u-shaped function, then each countr/s history probably did.
The rising portion of the u has dominated the literature on female labor fone participation

in the United States and other developed economies. Beginning at least with Mincer's (1962)

16

pioneering article on the female labor force, the central question for economists has been how
women's labor force participation could increase in the face of rising incomes given the negative

impact of the income effect The answer, supplied by Mincer, is that the substitution effect was
strongly posftive and that it swamped the income effect (see, for example, the articles in Layard

and Mincer 1985, lot a confirmation of the relationship across a variety ot developed
economies)!
We now know that the histories of women's employment in many developed economies
trace out the same type of Li-shaped function apparent across a variety of the world's countries
at any point in time, such as those in Figures 1 and 2. If the substitution effect strongly outweighs

the income effect along the rising portion of the U, what happens at the other side of the u and

what causes the function to change directions and turn upward? The existence of a u-shaped
function raises the distinct possibility that measured income and substitution effects may not be

constant across the process of economic development
The reasons why the function changes direction can be sought in whatever factors cause
the substitution effect to increase and eventually outweigh the income effect. As noted previously,

the estimated income effect may decrease over time as the substitution effect increases. By
reinforcing each other, changes in both the income and substitution effects could have contributed

to the upward portion of the u. There is also the possibility that relative prices (including wages)

change across the process of economic development or that certain fixed costs, for example of
travel to factory work, decrease. Although these are possibilities, the record for the United States,

at least, suggests that the primary change is fbund In the parameters of the income and
substitution effects.
2.2 Secondary schooling and lernale labor supply

The increase in the substitution effect, and the probable decline In the income effect,
occurred in the United States some time after the increase in secondary schooling for both male

and female youths? Secondary school enrollments and graduation rates advanced at
17

remarkable rates in the first several decades of the twentieth century. The graduation rate in the
non-South regions of the United States rose from less than 10% of the .17-year old population in
1910 to about 50% by about 1937 (see Figure 7). Thus the median 17-year old in the non-South

United States in 1937 was a high School graduate, even though just twenty-seven years before

fewer than one in ten 17-year olds would have received a high school diplomaP It should also
be pointed out that the graduation rates in Figure 7 have been drawn to the late 1950s to highlight
the fact that the growth of high schools during the 1920 to 1937 period was extraordinary. Virtually

all of the increase during the half-century depicted occurred in that seventeen-year period.
Female youths were 1.5 times more likely to graduate secondary school than were male

youths in the 1910s and 1.25 times more likely in the 1920s. In fact, in every year and in every
region in the United States, young women were more likely to enroll, attend, and graduate from
secondary school than were young men.
Many cf the world's countries have undergone a similar transformation of their secondary

schools during the past thirty years. That occurring in the southern portion of the Western
Hemisphere comes the closest to what occurred in the United States during the 1920 to 1937

period although the levels are a bit lower, Mexico in 1960, for example, had a secondary
enrollment rate of 8%, but by 1987 It was 53%; that in Colombia rose from 11% to 56% in the
same interval. Almost all the countries of South America, Central America, arid the Caribbean had

secondary enrollment rates in 1960 in the 10% to 20% range (with the exceptions of Argentina,
Jamaica, Panama, and Uruguay which were considerably higher, and Haiti which was far lower),

but by 1987 most Latin American countries had secondary enrollment rates in the 40% to 60%

range. Because these rates also include the lower secondary grades whereas those for the
United States generally include only grades 9 to 12, comparability is imperfect. But it is likely that
a comparable enrollment rate lot the non-South United States in 1910 was about 40% and that it

was 87% by 1937.'
Another important area of similarity between U.S. educational history and recent trends in

18

Latin America concerns gender differences. Latin America is the only part of the developing world

in which girls are educated in secondary schools to the same degree or greater than boys, It is

extremely interesting that the labor force participation rates of women in many Latin American
countries are at the bottom of the U in Figures 1 and 2, raising the distinct possibility, explored later

in section 3, that Latin America will soon see large increases in Female labor force participation
very similar to those experienced in the United States in the post-World War II period.
The equality of education by sex in the United States at the primary and secondary school
levels -- indeed the superiority of female education — almost throughout its history is unique in the

world's educational history. The only other countries that come close to such equality of treatment

are those that have been affected by U.S. occupation, and, as just noted, much of Latin America

but only for the past several decades. Part of the reason For gender neutrality in educational
attainment in the United States is the universal public funding of primary and secondary schooling

in the United States. But girls were taking advantage of this free schooling at decidedly higher
rates than were boys.
The reason girls attended secondary school for longer periods than did boys, and attained

high school diplomas at far greater rates, was becausesuch schooling had more obvious and

higher returns for them. The alternative to secondary school for a young woman was a
manufacturing job. Secondary schooling, on the other hand, offered her the option of an office job.
At the turn of this century many oflice jobs-- typists, stenographers, secretaries — earned very high

wage premia. But by the 1920s the wage premium paid to female clerical workers had tailen with

the large influx of teenagers from high schools and other students from a variety of business and
commercial schools. By the 1920s. the average female office worker earned about 30% more than

her counterpart in manufacturing and that premium probably remained in place until the 1 940s

(Goldin 1984, p. 14). It should be noted, however, that the private internal rate of return to
education is not so easily calculated. Had these individuals worked for the remainder of their lives,

the return would merely be the premium divided by the number of additional years of school

19

needed to move fromthe manufacturing to the clerical job. But women in the 1920s and 1930s
did not work for very long after they ma med. even when they made the transition to white-collar
employment.

Manufacturing jobs were not demeaned just because they paid less than did those in
offices, because many industrial jobs paid relatively well by the 1 920s. Office jobs were decidedly

preferred because they were "nice' jobs, and they were the jobs that "nicV girls took. They were
cleaner, neater, generally shorter in hours, and they commanded considerably more respect That

young women gave these factors considerable thought is found in the contemporary literature on
vocations. •The ambition of the school girl to "work in an office" in preference to work in a factory

has often been commented on by vocational counsellors and others in touch with girls who are
seeking their first jobs" (Breckinridge 1933, p. 181).

A few years of high school catapulted a young woman from a life of drudgery and
disrespect into a world of comfort and courtesy, or so it seemed to her. The young man, however,

did not often see high school as having so positive an impact. The rather dead-end clerical and

sales positions opened to young women were not the road to success for the young man.
Machinists, electricians, and other tradesmen could enter their craft with far less than a high school

diploma and little apparent loss. Thus the apparent private return for young women was actually
higher than hr young men, even though the latter remained employed for a considerably longer
fraction of their lives.
Another change for young women in the 1 920s was their ability to remain in white-collar

employment alter they married. Only in textile-mill towns and other dties with light-Industry were

married, white women employed to any extent outside the home In the pre-1940s period.
Employment changes of the 1 920s were apparent 10 many commentators and were expressed, for

example, in the famous ethnographic study of the Lynds. "When one speaks of married women's

working in Middletown one is talking almost exclusively of Middletown's working class and the

lowest rungs of the business class. Among these last. . . there is discernible a tendency for a

20

young wife to retain a clerical ob until her husband begins to get established. At the other extreme

of the business class, there are one or two young wives of men so wealthy that there can be no

question locally of their having to work,' and thus no reflection on their husbands' ability to
'provide' (quoted in Goldin 1990, p. 134). As more women became educated, the social stigma
of a wife's working declined.
The notion that the substitution effect rose over time and that the income effect declined
in absolute value is not just a-theoretical idea or mere rationalization of the time series movement

Rather, there are a host of cross section studies from 1900 to the 1960s that, taken together,
exhibit such changes (see Goldin 1990, table 5.2). The studies suggest that the substitution effect
was at a high point for U.S. women in the 19505 and 1960s, whereas the income effect may have

continued to decline from the eaily twentieth century down to the present
Thus Mincer's study, as well as other influential analyses of female labor supply, may have

been executed at the peak of the own-substitution effect in the United States (see Bowen and
Finegan 1969, for another early important study). Of more importance for the total Impact of an
increase in women's real wages, it may reflect a historic peak in the difference between the own-

substitution effect and the total-income elasticity Ithe income effect

(the wife's full-time

incomelfamily total income)1. Also historically high during the 1 950s and 1960s was the difference

between the wage elasticity and the income elasticity. It is this difference that moves us along the

upward sloping portion of the u-shaped function as incomes rise, as long as wages rise equally

(or greater) for women than men. The stabdity in the gender gap in wages during that period is
evidence that they rose at approximately equal rates.
2.3 The rise of women's white-collar employment
I have alluded to the impact secondary schooling had on the occupations of young women

in the I 920s and 1 930s but have not yet demonstrated that their work was fundamentally altered

during the period. Also left to be established is the notion that participation in these jobs early in
their lives altered their predisposition to paid employment later, a somewhat more slender thread

21

in the empirical analysis. Although the discussion emphasizes the clerical group1 many in the sales

and professional sectors, particularly teachers and nurses, could also be included.
The clerical sector is emphasized because office work required nothing more than some

secondary schooling, and its rise led to the first large shift in female employment away from
operative positions in manufacturing. Itwas also a sector that grew enormously in absolute terms
and in terms of its female composition during a brief period in American history that coincided with

the expansion of publicly provided secondary schooling.
In 1890 about 15% of all office workers were female and jUst 4% of all employed women

in that sector were married (see Table 2). By 1910 38% of all office workers were female and in
1920 the figure had risen to 48%. Thus by the 1920s office work in the United States had become

feminized, The share of women in the total employment of the clerical sector remained at about

50% from 1920 to 1940. But the share of employed female clerical workers who were married
reached 26% by 1940 and then climbed to 42% by 1950 when 62% of all clerical workers were
women. Whereas only 4% of all non-farm employed women were in the clerical sector in 1690,
more than 20% were thus employed by 1920.
The point is that office work became mainly a female domain in the 1920s, although at the

time it was the bastion of single, not married, women. Married women, however, increased their

numbers in this sector at a greater rate than they did in the nation's employment as a whole.
Although clerical work was a field dominated by relatively young women in 1930, it had the same
proportion of married women as did the female labor force as a whole by 1950.
The rapid increase in the number of young female clerical workers in the two decades after

1910 was fueled by the phenomenal increase in secondary school enrollments and graduation

rates, as shown in Figure 7. These workers were primarily unmarried women some of whom
continued working in offices and in sales positions for short periods after they married. But some

married women in the 1920s and many In the 1930s were faced with bars against their
employment in office work. Marriage bars - the stated policies of firms not to hire married women

22

in certain positions and to fire single women who married while in their employ -- existed in the

1920s in some firms, but they became far more widespread during the Great Depression (see

Goldin 1990, chapter

Thus the longer-run and full impact of the increase in white-collar

employment in the 1910 to 1930 period had to wait for the 1940s and 1950s when marriage bars
were generally dissolved and when the women of these cohorts were in the forties.
The evidence on the impact of early work experiences on later labor market participation

is slim for the period under consideration. One data set, however, has been found that contains
information on a women from a wide variety of backgrounds, interviewed in 1939 about their past

work and educational histories (Gold in 1989, table 3). The data suggest that women who had
worked in manufacturing early in their employment histories were less likely to be labor market
participants later in their lives. Their participation rates were 10 percentage points lower than were

those of the other women whose first jobs were in sates, clerical, professional, and other service

employments. Because the base labor force participation for this group was 25%, the Impact of
first employment in manufacturing was substantial.

The data set is insufficiently rich to separate the impacts of income effects, substitution
effects, and changing taste for work. There is, however, confirmation that whatever the locus of
reasons, a change in the employment of young women from manufacturing to white collar work -even lower-paid white collar work in offices and stores — can Increase labor force participation later

in their lives.
The key point I am making is that the rise of office work In the 1920s and 1930s was an

important component of the increase in married womerfs labor force participation in the 1950s.
The explosion of married women's labor force participation in the 1940s arid 1950s was primarily

experienced by women older than 40 years (see Table 1). Although there were important
increases at the younger ages during those decades, the participation rates of married women
under 40 years were to soar later, from the end of the 1960$ to the 1980s.
Although I have thus far emphasized only the white-collar occupations that required just

23

a high school education or diploma, the rise of high schools in the early twentieth century also
fueled the increase in college, normal school, and nursing school enrollment In the post-i 940$.

In the college graduating class of 1957, for example, more than 60% of the women became
teachers, social workers, nurses1 and librarians in their first few months after graduation (Goldin
1990). The vast majority of these women would exit the labor force with the birth of their children

and would remain out for varying lengths of time. But their intention in getting their degrees and
in their early employment was to establish an opportunity for future participation. The next cohort
of women would enter the labor force after school with the full intention of remaining in it with only

small breaks for child bearing and rearing.

A decisive shift had been made in married women's labor force participation. No longer
would young women exit from the labor force upon marriage not to reenter unless family income
was extremely low or when they became widowed or were abandoned. Women now planned their

education and labor force investments with a considerably longer time-horizon for their
employment. All of these changes find their origins in the rise of secondary schooling in the first
few decades of this century and in the rise of white-collar employment of women.

3. Economic Development and Economic History: Concluding Remarks

The path the world's developing countries are currently taking will never trace out that
which the United States took to the present The United States, for example, was never as poor
on a per capita basis as are the poorest countries today, and it never had as high a percentage
Muslim, Hindu, or Catholic as many of the world's countries, to mention but two differences that
affect comparisons in the status of women. But there are many similarities In the role of education

in spurring change for women.
In the early twentieth century the United States underwent changes in education not unlil
those currently underway in Latin America. In both cases, secondary schooUng advanced sharply

in a brief period of time and the levels for girls and boys were very similar. Many of the countries

24

in Latin America currently occupy the base of the labor force tJ.shaped functions of Figures 1 and

2. In all but the Caribbean, female labor force participation rates (for those 25 to 44 years) are in

the 20% tO 40°i range. The percentage of female workers who are employed in the clerical
sector is in the 1 O% to 20% range, approximately what it was in the United States in the I 920s.°
The percentage of all clerical sector employment that was female is in the 30% to 40% range, once

again approximately equal to what it was in the United States in the 1920s.
Although I do not know from the aggregate data which women are occupying these whitecollar positions, I suspect It is disproportionately younger women, as it was, until the 1 950$, In the

United States. It is likely, therefore, that many women in Latin America are ripe for the transition
to the upward sloping portion of the U and that married women's labor force participation rates will

rise substantially in the next decade or so even if income levels do as well.
The newly industrialized countries of Asia present a mixed picture. In some, for example
Singapore and Hong Kong, educational change has been rapid and women are quickly moving Into

white-collar occupations. But in others in which educational advances are also great, for example
Korea, women are poorly represented in the clerical trades. This is also the case in the Philippines
in which incomes are lower than in the three countries just mentioned but schooling levels are quite

high.4° According to the framework proposed, married women's labor force participation rates will,

in the future, advance less in Korea and the Philippines than in Singapore and Hong Kong, and
that women's status in various ways will progress differentially between the two groups,

In sum, I have demonstrated that the labor force participation of women is generally Ushaped over the course of economic development. The reasons for the downward portion of the
U are probably found in a combination of an initiaUy strong income effect and a weak substitution

effect, and a change in the locus of production from the home to the factory. It was the rising
portion of the Li that concerned most of this essay. Why the function changes direction holds the
key to why women enter the labor force at higher stages of economic development and why their

social, political, and legal status generally improves with economic progress. The reasons were

25

sought in the change in the education of females relative to males as educational resource
constraints are relaxed, and in women's ability to obtain jobs in the white-collar sector alter school

completion. Their increased education and their ability to work in more prestigious occupations
both increases the substitution effect and decreases the income effect As the substitution effect
begins to swamp the income effect, the upward portion of the U is traced out; and women's labor
force participabon enters the modern era.

26

END NOTES

1. By an income effect I mean the change in hours of work of an individual with respect to a
change in family income. The own-substitution effect is the change in hours of work of an
individual with respect to a change in their wage, holding income constant I will refer to the
own-substitution effect simply as the substitution effect By the substitution effect I will mean
the compensated wage effect
2. Miller (1982) is a fine study of the effects of women's employment in India on reducing
lemale seclusion and segregation.
3. All countries with available data except those in the Middle East and those centrally planned
are shown. The centrally planned economies are: Bulgaria, China, Czechoslovakia, Cuba,
Hungary, Romania, the USSR, East Germany, and Yugoslavia although data for some of these
countries was not available anyhow. Also excluded are countries for which the labor force data
differ substantially from those relating to employment status. The results do not materially
change if all available countries are included.
4. Even though certain religions are important in determining female labor force participation
rates across countries, the percent Muslim is not once the countries of the Middle East have
been excluded, in a regression of the participation rate on a quadratic In per capita GDP,

5. The economically active population data on which the labor force numbers are based comes
from International Labour Office (1986) according to the WISTAT reference manual.
Justifications for using the Barro and Lee data in preference to those of the World Bank
can be found in Barro and Lee (1993).
6. I have explored differences between the labor force data in WISTAT (which are from
International Labor Office 1986) and those (also from WISTAT) from various country sources
which are subdivided by employment status (wage labor, self-employed, unpaid lamily worker).
There are several countries in which the differences are very large. In some cases the labor
force numbers are greater and in others those by employment status are. Bangladesh, the
Central African Republic, the Dominican Republic, EL Salvador, Guinea-Bissau, Jamaica,
Jordan, Lesotho, Niger, and Pakistan afi have differences exceeding 30% In absolute value.
There are 8 other countries in which the differences exceed 20% In absolute value but are
below 30%. Mother 20 have differences that exceed 10% but are below 20%. These

countries have beenexcluded from both Figuresi and 2. lnonlyafewcasescanlfigureout
the precise reason for the discrepancy (e.g., differences in dates, exclusion oF unpaid family
workers). I should note that only the labor force data are given by sex and age, and that is the
reason for preferring them.

7. The WISTAT data contain only three age groups in the 20 to 59 year range —20 to 24, 25 to
44, and 45 to 59 years. There are also data by marital status and age, but many countries are
not covered in sufficient detail.
The relationship between the Labor force participation rates of the 25 to 44 year old

groupandthoseofthe45to59yearoldgroupisquitetight Forailcountriesinthesample
(not excluding those of the Mideast, for example) the relationship is:
lfpr 25-44 - 0.095 + 0.927 Ifpr 45-59, corrected A2 — 0.854 (N 164 countries).

27

8. See Hill (1983), for example, icr an analysis of the determinants of female labor supply in
Japan (C. 1975) which takes into consideration the choice of wage employment, family
employment, and nonemployment. The determinants between wage and family employment
are very different Whereas the wage and income effects on wage employment have the usual
signs, those on family employment have signs that are difficult to interpret and suggest that
some determinants have not been adequately controlled for in the analysis. Duraisamy (1993)
analyzes the determinants of wife's employment i.n wage labor and self employment in urban
south India and finds more neoclassical results in both employments. There is, though, a
greater negative effect of assets on wage employment than on self employment
9. Hem (1986) reports that in Mauritius the general tendency among single Iworneni workers is
to leave factory employment around the time of their marriage, even before they are pregnant
or have any children to look after (p. 288). The timing of these withdrawals is precisely what I
have found for the United States from 1890 to 1940 (Goldin 1989, 1990). As In other countries,
Hem notes that shusbands opposition to their wives' woiidng, particularly In a factory, is a
crucial factor in these withdrawals (p. 268). Mauritius is at the bottom of the u in Figure 2.
10. The impact of the Green Revolution is a good example. Mukhopadhyay (1991), for
instance, demonstrates that in West Bengal, India the introduction of high yield varieties
increased income, decreased female labor force participation, and increased fertility. The direct
income effect is only one part of the reason for the decrease in women's participation in
agriculture. The other part has to do with changed demands for sex-specific agricultural duties.
Weeding, a female occupation, was reduced considerably with the introduction of weedicides,
but the use of machinery, a male occupation, was increased with Green Revolution technology.
One may question the impact of the technological changes in the absence of income changes.
11. The model borrows from that in Gronau (1977).

12. There is no pure leisure time. The G produced by the firm and the G produced by the
home are perfect substitutes, as in clothing made by machine in a factory or in a home
workshop.
13. The stigma (S) is treated as a positive number and is, therefore, subtracted from the utility
level.
14. The model could easily be extended to the case in which there is wage work in home
production before wage work that takes place at the firm.
The relationship between female labor force participation and hours of work is
discussed, for example, in Goldin (1989).

15. The wage is always expressed relative to the price of 0. With wages somewhat less than
that given by v2 there would be some household production of G. None of this affects the
results, but makes the diagram cleaner.
16. Of course, the exact positions of points b and c are indeterminate. It child care and goods
are both normal goods (that is, if the income effects of both are positive), point b must lie to the
northeast of point a. By the seine logic, point c would lie to the northeast of a point on u2 (not
drawn on the diagram) that is at the tangent of U2 at a slope given by v. I have drawn point c
so that the substitution effect outweighs the income effect of the increase in the wage. That is,
there is an increase in time spent at work with an increase in the relative wage. But the
income effect of an increase in wages could outweigh the substitution effect and time spent at
work could decrease (that is, point c could be to the northeast of point b.
28

17. As noted before, point c can lie to the northeast of point b.
18. Once again, I am assuming that the substitution effect of a change In the woman's wage
swamps the income effect of the same.
19. It will be greater the higher is the wage Increase, for the simple reason that a higher wage
increases the change in potential utility from working outside the home. It will be greater the
higher is family income if marginal utility of income decreases with income.
20. Additions to the model will reinforce the u-shape. For example, if the movement from
home production to firm production involves a fixed cost, the kne V2 will be lowered a fixed
amount; equal to the fixed costs of going to work, getting another family member to take care of
the children, and so on. The choice set is now constrained to be some combination of the PPF
and the line v2 shifted down.
Mother addition concerns the efficiency of household production when the firm
competes with it. The model is constructed so that there is no change in the efficiency of home.
production and no change fri the price of the home produced good relative to the firm-produced
good (as might exist if there were differences In quality). One possibility Is that as some
households reduce their production of the good, the fixed costs of marketing It Increase. If the
good were collected by agents, the price received for it could decrease as the market became
geographically thinner. Indeed, the market could become so thin that production is driven to
zero.
21. Note that the wages of women will be correctly measured because women also Include
non-wives, who do not experience the stigma, and because some wives will not face a binding
stigma-equilibrium. The econornetrician will measure the correct wage lncraase for women

from period 1 (notshown)tov2inperiod2becausewageswillberecorciedforsomewomen.
But families in which S is low will have wives who shift from point b to point c, whereas in
families having a high S wives will remain at point b. By the 'true wage effect' I mean the
response from point b to c, that is in the absence of the stigma. The more families with a high
value of 5, the lower will be the measured wage effect If S went to zero for all families
(perhaps because the job were no longer manual labor but was, Instead, an office position), all
wives would move from b to c and the true wage effect would equal the measured wage effect.
When S is high enough, the measured wage effect (from period 1 to 2) will be zero but will be
equal to the true wage effect (from period 2 to 3) when wages Øn office work) rise to V3.
22. 1 say 'more accurate' in terms of the non-stigma equilibrium.
23. ?Jthough this need not hold, it is likely to hold for some range of Income.
24. One way of incorporating the possibility that home or agricultural production methods
change, but that women are excluded from the new technology, Is to consider the fact that the
old technology can still be used but that the price of the output decreases relative to the value
of time in using the new technology. That is, the value of G is reduced.relative to family
income.
There is also the possibility that as fewer families produce in home workshops, the
costs of marketing and distributing the goods and inputs increases. When families are engaged
in piece-rate production, for example,.the greater the density of such families the lower the
costs of distributing the inputs and collecting the finished pieces As fewer families are involved
in piece-rate production, the per unit costs will rise. This change can be incorporated into the
model by lowering the PPF, viewed here as net production (actual production minus the costs
of disthbution and marketing).
29

25. Many of the countries that lie below the line of equality of education between males and
females — that is, have greater secondary schooling rates for females than for males -. are in
Latin Ainerica.
26. The percentage of the total labor force in the clerical or office work sector could also have
been used. About one-third of all white-collar workers are clerical workers.
27. Boserup (1970) quotes from an lLO report on Uganda that 'The idea of being employed by
an outsider except in a post requiring education is distasteful both to her Ithe woman] and to
her family and husband' (p 116). In her discussion of India and Pakistan she notes that
public opinion makes a sharp distinction between work in home industries and 'literate work' which are regarded as respectable occupations, and factory work which is not regarded as
respectable for women' (p. 115).
28. When the same equation is estimated for the 25 to44 year old group slightly different
results are found. Years of schooling for adult women has a greater lmpact but the percentage
in the clerical sector has a smaller and less statistically significant impact. The interaction effect
is also smaller.
29. Boserup (1990, p. 141) suggests that as white-collar work expands for women In
developing countries manywill marry men with lower levels of education than they. Thus bluecollar workers will have wives who are white-collar workers. But as long as the wives of whitecollar workers are themselves employed En white-collar work, such work cannot be stigmatized
in the same way that blue-collar work is for married women.
30. The percentage of married African-American women who listed an occupation was
considerably higher. Almost all of them were domestic servants or agricultural laborers.
31. For comparability with the labor force construct of modem estimates only a fraction are
included to get an hours-adjusted measure.
One could also question whether the data from certain developing countries accurately
count women whose labor is often hklden from view even though they are involved in marketoriented production.. Many of the censuses on which the ILO data are based do try to count
these workers, but, as was pointed out in an earlier section, there are inconsistencies across
countries.

32. Most of the studies I cite estimate the income effect primarily from data on the income of
the husband, not from data on wealth. Thus there is an implicit constraint on the compensated
cross-substitution effect of a change of the husband's wage on the wife's time allocation. It is
assumed to be zero.
33. Secondary schooling in the context of United States history is grades 9 through 12; The
secondary schooling data for the cross section of countries include 7 through 12, or generally
ages 12 through 17 rather than 14 through 17.
34. It should be noted that these data are not yet corrected for various undercounis in both
public and private graduation data. it is unlikely that these adjustments will increase the 1910
figure to more than 15%. That for 1937 is likely to be virtually unaffected. Also, the data on
private school graduation do not exist after 1933. The entire function should be about 10%
higher after that date. These and other corrections will be made In my future work on the
history of secondary schools (for a preliminary work, see Goldin 1994). Only the data for the
non-South are used here because the South lagged in education In various ways.
30

35. These data have been provided by Anne Hill and form the basis of King and Hill (1993b).
Data in Schultz (1988, table A-2) are similar and show that Latin American countries had an
increase in secondary enrollment rates horn 14% to 44% from 1960 to 1980. See also Bustillo
(1993) who reports somewhat higher rates than King and Hill (1993b), although the end date is
1987, somewhat later than in King and Hill.
36. The enrollment rate of 14 to 17 year olds was about 20% in 1910 and 80% in 1937 In the
non-South United States. Virtually all 12 to 14 year okis were in school In the non-South even
in 1910. Assuming that there were halt as many 12 and 13 year olds as 14 to 17 year olds
and that allot the 12 and 13 year olds were in school yields the numbers given. If the
proportion of 12 and 13 year olds in school was 80% in 19101 the 1910 figure would have been
33%.
37. The 1W has documented that these policies were widespread in the teaching field across a
variety of countries (see Goldin 1990, chapter 6). It is interesting that firms and school districts
instituted these marriage bars in white-collar employment since tile societal norm against
married women working in these fields was considerably less than In manulacturing and
manual labor. The husband was made to feel the stigma of his wife's working in blue-collar
employment, but society imposed a rule against her working in white-collar employment.
38. Note that I have switched to a younger age group because the interest here is in seeing the
impact of increasing education on the jobs and labor bce participation of younger women.
The data I have currently available do not divide the occupational data by age.

39. See Table 2 for the United States data. I have excluded female farm laborers from the
United States calculation but have not for Latin America, Thus the percentage would be higher
in Latin America than the 10% to 20% given1 and more like the United States in the 19205
when it was slightly higher than. 20%.
40. The percentage of all female workers who are clerical workers was 19% in Hong Kong and
26% in Singapore in 1980, but only 6% in Korea and 5% in the Philippines. The proportion of
ail clerical workers who are women was 51% in Hong Kong and 63% In Singapore, but 33% in
Korea and 42% in the Philippines. Hong Kong and Korea also had female labor force
participation rates for the 25 to 44 year old group that exceeded those for the 45 to 59 year old
group of women, whereas in Korea the older group's participation rate Is higher.

31

REFERENCES
J. and Jong-Wha Lee. 1993. 'International Comparisons of Educational Attainment.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4349.

Barrow Robert

Boserup, Ester. 1970. Woman's Role in Economic 0evelont. New York: St Martin's Press.
Boserup, Ester. 1990. 'Economic Change and the Roles of Women,' in T.P. Schultz,ed., Economic

arid Demoqraphic Relationships in Development Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press.

Bowen, William G. and 1. Aldrich Finegan. 1969. The Economics of Labor Force Participation.
Princeton NJ: Princeton UniversityPress.
Breckinridge, Sophonisba. 1933. Women in the Twentieth Century. New York: McGraw-Hill.
B ustillo, lnes. 1993. 'Latin America and the Caribbean.' in EM. King and MA. Hill, eds., Women's

Education in Devep4nq Countries: Barriers, Benefits, and Policies. A World Bank Book.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993.

Duraisamy, Malathy. 1993. 'Women's Choice of Work and Fertility in Urban Tamil Nadu, India.'
Vale University, Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 695 (June).
Durand, John. 1975. The Labor Force in Economic Development: A Comparison of lnternational
Census Data 1946-66. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
601dm, Claudia. 1984. 'The Historical Evolution of Female Earnings Functions and Occupations,'
Explorations in Economic History 21 (January):1 -27.

Goldin, Claudia. 1986. 'The Economic Status of Women In the Early Republic: Quantitative
Evidence,' Journal of Interdisciplinary Histojy 16 (Winter):

375-404.

Claudia. 1989. 'Ufe-Cycle Labor Force Participation of Married Women: Historical Evidence
arid Implications: Journal of Labor Economics 7 (January): 20-47.

Goldin,

Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understandinq the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women.
New York: Oxford University Press.

601dm: Claudia. 1994. 'How America Graduated from High School: An Exploratory Study, 1900 to

1950,' Unpublished manuscript
Gronau, Reuben. 1977. 'Leisure, Home Production, and Work — the Theory of the Allocation of
Time Revisited.' Journal of Political Economy 85 (December): 1099-1123.
Hem, Catherine. 1986. 'The Feminisation of Industrial Employment In Mauritius: A Case of Sex
Segregation,' in R. Anker and C. Hem, eds., Sex Inequalities in Urban Employment in the Third
World. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Hill, M. Anne. 1953. 'Female Labor Force Participation in Developing and Developed Countries -Consideration of the Informal Sector,' Review of Economics and Statistics 65 (August): 459468.
32

International Labour Office. 1986. Economically_Active Population-- Estimates 1950.1980
Prolections, 1985-2025, six volumes. Geneva: l.L.O.
King, Eflzabeth M. and M. Anne Hill, ads. 1 993a. Women's Education in Developing Countries:
Barriers, Benefits, and Policies. A World Bank Book. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press.

King, Elizabeth M. and M. Anne Hill. 1 993b. 'Women's Education in Developing Countries: An
Overview.' In E.M. King and M.A. Hill, edt, Womerrs Education in Developing Countries:
Barriers, Benefits, and Policies. A World Bank Book. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1993.
Layard, Richard and Jacob Mincer, edt 1985. 'Trends in Women's Work, Education, and Family
Building' Journal of Labor Economics 3 (January1 supplement),
Lewis, W. Arthur. 1955. The Theory of Economic Growth. London: Allen and Unwin.
Mukhopadhyay. Sudhin K. 1991. 'Adapting Household Behavior to Agricultural Technology in West

Bengal, India: Wage Labor, Fertility and Child Schooling Determinants.' Yale University,
Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 631 (June).

Miller, Barbara 0. 1982. 'Female Labor Participation and Female Seclusion in Rural India: A
Regional View,' Economic Development and Cultural Change 30 (July): 777-794.

Mincer, Jacob. 1962. 'Labor Force Participation of Married Women: A Study of Labor Supply.' In
H. Gregg Lewis, ed., Aspects of Labor Economics. Universities National Bureau Committee
for Economic Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Norris, Mary E. 1992. 'The Impact of Development on Women: A Specific-Factors Analysis,'
Journal of Development Economics 38 (January): 183-201.

Psacharopoulos, George and Zaliris Tzannatos. 1989. 'Female Labor Force Participationt An
International Perspective' The World Bank Research Observer 4 (July): 187-202.

Schultz, T. Paul. 1986. 'Education Investments and Returns.' ln-Hollis Chenery and T.N.
Srinivasan, ads., Handbook of Development Economics. vol. I. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Schultz, T. Paul. 1990. 'Women's Changing Participation in the Labor Force: A World Perspective,'
Educational Development and Cultural Change 36 (April): 457-488.

Schultz, t Paul. 1991. 'International Differences in Labor Force Participation in FamIlies and
Firms,' Yale University Working Paper (July).
Summers. Robert and Alan Heston. 1991. 'The Penn World Tables (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
International Comparisons, 1950-1988,' Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (May): 327-68,
and computer diskette supplement.

Thomas, Duncan. 1990. 'Intra-household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach,' Journal
of Human Resources 25 (Fall): 635-64.
United Nations. 1990. Statistical Yearbook. Paris: United Nations.

33

United Nations. 1992. WISTAT: Women's Indicators and Statistics Spreadsheet Database for
Microcomputers (Version 2): Users Guide and Reference Manual. New Yoric United Nations.
United States Commisskner of Education. (various years) Biennial Reports ol the Commissioner
of Education. Washington D.C.: G.P.O.

34

1
MOZ

C

TZA

0.9

FIWA

E 0.8

SYiE

a)

LO].
U,
.4.

THA

GHA BEN
SEN

MW1

SWz
GLIB

ZR

0.6

FIN

OR

CM

KEN

JN

CD

E

o 0.5

TUR

.SOA
(0

FM

KR

KIN

M

IN

CD 0.3

SON

e
0
u..0.2
1
0

GY

(k

1110

cc

PER

NC

MJ

.0j
-j

NND

FRY
GIM

sq

FM

DA
AFIG

0

5.5

6.5

7.5
8.5
Log GDP/capita, (1985)

9.5

Figure 1: Labor brce participation rates for women 45 59 years old (c. 1980) and the iog

of GDP/caØa (1985,11985)

1

Mi

0aD

TA

AWA

r

C)

U,

THA

GHA

BEN

I-.

SWE

UGA

>%

SEN

C)

uwiCQO

U,

to
C

FIN

G1B

CPAW
-

ssr

lI- GIR

KEN

JFN

ZWE

BUS

4:::

wr

MS

IDN

KR

HO DU
R

BWA

U

URY

O.3

SDd

MDC
B$3A

OW
VIM

NC

MID BL

USC

cit"!°

PFL

EP MT

HND
GTIJ

2

1TO
(TA

FJI

MG

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Years of school, adult males (1980)

Fgure 2: Labor lorce participation rates for women 45 to 59 years oki and years of school br
me adult (> 25 years) male populabon, both c- 1980

12

Goods (U)

CAB

T

Time

household and market pn)duction with a non-stigma and a sbgma
Figuce 3: A model of
equiIibcilJll

3.2
TOO

2.8
ci 2.6
¼t
2.4

N

ISA

0MB

MU

SIE

SEN

MI

MO
MQZ

TAT4R

81.6
o

C)R
SONAWA

a
O1
IL

0Th

zweKEN
ION

atM

lilA

.MEX

BWA
•

lIPID.

0.8

SOt.

S9Pi3u-t

T

•

PcIv

VEN

¶pAY

-

6

7

onc •

•

0.6
0.4

I

0

1

I

I

I

I

2

3

4

5

8

9

10

11

12

Years of school, adult males (1980)

Figure 4: Ratio of male to female Secondary schoot gross enrofiment rates and years of school
for the adult (> 25 years) male population, 19806

0

0.6

C)

C
C

a

0.4
F
>'
0

a
w

0

0.2
00
-C

0

6

7

8

9

Log C3DPIcapita (1985)

Figure 5: Fraction of tout employment in white-coltar occupations (c. 1980) and the log of
GOP/capita (1985, $1985)

10

3

0
Nt

C)

d2
0

N
DNK
FRA

AL)T

to
oçu
C.)

JF

01
C

HKG

WAGLJ

MS

GTM
-

BA

-A

HNJ

P•

PER

ZWE

KQR

GA

TU•R

RWA

uA

tqo

u•u

ID."

L
L
I
I
I
I —4—
I
o o.i 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

1110

NPI.

0

I

4

L

1

1.1

1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5

log (male/female years of school)1980

Fure 6: The ratio of tamale to mate employment in the clerical sector and the log difteience
25 years), C 1980
between total years or school lor the male and female adut populations

Graduation Rate

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

Figure 7: Male, female, and total high school graduation rates in the United States (non-South
regions): 1910 to 1960

FIGURE SOURCES AND NOTES

Figure 1: Labor force participation rates for women 45 to 59 years old (c. 1980) and the log
of GDP/capita (1985, $1985)
Sources; Labor force participation rates: United Nations (1992); GDP/capita in 1985: Summers
and Heston (1991).

Notes: See Appendix 1, for the country codes; dots are given for countries that would have
overlapped with others. The centrally-planned countries and those of the Middle East (except
Israel) are omitted from the diagram. Also omitted are twenty countries for which the WISTAT
(United Nations 1992) labor force data differ substantially from those given for employment
status; see text. The regression line is a quadratic in the log of GDPlcapita.
Fiaure 2: Labor force participation rates for women 45 to 59 years old and years of school for
the adult (> 25 years) male population, both c. 1980
Sources: Labor force participation rates c. 1980: United Nations (1992); years of school for the
adult (> 25 years) male population in 1980: Barro and Lee (1993).

Note: See Appendix 1 for the country codes; dots are given for countries that would have
overlapped with others. The centrally-planned countries and those of the Middle East (except
Israel) are omitted from the diagram. France has also been excluded because of definitional
problems in measuring total years of education. Also omitted are twenty countries for which
the WISTAT (United Nations 1992) labor force data differ substantially from those given for
employment status, see text, The regression line is a quadratic in years of school.
Figure 4: Ratio of male to female secondary school gross enrollment rates and years of school
for the adult (> 25 years) male population, 1 980s

Sources: Male and female secondary school gross enrollment rates: United Nations (1990);
years of school for the adult (> 25 years) male population: Barro and Lee (1993).

Notes: Years of school for the adult male population is for c. 1980. The latest year of gross
enrollment rates from the source was used. It is generally between 1985 and 1988. See
Appendix 1 for the country codes; dots are given for countries that would have overlapped with
others. The centrally-planned countries and those of the Middle East (except Israel) are
omitted from the diagram.

Figure 5: Fraction of total employment in white-collar occupations (c. 1980) and the log of
GDP/capita (1985, $1985)
Sources: Occupational distribution: United Nations (1992); GDP/capita: Summers and Hestort
(1991).

Notes: White-collar occupations include those In the professional, managerial, clericaL and

sales categories. The % in white-collar occupations Is for c. 1980 unless data were
unavailable in which case the latest date was used (often in the mid-i 980s) or, if that were
unavailable, the c. 1970 figure was used. About 25 cases did not have data for c. 1980; See
Appendix 1 for the country codes; dots are given for countries that would have overlapped with
others. The centrally-planned countries and those of the Middle East (except Israel) are
omitted from the diagram.
35

Eklure 6: The ratio of female to mate employment in the clerical sector and the log difference
between total years of school for the mate and female adult populations (> 25 years), c. 1980

Sources: Occupational distribution: United Nations (1992); years of school for the adult (> 25
years) male population: Barro and Lee (1993).
Notes: The percentage in clerical occupations is for c. 1980 unless data were unavailable in
which case the latest date was used (often in the mid-1980s) or, if that were unavailable, the
c. 1970 ligure was used. About 25 cases did not have data for c. 1980.
Five countries (AUS, CAN, FIN, NOR. USA) with ratios of female to male employment
in the clerical sector> 3, one (AFG) with a log difference between male and female years of

education > 1.5, and two countries (ARC. URY) with negative log differences have been
excluded from the graph for reasons of clarity. See Appendix 1 for the country codes; dots are
given for countries that would have overlapped with others. The centrally-planned countries
and those of the Middle East (except Israel) are omied from the diagram.
Fjqure 7: Male, female, and total high school graduation rates in the United States (non-South
regions): 1910 to 1960

Source: U.S. Commissioner of Education (various years), see Goldin (1994)
Notes: Graduation rates are computed by dividing the number of graduates in a given year by

the number of 17-year olds. Graduation rates Indude public and private schools to 1933.
Alter 1933 the number In public schools is multiplied by 1.1. The figures do not yet correct for
underreporting in the U.S. Commissioner of Education report They also do not yet include
graduation from the preparatory departments of colleges and universities. Graduation from
high school almost always meant completion of grade 12.

36

Table 1
Married Women's Labor Force Participation Rams:
The United States, 1690 to 1980

Year
1690
1900
191O'
1920
1930

1940

White, 25-34 Years

White, 45-54 Years

2.5 Il2.9

2.6

3.2

3.1

2.3
2.6

7.7

4.Y

White, All Ages

6.5
9.8
12.5

1950

201

1960

29.8
38.5
49.3

1970
1980

7.8

11.5
18.7
21.0
26.7
36.2
56.0

10.1

22.2
38.6
46.7

53.4

'The figure in brackets is a revised estimate which includes various oMtted categories, such as boardinghouse keepers and unpaid family farm
laborers (both adjusted by hours of work), and manufacturing workers riot included in the population census. It Is likely that this figure is still an

underestimate of a female labor force datum that would be consistent with that in 1940, when the construct changed from one of 'gainful
employment'
ii Published data for the 1910 census are inconsistent with prior and subsequent data because oF a change in the labor force question that led
considerably more women on farms to listed an occupation.
'includes married, white women 55-64.
Source: 001dm (1990), tables 2.1, 2.2, and 2.9.

37

Table 2
Female Clerical Employment In the United States, 1890 to 1950

Year

% In clerical
sector of all
female workers

% female ot all
clerical sector
employment

% married of female
clerical workers

1890

3.9
6.3
11.0
21.7
22.7
22.3
27.6

14.6

4.1

24.0

3.7
n.a.
9.2
16.7

1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950

36.2

Source: Goldin (1964). table 1.

38

47.7
51.5
51.5

26.1

62.1

41.5

Appendix 1: World Bank 3-Letter Country Codes

WE Code

15 Letter Name

mm

DZA

Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland

ATG
ARG
AUS
AU?

India
Indonesia
Iran (Islamic R
Iraq

IND

Afghani Stan

AFG

Angola

AGO
ALB

Albania
Algeria
Antigua and Bar
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Ehutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussal
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon

ERS
3RD

EEL
BLZ
BEN
BTN
BOL
EWA
BRA
BRU
3CR
-

IWO

BDI
CAN

African
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Costa Rica
Cote d'Ivoire
Cuba
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Dominica
Dominican Repub
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Ethiopia

CA?

Fiji
Finland
France

Gabon
Gambia
Germany, Fed. It
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea-Djssau
Guinea
Guyana
Haiti

Malawi

CMR

Canada
Cape Verde

Central

Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea, Republic
Kuwait
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jam
Luxembourg
Madagascar

31W
EGO

Malaysia
Maldives

CPV

Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Mozambique
Myannar
Nepal
Netherlands Ant
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria

TCD
CHL
CHN
COL
COM
COG

CR1

CIV
CUB
CT?
CSK
DNX
DMA
DON
ECU
EGY
SLV

Nor-way

Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guine
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone

ETH
FJI
FIN

FRA
GAB
0MB
DEU
011k

GRC
GRD
GTM
GlIB

GIN
GUY
HTI

39

HKG
HUN
1St,

IDN
IRN
IRO
IRL
ISR
ITA

JAM
JPN
JOR
KEN
KOR
KWT
LEN
LSO
LBR•

LEY
LUX

MDC
MWI
MDV

MLI

ML?
MET
MUS
MEX
MAR
MOE
BUR

NPL
ANT
NLD
NZL
NIC
Nfl
NGA
NOR
OMN
PAl
PAN
P110

PRY
PER
PilL

POL
PRT
PRI
QAT
RON
RWA
SATJ

SEN
SiC
SLE

Singapore
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Lucia
St. Vincent/Gre
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Rep
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and To
Tunisia

Turkey

Uganda

United Arab Emi
United Rep. Tan
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire

Zambia
Zimbabwe

SGF
SLB

SCM
ZAP

ESP
LEA
LCA
VCT
SDN
STJR

SWZ
SWE
CUE
SYR
DMA
TOO
TON
TTO
TUN
TUR
UQA
ARE
TZA
GBR
USA
flY
VUT
YEN
YEll

TUG
ZAR
ZMB
ZWE

Note: AU counbies, with known codes, are listed even if the countries are excluded from the analysis for
various masons.

40

