                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ALCOHOL ADVERTISING
                          AND MOTOR VEHICLE FATALITIES




                                       Henry Saffer




                                 Working Paper No. 4708



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1994



I would like to thank Michael Grossman and Frank Chaloupka for their many helpful
comments on earlier drafts of this paper. I would also like to thank Christopher Ruhm and
Donald Kenkel for helpful comments, and Geoffrey Joyce and Patricia DeVries for their
assistance in preparing the data used in this study. This paper was funded by Grant Number
5 RO1 AA08349 from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. This paper
is part of NBER's research program in Health Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4708
                                                                                  April 1994

                                ALCOHOL ADVERTISING
                            AND MOTOR VEHICLE FATALITIES

                                           ABSTRACT

        The purpose of this paper is to empirically estimate the effect of alcohol advertising on

motor vehicle fatalities. The concept of an industry level advertising response function is

developed and other empirical issues in estimating the effects of advertising are reviewed. The

data set consists of quarterly observations, from 1986 to 1989, for 75 advertising markets in the

United States and includes 1200 observations. Since motor vehicle fatalities and alcohol

advertising are jointly determined, Two Stage Least Squares is used in the estimation. Reduced

form fatality models and advertising models are also estimated to predict the effect of changes

in the price of advertising. The regression results show that alcohol advertising has a significant

and positive effect on motor vehicle fatalities. The data and regression results are used to

estimate the effects of two policy options. The first option is to ban all broadcast alcohol

advertising. The data indicate that if a ban on broadcast alcohol advertising did not also include

bans on other types of alcohol marketing, the effect on motor vehicle fatalities might be in the

range of 2000 to 3000 lives saved per year. The second policy is the elimination of the tax

deductibility of alcohol advertising. This policy could reduce alcohol advertising by about 27

percent, reduce motor vehicle fatalities by about 2300 deaths per year and raise about $336

million a year in new tax revenue.


Henry Saffer
National Bureau of Economic Research
269 Mercer Street
Eighth Floor
New York, NY 10003
I Introduction

       Public health advocates have expressed concern that alcohol advertising may be a factor

contributing to the high number of motor vehicle fatalities in the United States. The National

Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse (1990) estimated that in 1987, over 42 percent of the

46,386 motor vehicle fatalities were alcohol involved. Advertising industry sources (Leading

National Advertisers, 1991) estimated that in 1990 alcohol producers spent over one billion

dollars on mass media advertising. Although the role of alcohol in motor vehicle fatalities is

well established and the substantial level of alcohol advertising is well documented, the link

between motor vehicle fatalities and alcohol advertising remains a controversial subject.

       The appropriateness of broadcast advertising by the alcoholic beverage industry has been

debated for some time. As part of the arrangements to end prohibition, spirits producers agreed

not to use broadcast advertising. This agreement did not extend to beer and wine producers. In

1939, the Senate Interstate Commerce Committee held hearings on a bill which would have

prohibited advertising of alcoholic beverages on the radio. According to Hernon and Ganey

(1991) those testifying in favor of the bill asserted that radio advertising contributed to motor

vehicle fatalities and that college aged young people were especially targeted for this advertising.

In 1976, the Hathaway congressional subcommittee held hearings to investigate the effects of

alcohol advertising. Also in 1985, the United States Senate Subcommittee on Alcoholism and

Drug Abuse held hearings to examine the issue of broadcast advertising of beer and wine.' In

December 1988, the issue of alcohol advertising again received national attention. At that time,




       Also, in 1978 and again in 1980, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms asked
for public comment on proposed changes to rules concerning alcohol advertising.

                                                 1
the Surgeon General of the United States, C. Everett Koop, held a two day workshop to discuss

the effect of alcohol advertising on alcohol abuse and drunk driving. In November 1991, the

Surgeon General of the United States asked the alcohol producers to voluntarily end advertising

aimed at youth. Several members of Congress have recently called for. warning statements to

accompany all alcohol advertisements. The alcohol producers claim they will stop advertising

before paying for warning statements.

       The central issue in this debate over alcohol advertising is whether the effect of alcohol

advertising is limited to brand choice or whether alcohol advertising also increases total alcohol

consumption. The position of public health advocates is that alcohol advertising is designed to

foster the belief that alcohol consumption is the key to achieving personal success. Public health

advocates contend that alcohol advertising increases total alcohol consumption, and drunk driving

and that young people are particularly vulnerable to these advertisements. The position of the

alcohol advertisers is that alcohol advertising only induces brand switching and has no effect on

overall consumptLon. The alcohol advertisers also contend that alcohol advertisements follow

a strict code, which does not allow them to depict over-consumption nor target the underaged.

       The purpose of this paper is o empirically examine the relationship between alcohol

advertising and motor vehicle fatalities. There are three novel features of this study which

distinguish it from other alcohol advertising studies. The first novel feature is the use of motor

vehicle fatalities as the outcome measure. Prior studies have examined the effects of alcohol

advertising on alcohol consumption, but no prior study has examined the effect of alcohol




                                                2
advertising directly on motor vehicle fatalities.2 The second novel feature of this study is the

use the of a market specific price of advertising.3 This variable is important in the treatment

of simultaneity bias and in estimating the price elasticity of alcohol advertising. The third novel

feature of this study is use of metropolitan areas as the unit of observation. Almost all prior

studies have used national aggregates. The use of metropolitan areas adds an important cross

sectional variance to the data. The use of metropolitan areas also increases the number of

observations in the data set to more conventionally acceptable levels than data sets used in prior

alcohol advertising studies.

2. Econometric Issues

       There have been a number of prior econometric studies of the effects of alcohol

advertising. Since these studies have generally found little evidence of any effect of alcohol

advertising, it is important to carefully consider the econometric issues involved in this type of

study. This section will outline several important specification issues and examine how these

issues have been treated in prior studies. Berndt (1991, ch.8) provides additional elaboration

of some of these issues.

2. 1 The Industry Level Response Function

        The most important econometric issue in the estimation of the effect of alcohol

advertising involves specification of the relationship between industry level alcohol advertising




       One exception to this is Saffer (1991). This study examined the effect of alcohol
advertising bans on alcohol consumption, liver cirrhosis and highway fatalities. The data were
annual national aggregates and included 17 OECD countries over 14 years.

      Other studies of advertising use a national level advertising price index. See for example
Ehrlich and Fisher (1982).

                                                3
and total alcohol consumption. The relationship between advertising and consumption is known

as a response function. Industry level alcohol advertising is defined as the sum of all brand level

advertising. An industry level response function shows the relationship between industry level

advertising and total consumption. The industry level response function, and its implications for

estimation, have not been discussed in prior econometric studies.

         Some insight into the nature of an industry response function may be found in brand level

studies of advertising response functions. Research on advertising response functions is at the

brand level since almost all advertising is done at the brand level. The consensus of brand level

research is that, ceteris paribus, advertising increases brand level sales and that these increases

are subject to diminishing returns. A study by Ackoff and Emshoff (1975) conflrms this

relationship for specific brands of beer. Brand level advertising response functions hold constant

all other determinants of brand level sales including advertising by rivals and product price. At

the   brand level, new sales induced by advertising come from either increases in market share

or increases in market size, or both.

         The industry level alcohol advertising response function is hypothesized to also be

positively sloped and subject to diminishing returns. This response function holds constant other

determinants of industry level sales including advertising by other industries and product prices.

This function assumes that industry advertising increases market size and that the effect is

subject to diminishing returns.

         A more complete discussion of the industry level response function can be made if

cigarette advertising, counteradvertising and advertising bans are also included. Cigarette

advertising studies are important since the empirical evidence provides an additional test of the



                                                 4
industry level response function concept. Counteradvertising is defined as the use of the mass

media to promote more healthy behaviors. Evidence from cigarette counteradvertising studies

is important since there are very few alcohol counteradvertising studies. Advertising bans are

important to include since bans limit media choices and can affect the average product of

aggregate advertising as well as the marginal product of advertising in non-banned media.

       Prior econometric studies of alcohol and cigarette advertising have measured the effect

of advertising expenditures, counteradvertising expenditures and advertising bans. Studies that

have investigated advertising expenditures have found little evidence that advenising increases

consumption. There have been a number of cigarette counteradvertising studies which clearly

show that counteradvertising has a negative effect on cigarette consumption.4 Studies that have

investigated advertising bans have found that advertising bans reduce consumption. These

seemingly contradictory results can be explained by the industry response function.

       The hypothesized industry level alcohol advertising response function is illustrated in

figure 1. This figure has total consumption on the vertical axis and aggregate advertising on the

horizontal axis. The function is drawn to show that industry level advertising increases

consumption and is subject to diminishing marginal product. The affect of an advertising ban

is shown as a downward shift of the response function. A ban on one or more media may

initially increase the marginal product of the remaining media. However if the industry

substitutes other media for the banned media, then the marginal product in these media will be

driven downward. This lowers the marginal product of the remaining media and lowers the

average product of aggregate advertising. Whether this function accurately characterizes the



      Saffer (1994) reviews some of these studies.

                                                5
nature of the relationship between industry level alcohol advertising and alcohol consumption

depends on the results from empirical studies.

          One category of empirical studies measure alcohol and cigarette advertising with annual

national advertising expenditures. Advertising expenditure studies of this type show no effect

of advertising on consumption. Since alcohol and cigarettes are among the most heavily

advertised consumer goods, it is likely that aggregate industry advertising is in the range of near

zero marginal returns. The range of near zero marginal returns corresponds to a range around

A1 range in figure 1. Since the function is relatively flat in this range there will be no clear

relationship between advertising and consumption found in the econometric results.

          A second category of econometric studies includes studies of alcohol and cigarette

advertising bans on consumption. The imposition of a ban on the use of one or more media will

increase the marginal product of advertising in the remaining media. However, a ban itself will

not reduce the demand for advertising and substitution to other media and other forms of

marketing is likely.5 As the remaining media are used more intensively, the marginal products

of these media will fall. This results in lower average product of a given aggregate advertising

level.6    In figures 1 and 2 this is shown as a shift downward of the industry advertising

response function. The empirical evidence from several studies of the broadcast advertising ban




          Other forms of marketing include sports and cultural event spon.sorships, consumer
novelties, in-store displays, clothing with brand names, closed circuit television in public places,
product placements, and direct marketing.

    6 A ban could also reduce consumption by signaling to individuals that the collective
perception is that alcohol has potentially adverse health consequences. An advertising ban could
thus act as a type of counteradvertising and reduce alcohol consumption even if aggregate
advertising is not reduced.

                                                 6
on cigarettes in the U.S. and international studies of alcohol and cigarette advertising bans shows

that bans reduce consumption.

       A third category         includes   studies of counteradvertising on consumption.
Couneradvertising is subject to the same diminishing marginal product as advertising. A
counteradvertising response function is illustrated in figure 2.         However, the level of
counteradvertising is relatively low so that empirtcal measurement occurs in a range where the

marginal product is significant. Studies of counteradvertising are likely to measure advertising

in a range around 0-CA1 in figure 2. In this range the function has a measurable negative slope.

Counteradvertisitig swdies find that counteradvertising is effective in reducing consumption.

        As a group, the results from these three types of advertising studies are provide empirical

evidence that the industry response function is pOsitive, subject to diminishing marginal product.

and shifts downwards the result of advertising bans. One implication of these results is that

empirical studies of industry level advertising of alcohol or cigarettes should employ advertising

data that cover a large variation in advertising. The empirical strategy used in this paper is to

employ a data set with advertising originating on the cross sectional level. Cross seCtional

studies of advertising are more likely to measure advertising in a range between 0-A1 in figure

 1 and thus reveal, if it exists, the positive relationship between advertising and consumption.

2.2 Other Econometric Issues

        The second econometric issue is simultaneity between advertising and consumption.

Some economists (see Schmalensee, 1972) argue that, for mature products, advertising budgets

are adjusted so that advertising expenditure is a fixed percentage of consumption. On the other

 hand, firms undertake advertising so that they can increase consumption. These assumptions


                                                 7
imply that advertising and consumption are jointly determined. If this is the case, OLS

estimation will be biased and a two stage estimation model is needed. A two stage estimation

model must have a structural consumption equation and structural advertising equation. The

structural advertising equation is a demand for advertising. Both structural equations must be

identified by at least one exogenous variable that does not appear in the other equation.

Identification of the consumption equation is achieved relatively easily with product price and

other variables. The advertising structural equation is harder to identify. In this study.

advertising price and the number of TV stations and radio stations are used.

       The third econometric issue in estimating the relationship between alcohol consumption

and advertising is temporal aggregation bias. Temporal aggregation bias refers to bias resulting

from the length of the tirne interval used to measure the data. Aggregation over a long interval,

such as a year, may obscure important variance in the dependent and independent variables.

Alcohol advertising expenditures follow a seasonal pattern and also vary during the year due to

expenditure pulsing schedules. Expenditure pulsing is a widely use technique of spending a

given annual budget in short intense intervals of advertising rather than maintaining a constant

level of spending throughout the year. The effects of these expenditure pulses may linger for

a month or more and result maximizing the effect of the given budget. In both the case of

seasonal spending and pulsing, annual data will not measure these important variations in

expenditure and any resulting influence on consumption.

       The last econometric issue involves the measurement of advertising. In estimation using

aggregate data, the advertising variable should measure the number of effective advertising

messages in the aggregation group. Effectiveness refers to the number of people exposed to an


                                                8
advertising message and the impact of the message.

2.3 The Evidence frprri Prior Studies

       The largest category of prior econometric studies are those which measure advertising

by advertising expenditure. These studies find no consistent effect of advertising on total alcohol

consumption. The second category uses advertising bans as the measure of advertising. To

measure the effect of a ban, a control group or period with no ban, is needed. In the case of

a time series, a long period may be needed for adjustment to a ban. In the case of an alternative

aggregate, appropriate controls for other factors are necessary. The effects of advertising bans

have been studied with interrupted time series techniques and with regression models. Some of

these studies have found that advertising effects alcohol use. A more detailed review of prior

studies including cigarette advertising studies is provided by Saffer (1994).

        In the advertising expenditure category, one group of studies relies on a short time series

of annual data from one country. The annual nature of the data and the small sample sizes are

problems. These studies generally account for non-linearity and simultaneity. Studies by

Comanor and Wilson (1974), Grabowski (1976), McGuiness (1980, 1983), Walsh (1982), Duffy

(1983, 1987), Johnson (1985) and Selvanathan (1989) are representative of this group. These

studies represent important efforts in estimating the effects of alcohol advertising. The results

are, however, weak and inconsistent.

        Three additional expenditure studies improve upon the data problems somewhat. A study

by Duffy (1991) and a study by Franke and Wilcox (1987) use quarterly data. Another study

by Bourgeois and Barnes (1979) adds some cross sectional data. These studies variously account

 for non-linearities, temporal aggregation bias but not simultaneity and do not provide any


                                                 9
evidence that advertising has any effect on consumption.

       Studies of alcohol advertising bans using interrupted time series techniques were done

by Smart and Cutler (1976) and Ogborne and Smart (1980). These studies examine the effect

of advertising bans in British Columbia and Manitoba, respectively. The ban in British
Columbia included all alcohol advertising but lasted only one year. The ban in Manitoba

included only beer advertising and was analyzed using an eight year time series. Both studies

concluded that these advertising bans had no effect on alcohol consumption. Alternatively, these

results may indicate that in a single province or country study a long time period is necessary

before there is any observable change in alcohol consumption.7

       Another study of advertising bans was      done   by Ornstein and Hanssens (1985). They

examine the effect of bans on outdoor advertising, bans on consumer novelties and bans on price

advertising on beer and spirits consumption in the United States. State data for the period 1974

to 1978 is used. The results show that states that allow price advertising and consumer novelties

have higher spirits consumption. They also find that outdoor advertising and novelties have no

effect on beer consumption while there is some evidence that price advertising increases beer

consumption.

       Saffer (1991) examines the effect of banning broadcast advertising of alcoholic beverages

on alcohol abuse.8 This study contains the first set of estimates, using international data, of the

effect of television advertising bans on alcohol abuse. The effect of a ban is difficult to estimate



     The provincial bans may not have resulted in much of a reduction in total advertising
exposure since these provinces receive a considerable amount of television programming from
the U.S.

     See also Young (1993) and Saffer (1993),

                                                10
using data from one country because the adoption of new advertising bans is an infrequent event

and requires many years for adjustment. However, an international data set can be used since

there is considerable variation in the use of advertising bans across countries. The data used in

this study are a pooled time series from 17 countries for the period 1970 to 1983. The empirical

measures of alcohol abuse are alcohol consumption, liver cirrhosis mortality rates, and motor

vehicle fatality rates. The many cultural factors which influence alcohol use are measured by

alcohol production variables and a set of country dummy variables. The empirical results show

that both alcohol advertising bans and alcohol price can have a significant effect in reducing

alcohol abuse.

3. The Empirical Model

       In this study, to test the potential endogeneity between motor vehicle fatalities and

advertising requires that the empirical model be specified as a two equation model. The first

equation is probability of a highway fatality equation and the second equation is a demand for

advertising equation.

       The demand for alcohol, by an individual, shortly before or while driving (q*) is defined

as a function of alcohol price (P), alcohol advertising (A), and other variables affecting alcohol

demand such as income, availability of alcohol, alcohol sentiment and other taste variables (x).

                                          =   q(P,   A, x)                                    1-I

       The probability of a fatal motor vehicle accident (p)     is   defined as a function of an

individual's alcohol consumption shortly before or while driving and a vector of additional

variables affecting the probability of a fatal motor vehicle accident (y).

                                          p = p(q, y)                                         1-2




                                                11
Substitution of the alcohol demand equation 1-1 into the probability of a motor vehicle fatality

equation 1-2, and aggregating across individuals, yields a reduced form probability equation.9

                                      p = p(P, A, x, y)                                         1-3

       The second equation in the empirical model is the advertising demand function. The

theoretical static oligopoly model of advertising and consumption developed by Schmalensee

(1972) provides some important insights in specifying the advertising demand function. This

theoretical model assumes that firms tend to compete with advertising rather than price which

tends to occur in the alcohol industry. It is assumed that price is set by total industry output

and each firm takes the price as exogenous. In this model, both demand for the firms's output

and its costs are functions of its advertising. The advertising demand function is derived by

differentiating the profit function with respect to advertising. Rearranging terms and aggregating

to the industry level yields:

                                      A = A(r, Q,     P, MC)                                    1-4

Equation 1-4 shows that industry advertising is a function of the price of advertising (r), industry

sales (Q), the price of alcohol and the marginal cost of producing alcohol (MC). In equation

 1-2 p is a function of q*, which means that q* is a function of p and y, which also implies that

Q is   a function of p and y. This function can replace Q in equation 1-4 which results in

equation 1-5.

                                     A = A(r, p,   P, y, MC)                                    1-5



       The industry level response function described in section 2. 1 imposes some limits on the
functional relationship described in equations 1-land 1-3. In equation 1-1, the effect of A on
q' is positive but subject to decreasing marginal product. A logistic transformation of q in 1-1
can provide this relationship. A logistic transformation of q would then appear in equation 1-2
and be replaced by a linear advertising variable in equation 1-3.

                                                 12
Equation 1-5 shows that industry level advertising is a function of the price of advertising, r,

the fatality rate, p, the product price, P, variables affecting the probability of a fatal motor

vehicle accident, y and the marginal cost of alcohol production, MC. Equations 1-3 and 1-5 are

a quasi-structural model of alcohol advertising and motor vehicle fatalities and can be estimated

by Two Stage Least Squares.

4. The Data Set

       The unit of observation in this data set is an aggregation of counties known as an Area

of Dominate Influence (AD!). The Arbitron Company (1990) has defined the AD! for all

television markets in the United States. The AD! is a well known concept in commercial

advertising research and consists of the counties within the reach of a group of television

transmitters. The original AD! definitions were established in 1965, and are updated annually.

The AD! is similar to, but somewhat larger than, a Metropolitan Statistical Area.1° The data

set consist of quarterly observations, from 1986 to 1989, for the top 75 ADIs the United States

and includes 1200 observations)' These 75 television markets account for more than 75

percent of the total population. Means and summary definitions of all variables are found in




    10 Arbitron assigns each county to only one AD!. This is only an issue for the counties
between the Baltimore and Washington DC ADIs. Arbitron assigned the following Maryland
counties to the Washington DC AD!: Allegany, Calvert, Charles, Fredrick, Montgomery,
Prince Georges, and St. Marys. Since people in these counties are exposed to some advertising
from Baltimore, there may be some under estimation of advertising exposure in the Washington
DC AD!.

      Over the four years covered by the data set there were three changes in the list of top 75
markets. However, the data set uses the set of 75 markets that were the top 75 in 1988 for all
four years. There were also some minor changes in the set of counties included in some ADIs
over the four years. These changes have been included in the aggregation and computation of
all AD! level data.

                                               13
Table 1.

4.! Fatalities Races

          Motor vehicle fatality rates are the best empirical measures of drunk driving available.'

While not all motor vehicle fatalities are the result of drunk driving, there is a strong correlation

beveen the two measures. The fatalities data was taken from the National Highway Traffic

Safety Administration's (NHTSA) Fatal Accident Reporting System. The Fatal Accident

Reporting System contains data on all fatal accidents in the US and includes the county of

occurrence and date of the accident. The population data was taken from the U.S. Department

of Commerce, Bureau of Health Professions, Area Resource File. The Area Resource File

contains data on population, by age, and by county of residence. Since the county level

population is reported for 1980 and 1984 only, quarterly population for 1986 though 1989 was

derived by extrapolation.'3 Eight fatality rates based on age and time of the accident are used

to measure drunk driving.

          The first fatality rate includes all ages and is called the total fatality rate. This rate

iflcludes the largest percentage of non-alcohol related fatalities. The three additional age specific

fatality rates focus on the effects of alcohol advertising and motor vehicle fatalities of younger

people. These age specific fatality rates are for ages 18 to 20, 21 to 24, and 25 to 34. Alcohol

involvement in motor vehicle accidents is estimated to be much higher in the younger age groups


     12
      Fatality data is preferred to accident data due to the across state variability in reporting
standards for accident data.
     ' The ARF file population data is reported by age intervals which include 15 to 19 and 20
to 24. Because of the minimum drinking age law, the age intervals of 18 to 20 and 21 to 24 are
more appropriate. The ARF data was adjusted based on state age specific population data to
reflect the alternative age breakdowns.

                                                  14
than it is in the overall population. Also, Atkin (1987) concludes that younger age groups are

more sensitive to alcohol advertising. It is, therefore, important to examine the effects of alcohol

advertising on motor vehicle fatalities for three younger age groups as distinct from the overall

population.

       To focus on alcohol involvement in motor vehicle fatalities four additional fatality rates

are defined. These four additional fatality rates are defined exactly as the first four are defined

with the exception that the fatality occurred between 12:00 a.m. and 3:59 a.m. These fatality

rates are called night fatality rates. The NHTSA estimates that a significantly higher percentage

of these fatalities are alcohol involved than fatality rates that include all hours.

       The fatality equation is specified as a logistic equation. The logistic functional form is

ideal since it constrains the fatality rate to lie between zero and one. The logistic specification

is obtained by transforming the fatality rate to ln[M/(l-M)J, where M is the fatality rate and In

is the natural logarithm. Maddala (1983) shows that weighted least squares should be used with

this logistic transformation. The weight is [nM(1—M)], where n is the relevant ADI

population.

4,2 Advertising Data

        Two companies, The Arbitron Company and LNA (Leading National Advertisers) collect

advertising data for all the major media. The Arbitron Company collects data for broadcast and

cable television advertising and LNA collects data for radio, print, and outdoor advertising.

These two companies are widely recognized in the advertising industry as the primary source

of advertising data. All of the data reported by Arbitron and LNA are independent estimates

and do not use any information from alcohol producers. Arbitron's estimates are derived from


                                                  15
monitoring each media and estimating per unit costs of advertising. LNA's estimates are derived

from monitoring specific media or from advertising wholesaler's reports. Jn 1990 the total

expenditure on alcohol advertising was 1.04 billion dollars for the media tracked by Arbitron

and LNA. Table 2 summarizes the distribution of these expenditures.

       Television advertising consists of network, syndicated, and spot advertising. Table 2

shows that network and syndicated television advertising accounts for 33 percent of all alcohol

advertising expenditures. However, network and syndicated advertising are done nationally and

have no cross sectional variation. Spot advertising accounts for 20 percent of all alcohol

advertising expenditures. Spot advertising is done locally and thus varies in each ADI,

       Radio advertising also consists of both network and spot advertising. Again, network

radio advertising is national and spot radio is local. Network radio advertising of alcohol is

trivial and spot radio accounts for 7 percent of alcohol advertising. Spirits advertising is, of

course, banned from television and radio in the United States.

       Table 2 shows that magazine advertising accounts for 27 percent of all alcohol advertising

and is primarily spirits advertising. LNA collects data for 166 magazines This advertising is

both national and regional. That is, some advertisements, in national magazines, differ by

region. Regions can include any number of urban areas, states or combinations of the two.

Magazine advertising was classified as national since the local variation is limited.

       The remaining media reported by Arbitron and LNA are outdoor, cable, and newspapers.

Outdoor advertising expenditures are reported to LNA by over 200 wholesalers in all ADIs that

permit outdoor alcohol advertising. Table 2 shows that outdoor advertising represents five

percent of a!! alcohol advertising. Outdoor advertising varies by location. Arbitron continuously



                                               16
monitors six cable networks. This programming is shown nationally and has no local variation.

Local cable is not monitored. Table 2 shows that cable advertising represents four percent of

al alcohol advertising. LNA measures daily and Sunday newspaper alcohol advertising space

and projects expenditures for the top 36 and 125 ADIs, respectively. Table 2 shows that this

advertising represents three percent of all alcohol advertising.

       In this data set, the media used to measure alcohol advertising are spot television, spot

radio, and outdoor. These media represent 91 percent of all expenditure with local origin. The

remaining nine percent is newspaper advertising. Spot television advertising data consists of

number of minutes, number of advertisements and dollar expenditures on beer and wine

advertising. These data are reported by quarter and by AD!. Arbitron records all programming

from all television stations in the top 75 ADIs. These tapes are edited and a log of all

commercial activity is created. Advertising expenditures are estimated using prices based on

station ratings, data from the stations, and data from advertising agencies. The top 16 ADIs are

monitored continuously and the remaining 59 ADIs are sampled one random week per month.

Spot radio data and outdoor data are reported to LNA by advertising wholesaler Organizations.

For both media, these data are advertising expenditures, by ADI, and include brand detail.

       The data that is actually available are seconds of spot TV advertising, spo TV prices,

spot radio expenditures, and outdoor expenditures. Advertising could be measured with either

advertising expenditures or advertising messages. Messages have the advantage of not being

dependent on local advertising prices. To define a message variable it is necessary to convert

radio messages and outdoor messages to a TV equivalent message. This conversion can be done

by assuming that the relative price of a message in each media is equal to relative expected


                                                17
number of people exposed to the message. Let:

       A=     tv advertising in seconds
       A, = radio advertising in seconds
       Ab = outdoor advertising in number of locations per time unit
          = price per second of tv advertising
          = price per second of radio advertising
          = price per outdoor location per time unit


and let P = OrP, and P = ebpb where e, measures the impact of a second of TV time

relative to a second of radio time. Effective radio messages are Aj01. The variable °b measures

the impact of a second of TV time relative to an outdoor location per unit time. Effective

outdoor messages are Ab/Ob. If A measure total effective messages then, A = A1 + A,I0, +

Ab/Ob. Since A. can be multiplied by P/P, and i/Os replaced by PrJPr. and "°b replaced by

b'r., then A = AP + ArPJPr. + AbPb/Pr.

4.3 Alcohol Price

       The alcohol price was computed with data from the American Chamber of Commerce

Research Association (ACCRA). These price data are reported on a quarterly basis for over 200

cities and towns in the United States. In cases where the ACCRA reports a price for more than

one community within a AD!, the prices were simply averaged. If an AD! had missing data,

the price data were estimated by interpolation between the available quarters.'4 The ACCRA

data are for specific brands of beer, wine and spirits and excludes sales taxes and deposits. The

beer price data is for a six-pack of 12 ounce containers of Schlitz or Budweiser. The wine price




     14 A few of the 75 ADIs were not reported at all, or were seldom reported, by the ACCRA.
In these cases a nearby metropolitan area, in the same state, with similar characteristics was used
as a proxy. The missing ADIs are Rochester NY, Providence RI, Flint MI, Little Rock AK,
Grand Rapids MI, and Detroit Ml.

                                                18
data is for a 1.5 liter bottle of Paul Masson Chablis. The spirits price data was the price of a

750 ml bottle of Seagram's 7-Crown until the fourth quarter of 1988 when it switched to the

price of a one litter bottle of J&B Scotch. To keep the series consistent, first the price of J&B

was multiplied by .75 to adjustment for container size. Next, the ratio of the price of Seagram's

7-Crown to the price of J&B was computed, for each AD!, using data from the third and fourth

quarter of 1988. The J&B price was divided by this ratio to project the price of Seagram's 7-

Crown.

       The alcohol price variable is a weighted average of the price of a unit of pure alcohol for

each of the three beverages. To convert to price per liter the beer price was divided by 2.56,

the wine price was divided by 1.5 and the spirits price was divided by .75. Next, to convert

the price per liter to a price per liter of pure alcohol the beer price was multiplied by .04, the

wine price was multiplied by .11, and the spirits price was multiplied by .41. The weighted

average price was constructed using weights of .536, . 137 and .327, for beer, wine and spirits

respectively. These weights represent the proportion of total alcohol consumed in each of the

three beverages. The alcohol percent and consumption weights are for 1986 and were taken

from the Brewers Association of Canada's International Survey of Alcoholic Beverage Taxation

and Control Policies. The same weights are used for all 16 quarters in the data set.

4.4 Consumer Price Index

         All variables measured in dollar terms are adjusted for AD! and temporal price level

changes. Adjustment for cross sectional price level differences is more important when using

ADI level data than when using state level data. Price level differences tend to be related to

ADI size. State level data tends to average out ADIs of different sizes and thus there is more



                                                19
between ADI price level variation than interstate price level variation. The consumer price

index used in this study was computed using the monthly national CPI for all urban consumers

reported in Business Conditions Digest, which is published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis,

US Department of Commerce, and the local price index reported by the ACCRA. The monthly

CPI was averaged together to create a quarterly CPI for the US and adjusted such that the first

quarter of 1986 is the base period. The ACCRA reports a quarterly cost of living index for over

200 cities and towns in the US. The ACCRA cost of living index is based on over sixty

categories of consumer purchases and uses expenditure weights based on government survey data

of expenditures of mid-management households. The ACCRA cost of living index has no time

variation. The cost of living index used in this study was computed by multiplying the ACCRA

index for each quarter by the national CPI for each quarter.

4.5 Other Independent Variables'5

       Real per capita personal income is also included in all estimated equations. County level

data on nominal income were taken from the Area Resource File.'6 Population weights were

used to create an ADI level income variable. This variable should be positively related to the

demand for alcohol, as well as to the demand for health and the quality and condition of motor

vehicles. Thus, the predicted effect of income on fatality rates is ambiguous.




    ' State data is difficult to use since a number of ADIs cross state boundaries. Data for the
cross state ADI's would have to be constructed as population weighted aggregates of the states
included in the AD!.

     16 The growth rate of income for each ADI between 1987 and 1988 was computed and this
 rate was used to project 1989 income by ADI. This is a good estimate since, on a national
 level, the rate of growth in per capita disposable income from 1987 to 1988 was 3% and from
 1988 to 1989 was 3.3%.

                                              20
      The median years of schooling, by county, for persons 25 or older was taken from the

Area Resource File.     This variable was included since it may be correlated with health

education. The data was available on a county level only for 1970 and 1980. Data for the

sample period was estimated by linear extrapolation.

       The unemployment rate, by county, for persons 16 or older was taken from the Ai:

Resource File. This variable was included since it may be correlated with stress related alcohol

consumption or with income. The data was available on a county level, on an annual basis for

each of the sample years. Data for the quarterly periods were estimated by interpolation.

       Also included are two demographic variables. These are the percentage of the ADI

population that is black and the percent of the ADI population that is Hispanic. These variables

were computed using population data from the Area Resource file. They are included because

they capture any ethnic differences in drinking and driving practices.

       A set of variables measuring religious adherence are used in several fatality regressions.

Adherents are defined as individuals that participate regularly in the activities of their sect. The

four religion variables that are included are the percent of the ADI population that are adherents

in the Mormon Church, Southern Baptist Church, Catholic Church, and other Christian and

Jewish religions. These variables are included since individuals that choose to be active in their

religious sect probably also choose a more temperate lifestyle than non-adherents. The Mormon

and Southern Baptists Churches specifically discourage alcohol consumption. The data come

from Churches and Church Membership in the United States, 1990 and 1980, published by the

Glenmary Research Center. The Glenmary Research Center estimated the number of religious

adherents, by county for 133 separate sects. The 1980 data and 1990 data were used to


                                                21
construct a quarterly growth rate which was then used to estimate the number of adherents by

quarter. These estimates were aggregate to the ADI level and divided by the ADI population.

       A set of dummy variables which measure the size of the AD! and a variable which

measures the percent of the population residing in urban communities have been defined. These

variables were included because larger and denser cities have tower average driving speeds

which leads to less fatality associated with motor vehicle accidents. The dummy variables were

computed using population data from the Area Resource file. The variable called Large City

is equal to one if the AD! is over 5 million people and the variable called Medium City is equal

to one if the ADI is less than 5 million and greater than 1.3 million people. The excluded third

variable is ADIs less than or equal to 1.3 million people. The Percent Urban variable is the

percent of each county that is living in incorporated communities of over 2500 people or living

in unincorporated communities of over 50,000 people. These percentages were aggregated to

the county level using population weights.

       The advertising demand function includes two variables which control for market size.

These are the number of TV stations, from Arbitron, and the number of radio stations, from

the World Radio Handbook, in each ADI. These which are included since more stations wilt

 result in more messages in each AD!. The advertising demand curves also include the price of

 spot television advertising which comes from Arbitron.

        Also included in a number of regressions are a set of 9 regional dummy variables. The

 9 regions are regions used by the Census. These dummies are equal to 1 if an AD! is in the

 region and otherwise is zero. These regional dummies can control for regional variations that

 are otherwise unobserved.



                                               22
       Finally, the time dummies are included in the regressions as controls for temporal

variation in unmeasured variables and other time trends. The time dummies are a set of 15

dichotomous variables for each of the quarters from second quarter 1986 through the last quarter

of 1989. The time dummies are included in all regressions.

5. Regression Models

       The first empirical problem is the potential endogeneity between advertising and motor

vehicle fatality. This possibility is examined with a Wu-Hausman test for correlation between

the error terms in the fatality equation and the advertising equation. Advertising cannot be

treated as exogenous if these error terms are correlated. This test can be performed by first

regressing advertising on all the exogenous variables in the structural model and saving the

predicted value from this regression. Next, fatality is regressed on all exogenous determinants

of fatalities, alcohol advertising, and predicted alcohol advertising. The null hypothesis is that

the coefficient on the predicted advertising variable is equal to zero. Advertising cannot be

treated as exogenous if the null hypothesis is rejected. The test was performed for the fatality

 rate defined for all ages. The predicted value of advertising was significant at the one percent

 level. The null hypothesis of exogeneity is, therefore, rejected and advertising and fatalities are

 treated as endogenous.

        Tables 3 through 6 present the results from Two Stage Least Squares estimation of 16

 alternative specifications of the motor vehicle fatality equation. The columns in each table

 represent alternative age definitions of the fatality rate. These four tables are arranged as two

 sets of two tables. Tables 3 and 5      present   the results from regressions using fatality rates

 defined over all hours and tables 4 and 6 present the results from regressions for night fatality


                                                   23
rates. The regressions in tables 3 and 4 include independent variables which measure economic

and demographic conditions and are called demographic variable models. The regressions in

tables 5 and 6 include only the endogenous advertising variable, alcohol price, city size

dummies, regional dummy variables and time dummies. The regional dummies are included to

control factors which vary by region such as highway conditions. These models are called Fixed

Effects models and are estimated as a test of robustness with respect to variable specification.

       The regression results provide evidence that alcohol advertising increases motor vehicle

fatalities. The endogenous advertising variable is positive in all 16 regressions and significant

at the 5 percent level in 13 regressions. The advertising variable is also marginally significant

in the other three regressions. In the age specific regressions, the magnitude of the advertising

coefficients increase with age. These age specific results seem to suggest that for people under

35, the effects of alcohol advertising on motor vehicle fatalities may cumulate with age. This

may reflect both a sensitivity to alcohol advertising and access to a motor vehicle. The

magnitude of the advertising coefficients are larger in the night mortality regressions than in the

all hours regressions.    This reflects the greater degree of alcohol involvement in night

mortalities. The magnitudes of the advertising coefficients in the Fixed Effects models are

smaller than the corresponding regressions in the Demographic models. This may reflect the

fact that the dummies in Fixed effects models account for all cross sectional only, and time only

variation in the dependent variable. This leaves only the variance in the dependent variable

which is both cross sectional and time varying to be explained by an independent regressor such

as advertising.

       The elasticity of motor vehicle fatalities with respect to advertising is 13*AI, where   is



                                               24
the alcohol advertising variable coefficient and A1 is the mean of the advertising variable. Using

the All Age regressions in tables 3 and 5 this calculation results in an elasticities of -. 11 and -

.06, respectively.

       In tables 3 to 6 alcohol price is generally negative and significant. The price of alcohol

is the consumption weighted average of the price of the three component beverages. The

weighted average price of alcohol is a good empirical variable since it represents all three

beverages but does not create the collinearity problems that occur when all three beverage prices

are entered separately. This variable only represents the money price of alcohol. The full price

of alcohol also includes search costs which are of particular importance to people under the legal

drinking age.

       The regression results can be used to estimate the elasticity of motor vehicle fatalities

with respect to beer taxes. Using the results in for the all age regressions in tables 3 and 5, the

elasticity of motor vehicle fatalities with respect to the price of pure alcohol is between .19 and

.15. These elasticities can be used o approximate the elasticity of motor vehicle fatalities with

respect to beer taxes. Since the beer tax is about 20 percent of the purchase price of beer, the

tax on alcohol in beer is also about 20 percent of the purchase price of alcohol in beer. The

elasticity of motor vehicle fatalities with respect to beer taxes is thus about .04 to .03. This

value is similar to those found in other studies (i.e. Chaloupka, Saffer, and Grossman, 1993)

involving beer taxes and motor vehicle fatalities. For a given percentage change, alcohol price

has a bigger impact than alcohol advertising on motor vehicle fatalities.

        Since both health and alcohol are normal goods, the effect of income on alcohol demand

is uncertain. However, in tables 3 and 4, real income is general negative and significant. This


                                                25
suggests that the impact of income on health exceeds that of income on alcohol consumption and

drunk driving.    This result is consistent with other studies (i.e. Chaloupka, Saffer, and

Grossman, 1993) of motor vehicle fatalities using state level data.

        In tables 3 and 4, the religion variables, Percent Mormon, Percent Southern Baptist,

Percent Catholic, and Percent other religions are all generally negative and significant. These

relationships are the weakest for Southern Baptists and the 18-20 year old group. This suggests

that the Southern Baptist prohibition against drinking may lead to less public drinking and more

private drinking, such as in cars. The 18-20 year old group may be least influenced by the

religious prescriptions of their elders.

        The ADI size variables, Medium City and Large City and Percent Urban are proxies for

highway condiiions. Larger cities generally have more traffic congestion which reduces average

speeds and reduces the probability of a fatal motor vehicle accident. The size variables are

negative and significant in all specifications for both the Demographic Models and the Fixed

Effects Models. The percent urban is only included in the Demographic Models and is negative

and significant in six of the eight regressions. The coefficient of the Large City variable is

always larger. in absolute value, than the Medium City coefficient. These results support the

theory that density increases traffic congestion which reduces speed which reduces motor vehicle

fatalities.

        Schooling may be a proxy for health knowledge which would have a positive effect on

the demand for health. An increase in the demand for health would reduce the demand for

alcohol and reduce the motor vehicle mortality rate. Schooling is negative and significant in all

specifications which confirms this expectation.



                                              26
        Both minority variables are generally significant but of opposite signs. The percent

Black is negative and the percent Hispanic is positive. These results may indicate an important

cultural distinction in drinking and driving behavior between the two groups.

        The unemployment rate is generally negative and marginally significant. Unemployment

could increase mortality if it resulted in more drinking due to stress or more leisure time.

Alternatively unemployment could reduce fatalities if it resulted in less drinking away from

home. The negative effect apparently indicates that the unemployed either drink less or at least

drink at home.

        The time dummies are included in both the Demographic Models and the Fixed Effects

Models and are almost always significant and positive. They show a time pattern of higher

fatalities in the third and fourth quarters with the lowest fatalities in the first quarter. This

parallels the time pattern of alcohol consumption and lags the pattern of alcohol advertising by

one quarter.'7

        Table 7 presents the results from two reduced form highway fatality models and two

reduced form advertising models. The logistic highway fatality rate used is based on fatalities

for all ages and all times of the day fatality rate. All four equations are estimated with OLS

using the weight derived for the above logistic fatality rate. These models are included to




    '  Because of this lag pattern, a lag specifications of all the models were also estimated. In
these specifications, advertising was lagged one quarter, and all observations for first quarter of
1986 were dropped. In these models current mortality was regressed on current values of all
variables except advertising, which was from the prior quarter. The results from these models
are not reported since they were almost identical to the results that are reported.

                                               27
estimate the effect of the price of advertising on highway fatalities and advertising.'8 The first

and third model in table 7 use the Demographic model variables while the second and third

models also use the regional dummies from the Fixed effects models. The overall results in

Table 7 conform to expectations. The price of advertising is negative and significant in all

specifications. The elasticity of highway fatalities with respect to the advertising price is abOut

.05 and own price elasticity of advertising is about .27.

6. Conclusions

       Based on the regression results, alcohol advertising is found to be a contributing factor

in the high level of motor vehicle fatalities in the United States. While advertising is significant,

it is less important than alcohol price as a determinant of motor vehicle fatalities. Using two

stage least squares, both Demographic and Fixed Effects Models were estimated. Reduced form

advertising demand models were also estimated. These models show that the demand for

advertising is negatively related to the price of advertising.

       The likely effects of two advertising policy initiatives designed to limit alcohol

advertising can be estimated using the data and econometric results. The first policy is an

extension of the voluntary ban on broadcast advertising to include beer and wine.'9             The



       The theoretical advertising equation includes variables measuring the marginal cost of
alcohol production and variables other than alcohol which affect highway fatality rates. The
marginal cost of alcohol production can be assumed constant across the country and thus falls
in the intercept. The other variables which affect highway fatalities are proxied by the included
variables. An omitted variable bias would exist to the extent that the included variables do not
act as good proxies.

    U The effect of a large reduction in advertising must account for the non-linearity of the
functional form. To estimate this effect first subtract the logistic fatality equation with
advertising at level A0 from the logistic fatality equation with advertising at level A,.
Advertising level A, is the mean level of advertising in the data set and A is a much smaller

                                                 28
second policy is the elimination of the tax deductibility of all alcohol advertising expenses.

          A ban on broadcast advertising of beer and wine is probably the most discussed option

for reducing alcohol advertising. The coefficients from the all age regressions in table 3 and

table 5 can be used to compute the elasticity of highway fatalities with respect to advertising.

Since these elasticities were estimated with spot data, it is assumed that the effect of national

advertising on fatalities is the same. These elasticities can be used to estimate an upper bound

effect of banning alcohol advertising. The estimated effect is an upper bound because these

elasticities assume no substitution to other media. The sum of local and national broadcast

advertising is about 200 percent of the advertising represented by the advertising variable. The

elasticity predicts that a complete ban on broadcast alcohol advertising could save about 10,000

to 5,000 lives per year!° As lower bound, if a ban on broadcast advertising resulted in
complete substitution to other media and no reduction in the marginal product of advertising in

other media, then the ban would have no effect at all.

          An estimate of the amount of media substitution that might follow a ban on beer and wine

broadcast advertising would help narrow the range between the upper and lower bound

 estimates. Since broadcast advertising for spirits is banned while broadcast advertising of beer

 and wine is not banned, it is possible to estimate the effect of the spirits ban on total spirits




 level. Taking the anti-log of both sides, the elasticity is (A1/A0) - 1.


     20
         Saffer (1991) estimates the effect of a ban on beer and wine broadcast advertising on
 highway fatalities using international data. The research concludes that a ban on beer and wine
 advertising could reduce highway fatalities by about 23 percent which would be about 10,000
 lives in the US. This estimate implicitly assumes no media substitution.

                                                 29
advertising. This estimation is based on two assumptions. First, a number of researchers agree

that for mature products, advertising expenditures are a fixed percent of sales revenue. The

second assumption is that this percentage is for beer and wine about the same as for spirits.

Under these assumptions, the ratio of advertising expenditures on beer and wine advertising to

advertising expenditures on spirits would be about the same as the ratio of consumer

expenditures on beer and wine to consumer expenditures on spirits. In the United States, total

expenditures on beer and wine are about 3 times the expenditures on spirits.2' Table 2 shows

that the advertising expenditures on beer and wine are also about 3 times advertising
expenditures on spirits. This suggests that the level of spirits advertising is about what would

be expected if spirits advertisers were allowed to use broadcast media. Since spirits producers

have substituted other media, it is likely that if beer and wine producers were banned from

broadcast media, they would also substitute other media.

        An extension of a broadcast ban to include a ban in all media would eliminate media

substitution. The Brewer's Association of Canada's international survey of 23 countries reports

that about half the countries that ban TV advertising of beer, wine or spirits have not extended

the ban to all media. This survey data suggests that a complete media ban might be difficult to

legislate. Even if a complete media ban were passed, it would not exclude other types of

marketing. Other types of marketing include sports and cultural event sponsorships, consumer

 novelties, in-store displays, clothing with brand names, closed circuit television in public places,

 product placements, and direct marketing. It might be very difficult to legislate against all forms




       Data is from Alcoholic Beverages Taxation and Control Polices, 8th edition, published by
 the Brewers Association of Canada (1992).
                                                 30
of marketing.

       These arguments suggest that if a ban on broadcast advertising of beer and wine were

enacted it would not include other media and would result in considerable substitution to other

media. However, the concentration of a given advertising budget into less media will reduce

the average product of aggregate advertising. Also a broadcast advertising ban could reduce

consumption by signaling a collective concern about potential adverse consequences of alcohol.

The implication of these arguments is that the effect of a ban would be closer to the lower bound

estimate of no effect than to the upper bound estimate of 5,000 to 10,000 lives. This could put

the effect of a ban on only broadcast alcohol advertising in the range of 2000 to 3000 lives saved

per year.

       The elimination of alcohol advertising as a cost which reduces taxable corporae income

is another policy option.22 Since the corporate income tax rate is 46 percent, elimination of

the tax deductibility of alcohol advertising costs would raise the price of advertising by about

100 percent. Since the elasticity of highway fatalities with respect to the price of advertising is

.05, a 100 percent increase in the price of advertising would reduce fatalities by about 2300 per

year. Elimination of the tax deductibility of alcohol advertising would also result in new tax

revenue. Since the alcohol advertising price elasticity is about .27, a 100 percent increase in

price would reduce alcohol advertising by about 27 percent. Total alcohol advertising would be

reduced from about $1 billion per year to about $730 million per year. The new taxes which




      Industry concern that this option might be enacted has resulted in creation of the
Advertising Tax Coalition and the State Advertising Coalition. In 1992 these organizations
helped to defeat an amendment in the US House of Representatives and 14 state initiatives o tax
advertising.
                                                31
would be paid if this $730 million was not allow as a cost would be about $336 million per year.




                                               32
            Figure 1




a             c1     cQ,TER&ovrSpG

    I   I            I       I       I
               313




             Figure      2
                                             Table 1
                               Definitions and Means of Variables'
Total Fatalities Rate     Motor vehicle fatalities, for all occupants, divided by population. This
                          variable is defined for all ages, ages 18 to 20, ages 21 to 24, and
                          ages 25 to 34. The mean fatality rates for each group are,
                          respectively, p=.0000S, p.00012, p.0001O, p.OOOO6
Advertising                Sum of alcohol advertising for spot tv, spot radio, and outdoor in tv
                           equivalent message units. p.48,l26.22
Alcohol Price              Weighted average price of a unit of alcohol in beer, wine and spirits.
                           Weights are percentage consumption of alcohol in the three
                           beverages. Price is divided by ADI specific CPI. p 110.47

 Real Income               Personal income for the counties in the AOl. Income is weighted by
                           the percent of the AOl the county population represents. Income is
                           divided by the AOl specific CPI. p= 14674.23

 Medium City               ADI with populations greater than 1 .3 million and less than or equal
                           to 5 million. p.57
 Large City                ADI with over 5 million population. p.O8
 Schooling                 Median years of schooling for persons over 25. p 1 2.3
 Unemployment Rate         The unemployment rate for the civilian labor force aged 1 6 or older.
                           Data are reported as a percentage times 10. 9—59.81
 Percent Catholic          Percent of the AOl that are Catholic. p'l8,23
 Percent Mormon            Percent of the ADI that are Mormon. p 1.56
 Percent Southern          Percent of the AOl that are Southern Baptists. p—8.42
 Baptist
 Percent Other             Percent of the AOl that are adherents of religions other than Catholic,
 Adherents                 Mormon or Southern Baptist. 9—24. 19
 Percent Urban             The percent of the AOl population that lives in towns of at least 2500
                           people or in areas contiguous to cities of at least 50.000 people.
                           p=72.l6
 Percent Black             Percent of ADI that self-identify as Black. p—il .36
 Percent Hispanic          Percent of ADI that self-identify as Hispanic. 9—6.31

 Advertising Price         Weighted average real price of alcohol advertising on TV, radio and
                           outdoor media. pl7.51
 TV Stations                Number of TV Stations in each ADI. p4.57
 Radio Stations             Number of Radio Stations in each AOl. 9—38.3

- Data is for the top 75 ADIs (metropolitan areas) in the United States for the first quarter 1986
to the last quarter of 1989.




                                                34
                                        Table 2

        Advertising Expenditure in Millions of Dollars by Media and Beverage 1990

                   Beer and   Spirits    Total        As % of      As % of      As %
                   Wine                  Alcohol      National     Local        of all
                                                      Media        Media        Media
Network and        347.30                 347.30       .52                      .33
Syndicated TV
Cable              37.00                  37.00        .06                      .04
Network Radio      5.00                   5.00         .01                          0

Magazines          45.60      232.20      277.80       .42                      .27
Total National     434.9      232.20      667.10       1.00                     .64
Media


Spot TV            210.40      1.30       211.70                    .56         .20
Spot Radio         72.40      2.00        74.40                     .20         .07
 Outdoor           20.00       36.50      56.50                     .15         .05

 Newspapers          13.90     18.90      32.80                     .09         .03
 Total Local       316.70      58.70      375.40                    1.00            .36
 Media


 Total of All      751.70      290.90     1042.60
 Media


* Source: LNA 1991




                                           35
                                          Table 3
                                        All Fatality
                                     Demographic Models

                           AllAges             Age lStoZO   A8e21 to2.4     Age25D34
Intercept                  -6.051              -5.634       .3.745          .3.427
                           (13.27)             (7.74)       (3.05)          (533)
Advertising                0.0000023           0.0000024    0.0000031       0.0000033
                           (5.52)              (3.53)       (4.61)          (5.56)
Alcohol Price              -0.0018             -0.00033     -0.003          .0.0019
                           (2.43)              (0.30)       (2.57)          (1.1$)
Percent Black              -0.0017             -0.0061      .0.0037         .0.0041
                           (1.65)              (3.72)       (2.26)          (2.fl)
Percent Hispanic           0.0064              0,0047       0.006           0.005
                           (8.11)              (3.65)       (4.71)          (4.45)
Real Income                -0000027            -0.000021    .0.000017       .0.000039
                           (4.43)              (2.16)       (1.69)          (4.56)
Percent Catholic           -0.011               0.0076      .0.009          -0.011
                           (14.05)             (6.17)       (7.37)          (10.1$)
Percent Southern Baptist   -00017              0.0011       -0.0041         -0.005
                           (1.50)              (0.53)       (2.21)          (3.07)
Percent Mormon             -0.0025             .0.0031      .0.0065         -0.0044
                           (2.13)               (1.67)      (3.13)        - (2.41)
Percent Other Adherents    -0.010               -0.010      .0.012          -0.011
                           (7.18)               (4.75)      (5.35)          (5.52)
Percent Urban              -0.0026              -0.0058     .0.0044         -0.0000039
                           (1.80)               (3.80)      (2.81)          (0.003)
Medium City                -0.119              .0.191       -0.205          -0.181
                           (6.19)              (576)        (6.11)           (6.15)
Large City                 -0.495              -0.602       .0.752           .0.666
                           (10.84)             (8.11)       (10.17)          (10.34)
Schooling                  -0.022              -0.019       -0.033          -0.041
                           (6.2%)              (3.21)       (5.63)          (1.16)
Unemployment               -0.0009             -0.001%      -0.0015         -0.00032
                           (1.70)              (1.25)       (1.77)          (0.42)
Time Dummy.862             0.135               0.265        0.175           0.141
                           (3.29)              (3.99)       (2.67)          (2.41)
Time Dummy-863             0.263               0.446        0.331           0.291
                           (6.82)              (1.16)       (5.75)          (5.2$)
Time Dumsny-864            0.203               0.212        0.195           0.221
                           (5.29)              (4.30)       (3.17)          (4.15)
Time Dummy-871             0.0042              .0.049       0.0036          0.011
                           (0.10)              (0.70)       (0.034)         (1.32)
Time Duminy-872            0.087               0.172        0.112           0.09%
                           (2.01)              (2.43)       (1.62)          (1.4$)
Time Dummy-873             0.166               0.298        0.133           0.166
                           (3.78)              (4.20)       (1.17)          (2.66)
Time Dummy-874             0.202               0.204        0.130           0.143
                           (3.1$)              (3.2%)       (2.04)          (2.54)
Time Dummy-881             0.025               0.090        0.062           0.0041
                           (0.60)              (1.31)       (0.94)          (0.061)
Time Dununy-882            0.063               0.110        0.064           0.061
                           (L47)               (2.95)       (0.90)          (1.10)




                                               36
Time Dummy-883                           0.198                  0.422      0.207     0.226
                                         (4.79)                 (6.40)     (3,13)    (3.85)
Time Dummy-884                           0.21$                  0.362      0.124     0.175
                                         (5.55)                 (5.65)     (1.95)    (3.07)
Time Dummy-891                           0.050                  0.082      0.021     0.067
                                         (1.22)                 (1.1$)     (0.30)    (1.14)
Time ummy-892                            0.078                  0.266      .0.0023   0.046
                                         (1.90)                 (4.01)     (0.034)   (0.79)
Time Dummy-893                           0.216                  0.408      0.213     0.225
                                         (5,53)                 (6.42)     (3.33)    (4.03)

Time Dummy-894                           0.194                  0.193      TT$       0.210
                                         (4.95)                 (2.92)     (1.62)    (3.76)
F-Staiisics                              59.575                 31.996     27.929    38.391
                                         0.3862                 0.4293     0.3954    0.4749
Adjusled R-Square
   Notc:      Absolute value of asymptotic 1-SUUSLICS is in paLCOUICSC$.




                                                                37
                                           Table 4
                                        Night Fatality
                                      DemographIc Models

                           All Ages             Age 18 to 20   Age 21 to 24   Age 25 to 34
                           -7.673               -5.655         -4.574         -4.283
Intercept
                           (11.51)              (5.41)         (4.31)         (4.39)
                           0.0000038            0.0000031      0.0000031      0.0000039
Advenising
                           (6.28)               (3.12)         (3.27)         (4.63)
                           -0.0018              -0.0022        -0.0022        -0.00024
Alcohol Price
                           (1.68)               (1.32)         (1.29)         (0.16)
Percent Black              -0.0038              -0.004         .0.0064        -0.0069
                           (2.51)               (1.67)         (272)          (3.23)
                           0.0018               -0.0021        0.00057        -0.0016
Percent Hispanic
                           (1.54)               (1.10)         (0.31)         (0.99)
Real Income                4.000017             -0.000019      -0.0000034     .0.000025
                           (1.96)               (1.40)         (0.23)         (2.07)
Percern Catholic           -0.0044              -0.00041       -0.004         -0.0041
                           (4.02)               (0.24)         (2.39)         (3.09)
Percent Southern Baptist   4.0014               0.00079        -0.0066        -0.0073
                           (0.81)               (0.30)         (2.50)         (3.11)
Percent Mormon             4.0053               0.00086        -0.010         -0.0051
                           (2.70)               (0.30)         (3.13)         (2.06)
Percent Other Adherents    4.0082               -0.0026        -0.0059        -0.0048
                           (4.18)               (0.81)         (1.99)         (1.75)
Percent Urban              4.00046              -0.0024        -0.0034        0.0025
                           (0.33)               (1.01)         (1.62)         (1.29)
Medium City                -0.183               -0.333         -0.211         .0.232
                           (3,97)               (6.87)         (6.14)         (lU)
                           -0.754               -0.966         -0.967         -0.130
Large City
                           (11.36)              (8.85)         (9.38)         (9.07)
                           -0.027               .0.029         -0.037         -0.051
Schooling
                           (5.16)               (3.55)         (4.30)         (6.99)
                           0.00073              -0.00023       -0.0031        0.0019
Unemployment
                           (0.95)               (0.19)         (2.60)         (1.13)
                           0.184                0.161          0.24.8         0.058
Time Durnmy-862
                           (3.03)               (167)          (2.63)         (0.69)
Time Dunimy-863            0.438                0.376          0.419          0.29$
                           (7.80)               (4.24)         (4.71)         (3.13)
Time Dummy-864             0.298                0.255          0.297          0.200
                           (3.27)               (2.86)         (3.39)         (2.55)
Time Dummy-871             0.110                -0.074         0.065          0.181
                           (l.84)               (0.71)         (0.69)         (2.26)
                           0.08$                0.0037         0.102          .0.003
Time Dummy-872
                           (1.37)               (0.036)        (1.00)         (0.034)
Time Dumxny-813            0.182                0.l76          0.161          0.069
                           (2.82)               (1.69)         (1.59)         (0.76)
                           0.212                0.101          0.237          0.172
Time Dummy-814
                           (363)                (1.08)         (2.62)         (2.13)
                           0.072                -0.063         0.108          0.028
Time Dummy-881
                           (1.18)               (0.62)         (1.13)         (0.34)
Time Dummy-882             0.110                p.p37          pJ99           0.076
                           (1.69)               (0.35)         (1.95)         (0.84)




                                                38
Timc Dummy-883                             0.2)9                   0.280      0.217     0.112
                                           (4.57)                  (2.93)     (2.27)    (2.15)
Time Dummy-884                             0.234                   0.242      0.222     0.130
                                           (3,98)                  (2.62)     (2.42)    (1.39)
Time Dummy-891                             0.115                   0.097      0.062     0.102
                                           (las)                   (0.9'7)    (0.63)    (1.20)
Time bumrny-892                            0.120                   0.075      0.115     0.020
  .                                        (1.97)                  (0.71)     (1.1$)    (0.24)
Time Dumniy-893                            0.305                   0.335      0.111     0.234
                                           (5.27)                  (3.73)     (1.96)    (2.94)
Time Dummy.894                             0.214                   0.092      -Oi       0.113
                                           (3.65)                  (0.97)     (1.84)    (2.30)
F-Statistics                               27.412                  18.631     16.306    17.722
Adjusted K-Square                          0.3904                  0.3246     0.2.846   0.2937
      rotc:    ADsOlule value 01 asymptotic 1-statislics IS III p(C0UIeSeS.




                                                              39
                                           Table 5
                                         All Fatality
                                     Dummy Variable Models

                            AU Ages             Age 18 to 20   Age 21 to       Age 25 to
                            -9.694              -9.071         4.818            9.313
Intercept
                            (111.17)            (65.69)        (64.60)         (75.24)
                            0.0000013           0.00000057     0.0000016       0.0000017
Advertising
                            (3.13)              (0.89)         (2.50)          (2.98)
Alcohol Price               -0.0014             0.0011         -0.0022         -0.002
                            (2.03)              (1.04)         (1.98)          (2.06)
Medium City                 -0.210              -0.215         4.2*2           .0.262
                            (9.90)               (8.69)        (8.57)          (8.63)
                            -0.571              .0.671         -0.786          -0.753
Large City
                            (11.44)              (8.56)        (10.02)         (10.41)
                            0.134                -00051        0.046
Mountain Region
                            (3.87)               (0.091)       (0.54)          (1.99)
Wcsi North Central Region   -014                 -0.102                        -0.186
                            (4.60)               (1.75)        (2.21)          (3.43)
Vest South Central Region   -0.159               .0.209        .0.249          -0.250
                            (6.65)               (4.69)        (5.57)          (6.25)
East North Central Region   -0.296               -0.25$        -0.309          -0.259
                            (12.28)              (1.59)        (1.1$)          (7.63)
East South Central Region   0.143                0.164         0.061           0.197
                            (3.81)               (2.83)        (1.12)          (3.65)
                            0.025                -0.064        0.013           .0.0004
south Atlantic Region
                            (1.01)               (1.63)        (0.34)          (0.012)
Middle Atlantic Region      -0.286               -0.337        .0.116          .0.233
                            (10.29)              (7.71)        (5.02)          (5.15)
                            -0.291               -0.152        -0.187          -0.295
New England Region
                            (7.10)               (2.94)        (3.01)          (4.99)
Time Dummy-862              0.171                0.330         0230            0.181
                            (4.08)               (4.96)        (3.54)          (3.00)
Time Dummy-863              0.292                0.479                         0.323
                            (1.34)               (1.63)        (6.49)          (5.64)
Time Dunimy-864             0.205                0.286
                            (5.21)               (4.51)        (3.28)          (3.71)
Time Dummy-871              -0.0078              -0.069        -0.011          0.05.1
                            (0.19)               (0.98)        (0.17)          (0.96)
Time Dummy-872              0.136                0.157         0.190           0.149
                            (3.11)               (3.67)        (280)           (1.36)
Time Dummy-a73              0.220                0.391
                            (4.98)               (3.71)        (3.13)          (3.41)
Time Dummy-874              0.214                0.237         0.160           0.141
                            (5.40)               (3.65)        (2.54)          (2.43)
                            0.0042               0.05.8        0.046           -0.037
Time Dummy-881
                            (0.10)               (0.84)        (0.70)          (0.60)
                            0.106                0.291         0.134           0.096
Timcl)ummy-882
                            (2.38)               (4.13)        (1.93)          (1.52)
                            0.233                0.485                     .
                                                                               0.247
Time Dumxny-883
                            (5.61)               (7.45)         (4.10)         (4.12)
                            0.224                0.379          0.154          0.154
Time urnmy-884
                            (5.64)               (5.96)         (2.42)          (2.65)




                                                  40
Time Dummy-891                       0033                    0.066       0.010    0,011
                                      (0.79)                 (0.9$)      (0.15)   (0.1$)
Time Dumxny-892                       0.090                  0.299       0.03*    0.039
                                      (2.17)                 (4.51)      (Oil)    (0.65)
Time Dummy-893                        0.219                  0.420       0.229    0.197
                                      (5.56)                 (6.67)      (3.66)   (3.46)
Time tuminy-894                       0.1*0                  0.1*5       0.111    0.170
                                      (4.51)                 (2.13)      (1.75)   (2.99)
F-Statistics                          55.039                 31.424      27.071   31.446
Adjusted R-Square                     0.549L                 0.4074      0.3709   0.4067
  Note:   AbsoluEc value or asymptotic c-statistics is ni parcnutescs.




                                                      41
                                           Table 6
                                        Night Fatality
                                     Dummy Variable Models

                            Au Ages              Age 18 to 20   Age2l to24   A1e251o34
                            .11.574              .10.064        -10.141      -11.015
Intercept                                                       ($2.94)      (62.74)
                            (93.16)              (51.35)
                            0.0000025            0.0000012      0.0000015    0.0000019
Advertising                                                     (1.66)       (2.30)
                            (4.35)               (1.27)
                            -0.0011              -0.00046       -0.00093     0.00031
Alcohol Price
                            (1.16)               (0.30)         (0.61)       (0.22)
Medium City                 .0216                .0.3fl         -0.315       -0.270
                            (7.12)               (7.82)         (6.81)       (6.23)
                            .0.697               .0.880         -0.930
Large City
                            (9.91)               (7.86)         (1.60)       (1.05)
                            0.112                0.04*          -0.040       0.021
Mountain Region
                            (2.15)               (0.56)         (0.49)       (0.31)
                            0.115                0.32.5         0.158        0.151
West North Central Region
                            (2.22)               (&08)          (L97)        (2.01)
                            -0.004               0020           -0.164       .0.073
West South Central Region
                            (0.10)               (0.32)         (258)        (1.31)
                            -0.121               0.083          .0-017       -0.031
East North Central Region
                            (3.5))               (1.53)         (1.6$)       (0.6$)
                            0.160                0.426          0.049        0.2.50
Last South Central Region
                            (2.17)               (5.06)         (0.54)       (3.22)
                            0.076                0.143          0103         0.012
South Atlantic Region
                            (2.12)               (2.44)         (1.81)       (1.64)
                            -0.114               .0.074         0.062        0.022
Middle Atlantic Region
                            (2.90)               (1.17)         (1.04)       (0.40)
                            -0.028               0.176          0.110        0017
New England Region
                            (0.50)               (2.00)         (1.31)       (0.21)
Time Dummy-862              0.221                0.231          OilS         0.092
                            (3.67)               (2.46)         (3.39)       (1.09)
Time Dummy-863              0.460                0.416          0.4fl        0.314
                            (8.23)                (4.78)        (5.4$>       (4.00)
                            0.294                0.247          0.30*        0.174
Time Dummy-864
                            (5.22)                (2.80)        (3.56)       (2.21)
                            0.085                .0.070         0.051        0.134
Time Dummy-871
                            (1.42)                (0.69)        (0.62)       (1.6$)
Time Durnmy-872             0.132                0.087          0.200        0045
                            (2.09)               (0.88)         (L02)        (0.51)
                            0.229                0.292          0.268        0.124
Time Dununy-873
                            (3.62)               (2.95)         (2.74)       (1.38)
                            0.207                0.116          0.292        0.14$
Time ummy-874
                            (3.59)               (1.27)         (3.30)       (1.84)
                            0.030                .0.097         0.115        -0.055
 Time Dummy-881
                            (0.50)               (0.97)         (1.26)       (0.65)
                            0.143                0117            0.297       0.104
 Time Dummy-882
                            (2.23)               (1.17)          (3.00)      (1.17)
                            0.303                0.343           0.313        0.191
 Time Dummy-883
                            (5.09)               (3.73)          (3.38)       (22$)
Time Durnmy-884             0.215                0.256           0274         0.064
                            (3.73)               (2.83)          (3.07)       (0.79)




                                                 42
Time Dummy'891                           0063                   0.050       0.017    -0.01$
                                         (1.03)                 (0.$2)      (0.10)   (0.21)
Time Dummy-82                            0.116                  0.099       0.195    -0.019
                                         (1.95)                 (1.07)      (2.01)   (0.23)
Time Dummy-893                           0.2$I                  0.345       0.216    0.166
                                         (4.96)                 (3.95)      (2,41)   (2.11)
Time Durnmy-894                          0.171                  0.072       0.19$    0.106
                                         (3.12)                 (0.71)      (2.23)   (1.34)
F-Statbics                               26*86                  20.146      16.67$   15.045
Adjusted R-Square                        0.3683                 0.3349      0.275    0.2434
  Note:      Ab5Otue value ol asyniptQuc L-st.atiStics is in paicntheses.




                                                           43
                                                     Table 7
                                            Reduced Form OL.S Models
                            •

                                    Logistic Fatality    Logistic Fatality       Advettlsliig   Advertiamg
                                    Rate                 Rate
                                    .7.373               -7.938                  .347.2*3.920   -223.514.900
Intercept
                                    (18.45)              (17.48)                 (6.9$)         (3.90)
Advertising Price                   -0.0031              .0.0027                  736.066       -705.111
                                    (6.87)               (6.36)                  (13.24)        (12.97)
TV Stations                         .0.021                 0.003                 11.731.361     11436.181
                                    (2.08)               (0.30)                  (9.26)         (9.33)
RADIO Stations                      0.0027               0.0022                  669.790        735.504
                                     (5.94)              (4.65)                  (11.64)        (12.4$)
Alcohol Price                        -0.0014              .0.0013                65.977         180.176
                                     (2.13)               (1.96)                 (0.10)         (2.15)
Percent Black                        -0.000*              -0.00012               210.119        210.516
                                     (0.88)               (0.12)                 0.46)          (1,66)
Percent Hispanic                     0.0012              0.005*                  170.781        -165.016
                                     (9.83)              (6.85)                  (1.1'?)        (1.35)
Real Income                          .0.000017           -0.000014               1.791          1.162
                                    (3.08)               (2.66)                  (2.35)         (2.71)
Percent Catholic                    -0.0)0               -0.0016                 107.054        *24*07
                                    (13.6!)              (7.1$)                  (1.19)         (6.22)
Percent Southern Baptist            -0.00037             0.0015                  102.291        5.624
                                    (0.36)               (1.14)                  (0.7$)         (0.034)
Percent Mormon                      .00037               .0.0045                  217.391       .343.83)
                                    (3.40)               (4.03)                  (2.14)          (2.46)
Percent Other Adherents             -0.0082              .0.002                  371.171        .229.420
                                    (6.72)               (1.22)                  (2.43)          (1.1))
Percent Urban                       -0.0011              -0.0000063              451.487        102.382
                                    (1.37)               (0.007)                 (4.31)         (0.91)
Medium City                         .0.074               -0.019                  6.523.364      3.908.160
                                    (3.73)               (4.65)                  (2.64)         (1.61)
Large City                          .0.369               -0.351                  30.674.IU      24.230.200
                                    (8.20)               (7.11)                  (3.43)         (4.21)
Schooling                           -0.0)4               .0.014                  1.642.162      1.013.676
                                    (4.34)               (3.18)                  (4.04)         (2.40)
Unemployment                        .0.00025             0.0023                  294.023        -134.331
                                    (0.52)               (4.10)                  (4.90)         (1.16)
Mountain Region                                          0.183                                  -3.793.312
                                                         (5.4.1)                                (1.31)
West North Central Region                                .0.0025                                -14.9*5.582
                                                         (0.06)                                 (2.14)
West South Central Region                                .0.22i                                 6.951.739
                                                         (6.06)                                 (1.50)
East North Central Region                                -0.131                                 -1.400.051
                                                         (3.10)                                 (0.32)
East South Central Region                                -0.060                                 7.755.0)1
                                                         (1.2$)                                 (1.32)
South Atlantic Region                                    0.015                                  -6.116.193
                                                          (0.4$)                                (1.72)
Middle Atlantic Region                                   .0.071                                 -28.986.531
                                                          (1.1))             .                  (5.39)
New England Region                                       0.017                                  .56.999.644
                                —                        (0.33)                                 (1$!)
Time Dummy-862                      0.221                0.130                   31.336.187     37.669.545
                                    (6.54)               (7.06)                  (8.13)         (9.1$) -
Time Dummy-863                      0.369                0.375                   36.998.444     35.324.479
                                    (10.71)               (11.56)                (1.57)         (8.62)




                                                        44
                                         0.2)3                   0.244     10.391.726    1.274.131
Time Duminy-864
                                         (6.68)                  (1.45)    (238)         (2.00)
Time Dummy-871                           .0.026                  -0.0082   -10,619.31$   -13.291.126
                                         (0.70)                  (0.24)    (2.30)        (3.03)
Time Dmmy-872                            0.196                   0.216     47.599.496    44.612,750
                                         (5.59)                  (6.53)    (10.15)       (10.69)
Time Dummy-873                           0.294                   0.318     35.011.179    51.459.224
                                         (8.53)                  (9.75)    (12.7$)       (12.51)
Time Dummy-8'74                          0.241                   0.267     17.678.134    14.072.139
                                         (6.89)                  (8.08)    (4.04)        (3.37)
Time Dummy-881                           -0.018                  0.014     -14.690.166   -11.931.194
                                         (0.48)                  (0.39)    (3,16)        (4.27)
Time Durnmy-882                          0.161                   0.196     45.723.363    41.393.954
                                         (4.51)                  (5.76)    (10.22)       (9.65)
Time bummy-883                           0.211                   0.316     36.154.089    32.231.740
                                         (8.02)                  (9.48)    (1.40)        (746)
Time Dummy-884                           0.239                   0.273     82.090.771    7.931.417
                                          (6.73)                 (8.09)    (2.72)        (1.16)
Time Dummy-891                           0.0011                  0.031     -15.295.560   -19.172.748
                                          (0.046)                (1.07)    (3.27)        (4.27)
Time Dummy-892                           0.111                   0.152     20.562.211    16.266.127
                                          (3.24)                 (4.39)    (4.50)        (3.71)
Time Dummy-893                            0.259                  0.293     15.932.605    10.149.555
                                          (7.2$)                 (8.64)    (3.56)        (2.53)
Time Dummy-894                           0190                    0.224     3.111.264     -1.117.241
                                         (5.33)                  (6.60)    (0.87)        (0.2*)
F-SL2tistics                             61.11                   65.493    123.494       112.792

Adjusted R-Square                        0.6344                  0.6772    0.76          0.7143

Note:   Absolute value of asymptotic t-scattscics ts In pa.rentleses.




                                                            45
                                          REFERENCES

Ackoff, R. and J. Emshoff, 'Advertising Research at Artheuser-Busch, Inc. (1963-68)",
Management Review, Winter, 1975, 1-15.

Arbitron, Description of Methodology, New York, NY: The Arbitron Company, 1990.

Atkin, C. "Alcoholic-Beverage Advertising: Its Content and Impact", in Control Issues in Alcohol
Abuse Prevention: Strategies for States and Communities, Ed. Harold Holder, Greenwich, CT: JAL
Press Inc., 1987, 267-87.

Bass, F. and R. Leone, "Temporal Aggregation, the Data Interval Bias, and Empirical Estimation of
Bimonthly Relations from Annual Data', Management Science, 29, 1983, 1-11.

Berndt, E. The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary, Reading MA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co. 1991.

Bourgeois, J. and J. Barnes, 'Does Advertising Increase Alcohol Consumption?", Journal of Advertising
Research 19, 1979, 19-29.

Chaloupka, F., H., Saffer, and M. Grossman, "Alcohol Control Policies and Motor Vehicle Fatalities".
Journal of Legal Studies, 22, 1993, 161-186.

Duffy, M., "The Demand for Alcoholic Drink in the United Kingdom, 1963-78", Applied Economics,
15, 1983, 125-140.

Duffy, M., 'Advertising and the Inter-product Distribution of Demand", European Economic Review,
31, 1987, 1051-1070.

Duffy,   M. "Advertising in Demand Systems: Testing a Galbraithian Hypothesis", Applied Economics,
23,   1991, 485-496.


Ehrlich,   I., L. Fisher, "The Derived Demand for Advertising: A Theoretical and Empirical
Investigation", American Economic Review, 72, 3, 1982, 366-388.

Franke, G. and G. Wilcox, "Alcoholic Beverage Advertising and Consumption in the United States,
1964-1984", Journal of Advertising, 16, 1987, 22-30.

Glenmary Research Center, Churches and Church Membership in the United States, Glenmary Research
Center, Altanta Georgia, 1980.

Glenmary Research Center, Churches and Church Membership in the United States, Glenmary Research
Center, Altanta Georgia, 1990.

Grabowski, H. 'The Effects of Advertising on the Interindustry Distribution of Demand", Explorations
in Economic Research, 3, 21-75 1976.



                                                  46
Hernon, P. and T. Ganey, Under The Influence, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1991.

Johnson, L., "Alternative Econometiic Estimates of the Effects of Advertising on the Demand for
Alcoholic Beverages in the United Kingdom", International Journal of Advertising, 4, 1985, 19-25.

Lambin, J., Advertising. Competition and Market Conduct in Oligopoly Over Time, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1976.

Maddala, G.S. Limited Dependent and Oualitative Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, 1983.

McGuiness, T. "An Econometric Analysis of Total Demand for Alcoholic Beverages in the U.K. 1956-
1975", Journal of Industrial Economics, 29, 85-105. 1980.

McGuiness, T. "The Demand for Beer, Spirits and \Vine in the UK, 1956-1979", in Grant, Plant and
Williams, eds. Economics and Alcohol Gardner Press, Inc. New York. 1983, 238-242.

Ogborne, A., and Smart, R., Will Restrictions on Alcohol Advertising Reduce Alcohol Consumption?",
British Journal of Addiction, 75, 293-296 1980.

Ornstein, S. and Hanssens, D., "Alcohol Control Laws and the Consumption of Distilled Spirits and
Beer". Journal of Consumer Research, 12, 200-213. 1985.

Saffer, H .,"Alcohol Advertising Bans and Alcohol Abuse: An International Perspective", Journal of
Health Economics, 10., 65-79, 1991.

Saffer, H., "Alcohol Advertising Bans and Alcohol Abuse: Reply", Journal of Health Economics. 12.,
229-234, 1993.

Saffer, H. "Alcohol Advertising and Alcohol Abuse: Econometric Evidence", National institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Washington, D.C.. forthcoming, 1994.

Selvanathan, E., "Advertising and Alcohol Demand in the UK: Further Results", International Journal
of Advertising, 8, 1989, 181-188.

Schmalensee, R. The Economics of Advertising, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1972.

Smart, R. "Does Alcohol Advertising Affect Overall Consumption? A Review of Empirical Studies",
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 49, 314-23, 1988.

Smart, R. and Cutler R., "The Alcohol Advertising Ban in British Columbia: Problems and Effects on
Beverage Consumption", British Journal of Addiction, 71, 13-21 1976.

Walsh B., "The Demand for Alcohol in the UK: A Comment", The Journal of Industrial Economics,
vol. 30, no. 4, June 1982.

 Young, D., "Alcohol Advertising Bans and Alcohol Abuse: Comment", Journal of Health Economics,
 12.,   213-228, 1993.


                                                47
