                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE U.S. FISCAL PROBLEM:
                           WHERE WE ARES HOW WE GOT
                          HERE AND WHERE WE'RE GOING




                                     Alan J. Auerbach




                                 Working Paper No. 4709



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April1994


This paper was prepared for the 1994 NBER Macro Conference held in Cambridge, March
11-12, 1994. I am grateful to Rosemaiy Marcuss for guidance in the use of CBO data, to her
and V.V. Chari, Martin Feldstein, Stan Fischer, Tom Barthold, Tom Bowne, David Romer
and other participants in the conference and in workshops at Penn and Berkeley for comments
on earlier drafts, and to the National Science Foundation (grant #SBR9O-22707) and the
Edward Netter Research Fund for financial support This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Economic fluctuations and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                      NBER Working Paper #4709
                                                                                    April 1994

                                THE U.S. FISCAL PROBLEM:
                               WHERE WE ARE, HOW WE GOT
                              HERE AND WHERE WE'RE GONG

                                           ABSTRACF

        This paper deals with several issues regarding the causes and implications of recent and
projected U.S. federal budget deficits. It considers why deficits have remained so large in spite
of deficit reduction efforts, evaluates the impact of the recent policies of the Clinton
administration, and offers tong-range deficit projections. Among the paper's findings are:
        1. Until the past year, deficit projections over the past decade have been consistently too
optimistic; had initial projections for the current fiscal year proved accurate, the deficit-reducing
policies of die early 1 990s already would have driven the federal budget well into surplus; there
is no single explanation for these large and systematic forecasting errors.
       2. The budget rules that legislators have developed to control deficits, including those now
in effect, are ill-designed for their apparent purpose. They fail to compensate for forecasting
errors and encourage shifts in the timing of revenues and expenditures. The paper presents
evidence that such shifting has followed the incentives of the different schemes.
       3. The projected decline in the deficit as a share of GD? over the next few years reflects
not only the policies already enacted but also the continuation of significant real reductions in
discretionary spending -- representing a drop of 2.2 percent of GDP between 1994 and 2004.
        4. Even if such optimistic forecasts prove to be correct, longer run projections suggest
that current fiscal policy is unsustainable. Without any growth in the relative price of health
care, the demographic transition still is projected to lead to sharp increases in Social Security and
Medicare benefits as a share of GDP, and primary deficits of nearly 4 percent of GD?.

Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
 1. Introduction

          in fiscal year 1992 the U.S. federal budget deficit was $290 billion dollars, equal to nearly 5

percent of GD? and contributing to the continued rapid growth in the national debt. By the end of

that fiscal year (on September 30 of the calendar year), the ratio of publicly held national debt to GD?

bad risen from a low of 24.5 percent in 1974 to 51.1 percent.

          To altack the deficit, President Clinton proposed, and each house of Congress barely passed in

August, the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA 1993). an act which, according to Executive

branch estimates, will raise revenues and reduce spending by a total of roughly $500 billion over the

five fiscal years from 1994 through 1998.'

          Was   this action necessary? Was it enough? Among the questions addressed in this paper are:


          • Whit Is the current path of U.S. fiscal policy?
          - How has this path been altered (thus far) by the Clinton economic program?
          - Is the current fiscal policy trajectory sustainable and, if not,what is the magnitude of
            necessary changes?


          These questions are central to the fiscal policy debate but difficult   to answer. To identify

fiscal policy's current trajectory, we must make long-range economic projections as well as

assumptions regarding what current policy actually is. Moreover, we must know bow to interpret this

information. The budget deficit can be defined in a variety of ways and there is nothing to ensure that

one years budget deficit will be comparable to the next, or what a short-term trend in the budget

deficit signifies about the long-run viability of fiscal policy. Conclusions about the state of fiscal

policy should not depend on arbitrary accounting conventions or budget 'scoring' rules. Finally, to



    1According to the Office of Management and Budget's 1993 Midsession Review (0MB 1993), the
total is $504.8 billion, while the Congressional Budget Office's estimate is $432.9 billion (CBO
1993b).
consider the magnitude of necessary policy changes, we must be able to gauge how
                                                                              different policies

will change the economy's fiscal path.

        As discussed below, the uncertainties involved in each of these stages are considerable. Fiscal

performance has proved difficult to project with any degree of accuracy; budget measures are rife with

ambiguous concepts, making them difficult to interpret and the measurement of economic responses

to fiscal policies has been a source of controversy. This leaves those who would design policy with a

daunting task, the nature of which is amply illustrated by recent events.

        The politically difficult deficit reduction effort of 1993 follows an equally painful OBRA

1990, signed after a protracted "budget summit" by a President who had made a campaign

commitment to 'no new taxes' but who nevertheless agreed to significant revenue increases along with

spending cuts, again estimated at the time to total about $500 billion over a five-year budget period.

        With recent Federal budget deficits running in the neighborhood of $2004300 billion per

year, one might think that these two acts, each apparently reducing the deficit by about $100 billion

per year, would have led us close to budget balance in the ensuing years. Yet the near-term outlook

is for continued budget deficits of nearly $200 billion dollars, even assuming that the 1990 Act's very

tight caps on discretionary spending, which keep discretionary spending essentially fixed in nominal

terms, are followed through fiscal year 1998.

        What's going on? Another of this paper's goals is to find out, to address the question:


        - Wby have large deficit reduction policies apparently resulted in 'o little deficit
          reduction?


Each of the difficulties cited above might have played a role. First, economic responses to tax

increases may have blunted the force of these deficit-reducing policies. Second, "deficit reduction"

doesn't necessarily mean deficit reduction. Budget scoring rules measure the effects of legislation on

the deficit relative to some hypothetical "baseline", which is intended to indicate what the deficit in

                                                    2
some future year would have been had no policy changes been adopted. If the baseline forecasts

project sharply increasing deficits, then even significant "deficit reduction" would not necessarily

result in reduced deficits. Third. we may simply have been the victims of forecasting errors,

expecting deficits to be tower than they wined out to be.

        Identifyifig the reasons for the recent Sisyphean fiscal ordeal has implications for future policy

design. Most importantly, the recent success or failure in forecasting budget trends should help

inform our judgment about the accuracy of current forecasts and the extent to which additional policies

are needed to achieve long-mn fiscal viability. Studying recent fiscal performance can also help us

understand the effects of budget accounting rules and procedures. Much of the federal government

effort at budget control during the past decade, beginning with the Gramm-Rudman-llollings

Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, has taken the form of procedural changes intended to place

obstacles in the way of deficit spending. In light of recent events, I wilt consider the following

question:


         - Bow have budget control rules affected fiscal policy, and how is the effectiveness of
            such rules influenced by our abIlity to forecast future fiscal performance?


        After a brief review of recent current budget trends, I turn in Section 2 to a review of the past

decade of budget forecasts and results, in order to sort out the causes of these trends. Section 3

considers the impact of deficit control measures on fiscal policy, in light of recent history. Section 4

describes the recent changes in fiscal policy brought about by the 1993 legislation. In Section 5, I'll

return to the papers initial question of sustainability and, in light of all the difficulties recognized.

discuss the magnitude of the current fiscal imbalance and the changes potentially needed to prOduce a

sustainable fiscal policy. Section 6 offers some conclusions.




                                                     3
1.1. Recent Fiscal Performance

        Figure 1 presents annual U.S. federal budget deficits since fiscal year 1983, and deficits

projected through 2004 by the Congressional Budget Office2 As the figure indicates, the deficit has

ranged between $150 billion and $290 billion throughout the historical period, and between 3 and 6

percent of GD?. Current projections are for the deficit to fall over the next couple of years, both in

nominal dollars and as a share of GD?, then begin rising again by both measures. Ill discuss below

why the deficit is projected to rise, and the extent to which deficit trends accurately represent the path

of fiscal policy. First, however, it is useful to consider the factors that have contributed to the

deficits, measured as they are, experienced over the past decade.


2. ldent:fiuing the Sources of Recent Deficits

        As indicated above, there are three potential explanations for the persistence of deficits of

$200 billion or more in the face of the large deficit reduction packages passed in 1990 and 1993: high

"baselines,' unanticipated behavioral responses, and other forecast errors. I'll consider each of these

explanations. Much of my analysis will be based on the historical record of CBO deficit forecast

revisions.

        For several years, CBO has published forecasts of deficits, revenues and expenditures for the

current and five subsequent fiscal years. Typically twice a year, CBO has provided revised estimates,

dividing the revisions from one forecast to the next for a particular future fiscal year into three

categories, according to whether they could be attributed to changes in policy, changes in projected

macroeconomic behavior, or those residual, or 'technical", changes in revenues and spending that




    Tbroughout the rest of this paper, 1 will use CBO forecasts except as noted otherwise. These
projections do not incorporate CBO's recent estimates of the impact of the Clinton health proposals.

                                                    4
could not be explained either by policy changes or macroeconomic changes. Within each category,

revisions are broken into spending and revenue forecast revisions, and sometimes further.

        For example, a reduction in projected tax collections due to an unexpected recession would be

classified as an economic change, while a reduction in income taxes caused by a shift in the

distribution of taxable income toward lower marginal tax brackets would count as a technical error,

because the income distribution is not part of the macroeconomic forecast. Policy projections, and

changes in them, reflect not simply actual legislation, but a professional judgment of what is likely to

occur. This revision process my be expressed as:


                                             —
                                                                                                         (1)



for i = 0 to 5. where        is the deficit forecast for year tat the end of year t-i (equal to the actual

deficit 1), for i = 0) and            and 1T are the policy, economic, and technical revisions to the

year deficit forecast in year t-i (denoted l\. T,, and E when i       0).

        A similar procedure has been followed by 0MB. with similar results, at least in recent years.

I use CBO figures for two reasons. First, the CBO methodology is likely to have been more
consistent over the past decade than the corresponding 0MB projections of three different presidential

administrations. Second, the CBO projections are likely to have been closer to true forecasts than the

0MB projections, because the latter were often distorted by budget rules reouixin2 that projected




                                                     S
budget deficits meet certain targets.3 My comments should not be taken as a critique of CBO

methods or competence.4


2.1. Initial Baselines and the Effects of Policy

       To understand why deficits remain so large, it is helpfizl to begin by applying expression (1)

successively for a given fiscal yea? s deficit, cumulating all the revisions that occur during years i-S

through t. This yields:


                                          - ,4D,+                                                       (2)




One possible reason why deficits remain so large is that initial baseline deficits themselves — the

original projections D1 made five years prior to each fiscal yeas in question — were extremely high.

This could have come about for two reasons. First, the excesses of the past simply might have set

policy on a smooth trajectory that, left to its own, would have produced ever higher deficits. For

example, the Reagan tax cuts of 1981 have often been blamed for subsequent deficits. Alternatively,

previous policies might have included timing shifts in revenues and/or expenditures that reduced near-

term deficits at the expense of deficits beyond the six-year forecasting period. For example, a policy

enacted in 1983 to speed up revenue collections from 1990 to 1987 would reduce the 1987 deficit but

lead to a higher baseline deficit forecast for 1990. when the initial baseline forecast for that fiscal year

first appeared in 1985.


    'Reischauer (1990) provides evidence that the gap between 0MB budget projections and CBO
reestimates of these budgets rose after the enactment of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act, which
required that budgets meet specified deficit targets.

    lndeed, CBO (1993b, Appendix A) provides evidence that its cx post macroeconomic forecasting
record, measured in terms of root mean squared errors in the prediction of real GNP, inflation and
short-term interest rates, is comparable to that of the private sector 'Blue Chip' consensus and
somewhat better than the combined Administration record.

                                                     6
        While offering different explanations for why the initial baseline for a particular fiscal year

might be high, each argument suggests that policy changes enacted durinE the six-year forecasting

window between the date of the initial baseline forecast and the end of the fiscal year itself sinipy

were too small to offset the high initial baseline deficits. However, this story is not consistent with

the data for recent fiscal years or for those in the immediate nature.

        There have been several policy changes aimed at reducing deficits since the early '80s, in

addition to the changes of £990 and £993 already cited. The importance of these intervening changes

can be seen in Figure 2. This figure presents two series, based on data from February 1983 to

January 1994. The first, labelled "Initial Baseline Deficit," is the deficit for that year as forecast by

CBO six years earlier, J), or, for fiscal years prior to 1988. the deficit forecast in February 1983.
which is as far back as the data go. The second curve in Figure 2, labelled Baseline Plus Policy"

adjusts the initial deficit forecasts for the effects of all policy changes dating from the first forecast for

each fiscal year through the end of the fiscal year itself or, for fiscal years after 1993, through

January 1994. It corresponds to the right-hand-side of expression (2), with the economic and technical

revisions set to zero, cumulating the changes in deficit forecasts that CBO attributed to changes in

policy, from the date at which calculations for that fiscal year began until the end of that fiscal year

or, for current and future fiscal years, until January l994. Thus, a MI six years' estimated policy

effects are presented only for fiscal years 1988-93.

        As the figure indicates, fiscal policies since 1983 have, according to estimates, reduced budget

deficits relative to initial baseline in every fiscal year. For the fiscal years 1988-93, the average

reduction over six years was $154 billion. Some of these reductions may simply have acted to offset

the deficit increases embedded in the initial baselines by earlier policy actions. Still, had the policy

effects actually measured been the only changes from initial baseline pn4ections, the federal budget




                                                       7
would have been in surplus in 1991 and 1992 and would be projected in surplus for fiscal years 1994

through 1996.

        Of course, the policies themselves would probably have been different had there been no jgl

(i.e., economic and technical) revisions from initial baseline forecasts during this period. That is,

some of the policies aimed at deficit reduction resulted from the realization that things were worse

than originally projected. But this argument does not alter the conclusion that the policies actually

enacted were estimated to be large enough to offset the budget deficits initially projected.

        After fiscal year 1996. the initial baseline deficits rise quite sharply. For the future, then, as

I'll discuss below, the devil may well be in the baselines (or at least may start there); but for recent

years, we need to look elsewhere.


2.2. Forecast Errors

        The surpluses indicated   by the lower curve in Figure 2 were exceeded by actual deficits (or
those projected as of January 1994) by the sum of cumulative economic and technical forecast errors.

Figure 3 presents these errors for the same period. Moving vertically, the figure shows the

cumulative impact of, respectively, economic errors, technical errors, and the additional interest

payments associated with these two changes. These interest costs include the effects (counted as

economic changes) of revisions in nominal interest rate forecasts, as well as the cumulative debt

service effects resulting from the economic and technical errors.

        There are two reasons to consider these changes in interest costs separately. First, errors in

the prediction of debt service costs arise only as the result of underlying errors in other projections.

Second. to the extent that projected nominal interest rates and hence interest costs change because of

changes in the expected inflation rate, the associated change in the projected deficit is a change in the




                                                    8
nominal deficit but not the real deficit.5 For fiscal years after 1995, declines in projected nominal

interest rates have outweighed increased debt service projections, causing revisions of estimated

interest costs to be slightly negative, thus far.

         In studying Figure 3. one needs to keep in mind that, as in Figure 2, only the years 1988-93

offer a full six years of data. Hence, the small errors in the early lOs and late '90s simply reflect the

relatively short intervals over which errors are being cumulated. Focusing again on the period from

1988   to 1993, then, we observe that both technical and economic forecast errors have been positive in

every one of these fiscal years. Further, both economic and, particularly, technical errors have been

very large in recent fiscal years. For fiscal years 1990-93. technical errors alone (excluding interest)

accounted for an average of $132 billion per year. Even more disturbing is the fact that for fiscal

years 1994-96, for which fewer than six years' revisions have been counted, the average technical

error equals $166 billion.6


2.3. Decomposin2 Technical Forecast Errors

         These large technical prediction errors deserve further attention for several reasons. First of

all, unlike economic forecast errors, which by definition are directly attributable to changes in the

forecasts of aggregate variables, these are the residuals of the forecasting process and therefore not



     3preswnably, there are other components of the economic forecast error attributable to changes in
inflation expectations that we would also like to exclude or consider separately for the same reason.
However, at least in recent years, holding nominal interest rates fixed, ebanges in inflation have little
impact on the deficit because they tend to push up revenues and spending by roughly equal amounts."
(CBO 1993b, p. 35). Hence, the ut changes in the primary deficit (i.e., the deficit excluding
interest) associated with changes in macroeconomic forecasts should be due mainly to changes in real
economic variables, such as real growth and the unemployment rate. This will not be true, of course,
for forecasts of nominal revenues and spending, each of which will be quite sensitive to rate of
inflation.

    'The cumulative forecast error for fiscal year 1998 is negative, in contrast to the general trend.
This reflects one year's revision (from January 1993 to January 1994), during which technical and
economic forecast errors for fiscal years 1994-1997 were negative as well. Whether these very recent
revisions indicate a shift in the trends of recent years is too early to tell.

                                                    9
directly linked to any aggregate changes. Their causes are not    as easily identified and could have

different implications for the future. Second, economic forecast errors may present less reason for

concern or policy reaction, because they reflect, in part, the automatic stabilizers that, at least from a

                                                              hand, there need be no obvious benefit
           Keynesian perspective, are desirable. On the other

associated with forecast errors, conditional on the state of the economy.

        Finally, to the extent that recent deficits have been caused by inaccurate assessments of

taxpayer responses to tax changes, we would expect this to show up in technical forecast errors of tax

revenues. For example, suppose an increase in capital gains tax rates reduced capital gains

realizations more than CBO predicted. This would reduce capital gains realizations, given the level of

income and other macroeconomic aggregates, and therefore would lead to overestimates of individual

income tax collections, conditional on macroeconomic conditions, in the years following the enactment

of the tax increase.

        Perhaps the biggest single source of technical forecasting error during the past decade was the

Savings and Loan bailout and associated problems. There was, initially, an underprediction of the

cost of the bailout, leading to large forecast errors in the early '90s. Thereafter, there was uncertainty

regarding when Congress would choose to provide the funds already seen as needed, essentially a

timing issue that has led to both positive and negative technical forecast errors in fiscal years after

1992.

        However, the S&L bailout explains only a small part of the overall picture. Figure 4 graphs

the cumulative technical forecast errors for fiscal years 1983-98 shown in Figure 3, but excluding both

the associated debt service and the errors atthbutable to the S&L bailout. The figure breaks the

remaining forecast errors into three components: revenue overpredictions, undexpredictions in the cost

of Medicare and Medicaid, and all other.




                                                     10
        The rapid groMb of medical spending in recent years has (until calendar year 1993) been

underpredicted consistently, leading to the technical errors associated with the Medicare and Medicaid

programs. While these errors have been important, the figure shows that revenue overpredictions

have been an even more significant source of technical forecast errors in recent years. However, even

with these two areas (plus those already excluded) accounted for, a significant residual — around $70

billion in fiscal years 1993 and 1994 — remains.

        Although a relatively short period of time is represented in Figure 4, this persistence of large

positive cumulative technical errors calls into question whether these are true forecast errors in terms

of being the results of an optimal forecasting process.

        One possibility is that technical errors are systematically positive because baseline forecasts

fail to account for the 'unexpected' emergencies that always arise, in the way that a local government

might not 'expect' snow and hence fail to provide a snow removal budget. Aside from the Savings

and Loan bailout, which is already excluded from Figure 4, recent years have seen hurricanes, floods,

earthquakes, Operation Desert Storm, etc. On the other hand, we have also experienced an

unpredictably rapid decline in defense spending (the peace dividend') due to the deterioration of the

Soviet Union and now Russia as a military threat, which has led to negative technical forecast errors.

        Moreover, unlike in the snow removal example, these are deficit forecasts. They are not the

actual budgets presented by presidents who have been accused of adopting a 'rosy scenario' in order

to put off proposing difficult budget choices, and who have been given further incentive to do so by

budget rules requiring that submitted budgets be claimed to satisfy certain criteria (see footnote 3

above). There undoubtedly has been political pressure not to forecast realistically large deficits, but it

is difficult to know how important a role such pressure has played In producing the forecasting record

observed during the past decade.




                                                   11
2.4. The Statistical Properties of Revenue Forecast Errors

        Whatever the importance of the "one unexpected emergency after another" hypothesis on the

spending side, it is difficult to think of comparable examples on the revenue side, given that these

errors are residuals after account has been taken of macroeconomic and policy effects. Further, while

CBO provides a breakdown of spending forecast errors by source (defense, medical, etc.) there is

usually no explicit breakdown given for revenues.

        In the aggregate, though, these revenue forecast errors have typically been negative (i.e.,

revenues were overpredicted). not just cumulatively for each fiscal year, but for each individual

revision as well. Table I presents the average k-year-ahead forecast revisions during the sample

period, for k ranging from 0 (the current fiscal year) to 5 (the most distant fiscal year being

predicted). For each value of k, average economic and technical revisions are negative and policy

revisions are positive.7 Presumably, the economic revisions are attributable to unexpectedly weak

growth and lower inflation after the mid '80s, while the policy revisions simply reflect the continual

process of attempts at deficit reduction.

        Whence the technical errors? As a first step toward answering this question, Table 2 presents

the results of regressions in which each technical revision for each fiscal year is represented as an

individual observation. Explanatory variables in the first specification include a constant and lagged

values of the three forecast revisions for the same fiscal year.




     'These calculations are based on the evidence through fiscal year 1993. The revisions are smaller,
on average, for the 5-year-ahead estimates because these typically reflect only a partial year's
information. The first forecast for the fiscal year 5 years into the future is typically published in
January. whereas the fiscal year begins on October 1. For example, CBO's first published estimate
for fiscal year 1998 appeared in January 1993. Hence, the 5-year-ahead revision for fiscal year 1998
reflects changes only from January 1993 through late September 1993. The flscal-year-1993 revisions
of projected deficits in fiscal years 1993-1997 (0 through 4 years ahead) include revisions from
September 1992 through September 1993.

                                                    12
        As the first column of the table shows, technical revisions are essentially unpredictable using

this information — the equation's It2 is -.01, and no variable has a statistically significant impact.

However, adding a simple time u-end to the regression explains one-third of the variance of the

technical forecast errors. In this second specification, the technical error, aside from u-ending sharply

downward over time, relates negatively to all three components of the lagged forecast revision,

suggesting that revisions are systematically too large in absolute value. Interestingly, though, the one

such relationship that would have the most straightforward explanation — the overstatement of

revenues attributable to policy changes because of an underprediction of the magnitude of behavioral

effects — is the least significant, both statistically and quantitatively.

        What can we conclude from this exercise? First, that technical errors seem clearly not to be

optimal forecast errors in the sense of being drawn from a distribution having zero mean and

independent of available information. On average, they are significantly negative and related to past

information. Second, at least in the aggregate, underprediction of behavioral responses to taxation

does not seem to have played a crucial role in producing the consistent overprediction of revenues.'

Finally, the errors themselves have been getting worse over time. While it is implausible that such a

trend could continue for very long (and recent evidence encourages the hope that it may be ending),

one still is led, pending a better understanding of the process, to be concerned about what revisions lie

in store, and to be skeptical of any conclusions about the sustainability of fiscal policy based on point




     'This finding does not demonstrate that behavioral effects have been accurately predicted in all
instances, or that potential prediction errors are not an important factor in evaluating future policy.
Rather, it simply indicates that there is much more to the historical puzzle. Indeed, an important
component of CBO's forecasting errors following the Tax Reform Act of 1986 can be attributed to
overestimated capital gains tax realizations. Also after 1986, individual income tax revenues rose
more than originally predicted, which some (e.g. Feenberg and Poterba 1993, Feldstein 1993) have
attributed to the behavioral response of high-income taxpayers. However, this is masked in the data
by the fact that corporate income tax revenues fell unexpectedly.

                                                      13
estimates of revenues or expenditures. I will return to this issue below when evaluating the current

state of policy and recent fiscal changes.


3. Budget Rules and Their Impact on Policy

             Since the advent of large federal budget deficits in the early l980s, the federal government has

relied on a succession of budget control measures in its attempts to achieve fiscal balance. Recently.

despite the 1993 extension of the provisions of the 1990 Budget Enforcement        Act, there have been

renewed calls for an even stronger measure, namely a balanced budget amendment.

             Presumably, budget rules are imposed by legislators (and presidents) to force themselves to

accept more fiscal austerity than they would agree to in the normal course of events. The notion is

that while a majority of legislators may agree on the need for overall limits, the legislative process

fails to produce a majority coalition in opposition to any particular deficit-increasing provision. While

the   political economy of this process is not particularly well understood and thus merits further

attention9, I will confine my discussion to how well the rules have been designed to achieve their

apparent objective. The persistence of significant deficits throughout the past decade suggests the

absence of complete victory, to say the least.

             This section describes the different budget control measures that have been used since the mid-

'SOs,   and considers the impact that they have had on fiscal policy. It also draws out the implications

for the design of such measures of two important factors. One is the difficulty of making accurate

budget predictions, which was discussed in the previous section. The other, which is illustrated

below, is the demonstrated ability     of government to alter the timing of measured deficits with minimal
changes      in the underlying fiscal policy itself. Each of these factors bas confounded past budget

control mechanisms and, indeed, led to perverse results.



      9See   Gramlich (1990) for some further discussion along these lines.

                                                      14
3.1. Bud2et Rules

        The first attempt at imposing an external mechanism to control the budget deficit was the

Balanced Budget and Emergency Control Act of 1985. commonly known as Gramm-Rudman-Hollings

(GEl-I). Enacted in December 1985, it imposed specific deficit targets for fiscal years beginning in

the sante   fiscal year (1986), declining linearly to zero by fiscal year 1991. If, at the beginning of a

fiscal year, the target for that year was judged by 0MB not approximately to have been met,

automatic, across-the-board budget cuts (sequestration) would follow. Once the target was declared

met for a particular fiscal year, subsequent forecast revisions during the remainder of that fiscal year

were ignored.

        Failure to meet the original URN targets for fiscal year 1988 led to amended targets in 1987,

declining to zero by fiscal year 1993. Failure to meet the revised targets led ultimately to the

supplanting of GRJ-1 by the 1990 Budget Enforcement Act (BEA). Under BEA, there are specific

caps on discretionary spending that translate into real annual spending reductions, along with a Pay-as-

You-Go (PAYGO) process for revenues and entitlements (excluding Social Security, which is treated

separately and in similar fashion) that prohibits policy changes from increasing the estimated deficit in

any year during the six-year period (covering the current and five subsequent fiscal years) for which

official deficit forecasts are made.

        Unlike GRI1. BEA effectively imposes no deficit targets      —   only the requirement that any

year's policy changes not increase the estimated current and near-term deficits relative to the levels

forecast at the beginning of the current fiscal year. For example, policy changes enacted during fiscal

year 1992 could not increase the estimated deficits in any of the fiscal years from 2992 through 1997

over the levels predicted for these deficits at the beginning of fiscal year 1992.




                                                      15
3.2. The Impact of Forecast Errors

        The large forecast errors discussed in the previous section clearly have confounded the

operation of CR11 and BEA
                          in reducing deficits. Consider first the impact under CR11. The GRH

budget rule can be written:


                                                           1); —                                     (3)


where [1 is the deficit target for year t. Given that the actual deficit in year t, D, equals the previous

yea? s estimate plus economic, technical and policy revisions,

                                                    —                                                (4)



it follows that, if (3) is just satisfied, then:

                                                   I), =                                             (5)


That is. the CR11 target for year t is missed by the extent of technical and economic forecast errors.'°

        Under BEA, the deficit policy rule is much simpler, namely:


                                                        f_apt s o                                    (6)


for i = 0 to 5. If this condition is satisfied by equality, then expression (2) becomes:

                                                             5
                                           I), -                 (E,..,+T,,)                         (7)




    '°While there might be stabilization arguments for not offsetting some components of the economic
forecast errors, the same argument presumably would call for a simultaneous adjustment to future
years' targets as their economic forecasts were revised in year t.

                                                            16
        Thus, the BEA rule incorporates the cumulative effect of the full six years' prediction errors

of a fiscal year's deficit, rather than just those occurring in the fiscal year itself. Even if each

individual prediction error were unbiased, this cumulation would increase the magnitude of

deviations." But the sample mean of $123.8 billion dollars in cumulative economic and technical

forecast errors for a typical fiscal year (see Table 1) implies that the rule also systematically has led to

a deficit exceeding the initial baseline forecast by this amount. Moreover, in comparing equations (5)

and (7), it is important to realize that there is nothing to suggest that the initial baseline forecast bears

any relation to an optimal deficit target. Thus, in practice, the BEA validates deficits substantially

higher than those initially forecast, which may themselves be viewed as far too high. Indeed, one

reason for their being too high is that policy actions prior to the date of initial forecast may have

shifted the timing of deficits from earlier years.


3.3. The Timin2 of Deficit Reductions

        In addition to impounding forecast errors in the eventual deficits, both CR11 and SEA

provided policymakers seeking to avoid the austerity of "permanent" deficit reduction with the

incentive and the opportunity to alter the timing of revenues and expenditures without necessarily

affecting their long run levels or even their present values.

        Under GR}I, a particular fiscal year's deficit target could be met by increasing deficits in

subsequent years. The classic mechanism for doing so was the sale of government assets which, in

the most straightforward case, would reduce a current year's deficit and increase the deficits of

remaining years by an amount equal in present value. According to Reiscbauer (1990). fully half of

the deficit reduction under OR!-! fell into the "one-time savings" category including asset sales and

moving agencies off-budget.


    tlflj5 follows directly from the fact that the optimal forecast errors of the year t deficit made in
years t-5 through t should be temporally uncorrelated.

                                                     17
        Some have argued that this use of "smoke and minors" could have been curtailed through

better budget rule design. For example, a capital budget would have eliminated the deficit impact of

pure asset sale transactions. However, there were many "legitimate" fiscal changes during this

period, not generally criticized as "budget gimmicks", that had the same timing effects. An example

is the provisions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 that repealed the investment tax credit immediately

and retroactively and partially compensated for this tax increase by reducing the corporate tax rate."

This illustrates the futility of trying to distinguish between "good" and "bad" budget changes in an

annual context.

        The experience under ORB led to the BEA's use of a multiyear approach. However, even

under the BEA. incentives for shifting remain. Now, they simply must occur from fiscal years

beyond the six-year budget window over which the restrictions on policy apply. However, because

the shifting of deficits would be made only to those budget years for which an official deficit forecast

has yet to be made, it is impossible to identify such shifting from the policy changes actually

recorded. These shifts of deficits to "outside the budget window" would ultimately show up indirectly

through unusually high initial deficit forecasts for those future fiscal years.

        The fact that the restrictions that the BEA places in the future are then based on these initial

baseline deficits leads to the perverse result (not present under CR11, which relied on predetermined

deficit targets) that policies that decrease current deficits at the expense of future ones are then

sustained by the budget rules once those future years enter the budget window.




    "Since the investment tax credit reduces taxes on investments when they occur, while a corporate
tax cut reduces taxes on investments over time, a policy of reducing the ITC and the corporate tax at
the same time, keeping the present value of taxes collected from each new investment constant,
accelerates the tax collections from new investment. The provisions of the "86 Act were somewhat
more complicated in that they repealed the ITC retroactively and extended the corporate tax reduction
to existing assets.

                                                    18
          For example, the current budget window includes fiscal years 1994-99. A tax speed-up

enacted   this year from fiscal year 2000 to fiscal year 1999 might be used to raise enough revenue in

 1999 to offset some other, deficit-increasing policy of equal magnitude in the same fiscal year. As a

result, the combined policy would cause no net change in the estimated fiscal year 1999 deficit, and an

increase in the baseline deficit for fiscal year 2000, when initially reported. The BEA rules would

then   be based on this initial forecast, and thereby would sustain the previous year's deficit increasing

policy. Indeed, if the collection of all the income taxes from fiscal year 2000 were speeded up to

fiscal year 1999, the initial baseline deficit for fiscal year 2000 would reflect the absence of any

income tax collections.

          1-low much shifting has occurred under the different budget rules? We cannot observe the

magnitude of shifts under BEA, for they would occur from future years for which estimates have not

generally been available. Within the six-year budget window, we can only observe the shifts induced

by OR]-!, which would take the form of deficit reductions in the current fiscal year achieved at the

cost of increased deficits in subsequent fiscal years.

         Figure 5 presents the pattern of deficit reduction (excluding interest) during three regimes:

pre-GRH, OR]-! and BEA. For each of these eras, I have aggregated the policy changes, in each case

recording the impact of the change on the current year's deficit and those of the five subsequent fiscal

years. In terms of the notation introduced above, the policy changes along each curve      are the average

values of P1, 1P,.1,      P1.,, 1P1, and 1P,5 during the regime, expressed in terms of deficit

Suction (i.e., in negative terms) and as a percentage ofthe total.'3

         The incentives under ORB for shifting into the current fiscal year suggest that a greater share

of such deficit reduction would occur during the current fiscal year under ORB than before ORB. On



    t3Because of the difficulty of classification, I have omitted the changes that occurred
contemporaneously with the enactment of both ORB and BEA.

                                                     '9
the other hand, BEA's restrictions on shifting from any of the next five years would, if anything.

make shifting from these fiscal years less likely even than before CR11. when no explicit restrictions

on shifting existed.

        Indeed,   Figure 5 bears these predictions out. Before GEM, the average policy change

involved an increase in the current year's deficit and reductions in the deficits of the next five years.

Under GEM, enacted policies had little effect on the deficit five years out but a considerable impact on

the current year's deficit. Under BEA, we have reverted to a situation in which the average impact of

policy is to increase the current year's deficit", but the pattern of deficit reduction is shifted even

more toward the later years of the sample than before GEM. In a sense, the adoption of the BEA has

succeeded in eliminating timing shifts within the budget window. But this change does not indicate

the absence of shifts from fiscal years more than five years into the future, and could be one

explanation for why the initial baselines jumped suddenly in fiscal year 1997, the first initial baseline

to appear after the adoption of the new budget rules (see Figure 2).


3.4. Summary

        The budget rules of the past decade have not succeeded in achieving sustained deficit

reduction. The "budget gimmicks" and unrealistic deficit targets of CR11 give way to the less

ambitious but longer-horizon constraints of the BEA. However, the BEAk still permits policies that

shift deficits 'outside the budget window" and sustains these policies by relying on initial baseline

estimates rather than budget targets. Moreover, it provides no error-correction mechanism to deal

with the six years of forecast errors that occur after a fiscal year's deficit is first officially forecast.




     "These deficit increases are possible, given the restrictions against enacting a policy to increase
the deficit, because of various loopholes in the rules, such as the ability to suspend the rules in cases
of "emergency".

                                                     20
         These incentives to shift deficits from one year to another have translated into policy actions,

 as measured by patterns of deficit reduction within the six-year budget window. Much of these shifts

 resulted from 'legitimate' budget changes not viewed as budget 'gimmicks,' illustrating one of the

 weaknesses   of budget control measures based on annual or multiyear deficits rather than on long-mn

 fiscal consequences. Under BEA, though, the full impact is difficult to ascertain precisely because the

 increased deficits are beyond the official forecast horizon.


4. OBRA 1993 and its Medium-Run Effects

        The Clinton program enacted in OBRA 1993 was the first important change in fiscal policy

since the 1990 budget agreement. As the introduction indicated, the legislation was estimated to have

provided as much as $500 billion in deficit reduction over the five fiscal years between 1994 and

1998. It includes a variety of tax increases, reductions in the level of discretionary spending, and

reductions in spending on entitlements, particularly Medicare.


4.1. Sources of Short-Term Deficit Reduction

        Before considering the long-mn impact of the Clinton plan, it is important to ask how realistic

its projected savings are, even in the short nm. Put another way, how likely is it that the recent

pattern of upward forecast revisions of deficits continue.

        On the revenue side, there has been the critique, already cited above, of the projected

revenues from the legislations large increases in the top individual marginal tax rates. For example,

Feldstein (1993) argues that virtually no net revenue will be collected as a result of the tax increase.

representing a gap of over $20 billion per year at 1993 income levels relative to estimates ignoring




                                                   21
 any behavioral effects." His estimates are based on the responsiveness of taxpayers to the marginal

 tax rate reductions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.

        Given the relatively small overall labor supply and savings elasticities typically found in the

 empirical literature, bow can Feldstein's estimated revenue effects be justified? There are two main

 arguments, both based on the fact that the 1993 tax changes are highly progressive.

        First, absent any behavioral effects, a progressive tax change will raise less revenue from

affected taxpayers than would a proportional tax change on the same group that produced the same

increase in their marginal tax rate, since the average tax rate will be lower than the marginal tax rate.

But the policies will have the same substitution effect of behavior. Hence, if the two policies lead to

the same behavioral reduction in before-tax income, the associated percentage reduction in the revenue

gain will be larger under the progressive tax increase. This is just another way of saying that the

deadweight loss of progressive taxation is greater than that of proportional taxation.

        In addition, the implied behavioral responses of taxpayers, particularly those in the
                                                                                              highest
income classes, to the 198116 as well as the 1986 reductions in marginal tax rates, are much larger

than would be implied by labor supply and savings elasticities. The usual explanation is that much of

the taxpayer response took the form of income shifting from tax-favored to fully taxable (and

observed) categories, rather than changes in underlying work and saving behavior.

        Is behavior after the 1986 Act a good predictor of what will happen after the 1993 Act?

Given the many other provisions contained in each piece of legislation, and other economic changes

that have occurred simultaneously, it is extremely hard to know. There are differences in the two

pieces of legislation that could push the results in either direction. For example, some of the increase


    "The CBO projections, based on revenue estimates produced by the Joint Tax Committee,
presumably incorporate some assumed behavioral changes, but they are clearly smaller than those for
which Feldstein argues.

   "See Lindsey (1987).

                                                  22
 in taxable income in higher income classes after the 1986 Act undoubtedly resulted from the Act's

 restrictions on tax shelter activity, which were not reversed by the 1993 Act. On the other hand,

 because the 1993 Act is very progressive, its income effects on labor supply and saving behavior are

 likely to be smaller relative to its substitution effects, compared to the those of the 1986 Act. As long

 as leisure and consumption are normal goods, this would lead to greater behavioral responses, given

 the marginal tax rate changes, than occurred after the 1986 Act.

         In summary, it is difficult to know whether we will observe large "technical" adjustments to

 revenue forecasts over the next few years as a result of the assumptions underlying present

 projections. There is also the question of whether any large behavioral changes that do occur

 represent permanent changes, or simply temporary ones)7

        While OBRA 1993's projected revenue increases derive from changes in specific tax njles,

some of the estimated spending reductions simply reflect the legislation's changes in the targets for

future spending levels, which both CBO and 0MB have chosen to incorporate into their baseline

forecasts. Foremost among these — and representing about a third of the estimated non-interest deficit

reduction by 1998 — is the "bard freeze" in overall discretionary spending that would keep

discretionary spending roughly constant in nominal terms between fiscal years 1993 and 1998 —

representing a drop of roughly 2 percent of GDP, or about a 22 percent cut in the level of

discretionary spending relative to what would prevail if suck spending remained at its 1993 share of

GD?.




     "Feenberg and Poterba (1993) provide evidence that the surge of reported income among high
income taxpayers occurred largely in 1987 and 1988, and actually receded in 1989. This is relevant
to the results Feldstein presents, which compare the behavior of taxpayers in the years 1985 and 1988.

                                                   23
4.2. Timing and Deficits Beyond 1998

        The previous discussion dealt with the extent to which the estimated effects of OBRA 1993 on

near-term budget deficits is plausible. Even if these estimates are accurate, a second question is the

extent to which such deficit reductions help address the federal government's long-mn fiscal problems,

as opposed simply to reducing deficits temporarily or shifting deficits to fiscal years beyond 1998 that

lie beyond the official budget forecasting horizon.

        Because much of OBRA 1993's estimated deficit-reduction on the spending side simply takes

the form of reduced spending targets, rather than specific reductions, it is difficult to identify the

longer run effects of the legislation on spending. On the revenue side, though, it is easy to identify

specific provisions of the legislation that do not increase revenues beyond 1998 as much as they do

during the budget period, or lose more revenue afteT 1998 than they do during the budget period.

        For example, both corporate and individual estimated tax provisions have been tightened,

leading to a one-time speed-up in the timing of tax collections as a greater share of each year's tax

payments are made in advance. Securities dealers holding appreciated securities in inventory must

move from a cash basis to an accrual basis in paying tax on these gains, again a one-time speed-up

revenue collections. The tax treatment of intangible assets was altered in a way that raised more

revenue during the budget period than afterward, when it may well lose several billion dollars per

year.' These four revenue provisions alone have been estimated by the Joint Tax Committee (1993)

to raise approximately $14.8 billion over the period 1994-98. The small business capital gains tax



    "There were two factors that led to this result. First, the provisions could be applied up to two
years retroactively at the discretion of the taxpayer. As a result, firms whose past acquisitions of
intangible assets would benefit from the new provisions were induced to settle court cases and pay the
now-Iowa taxes due on these past transactions, thereby speeding up tax payments but lowering them
in present value. Second, by shifting from a system under which some intangible assets (i.e.
goodwill) could not be amortized at all and others were amortized over short lifetimes to one under
which most intangibles were written off over 15 years, the legislation raised more revenue in the short
run than the long run. See Gravelle (1993) for further discussion.

                                                      24
cut, one of the key tax incentives of the Clinton program, loses less than a billion dollars over the five

years through 1998 — because stock must be held for at least five years after the effective date to

qualify for the 50 percent capital gains tax exclusion. Presumably, once the five year waiting period

is over, the revenue loss will burgeon.19 And, while the extension of the low-income housing credit is

projected to lose $4.9 billion between 1994 and 1998, its annual cost will reach much higher levels in

the years that follow because more and more vintages of housing wilt be receiving this multi-year

credit simultaneously.

        How much impact do these and other such provisions have on future deficits? As discussed

above, official forecasts   of the impact of OBRA 1993 in fiscal years beyond 1998 do not exist.

However, an estimate can be made using the overall, unofficial' 10-year budget forecasts     that CR0

recently has begun publishing. While CR0 does not explicitly identify how much of the revisions in

these forecasts over time are attributable to economic, technical and policy changes, a rough division

can be made. The Appendix describes the method used. The resulting estimates       of the policy impact
of OBRA 1993 for fiscal years 1999-2003. expressed as a share of GDP, are shown in Figure 6,

along with CEO's official estimates for the period 1994-1998?

        In Figure 6. the revenue increase attributable to OBRA 1993 clearly falls after 1998. The

magnitude   of this drop amounts to about 15-20 billion dollars per year in 1994 dollars, which is

plausible given the magnitude of the various speed-up provisions reviewed above and the crudeness of

the calculation. However, there is no such drop on the spending side where, remarkably, the

magnitude of the projected deficit reduction continues to grow, not simply in absolute terms but as a




    "The small immediate revenue loss estimated results from the assumption that some gaiiis that
otherwise would have been realized will be deferred in order to receive the tax cut.

     '°The lack of smoothness in the projected revenue and expenditure patterns in 1999 presumably is
attributable to the roughness of the projection technique being used.

                                                    25
share of GD? — from 1.53 percent of GDP in fiscal year 1998 to 2.04 percent in 2003. A large part

of this comes from a projected slowing of Medicare growth after 1998.

       Are these spending forecasts plausible? In addition to the slower growth of Medicare, they

include the prediction (carried over from before OBRA) that discretionary spending wilt continue to

fall after 1998 as a share of GD?, from 6.9 percent to 6.3 percent — a net reduction of 2.5 percent of

GD? over the 10-year period beginning in fiscal year 1993, and a drop of 4.2 percent of GDP from

fiscal year 1985. Whether such continued reductions are feasible remains to be seen. However, it is

clear that they cannot continue forever, even if the projections through 2003 prove to be accurate.


5. The Suslainability of Current Fiscal Policy
        Despite the persistence of deficits in recent years, many observers find reasons for optimism

about fiscal policy's long-mn trajectory. After all, the frderal deficit, which exceeded 5 percent of

GD? for each year of the period 1983-86 and neared this level again in the early '90s. is projected to

fall to 2.2 percent of GDP by 1998. The deficit for 2003, which before the passage of OBRA was

projected to rise to 6.9 percent of GD?, is now forecast to rise only to 3.1 percent. Moreover, the

primary deficit (the deficit excluding net interest paid), a key measure for empirical tests of

sustainability, is now (in fiscal year 1994) only .4 percent of GDP and is projected to pass into

surplus in fiscal year 1995 and stay there through 2003.

        However, longer run projections do not support optimistic conclusions based on such short-mn

measures. There are two basic reasons for this. One is the continuing rapid growth of government

medical care expenditures. The other is the shift of the social security system from its recent cash-

flow surpluses to significant cash-flow deficits. Each of these changes illustrates the difficulty of

evaluating sustainability based on the behavior of current or past deficits, as empirical tests typically

have tried to do.



                                                   26
5.1. Sustainability and the Intertemporal Bud2et Constraint

        Most discussion of the sustainability of fiscal policy begins with the presentation of the

governments intertemporal budget constraint,


                                       B, + S (1 +rfl'DP          0                                    (8)




where BL is the debt outstanding at the beginning of year t, DP1 is the primary deficit at the end of

year t, and r is the discount rate. This constraint is derived simply by applying the annual budget

constraint relating B, and B11 forward successively and then imposing the terminal condition,

 urn (1 +r)""BT=O.
1—
        A policy that does not satisfy this terminal condition is not sustainable, for it implies that the

debt will explode at a rate faster than r. Hence, one strategy of testing for sustainability. putsimply,

has been to see whether the behavior of B1 over time has been consistent with the terminal condition

being met — basically whether the national debt, given its past time series properties, is predicted to

grow faster than the appropriate discount rate (see, e.g., Hamilton and Flavin 1986; Wilcox 1989).

An intrinsic problem with such tests, however, is their reliance on past behavior of the debt as a

predictor of the future. This is a particular problem now, as demographic shifts alter the level and

growth rare of entitlement spending.

        Moreover, these tests are very susceptible to the changes in the timing of deficits so easily

accomplished by policymakers rn the past. The underlying hypothesis being tested relates to the sum

of the initial stock of debt and the present value of future primary deficits —the left hand side of(S)

above. But, without changing the value of this sum, it is very easy to change B, and each annual

primary deficit, and hence the short-run behavior of both the debt and the deficit.




                                                    27
        The problem here is much more serious than needing to make corrections for "budget

gimmicks" that distort the "true" pattern of deficits. As discussed above in SectionS, there are many

"legitimate' policy changes that have precisely the same time pattern of deficit effects. There really is

no true pattern of deficits, only what particular policies and conventions define.

        For example, replacing the social security system with an actuarially fair public pension

system investing in government debt plus an old age transfer program to the elderly (to replicate the

net transfers implicit in the current social security system) would have no effect on the sum of the

national debt plus the present value of future primary deficits — indeed, it would have no real effects

at all — but it would raise the national debt immediately by the stock of outstanding unfunded

liabilities of the social security system, and offset the surpluses presently being recorded with even

larger accumulating liabilities to the working population. Hence, our conclusions, not only about the

level of deficits but also about their trajectory, would be strongly affected.

        In short, while the intertemporal budget constraint is well-defined, the level of any year's debt

or deficit is not (Kotlikoff 1986). There are many examples from actual and proposed legislation of

policies that are essentially equivalent to one another, except for their consequences for the timing of

measured deficits.2' The only solution is to measure the entire left-band side of(S) — to look at

projected fiscal policy into the very distant future?2


5.2. Long-Run Fiscal Projections

        To evaluate the sustainability of fiscal policy, I form projections of primary Federal deficits

after 2004, the last fiscal year for which CBO estimates exist. To highlight the importance of

entitlement spending, I assume — probably optimistically, given the low level of discretionary


   21See Auerbach and Koiiikoff (1987) and Auerbach, Gokhale and Kotlikoff (1991).

    Even this statement is true only under the assumption, which seems reasonable, that satisfaction
of the terminal condition will not be influenced by changes in budget accounting conventions.

                                                   28
 spending relative to GD? forecast for 2004 — that all non-interest spending other than Medicare,

 Medicaid and OASDI (Social Security) remain constant at their projected 2004 shares of GD?, and

 that all revenues except OASDI payroll taxes do so as well. Hence, I assume primary deficits as a

 share of GD? grow after 2004 exactly to the extent that Medicare plus Medicaid and OASDI benefits

 less payroll taxes do so.

         For social security benefits, I use the Social Security Tnistees' 1993 middle ('Alternative II")

projections, which extend through the year 2OlO. For federal Medicare and Medicaid spending, I

use the middle projections for real spending through the year 2030 made by the Health Care Financing

Administration (HCFA) in 1991, the most recent such projections publicly available. Between 2030

and 2070, I assume that Medicaid stays constant as a share of GD?, and that Medicare grows at the

same rate as OASDI benefits. This assumption basically means that post-2030 growth in federal

medical costs comes from demographic shifts — the growing share of elderly in the population —

rather than changes in the relative price of medical care. After 2070, I assume that OASDI,

Medicare, and Medicaid all row at the same rate as GD?.

        These projections, along with those resulting for the primary deficit, are shown in Figure 7.

The Social Security system's current cash flow surpluses are projected to turn to deficits by 2017,

which continue growing in magnitude thereafter. The swing increases the primary deficit by 1.7

percent of GD? by 2030, and 2.3 percent by 2070. At the same time, federal spending on Medicare


   rThese projections give taxes (income), benefits (outgo) and the balance between taxes and
benefits as a share of GD? every five years. I interpolate to obtain values for the years in between.

    2'Medicaid spending financed by state governments is excluded from the calculations.

     'l'hese are the same projections used in the 'Generational Accounting' calculations of the federal
budget during the past three fiscal years. See, for example, 0MB (1994). Because the HCFA
projections for 2004, primarily for Medicaid, differ from those currently offered by CBO. I
benchmark the 2004 numbers to the CBO projections, and adjust all subsequent years' HCFA
projections by the same fraction of real GD? as the 2004 adjustments represent. The projections for
real GD? are based on CBO's assumed growth rate for the period 1998-2003 of 2.3 percent per year.

                                                   29
 and Medicaid is predicted to continue to grow faster than GD? through 2030, due to growth in both

 the real cost of health care and the ratio of beneficiaries to the total population. This growth in

 medical care spending increases the primary deficit by 2.3 percent of GD? between 2004 and 2030.

MItt 2030, demographic shifts alone add another .2 percent of GD? to the primary deficit.

        Together, these two factors are projected to increase the primary deficit steadily over the

period from .2 percent of GD? in 2004 to 4.2 percent of GDP in 2030 and 5.0 percent by 2070.

Indeed, the prospects may be even worse. These calculations incorporate projections for the growth

of real health care spending between 2004 and 2030 that were based on a lower assumed rate of GD?

growth than the 2.3 percent assumed here. In a sense, I am assuming that faster GD? growth will not

lead to faster growth in Medicare and Medicaid. If, instead, I incorporate the original projections of

Medicare and Medicaid spending, relative to GD?. through 2030, the result will be faster growth in

health care entitlements and primary deficits that are nearly 2 percent of GD? higher by 2030. as

indicated by the upper dashed line in Figure 7.

        Even if the relative price of medical care were completely stabilized in 2004, rather than

203021 (as represented by the lower dashed line in Figure 7), the primary deficit would still grow to

3.2 percent of GD? by 2030 and 3.9 percent by 2070.


5.3. Addressin the LonE-Run Imbalance

       With primary deficits projected to grow continually over the next several decades, fiscal

policy is not on a sustainable path. These large projected primary 4eficits, in combination with the

initial stock of outstanding debt, would cause the fill deficit, including interest, to grow explosively

relative to GD?. For example, under the base case projections in Figure 7 and a real interest rate

exceeding the real GD? growth rate by 1 percentage point, the debt-GD? ratio would grow from .55


  21For this simulation, Medicaid is held constant as a share of GD? at its projected 2004 level, and
Medicare is assumed to grow at the same rate as OASDI benefits starting in 2004, rather than 2030.

                                                   30
 in 2004 to 1.31 at the end of 2030 (the beginning of 2031) and 4.1 at the end 012070. For an

 inflation rate of 2.5 percent, this would translate into full nominal deficits rising from 3.3 percent of

 GDP in 2004 to 11.5 percent of GD? in 2030 and 28.5 percent of GD? in 2070!

         One way of interpreting an imbalance of this magnitude is in terms of the immediate,

permanent reduction in the primary deficit (brought about through tax increases and/or spending

reductions) that, if projections prove accurate, would be needed to bring the debt-GD? ratio at some

date T in the future doit to its level at some initial date I, in this case 2004. This needed reduction

in the primary deficit, as a share of GD?. may be shown to equal:




                                  A   a   (r—g)[b,
                                                     +
                                                          1+r   j+,:
                                                                d1,(JtL)T1


                                                                (j;)l
                                                                                                       (9)




where g is the growth rate of GDP and d, is the primary deficit-GD? ratio in year s.

        As discussed in Blanchard ul (1990), a terminal date of T=co corresponds to satisfying the

intertemporal budget constraint, (8). Given the projected growth of primary deficits between 2004

and 2070, hitting the target debt-GD? ratio at some intermediate date will require a lower tax

increase, but still leave the job partially unfinished.

        Table 3 presents the permanent reductions in the primary deficits indicated by this procedure,

for terminal dates of 2031 • 2071 and w, for different assumptions about medical care spending and

different government discount rates. As a comparison of the upper and lower panels of the table

indicates, a lower interest rate assumption (with the interest rate exceeding the growth rate by I

percent rather than 2 percent) reduces the needed deficit Suction for the shortest horizon, but

increases it over the longest horizon. This is because, in the short run, the lower cost of servicing the

existing debt dominates the calculation (see (9)). Over the longer run, the future primary deficits



                                                         31
dominate the calculation and, with a lower interest rate, those far in the future — which are larger as a

share of GD? — matter relatively more.

        Even under the more optimistic assumptions about the growth of Medicare and Medicaid, an

immediate, permanent reduction of nearly 4 percentage points in the primary deficit-GDP ratio is

needed to satisfy the intertemporal budget constraint (8) (i.e., for T=w). The magnitude of this

change can be understood by noting that the federal individual income tax now raises just over 8

percent of GD?. Hence, individual income taxes would need to be raised permanently by nearly 50

percent. Alternatively, OASDI benefits would have to be cut permanently by about 60 percent.


5.4. What Policy Changes Are Needed?

        A natural reaction by policy makers is to dismiss pessimistic calculations based on long-term

forecasts, because the forecasts involve so much uncertainty. Indeed, the bounds on long-nan

projections are wide. For example, the Social Security Trustees' more optimistic ("Alternative I')

projections show the OASDI system in positive balance until around 2028, and back in positive

balance again about ten years later. Under such projections, even with no change in the medical

projections through 2030 or any of the other assumptions made above, the fiscal imbalance as

measured by A would be reduced by 1.1 to 1.6 percent of GDP. On the other hand, under the more

pessimistic ('Alternative Ill') Social Security projections, A would rise by 1.6 to 2.3 percent of GD?.

But the uncertainty inherent in long-run projections doesn't imply that no policy actions are necessary

until the uncertainty is resolved, merely that further actions will be inevitable.

        The calculations for T=a, made at any particular date t indicate the magnitude of the

permanent reduction in the primary deficit-GD? ratio, say A1, that is needed for currently projected

fiscal policy to satisfy the government's intertemporal budget constraint. (8). Such a change,

maintained over time, will actually satisfy (8) if projections at date t prove to be accurate. In



                                                     32
general, though, a trajectory based on 6 will not satisfy (8) in year t+ 1, once forecasts are revised.

Assuming that forecast revisions cannot be predicted, the process A.         A÷       will thus equal a

random walk. But the fact that A1 will change does not alter the fact that it represents an optimal

forecast at date t. At best (given recent experience), uncertainty means that projected deficits are as

likely to rise as to fall.

         It is a separate issue how the fiscal imbalance as estimated at any date should be addressed

over time. If tax rate changes are used to close the estimated fiscal gap, the simplest tax-smoothing

arguments derived from single-agent models (e.g. Barro 1979) might be used to support a policy of

implementing each period's A immediately, and letting the tax rate follow a random walk.

        In the real world, a variety of complications too numerous to mention make the solution more

difficult. It may not be feasible or even desirable to induce large frequent changes in tax rates. In the

shon run, other macroeconomic concerns may dominate decisions. Moreover, with population

heterogeneity within and across generations, distributional concerns must be added to arguments based

on minimizing the deadweight loss of taxation. Once this is done, annual patterns of deficit reduction

will not tell us enough about the underlying policy being adopted, for we must know which

generations, and which individuals within generations, are bearing each year's tax increases or

spending reductions.1 Here, the recently developed technique of generational accounting (Auerbach

ji 1991) is more appropriate, at least for evaluating changes in fiscal burdens across generations. Put

simply, generational accounting considers the impact on different generations of alternative ways of

satisfying the government's intertemporal budget constraint, (8).




    3'Such disaggregate analysis is also important for understanding the macroeconomic effects of
deficits, for the wealth effects of different policies on household consumption will vary across
members of particular generations and across generations as well. One recent attempt to consider the
macroeconomic effects of the large long-term deficits looming in the next century may be found in
U.S. General Accounting Office (1992).

                                                   33
       Recent calculations using generational accounting (0MB 1994, Table 3.3) are very sobering.

                                                                                constraint fall entirely on
They suggest that, should the tax burden of meeting the intertemporal budget
future generations (representing, perhaps, an unrealistic delay given the magnitude of the imbalance),

these generations will face tax burdens (net of transfers) that are more than double what current policy

would indicate — an increase from 36 percent to 82 percent of the present value of lifetime labor

income.2'



6. Conclusions

       The United States federal government has appeared to reduce deficits mightily over the past

decade, without actually doing so. Deficit forecasts during this period have proved very inaccurate

and overly optimistic. There is no simple economic explanation for such errors and, while political

pressures may have played a role, the exact mechanism is not yet clear. The budget rules of the

period may have hastened legislators to act, but were poorly designed for the purpose of restoring

fiscal balance. The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act and, particularly the 1990 Budget Enforcement Act,

impounded forecasting errors in their rules, and both permitted the postponement of serious action.

        Even with the passage of the 1993 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, the United States still

faces a major fiscal imbalance, attributable to growing health care costs and changing population

demographics. This imbalance, though enormous, is not easily identified using traditional methods of

evaluating fiscal sustainability because it is not apparent in the projections of current or near-term

deficits. Even if the growth of health care costs were stabilized within the next decade, demographics

alone would still produce large increases in the share of GDP accounted for by Social Security and

Medicare. Yet, the recent COO estimates of the impact of the Clinton health plan (COO 1994b),




    2These calculations include state and local taxes and transfer payments as well as those at the
federal level.

                                                    34
which project increased near-term deficits, suggest that health care reform may actually worsen the

looming fiscal imbalances reported here.




Appendix - Estimating the Effects of OBRA 1993 for the Period 1998-2003

       This appendix describes how the changes in deficits forecast by CBO for the period 1999-2003

from just before to just after the passage of OBRA 1993 are divided into economic, technical and

policy revisions. All calculations apply to the primary deficit, excluding interest.

        I begin with the changes in the deficits forecast for fiscal years 1999-2003 in early 1993 (CR0

1993a), before OBRA 1993. and late 1993 (CBO 1993b), after OBRA. I assume that economic

changes are captured entirely by changes in the forecast of nominal GD!'. Specifically, I measure as

changes due to economic factors those changes in revenues and non-interest spending that would have

occurred had these items been held constant at their post-OBRA shares of nominal (3D!'. Technical

changes are more difficult to guess, but, fortunately, these were quite small for the reported years

1993-1998 during this interval. Given this, I simply assume that the technical revisions over this

period to estimated 1998 revenues and expenditures also apply to each of the years 1999 through

2003, as well.

        Subtraction of these estimated economic and technical changes in revenues and spending yields

the estimated policy effects presented in Figure 6.




                                                      35
References
Auerbach, Alan 1., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, 1987, Dynamic Fiscal Policy (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).

Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence 3. Kotlikoff, 1991,"Generational Accounts: A
Meaningful Alternative to Deficit Accounting," in I). Bradford, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy 5
(Cambridge: MIT Press), pp. 55-110.

Barro, Robert .1., 1979, "On the Determination of the Public Debt," Journal of Political Economy 87,
October, pp. 940-971.

Blanchard, Olivier, Jean-Claude Cliouraqui, Robert P. Hagemann. and Nicola Sartor, 1990, "The
Suscainability of Fiscal Policy: New Answers to an Old Question," OECD Economic Studies 15,
Autumn, Pp. 7-36.

Feenberg, Daniel R. and James M. Poterba, 1993, "Income Inequality and the Incomes of Very
High-Income Tax Payers: Evidence from Tax Returns,' in J. Poterba, editor, Tax Policy and the
Economy 7 (Cambridge: MIT Press). pp. 145-77.

Feidstein, Martin, 1993, 'The Effect of Marginal Income Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel
Study of the 1986 Tax Reform Act," NBER Working Paper No. 4496. October.

Gramlich, Edward M., 1990, "U.S. Federal Budget Deficits and Gramm-Rudman-I-Iollings.
American Economic Review 80. May, pp. 75-80.

Gravelle, Jane G., 1993. "Estimating the Long-Run Revenue Effects of Tax Law Changes,'
Congressional Research Service. September.

Hamilton, James D. and Marjorie A. Flavin, 1986, 'On the Limitations of Government Borrowing: A
Framework for Empirical Testing,' American Economic Review 76. September. pp. 808-819.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., 1986, "Deficit Delusion," The Public Interest no. 84, Summer, pp. 53-65.

Lindsey, Lawrence, 1987, "Individual Taxpayer Response to Tax Cuts: 1982-1984, With Implications
for the Revenue-Maximizing Tax Rate," Journal of Public Economics 33, pp. 173-206.

Reischauer, Robert D.. 1990, 'Taxes and Spending Under Graznm-Rudman-Hollings," National Tax
Journal 43, September, pp. 223-232.

U.S. Congressional Budget Office, 1983a-1994a, The Economic and Budget Outlook.

_________ l983b-1993b, The Economic and Budget Outlook. Undate.

__________ 1994b, An Analysis of the Administration's Health Pronosal, February 8.



                                                 36
U.S. General Accounting Office, 1992, BudEet Policy PromDt Action Necessai-v to Avert Lonif-Term
Damaee, June 5.

U.S. Joint Committee on Taxation, 1993. Summary of the Revenue Provisions of the Omnibus Bud2et
Reconciliation Act of 1993, August 23.

U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1993, Mid-Session Review of the 1994 Bud2et, September.

__________ 1994, Bud2et of the United States Government. Fiscal Year 1995: Analytical
Persoectives, Chapter 3, February.

White, Halbert. 1980. 'A Heteroscedasticity-consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test
for Heteroscedasticity.' Econometrica 48, pp. 817438.

Wilcox, David, 1989. 'The Sustainability of Government Deficits: Implications of the Present-
Value Borrowing Constraint," Journal of Money. Credit and Bankin2 21, August, pp. 291-306.




                                                37
                                           Table I

                            Revenue Forecast Revisions, 1983-1993




Years Ahead                   Policy       Economic     Technical

          0                     3.8          -11.9        -4.6

          1                    10.0          -15.2        -6.5

          2                    21.0          -15.7        -6.7

          3                    14.9          -17.6        -7.6

          4                    17.9          -20.7        -7.2

          5                     9.5          -7.2         -2.9



  Total                        67.9         -88.3         -35.5




Source: CBO and author's calculations
                                                Table 2

                       Explaining Technical Revenue Forecast Revisions



                                                           Soecification

                                                  (1)                       (2)


Independent Variable

Constant                                         -4.21                     10.94
                                                 (-1.54)                   (2.56)


Dependent                                         0.28                      -0.61
Variable, lagged                                 (1.84)                    (-2.83)


Policy Revision.                                 -0.01                      -0.12
lagged                                           (-0.09)                   (-1.39)


Economic Revision,                                0.04                      -0.13
lagged                                           (0.73)                    (-2.03)


Time Trend                                                                 -4.50
(1985 = I)                                                                 (-4.22)




                                                  -.01                       .31



Number of Observations: 45



Note: t-statistics (incorporating the White (1980) standard error correction) are in parentheses
                                              Table 3

            Primary Deficit Reductions Needed to Achieve 2004 Debt-GDP Ratio

                                         (Percent of GDP)




                                                            Terminal Year

                                              2Q11            2221
Interest Rate

Growth Rate + 2%:

        Base Case                             2.97%           4.16%          4.72%

        Demographics only                     2.34            3.33           3.81

        Health Care GDP-adjusted              3.60            5.32           6.07




Growth Rate + 1%:

        Base Case                             2.52            3.88           4.80

        Demographics only                     1.86            3.01           3.81

        Health Care GOP-adjusted              3.19            5.16           6.39




Note: Simulations labeled 'Base Case' incorporate HCFA's 1991 projections of the levels of real
health care entitlement spending from 2004 to 2030; those labeled 'Demographics only' exclude those
increases in Medicare estimated to result from increases in the relative price of health care; those
labelled "Health Care GOP-adjusted' base health care projections from 2004 to 2030 on HCFAs
original projections of health care entitlement spending as a share of GOP. These simulations show
faster health care spending growth than the base case because the original IICFA projections were
based on lower real GD? growth rates than the 2.3 percent used in the base case simulations.
                                      Figure 1
      U.S. Federal Budget Deficits
                               Actual and Projected
     400                                                       7




     350
                                                               6




 300
 ct
                                                                    0
 250                                                                40
                                                                    t
 0                                                             A
                                                               .t   I—
                                                                    V
200
                                                               3
     150




     100                                                       2
           1983         1988            1993     1998   2003
                                        Year


Source: Congressional Budget Office
                                       Figure 2
      Initial Baselines and Policy
     400



                            mit] al Baseline D4flcit



                                                                                                     /
                                                                                                 11
                                                                                        •1

      100 -
                                       /
                                                                        mI'
                                                                         \I!
                                                                            II
                                                                          \II
                                                                                             I




                                 \I    I
                                                                /
                                                                    /                        I
            Baseline plus Policy                           •1                               II
        0 _____________________                    '.—J
                                                                        '               I
                                                                                        /
                                   :                                                /
                                   :
                                   :
                                               I   I   I
                                                             "I             I   I       I        I
     -100                          )       I                                                          I



            83 84   8.5   86 87 88 89 90 91            92939495969798
                                       Year

Source: Congressional Budget Office and author's calailalions
                                   Figure 3

                       Forecast Errors
      400




      300




 =    200




 I100
       0




     -100
            83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98
                                       Year

Source: CEO and author's ca1i1alions
                                      Figure 4

                       Technical Errors
                      Excluding Interest and S&L Bailout
     200




     150




 =   100




      50

 2
       0




     -50
           83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98
                                       Year

Source: CBO and author's ctilatjons
                                          Figure 5
             Deficit Reduction Patterns
                          Under Different Budget Regimes
        50




        40
                                                             BEA..
  C

        30
                                                     ,....
                                  pre-GRH
  I-             GRIT
        20
  4)
 0                                        4.-
 '2
        10



                              /
                     //
         0

 I     10
                 /
       -20                I           I          I
             0            1           2          3       4       5
                     Number of Fiscal Years into the Future

Source: CBO and author's 1ai1afions
                                          Figure 6
                Deficit Reduction, Relative to GDP
                                          OBRA 1993
         2.5




          2




         1.5




 I        I


 -3
        as
  4-.
 13
  0
          0



        -0.5
               1993 1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999 2000   2001   2002 2003
                                          Fiscal Year

Source: CBO and author's calculations
                                   Figure 7

     Components of Primary Deficits
                             Relative to GDP
     10

                                   Medicare + Medicaid
      8-

                         iJaing projected heaithJGDP ratios -- -
      6                        /
                             //      a
                                     nmary            t    a



      4                                                               -




      2




                                                  OASDJ Balance
     -2            I                          I   i         I
          2004    2017        2030          2043          2056     2069
                                  Fiscal Year

Source: See tet
