NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

U.S. INTEREST ALLOCATION
RULES: EFFECTS AND POLICY

Rosanne Altshuler
Jack Mintz

Working Paper No. 4712

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1994

We wish to thank Angela Cadena, Balvinder Sangha and Shvetank Shah for excellent research
assistance that had to be completed in a short period of time. We have benefitted from
comments from Julie Collins, Peter Merrill, Joel Slemrod, and members of the International
Tax Policy Forum. We also thank Julie Collins and Jim Hines for helpful discussions. This
Public
paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Trade and Investment and
not
those
of
the
National
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4712
April 1994
U.S. INTEREST ALLOCATION
RULES: EFFECTS AND POLICY

ABSTRACT
One of the important changes of the 1986 tax reform for U.S. multinationals is related to

the allocation of interest expense. Prior to 1986, U.S. companies allocated domestic interest

expense to the income of foreign affiliates on a non-consolidated basis according to the
distribution of gross income or assets. After 1986, a U.S. multinational is required to allocate

domestic interest expense on a consolidated basis according to the distribution of U.S. and
foreign assets.
We analyze the impact of the new interest allocation rules on the financial and investment

decisions of U.S. multinationals using data from a survey of multinationals assembled by Price
Waterhouse. We find that the allocation of interest expense increases the marginal cost of U.S.
debt by about 38 percent for firms with excess foreign tax credits. Our empirical tests suggest
that firms have altered the location of their borrowings in response to the new rules. We also
find that the requirement to allocate interest expense has a significant impacton the effective tax

rate faced by U.S. multinationals. For U.S. domestic investments, the interest allocation rules
increase the U.S. effective rate from 17.6 percent to 21.9 percent. The rules also increase the
effective tax rates on foreign investments made by U.S. firms.

Rosanne Altshuler
Department of Economics
New Jersey Hall
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
and NBER

Jack Mintz
Faculty of Management
University of Toronto
246 Bloor Street West
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1V4
CANADA

1.

INTRODUCTION
In 1986, the U.S. government undertook a significant reform of its income tax system.

Among the many changes were those made to the tax treatment of foreign source income of U.S.

multinationals. Included in the tax reform were new rules for the calculation of foreign source
income, foreign tax credits and the allocation of costs between foreign and domestic sources.

One of the important changes of this reform is related to the allocation of interest
expense. Prior to 1986, U.S. companies allocated U.S.-source interest expense incurred by their
domestic members to the income of foreign affiliates on a noncorisoIidated basis according to

the distribution of gross income or assets. After 1986, a U.S. multinational is required to
allocate domestic interest expense to U.S. and foreign source gross income on a consolidated

basis according to the distribution of U.S. and foreign assets. The intent of this and other
policies directed towards the tax treatment of foreign source income was to prevent the erosion

of the U.S. corporate tax revenue base that would result from multinationals shifting expense
to the United States. However, by increasing the U.S. tax on U.S. source income, the outcome
of these policies may have affected the competitiveness of U.S. multinationals vis-a-vis other
foreign multinationals located in countries where similar rules have not been adopted.'

This work analyzes the impact of the new U.S. interest allocation rules on the financial
and investment decisions of U.S. multinational corporations.2 The paper is divided into four

deductions have raised the cost
'As discussed below, the U.S. allocation rules for interest
of
capital
for
U.S.
multinationals making them
of financing operations by U.S. debt and the cost
less competitive relative to domestic corporations.

2Earlier studies of the interest allocation rules include Collins and Shackelford (1992),
Andrus (1988), and Froot & Hines (1994).

2

additional sections. Section 2 provides a background discussion of the impact of interest
allocation rules on financing and investment decisions of U.S. companies. Section 3 reports the

results of empirical tests regarding the impact of U.S. interest allocation rules on the financing

of U.S. parent and subsidiary operations.3 Section 4 examines the potential impact of interest

allocation rules on the competitiveness of U.S. multinationals and presents calculations of
effective tax rates for investments at home and abroad taking the interest allocation rules into

account. Conclusions are contained in section 5.

2.

BACKGROUND
As mentioned above, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (hereafter, TRA'86) altered the U.S.

rules for the allocation of interest to domestic and foreign source income. Underlying the
interest allocation rules is the theory that the debt of multinational corporations is fungible across

jurisdictions.4 In this section, we review the law related to interest allocation, and discuss, in
theoretical terms, its impact on the financing and investment decisions of U.S. multinationals.5

2. 1

Interest Allocation Rules

The interest allocation rules contained in TRA'86 resulted in three primary changes:
3Since our data comes from foreign subsidiaries of U.S. parent companies, we focus on the
interest allocation rules concerning this form of foreign affiliate organization. Special rules
apply to the allocation of interest expense for foreign branches.

4Note that full fungibility was not adopted in 1986. Debt of the U.S. group, and interest
thereon, is allocated to income received from foreign affiliates even if the foreign affiliates are
self-financed, i.e. the debt of foreign affiliates is disregarded.
5A good description of the tax law concerning the allocation of interest expense is contained
in Froot and Hines (1994).

3

i. One taxpayer concett for affiliated companies: Prior to 1986, companies in an affiliated
U.S. group could apportion interest expense between domestic and foreign sources on a separate

company basis. After 1986, U.S. multinationals are required to aggregate affiliated company
income and interest expense to calculate interest for the purpose of taxing foreign and domestic
source income. A company is affiliated to a group if 80 percent of its voting stock or 80 percent

of the total value of outstanding stock is held directly or indirectly by includible corporations.

One impact of this provision is that it is much more difficult, perhaps impossible, for parents
to avoid the allocation of interest expense to foreign source income simply by isolating debt in
a single affiliated domestic subsidiary which has no foreign source income.

ii. Asset allocation: Prior to 1986, multinationals had the option to allocate domestic interest
expense under either the gross income method6 (i.e. ratable to amounts of foreign source and
domestic source income) or the asset method (assets were measured according to "fair market
value" or "tax book value").7 Since 1986, companies must allocate domestic interest expense

according to the distribution of assets held by the parent in domestic and foreign affiliates.
Therefore the ratio of foreign assets to worldwide assets determines the percentage of interest
expense that must be allocated abroad. Domestic assets include business assets held by the U.S.

affiliated group which produce U.S. source income, while foreign assets of the U.S. affiliated

6Both prior to and after 1986, interest expense on certain non-recourse debt could be
allocated entirely against the income generated by the secured asset.
7Tax book value is generally equal to the original cost of assets less depreciation allowed for
tax purposes.

4

group include foreign branch assets and affiliated foreign company equity (stock and accumulated

earnings and profits).

iii. The netting ruk: The netting rule is related to U.S. parent financing of subsidiary debt.
The rule is intended to prevent taxpayers from replacing third-party debt of foreign affiliates

with debt to the U.S. group, an otherwise available 'self-help technique for achieving
worldwide fungibility. Under the netting rule, interest incurred on third-party debt issued by
the U.S. members may be attributed directly to foreign source interest on debt held by the parent

in affiliated foreign companies. The amount of domestic interest expense allocated to foreign
source income is determined by the relationship of debt as a ratio of assets for the subsidiary and

parent. In particular, if the parent's ratio of third-party debt to assets is more than 80 percent
of the foreign affiliate group's debt/asset ratio, then the excess interest on debt will be allocated

to foreign source income. The netting rules have been modified fundamentally on two
occasions since their original promulgation in 1987.

2.2

Tax Impact of the Interest Allocation Rules

The allocation of interest to foreign source income need not affect the amount of U.S.

tax paid by the U.S. multinational.

The impact depends on the position of the U.S.

multinational vis-a-vis its payment of tax on foreign source income. U.S. multinationals are
subject to taxation on both U.S. and foreign source income. A company is subject to U.S. taxes

This ratio test was the second iteration of the rule, since replaced by a third version which
an increase in U.S. group loans
"triggers" if there has been an increase in U.S. group debt
to foreign affiliates.

5

on actual and deemed dividends from foreign subsidiaries but is allowed a credit, subject to
with respect to these
limitation, for withholding taxes paid andincome taxes deemed to be paid

dividends. If the foreign tax credit is less than

the

U.S. tax on remitted income, the U.S.

multinational will pay U.S. tax equal to the difference between the two amounts. This is the socalled "excess limitation" case.9 If the potential foreign tax credit is more than the U.S. tax
liability, there is no U.S. tax owing on foreign source income.'0 In this case, the multinational
is in an "excess credit" position because it has more available credits than it can use in a given
year.

The foreign tax credit thus is limited to the lesser of foreign income tax paid on foreign
source income (in the "excess limitation" case) or U.S. tax due before credit (in the "excess

tax

credit" case). As a result of this limitation on the use of foreign tax credits, the interest
allocation rules may have an important impact on a U.S. multinational depending on its foreign

tax credit position. In particular, when the U.S. multinational is in an excess limitation position,
the interest allocation rule has no impact on the U.S. company. Although allocated U.S. source

interest may decrease foreign source income, the reduced U.S. tax liability on foreign source
income compensates for the increased U.S. tax liability on domestic source income. However,
when the company is in an excess credit situation, the allocation of U.S. source interest expense

9Alternatively, this is called the deficient tax credit case.

Foreign tax credits can be carried back for two years and carried forward for five years.
However, under current U.S. tax law, unused credits are not carried forward at a rate of
interest.

6

to foreign source income decreases the U.S. tax paid on foreign source income (the limitation)
and thus increases the amount of tax paid on domestic source income.t
This argument can be presented more formally as follows. Let t*F* be foreign tax paid

at the rate t on foreign source income defined by the foreign authority (F*).12 Let tF be the

U.S. tax paid at the rate t on foreign source income F as defined under U.S. rules. As
discussed above, the U.S. multinational is given a foreign tax credit equal to the lesser of t*F*
or tF. Further, let D be domestic source income (before the deduction of interest) and I be U.S.
source interest expense.
When the company is in excess limitation, it receives a foreign tax credit of t*F* and its
aggregate tax on domestic and foreign source income without interest allocation is the following:

T = t(D-I) + tF - t*F*
= t(D+F-I) - t*F*

(1)

When interest is allocated abroad, a portion is deductible against domestic source income and
the balance against foreign source income as defined by the U.S. authorities (note only the U.S.

tax liability, not the foreign tax paid to other authorities, is affected by the amount of interest
allocated abroad). Let a be the portion of interest expense allocated to foreign source income.
Thus, for excess limitation corporations, total tax paid with interest allocation remains constant:

T = t[D-(l-a)I] + t(F-al) - t*F*
This loss of foreign tax credits may only be temporary due to credit carryforwards.

However, since foreign tax carryforwards do not earn interest they are worth less than foreign
tax credits that can be claimed either in the current period or through carrybacks.

'2Under U.S. rules, companies pooi sources of foreign income into "baskets". Thus, t' may
be thought of as an average tax rate imposed on aggregate foreign source income in the basket
in question.

7

= t(D+F-l) - t*F*

(2)

The allocation of interest increases U.S. tax paid on domestic source income (by the amount tal)

in favor of a reduction in U.S. tax paid by the same amount (taT). Thus, as long as the U.S.
multinational maintains its excess limitation position after the allocation of interest, there is no

impact of interest allocation on the tax paid by the parent company.

On the other hand, if the U.S. multinational is in an excess credit position, the foreign

tax credit is limited to the U.S. tax on foreign source income, tF. The amount of tax paid,
without allocation of interest, is the following:

T = t(D-I) + tF - tF = t(D-L)

(3)

With the allocation of interest expense to foreign source income, the U.S. company's tax liability

will be the following:

T = t[D-(1-a)I] + t(F-al) - t(F-aI)
= t[D-(1-a)I]

(4)

Effectively, the role of the interest allocation rule is to reduce the amount of U.S. interest
expense that corporations in excess credit positions can deduct against total income.'3

To what extent do interest allocation rules impact on the taxes paid by multinationals?
Earlier work by Hines and Hubbard (1990) and Altshuler and Newton (1993) suggestthat many

'3Note that if the U.S. government gave a refundable tax credit when foreign taxes are more
than U.S. tax liabilities on foreign source income, then the allocation rule would have no impact
on the amount of tax owing. Allocated interest expense would reduce U.S. tax liabilities and
increase the amount of the tax refund. Of course, the U.S. government does not give a refund
for excess foreign taxes paid in order to protect its revenue base and avoid subsidizing high tax
rates in foreign countries.

8

u.s. multinationals were in excess credit positions in the mid-1980s)4 Thus, interest allocation
rules would be expected to have at least some effect on U.S. companies)5
Almost all of the 17 large multinational companies surveyed by Price Waterhouse for this

project reported that the interest allocation rules had at least some impact on their decisions)'

Twelve companies reported that the "one taxpayer" rule had a major impact while three
companies reported a moderate impact. The asset-apportionment rule had a major impact on
nine companies and a moderate impact on five companies. The netting rule had a major impact

on two companies, a moderate impact on three companies and no impact on eight companies.
Thus, the "one taxpayer" and asset-apportionment rules were the most importantin their impact
on the surveyed multinationals.

2.3

Impact on Behavior

There are a number of expected effects of the interest allocation rules on the behavior

of the U.S. multinational when it is in the excess tax credit case. One obvious impact of the
new rules is for the U.S. multinational to reduce U.S. interest expense to mitigate the direct
effects of interest allocation. This can be achieved in a number of ways, including substituting
preferred equity for debt, deconsolidating highly leveraged domestic subsidiaries, and reducing

parent debt.

4Hines and Hubbard (1990) present statistics on foreign tax credit positions of U.S.
multinational corporations using tax return information from 1984. Altshuler and Newlon (1993)
calculated foreign tax credit positions using similar data from 1986.

'51t is more likely that multinationals will find themselves in excess credit positions after
1986 since TRA'86 lowered the statutory U.S. tax rate from 46 to 34 percent.
"Section 3 contains a description of the dataset assembled from this survey.

9

Alternatively, the U.S. multinational can shift financing offshore by reducing debt of the

U.S. group and increasing borrowing by foreign affiliates. Moreover, since only the equity held

by foreign affiliates is included in the allocation formula, a shift to foreign debt reduces the
percentage of remaining interest expense allocated to foreign source income.'7 At the same
time, a shift to debt held by subsidiaries reduces foreign source income and corporate taxes paid

to foreign jurisdictions. Depending on corporate tax rates, interest rates, and other factors, this
may result in the multinational moving from an excess tax credit position to an excess limitation
position so that interest allocation rules no longer matter (although should such a shift occur, the

multinational pays some U.S. tax, in excess of foreign tax credits, on foreign source income).

There are, however, other expected effects on behavior. One important impact would
be on investment. More U.S interest expense is allocated to foreign source income when the

subsidiary undertakes new investments abroad. Thus, interest allocation can increase the
effective tax rate on foreign investments. Similarly, foreign subsidiaries can divest ownership
of assets and reduce the amount of allocated interest expense.

Increased capital investment in the U.S. also reduces the amount of interest expense
allocated abroad. However, to the extent that the U.S.-Iocated investment must be financed in

part by U.S. debt, the interest allocation rules will increase the effective tax rate on U.S.
investments as well (see the technical appendix).
In the next section, we test the impact of interest allocation rules on the financing of U.S.

multinational operations. In section 4, we measure the impact of interest allocation rules on the

'7Note, however, that assets rather than equity are used for allocating interest expense for
branches. Even foreign corporations operating in the U.S. with branches must allocate U.S.
interest expense abroad in calculating U.S. tax liabilities.

10

effective tax rates for domestic and foreign investments made by U.S. companies and compare

these to alternative policies for the tax treatment of U.S. interest expense.

3.

EMPIRICAL RESULTS
The previous section discusses the impact of the 1986 changes in the interest allocation

rules on the investment and financing decisions of U.S. multinational corporations. The
theoretical model developed in the technical appendix shows that the interest allocation rules
raise the cost of financing operations by U.S. debt for multinationals in excess credit positions.

This increased cost of U.S. debt provides multinationals with incentives to alter theirfinancial
structure and investment decisions. Collins and Shackelford (1992) provide evidencethat firms

increased their issuance of preferred stock in response to TRA'86. Froot and Hines (1993)
provide preliminary evidence that the new interest allocation rules have reduced borrowingand

investment by multinationals in-excess credit positions. In this section, we use data from the
Price Waterhouse survey mentioned above to explore the possibility suggested by the theory that

multinationals have substituted borrowing abroad for U.S. debt. In addition, we investigate
whether the 1986 changes in the interest allocation rules have led to lower overall debt levels
for the multinationals in our sample.

3.1

Data description

Data on the location of the debt of U.S. multinationals is extremely difficult to obtain.

Although data from Compustat does contain some information on the foreign operations of
corporations, the Geographic Segmental File of Compustat does not report information on debt

It
held abroad in foreign affihiates. Information from tax returns is difficult to access and is not
adequate for our project. The information returns filed by controlled foreign corporations (Form

5471) do contain some balance sheet information. However, information on the ratio of foreign
to worldwide assets (which is necessary to calculate the percentage of U.S. interest expense that

must be allocated abroad) and foreign to worldwide debt (which is necessary to determine the

impact of the tax rules on the location of borrowing) is not available from tax return data.'9
We were able to obtain much of the information necessary for our analysis from a survey

of U.S. multinationals organized by Price Waterhouse. The survey contains information from
corporate tax returns, subsidiary information returns and annual reports. The information from

corporate tax returns allows us to calculate foreign tax credit positions. The data from the
annual reports provides us with a breakdown of U.S. and foreign debt and assets. In addition,

the data from the subsidiary information forms allows us to calculate debt to asset ratios for

operations in three countries: Canada, Japan and the U.K. The data appendix contains a
detailed description of the dataset.

The drawback of this dataset is its size. The survey was sent to 25 multinational
corporations. Only 13 parent corporations in the non-financial sector returned the survey to

Price Waterhouse and only four years of data are available: 1986, 1988, 1990 and 1991 •20

'81n

addition, for many corporations the few foreign variables that are reported are

aggregated by geographic region.

'9This is the case either because the data in question is not reported on the tax and

information returns or is not recorded on the dataset assembled from the tax and information
returns.
20Since financial corporations generally face different tax rules we eliminated them from our
analysis. This reduced the sample from 17 to 13 corporations.

12

However, since the interest allocation rules that we are interested in studying did not take effect

until after 1986, we can use this dataset to study how the financial structure of parents and
subsidiaries has changed since 1986.

Table 1 presents some summary statistics taken from annual reports for the 13 nonfinancial corporations in our sample. As mentioned above, these firms are extremely large in
terms of asset size

in 1991, they reported average worldwide assets of 67 billion dollars (68

percent of which were U.S.). Worldwide debt to asset ratios range from about 21 percent in

1986 to about 36 percent in 1991. U.S. debt to asset ratios were quite similar ranging from
approximately 20 percent in 1988 to 36 percent in 1991. An increasing fraction of the pre-tax

income of these firms is from foreign sources: from 55 percent in 1986 to 83 percent in
1991.21 Tax payments on worldwide income averaged about 1 billion per year while U.S. tax

payments averaged about 325 million per year over the sample period. Finally note that the
U.S. interest expense of our sample firms more than doubled from 1986 to 1991. During the
same time, worldwide interest expense tripled. The remainder of this section explores the extent

to which the new interest allocation rules have contributed to this trend.

3.2

The Geo2raphic Distribution of Borrowing after TRA'86

We start by calculating the foreign tax credit positions of the 13 non-financial
corporations in the dataset. Since the interest allocation rules only affect those multinationals

in excess credit positions, it is natural to separate the firms by credit position and look for
differences in financial structure after 1986. Over 60 percent of the firms were in excess credit

2tPre-tax income is net of interest expense.

13

positions in each sample year. Nine firms in 1986 and eight firms in 1988 were in excess credit

positions. In 1990, nine firms had excess credits and by 1991 there were ten firms with excess
credits.

We also looked at the extent to which parent corporations in our sample remained in the

same credit position for all four sample years. All of the parent corporations were in excess

credit positions for at least one sample year and only two firms were in excess limitation
positions for three of the four years. The remaining eleven firms are partitioned as follows:
three were in excess credits for all four years and the remaining eight spent either two or three

years in excess credits. This distribution suggests that all of the firms in our sample were
impacted by the changes in the interest allocation rules.

Table 2 presents foreign subsidiary and parent specific debt and asset information
averaged over the four sample years. Our theory predicts that multinationals with excess credits

should have lower levels of U.S. debt and higher levels of foreign debt relative to worldwide

debt than those in excess limitation positions. This table presents some supportive evidence.
To construct the table we first calculated the average proportion of total debt accounted for by

debt in the U.S., Canada, Japan, and the U.K. for all of the firms in the sample. We then
partitioned the data by credit states: all observations associated with parents in excess credit
(limitation) positions are averaged separately. Unfortunately, only eight of the thirteen nonfinancial corporations reported information on U.S. debt.
Table 2 shows that U.S. debt accounts for almost three-quarters of worldwide debt (71.9

percent). The three countries for which data were available make up, on average, from 7.5

Six spent three years in excess credits and two spent two years in excess credits.

14

percent (Japan) to 11.5 percent (U.K.) of overall debt. These country-specific averages show

an interesting pattern. U.S. debt makes up a lower proportion of overall debt for parents with
excess credits. Similarly, these parents hold a higher proportion of debt in each of the three

countries than those parents in excess limitation positions?

Although these results are

consistent with the predictions of our model, they do not offer conclusive evidence of an impact

of interest allocation rules on financial behavior. The results may simply be due to a positive
correlation between excess credit status and assets abroad --- in other words, firms with excess

credits may have higher levels of assets and debt abroad for reasons that are not related to
interest allocation.
Table 2 also presents statistics on the ratio of foreign assets net of foreign debt (FA) to
worldwide assets net of foreign debt (WWA) used to determine the proportion of U.S. interest
expense that must by allocated abroad. Foreign debt is calculated by subtracting U.S. debt from
worldwide debt. Therefore we can only calculate this ratio for the eight firms in our sample that

reported figures for U.S. debt. The average value of FA/WWA for all firms is almost 35
abroad
percent. Parents with excess credit tend to have a higher fraction of assets located

about 38 percent.24 This suggests that an additional dollar of U.S. interest generates a
deduction of 62 cents for these firms.

The difference between the means for the parents in the two credit positions was
statistically significant at a ten percent confidence level for debt in U.K. as a fraction of
worldwide debt and the sum of debt in the three countries as a fraction of worldwide debt.

The difference in means of FAIWWA for the parents in the two credit positions was
statistically significant at the ten percent level.

15

The last row of table 2 contains a rough estimate of the average cost of interest allocation

over the sample period. To calculate this figure we multiplied reported U.S. interest expense
by FA/WWA for each observation with excess credits. The resulting dollar amount represents

the effective loss of interest deductions in the U.S.a We find that the average cost of interest

allocation for firms in our sample is about 402 million dollars per year. Multiplying by a
combined federal and state corporate statutory rate of 0.38 gives an average increase in tax
payments of 153 million dollars per company.26 This represents 50 percent of average U.S.
tax payments, per company with excess credits, over the four sample years.

Averaging over the four years of data may hide adjustments in financial structure
influenced by changes in the interest allocation rules. In table 3, we contrast debt ratios for
1986 with those for 1990. The 1991 data is not used for this table since it contains only two

parents in excess limitation7 Recall that the 1990 data contains three parents in excess
limitation and is therefore better suited to our analysis.
Table 3 shows that the ratio of U.S. to worldwide debt increased from 1986 to 1990 for
all parents. However, the increase in U.S. debt relative to worldwide debt was smaller for those

Recall that these allocated interest expenses are not allowed as deductions by host
countries.
26See appendix table 1 for combined state and federal corporate statutory tax rates for the
sample years. This is a rough estimate since the U.S. statutory rates varied over the four sample
years. In addition, it does not tale foreign tax credit carrybacks or carryforwards into account.
The estimate would be lower if the firms with excess credits in our sample claimed their credit
carryovers.
2Furthermore, only one of the two firms in excess limitation in 1991 had appropriate data

to calculate the ratio of U.S. to worldwide debt.

16

parents with excess credits.2 During the same time period the fraction of debt in Japan grew

for excess credit firms and decreased for excess limitation firms. The fraction of debt in the
U.K. decreased for both sets of firms but more so for those firms in excess limitation positions.

While these results are suggestive, we have not yet controlled for other factors besides interest
allocation that may explain the changes in the distribution of debt across these three countries.

We do this in the regression analysis below.
Table 3 presents an additional piece of evidence that is consistent with the hypothesis that

firms impacted by the interest allocation rules have substituted foreign debt for U.S. debt.

Notice that the ratio of foreign assets to worldwide assets has increased for excess credit
firms. An increase in foreign debt would be consistent with this result.
The focus so far has been on the allocation of debt across countries. Tables 4 and 5 give

information on the capital structure of operations abroad, at home, and worldwide, and present
calculations of the growth of debt between 1986 and 1991 relative to assets in 1986. In contrast
to the previous tables, we now divide firms based on their four-year history of foreign tax credit

positions.3° We contrast the three parents that were in an excess credit position for all four
years with the ten parents that were in an excess limitation position for at least one year.
Table 4 presents evidence that growth rates of debt at home and abroad differed for these

two groups of multinationals. The growth rate of U.S. debt relative to assets in the U.S. in

211n 1990, the difference between the mean value of U.S. debt as a fraction of worldwide
debt for parents in the two credit positions was significant at the ten percent level.

29The difference in the mean values of FAIWWA between parents in the two credit positions
in 1990 was statistically significant at a ten percent level.

30Recall that the four sample years are not consecutive.

17

1986 was 31 percent for all multinationals. This rate was only 15 percent for firms in excess
credits in all four years.3' A higher cost of U.S. debt due to the interest allocation rules could
be partially responsible for this result.
We next focus on the growth rates of debt abroad. The theory suggests that, holding all

other factors constant, the growth rate of debt in each of the three countries should be higher
for those firms that are always in excess credit positions. However, table 4 presents evidence
that this is only the case for Japan. As mentioned above, we attempt to control for some country

specific effects in our econometric work.

As is shown in the technical appendix, the interest allocation rules increase the cost of

debt finance at home for firms with excess credits. Using a much larger dataset, Froot and
Hines (1994) find that the change in overall debt for firms with high foreign to worldwide asset
ratios is significantly less for those firms in excess credit positions than those in excess limitation

positions. In table 5 we control for differences in foreign to worldwide asset ratios. Before
turning to that analysis, note that table 4 provides evidence that is consistent with Froot and
Hines (1994). The growth rate of worldwide debt for parents in excess credits for all four years

is 11 percent as compared to the 31 percent growth rate for our alternative group of parents.32

This difference in growth rates suggests that the interest allocation rules may have led to an
increase in the use of other non-debt sources of finance.33

31The difference in the growth rates is statistically significant at a ten percent level.
32The difference in growth rates is statistically significant at the ten percent level.
"See Collins and Shackelford (1992) for an investigation of the impact of interest allocation
on the issuance of preferred stock.

18

Up to this point the analysis has ignored the impact of the ratio of foreign to worldwide

assets on the tax advantage of U.S. debt. Recall that the increase in the cost of U.S. debt is an

increasing function of the ratio of net foreign assets to worldwide assets (FA/WWA). This
suggests that the interest allocation rules will have a differential impact on multinationals with

high versus low ratios of foreign to worldwide assets. Table 5

presents

evidence that is

consistent with this prediction. We divide parents into two groups based on FA/WWA. Debt

to asset ratios and growth rates of debt are then calculated separately for parents above and

below the median value of FA/WWA in 1986. Parents above the median experienced
significantly higher growth rates of debt in all three countries. In addition, these parents had
growth rates of U.S. debt and worldwide debt that were significantlylower than those below the
median.

The results presented in table 5 are quite strong.' As mentioned above, all of the
multinationals in our sample were adversely affected by the changes in the interest allocation

rules at some point during our sample period. As a result it is difficult to divide the sample
based on whether the interest allocation rules are relevant. However, there is variation in the
ratio of foreign to worldwide assets. Table 5 makes use of this variation and demonstrates that
there is a negative correlation between growth rates of U.S. debt and FA/WWA and a positive

correlation between growth rates of foreign debt and FAIWWA.

'The difference in mean growth rates of debt for parents with FA/WWA above and below
the median was statistically significant at the ten percent level for U.S. and worldwide debt.

19

3.3

Regression Analysis
In the regression analysis that follows we treat the country data reported for subsidiaries

located in Canada, Japan and the U.K. by each parent corporation as an observation. This

means that for each year there are three observations for every parent. Since there are eight
parents with information on FA/WWA, three countries and four years, this procedure leaves us

with 96 observations (=8*3*4).
In this section, we attempt to measure the impact of the interest allocation rules on debt

levels abroad. Our theoretical model suggests that for parent corporations with excess credits
the percentage of overall debt held in a particular host country should be an increasing function

of FAIWWA, all else equal. This ratio should have less of an impact on the debt location
decisions of parents in excess limitation.36

As explained in the technical appendix, host country borrowing may also be sensitive to

differences between home and host country tax rates and nominal interest rates. A marginal
dollar of debt at home lowers the tax bill in country j by iu where i, equals the nominal interest
rate and u1 is the corporate statutory tax rate in country j.37 The same increase in debt at home

decreases taxes in the U.S. by iu where i is the nominal interest rate and u is the corporate

35By treating the data in this way, we are assuming that each parent has only one subsidiary

in each of the three countries for which data is reported. In fact, the parent companies were
asked to aggregate information from their ten largest subsidiaries in each of the three countries.

36The interest allocation rules may impact excess limitation firms that expect to transit to
excess credit positions.

-

37The true cost of debt finance in a foreign country is d = i,(l-u,) i with ir denoting the
rate of inflation. If it is assumed that real interest rates are the same acrosscountries, then i Subtracting this expression
= r for all countries. By substitution, we obtain d = r from a similar one obtained for the U.S., we obtain the expression iu-iu.

20

statutory tax rate in the U.S. This intuition suggests that local borrowing in host country j
should be an increasing function of i,u, - iu. This relationship does not hold for multinationals

that are not tax paying either at home or abroad, however. Consider a parent corporation that
has a zero tax bill in host country j. Additional interest deductions have a tax value that is less
since interest deductions are only written off when the firm becomes tax paying through

than

carryforward provisions. The present value of interest deductions is also less than iu for parents

that do not pay taxes at home due to losses. This suggests that we should treat parents with

losses at home and/or abroad differently in our regression equation.3 We do this by
calculating the following explanatory variable for each country-specific observation of parent k:

Benefit

uJiJ.(l-TkJ) - ui(l-Tk)

where3'

j

=

subsidiary location subscript (j =Canada, Japan, or the U.K.),

k

=

parent subscript,

u

=

the overall corporate tax rate in country i

=

the

nominal interest rate in country j

40

,

38Since we do not have information on tax loss carryforwards of the parent corporations at
home or of subsidiaries abroad, we treat losses as if there were no carryover provisions. This
is equivalent to assuming that losses cannot be carried back and carryforwards expire unused.

39For simplicity, we suppress subscripts for time.

°The overall foreign and U.S. corporate tax rates are inclusive of state and local taxes. The
rates used in the regressions are presented in the data appendix.

41The nominal interest rates are taken from OECD (1992). Appendix table 1 reports these
rates for the four sample years.

21
TkJ

=

a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if taxes paid in country j by
subsidiaries of parent k are less than or equal to zero and takes the value of 0
otherwise,

u

=

the overall corporate tax rate in the U.S.,

i

=

the nominal interest rate in the U.S.,
a dummy variable that takes the value of I if taxes paid in the U.S. by parent k

Tk

are less than or equal to zero and takes the value of 0 otherwise,
Note that the benefit variable takes into account changes in statutory tax rates and exchange rates

(resulting from shifts in anticipated inflation rates across countries). These factors influence debt

decisions in addition to the interest allocation rules.

We start by estimating the following equation:

DkJWWDk

= IBenefit(ECk) + 2BenefitkJ(l-ECk) + I33ECk
+ 4FAk/WWAk + fl(FA/WWAkXECk) + MANk +

(5)

where

=

debt holdings of subsidiaries located in country j remitted to parent k,

WWDk

=

worldwide debt of parent k,

ECk

=

a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if parent k is in an excess

DkJ

credit position and zero otherwise,

Industry

=

a set of industry specific variables for parent k, and

=

an error term.

For expositional ease, we suppress parent subscripts in the following discussion.

22

The industry variable in equation (5) is designed to control for factors explaining debt

location decisions that differ across industries. In our regressions we use a dummy variable,
NMAN, that takes the value of one if the parent company is in the non-manufacturing sector and

zero otherwise. This specification is meant to capture differences in the riskiness of foreign debt
for manufacturing and non-manufacturing firms.

This formulation allows us to distinguish between the impact on D/WWD of the interest

allocation variable, (FAIWWA)(EC), and FA/WWA. In addition, equation (5)

takes into

account that the tax benefit term may have a different impact on firms depending on their foreign

tax credit status. Recall, that firms in excess credit positions do not pay U.S. taxes on foreign

earnings. Higher deductions in countries with corporate tax rates that exceed U.S. tax rates
could decrease worldwide taxes. This points to a positive relationship between the tax benefit

variable and the dependent variable for firms in excess credit positions. However, this is not
necessarily the case for firms in excess limitation positions. Consider the tax bill of a subsidiary

of a parent in excess limitation located in a high tax country. An increase in interest deductions

will decrease foreign after-tax income and foreign tax credits which would no longer be used

to shelter other sources of low-tax income being remitted to the U.S.42 This argument points

to a negative relationship between Benefit and D,/WWD for parents in excess limitation
positions.

Table 6 contains our regression results. The first column reports the coefficients for
equation (5). Neither the EC dummy variable or the interest allocation variable are statistically

42This argument depends on the ability of U.S. multinationals to average high and low tax

income for the purpose of the foreign tax credit. For a theoretical derivation of the debt
decision in the case of excess limitation, see Hines (1992) and Leechor and Mintz (1993):

23

significant.43 At the same time, the FA/WWA variable is significant. The coefficient on
FA/WWA indicates that a ten percent increase in FA/WWA would lead to a .048 increase in
foreign subsidiary debt relative to worldwide debt. This is quite large relative to the mean value
the
of .105 for DIWWD. Notice also that the benefit variables are significant and have

predicted signs.
The remaining columns in table 6 contain the results of a series of revisions to equation
FA/WWA to impact the local
(5). In column (2) we experiment with a specification that allows
borrowing decisions of subsidiaries with parents in both credit positions. All of the variables
in this equation are statistically significant different from zero at the ten percent level or lower.

These results suggest that the interest allocation rules are important to the local borrowing
decisions of all subsidiaries regardless of the credit position of the parent.45 Given that all of
the subsidiaries in our sample were associated with parents that were in excess credits for at least

one year, this result is not surprising. On the other hand, there could be other factors besides
the interest allocation rules that lead to a positive correlation between FAfWWA and local debt.
Our last specification replaces current with lagged values of FA/WWA since this variable

may not be exogenous to decisions concerning the location of debt. The results in

column (3)

are similar to those discussed above. The benefit variables are no longer significant and have

43These results could be driven by the fact that 73 percent of the observations are associated
with parents in excess credits.

"Also note that the coefficients are quite large.

To interpret these results, consider a ten percent increase in FAIWWA. For parents in

excess credit (limitation) positions, this increase would lead to a .053 (.057) increase in the ratio
of foreign subsidiary debt to worldwide debt. This is quite large in relation to the average value
of .117 (.068) for DJ/WWD for subsidiaries with parents in excess credits (limitation).

24

smaller coefficients than those in columns (1) and (2). The interest allocation vasiable is
significant for subsidiaries with parents in both credit states. However, consistent with the
theory, the coefficient on FAIWWA is larger for subsidiaries associated with parents in excess

credits.
Our work with the Price Waterhouse survey supports the following conclusions:

i. The growth rate in foreign debt as a percentage of worldwide debt differed for firms in the

two foreign tax credit positions. The sum of debt in Canada, Japan, and the U.K as a
proportion of worldwide debt was 8.7 percent for firms with excess credits in 1986. By 1990,

debt in these three countries as a proportion of worldwide debt had increas by 25 percent for
firms with excess credits. For firms in excess limitation positions, the proportion of debt in the

three countries in our sample decreased by 52 percent from 1986 to 1990. This suggests that
the firms in our sample have altered the location of debt in response to TRA'86.

ii. The effect of the interest allocation rules on U.S. debt to asset ratios is strongest for those
multinational corporations with high foreign to worldwide asset ratios. The growth in U.S. debt

between 1986 and 1991 relative to U.S. assets in 1986 was 15 percent for those corporations

with high foreign asset to worldwide asset ratios in 1986. The growth rate of U.S. debt for
firms with low foreign to worldwide assets ratios in 1986 was 39 percent. This also suggests
an impact of the new interest allocation rules on the location of borrowing.

25

iii.

As explained in the text, firms with excess credits lose a dollar's worth of interest

deductions for every dollar of U.S. interest expense abroad. We find that this allocation of
interest expense increases the marginal cost of U.S. debt by about 38 percent for these firms.

We estimate that the interest allocation rules increased the U.S. tax payments of firms with
excess credits by about 50 percent.

These results suggest that the new interest allocation rules have distorted the financingdecisions

of U.S. multinationals. Without taxes, firms issue debt in countries to minimize the cost of
funds including bankruptcy and transations costs. With the new interest allocation rules, at least

for the firms in our sample, this choice is distorted. This distortion induces a potentially large
efficiency cost.

4.

THE IMPACT OF THE INTEREST ALLOCATION RULES ON
COMPETiTIVENESS
With global economic integration, the impact of government tax policies on the ability

of U.S. multinationals to compete in domestic and foreign markets is an importantconsideration

for tax policy analysis. To determine the impact of interest allocation rules on competitiveness,
we estimate the effect of these rules on the effective tax rate of foreign or domestic investments

undertaken by U.S. multinationals. These comparisons also allow one to examine the impact
of interest allocation rules on the competitiveness of U.S. and foreign firms, assuming that the
firms have similar investment projects and debt/equity ratios. Foreign multinationals operating
in either the United States or their own country are less likely to face restrictions on their ability

26

incurred to finance domestic or foreign investments. Thus, the effective
to deduct interest
would be the one calculated for the "no interest allocation" case.

tax rate for foreign firms

The effective tax rate that is measured below is the amount of corporate tax paid on
income generated by the last unit of, or marginal, investment made by

the U.S. company at

home or abroad41. It is a summary measure that takes into account various

tax provisions that

affect the cost of capital such as the corporate income tax rate, depreciation

allowances and, in

net-of-tax rate of
this paper, interest allocation rules. For example, suppose that the required
investors is 6 percent. A corporation that offers a net-of-tax
return on capital for international
6 percent would not be able to obtain financing. Suppose further
rate of return on capital below
corporation to
that the effective tax rate on the return on capital is 40 percent. For a u.s.
of capital at least
attract financing for a marginal project, it must earn a before-tax rate of return
international investors to earn a rate of return on capital equal to 6

equal to 10 percent for

percent, net of taxes. Therefore, the effective tax rate on marginal investments
how much the tax system can affect the

investment decisions of a firm.

In the attached technical appendix, we
U.S. domestic and foreign investments

is indicative of

derive expressions for the effective tax rate on

in the presence of interest allocation rules. It is assumed

that the u.s. multinational is in an excess tax credit position so that interest allocation

rules

would reduce the amount of U.S.-source interest expense that can be taken against domestic

has
United States, similar to a number of other jurisdictions such as Germany and Canada,
to
deduct
a "thin capitalization" rule that restricts the ability of a foreign-owned corporation limit.
interest expense against U.S. taxable income when debt deductions surpass a certain
A
47The methodology follows Boadway, Bruce and Mintz (1984) for an open economy.
and more
similar methodology may be found in King and Fullerton (1984), AuerbaCh (1983)
recently Bovenberg et al (1990) and OECD (1991).

27

income. We also assume in the model that the U.S. parent or subsidiary operating in a foreign

country invests in depreciable capital (machinery and buildings) using either equity (retentions

or new equity) or debt as finance. Debt is assumed to be fungible across countries; however,

the parent and subsidiary bonds are not perfect substitutes as there are country-specific
transaction and bankruptcy costs that affect corporate bond rates. Inflation rates differ across

countries which in turn influences the appreciation or devaluation of the exchange rate of a
country relative to that of the United States.

The estimates of effective tax rates are based on 1993 tax provisions, interest and
inflation rates in the United States, Canada, Japan and the United Kingdom (see the data
appendix for further details on parameters). The amount of U.S. interest allocated to foreign
sources is taken to be 34.6 percent, based on the average amount of interest allocated by the
non-financial companies in our data set.
In Table 7, we provide estimates of effective tax rates on U.S. multinational investments

that are made in either the United States, Canada, Japan or the United Kingdom. In the first

column, we calculate the effective tax rates assuming that interest is allocated. The second
column provides the effective tax rate when interest is not allocated. The difference in the two
columns is presented in the third column.
As is illustrated in Table 7, the requirement to allocate interest expense has a significant

impact on the effective tax rate faced by U.S. multinationals. For U.S. domestic investments,
the interest allocation rules increase the U.S. effective rate from 17.6 percent to 21.9 percent.
The effect of interest allocation rules is to result in some of the interest that is used for domestic
investments to be allocated to foreign income. Effectively, the U.S. multinational cannot deduct

28

all its borrowed financing expenses, unlike a corporation that need not allocate U.S. interest
expense.

For foreign investments, the effect of the interest allocation rules is even more dramatic.
The effect of interest allocation is to increase the effective tax rate on Canadian investment made
by U.S. companies by almost 8 percentage points for both manufacturing and non-manufacturing

companies. The effective tax rate on Japanese investment for U.S. multinationals increases from

18.0 percent to 28.3 percent. The effective tax rate on U.K. investments rises from 17.4
percent to 26.5 percent. If it is assumed that foreign firms do not allocate interest, then U.S.
multinational companies.are significantly disadvantaged from a tax point of view.

5.

CONCLUSIONS

The results of our empirical work suggest that interest allocation rules have had a
significant impact on the financing of U.S. multinationals. Parents have reduced debt finance

in the U.S. in favor of debt financing of foreign affiliates. We also find that the interest
allocation rules have had a substantial impact on the effective tax rates of U.S. companies,
particularly for foreign investments. Compared to foreign companies that do not have to allocate

interest expense, U.S. companies face a tax disadvantage when undertaking new investments
since some of the debt costs may not be deductible.

29

REFERENCES
Altshuler, Rosanne and T. Scott Newlon, 1993, "The Effects of U.S. Tax Policy on the Income

Repatriation Patterns of U.S. Multinational Corporations," in Studies in International
Taxation, eds. A. Giovannini, (3. Hubbard, and J. Slemrod, (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Andrus, Joseph, 1988, "Allocating Interest Expense for the Foreign Tax Credit," Tax Notes,
Volume 41, Number 10.

Auerbach, Alan J., 1983, "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital,
Journal of Economic Literature, 21, 905-40.
Boadway, Robin, Neil Bruce and Jack Mintz, 1984, "Taxation, Inflation and the Effective

Marginal Tax Rate in Canada," Canadian Journal of Economics, 17:62-79.

Bovenberg, A.L., K. Anderson, K. Aramhi and K. Chand, 1990, "Tax Incentives and
International Capital Flows," in Taxation in the Global Economy, ed. by Assef Razin and
Joel Slemrod, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 283-324.

Collins, Julie and Douglas Shackelford, 1992, "Foreign Tax Credit Limitations and Preferred
Stock Issuances," Journal ofAccounting Research, 30.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Janes R. Hines, 1994, "Losing Interest: Interest Allocation Rules and
the Cost of Debt Finance," manuscript.
Hines, James R. Jr., 1992, "Credit and Deferral as International Investment Incentives," NBER
Working Paper Number 4191.

Hines, James R. and R. Glenn Hubbard, 1990, "Coming Home to America: Dividend
Repatriations by U.S. Multinationals," in Taxation in the Global Economy, eds. A. Razin
and J. Slemrod, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

King, M. and A.D. Fullerton, The Taxation of Income from Capital: A Corporate Study of the
United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden and West Germany, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Leechor, Chad and Jack Mintz, 1993, "On the Taxation of Multinational Corporate Investment
When the Deferral Method is Used by the Capital Exporting Country," Journal of Public
Economics, 51(1), 75-96.

Mintz, Jack and Thomas Tsiopoulos, 1993, "Latin American Taxation of Foreign Direct
Investment," Manuscript, Foreign Investment Advisory Service, The World Bank, Toronto.

30

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 1992, Main Economic
Indicators, July.
___________ 1991, Taxation and International Capital Flows, Paris.

31

TECHNICAL APPENDIX

This appendix provides the background theory needed to determine the impact of interest

allocation rules on the financing and investment decisions. The model is based on a two period

formulation of investment and financing decisions of the multinational. It is assumed that the
multinational invests in productive opportunities in the U.S. and a foreign country (below, a *

will denote foreign values). Either the parent or subsidiary may borrow debt. It is assumed that
parent and subsidiary debt are not perfect substitutes or fully fungible. This assumption arises
from the performance and regulation of national capital markets which result in lenders looking

at the parent and foreign affiliate on their own terms even though the subsidiary may have

guarantees of the parent. The implication of this assumption is that bankruptcy and other
attendant transaction costs associated with debt financing depends on the parent and foreign

affiliate's own leverage. In addition, the multinational pays taxes to the U.S. and foreign
countries on income generated by investments. It is assumed for U.S. tax purposes that interest
is allocated abroad and the multinational is in an excess credit position (as described in the text).

In the first period, the multinational invests in capital in the U.S., equal to K, and
abroad, equal to K*. It is assumed that the price of capital in each country is unity in the initial

period. By investing in capital, the firm will obtain a stream of capital cost deductions that
reduces the effective purchase price of capital. Let Z and Z* be the present value of capital cost
deductions in the U.S. and foreign country respectively. The tax value of capital cost deductions

is uZ in the U.S. and u*Z* in the foreign country, u and u' denoting the U.S. and foreign

32

corporate tax rates respectively. The multinational borrows funds in the U.S. equal to B and
in the foreign country equal to B*.
In the second period, the multinational earns income and sells off its investment in each

country. Foreign values are converted into U.S. dollars by using the exchange rate, denoted by

x. The foreign currency is expected to appreciate relative to the U.S. dollar according to
purchasing price parity. This implies that x = (l+i.)/(l+T*), r and

denoting the rate of

inflation in the U.S. and foreign country, respectively.

Second period returns earned on U.S. investments are equal to nominal revenues,
(1+i)F{KJ, net of interest expense on U.S. debt, i[y]B, and U.S. taxes, T. The production
function for output, F[K], is strictly concave. The nominal interest rate on debt, i['y] is a rising

function of the debt-asset ratio of the U.S. parent, to be explained more fully below. In
addition, the firm cashes in the value of its capital at the end of the second period. The value

of the firm is the undepreciated replacement cost of capital. Letting denote the percentage

amount of capital that has physically depreciated, the replacement price of capital is

(l-)K(l +i'),

assuming

the price of capital rises with the general rate of inflation, i' Debt

is also retired. A similar set of assumptions apply to the subsidiary with all values denoted by
* and converted into U.S. dollars.

As for taxes paid to the U.S. government, the corporate tax base is equal to revenues net

of interest expense and depreciation. Thus, the after tax revenues are equal to (l-u)(l +x-)F[K]

and after tax cost of interest expense, without interest allocation, is equal to i(1-u). However,

'It is trivial to allow the capital good price to rise by a rate different than the general rate
of inflation. One could instead think of 5 as the rate of physical depreciation net of real capital
gains earned by holding the asset K.

33

since interest is allocated to the foreign subsidiary, only i(l-cr) of interest expense is deductible

from U.S. tax with a denoting the proportion of allocated interest expense based on ratio of
foreign net assets to total worldwide assets of the parent:

(K*B*)/(K*B*+K). Since we

have included the present value of depreciation deductions in the first period, we note that, when

the firm sells off its assets, it loses the value of the future stream of tax depreciation. Thus, the

liquidating value of the firm is L =(l +7)(1-)K(1-uZ).2
As mentioned above, the interest rate is assumed to be a rising function of the debt asset
ratio (y) of the company. If the firm is liquidated, the value of assets is equal to K( 1 -uZ) (after
replacement of depreciated capital with income). We therefore assume that the interest costs on

debt rise depending on the ratio, = B/K(1-uZ).
The multinational chooses the optimal amount of capital and debt to issue in the U.S. and

foreign country to maximize the value of its investment. Letting p equal the shareholders'
nominal discount rate, we can state the value of the firm as follows:

V=

rp
' uf
1+p

with

—

[K(1—uZ)+K(1—uZ)—B—BJ

(I)

Y = (I-u)(l+r)F[K] -i[y](1-u(1-a)B +(1-ô)(l+)K(1-uZ) - B
Y1 = (1_u*)(1+7*)F[K*] _j*[y*](l..u*)B* +(1_&)(1+i.*)K*(lu*Z*) - B*

a = (K*B*)/(K*_B*K), y = B/(K(l-uZ)), y* = B*/(K*(1u*Z*)).
The first order conditions yield the following results:

21n principle, recapture of depreciation rules may result in the gain or loss to be treated as
income and fully taxed rather than a reduction in a future stream of capital cost deductions.
However, we are using this "static model to capture in a simple way the dynamic one in which
firms operate over a long period of time. The model outlined here provides the same results as
the dynamic one.

34

(i)

Choice of FinancinE

The firm issues debt in the U.S. until the after tax cost of interest is equal to the
opportunity cost of equity (p):

p = (i+i"y)(l-u(l-a))

(with i' = 8iIô').

(2)

Foreign debt is issued until its after tax cost is equal to opportunity cost of equity:

p = (j* +i*y*)(lu*) - ui(l-a)2(B/Kx).

(3)

Note that the first term is the after tax cost of debt (in absence of interest allocation). The
second term is the tax savings arising from issuing debt in the foreign country rather than the

United States. This term reduces the cost of debt finance in the foreign country. If all U.S.
source interest in the U.S. is allocated abroad (a = 1), then there is no advantage to issuing debt

in the foreign country to reduce the impact of the interest allocation rule faced by the parent.

(ii)

The Investment Decision in the U.S.
The cost of capital for the parent's investment in the United States is the following:
(6+rf)(l—UZ)

(4)

(1-u)
where r, = (l-y)r + [7/(l+i)]{i(1-u(l-a2)-1}.
The cost of capital is similar to the usual one found in the literature. The only difference being

that the cost of debt finance is higher resulting from the allocation of U.S. interest expense to

the foreign subsidiary. If no interest is allocated (a = 0), the U.S. company would be able to
deduct the full cost of interest expense from taxable income. The term I -cr2 reflects the overall

impact of the capital investment on interest allocation. Vhen the firm raises one unit of capital

35

stock, it finances investment by y units of debt with tax relief equal to (l-a)u. On the other
hand, by increasing capital stock, the proportion of U.S. interest allocated abroad declines. The

combination of the two effects results in the tax value of interest deductions being equal to
ui(1-a2).

(iii)

The Investment Decision in the Foreign Country

The cost of capital for the foreign affiliate is determined as follows:

F /= (ô+r) (1uZ)+R

(5)

(1-u)

where rj = (1_,*)r + [*/(1+i.*)]{i*(1_u*)_i.*}and

R= uiy(1—u)2(1—uZ) (1—y(1—u'Z') }
(1 +) (1 —u)
The cost of capital for the foreign affiliate is adjusted by adding on the term, R, which is the
interest allocation tax penalty resulting from additional capital expenditure made by the foreign

affiliate. The amount of U.S. source interest that is allocated to the foreign affiliate depends on

net assets of the foreign affiliate. When the foreign affiliate increases its capital expenditure,

it increases U.S. interest expense allocated abroad. On the other hand, part of the foreign

affiliate's capital expenditure is financed by additional debt (y*(1u*Z*) = B*/K*) which
reduces the amount of allocated U.S. interest. However, given that B* is likely less than K*,

then R > 0.

36

DATA APPENDIX

Much of the data used in this paper were assembled from a survey conducted by Price
Waterhouse for this project. In the first section of this appendix we provide information on the
survey data we used in the analysis. Notes on the data used to calculate effective tax rates

appears in the second section.
A.

The Price Waterhouse Survey

As mentioned in the paper, the survey data comes from tax forms and annual reports.
The following list describes the source of the data used to construct tables I through 5.
1.

Information from the tax form filed to claim a foreign tax credit (Form 1118).'
a.

b.

c.

2.

Total taxable income from all sources. This variable was used to determine
whether the parent corporation was taxable in the year in question.
Foreign tax credit limitation.
Foreign tax credit. To determine the credit position of the parent, we compared
the foreign tax credit claimed to the foreign tax credit limitation. If the foreign
tax credit equalled the limitation, the parent was in excess credits in the year in
question.

Information from the information form filed for controlled foreign corporations of U.S.
parent companies (Form 5471).2

a.

Taxes. This variable was used to determine whether subsidiaries were taxable in
the year in question.

'The survey requested multinationals to report information from their "primary basket." For
the non-financial companies used in this study, this would be the overall basket.
2Price Waterhouse collected information from these forms by country. Multinationals were
instructed to aggregate information for their ten largest subsidiaries if more than one Form 5471

was filed for a particular country. The multinationals were asked to provide information for
Canada, Japan, and the U.K.

37
b.

c.
3.

Assets.
Short- and long-term debt.

Information from the annual report.

a.
b.
C.

d.

e.

Worldwide assets.
Worldwide debt.
U.S. assets.

U.S. debt.
U.S. interest expense.

This information was used to calculate the ratio of foreign to worldwide assets for the
purpose of interest allocation. The formula is:

FA/WWA = (WWA - U.S. assets - FD)/(WWA - FD)
where

FD = foreign debt
= worldwide debt - U.S. debt,
FA = foreign assets,

WWA = worldwide assets.
B.

Effective Tax Rates

Data used for effective tax rate calculations included the following:

Corporate Tax Rates: See the table below. Includes tax rates on income at federal, state and
local government levels. Primary source of information was taken from the International Bureau
of Fiscal Documentation.

Tax Depreciation Rates: Data on average tax depreciation rates for machinery and structures
are based on OECD (1991) (information for updating rates were taken from International Bureau
of Fiscal Documentation or Mintz and Tsiopoulos (1992)). Present value calculations include
adjustments for the half-year convention in Canada and United States.
Economic Depreciation Rates: Economic depreciation rates for structures are assumed to be 4%
and for machinery 16% (exponential). Taken from Mintz and Tsiopoulos (1992).

Cost of Finance: Corporate long term interest rates and consumer price inflation rates were
taken from IMP statistics. The real riskiess cost of equity finance was assumed to be 3% in all
countries. The risk component associated with equity finance was assumed to reflect "income
risk'. The cost of debt finance was augmented for bankruptcy costs.

38

Debt-Asset Ratio: Debt-asset ratio, prior to an adjustment for tax depreciation recapture (see

technical appendix), was 38.4% for ail investments in all countries. Taken from U.S. and
Canadian data (see Mintz and Tsiopoulos (1992)).

Capital Stock Weights: Proportion of investments in structures (35%) and machinery (65%)
were assumed to be the same for all countries. Data taken from Mintz and Tsiopoulos (1992)
for manufacturing companies.

39

Appendix Table

1

Country Tax Rates and Nominal Interest Rates

1986

1988

1990

1991

42.73

39.66

37.65

37.05

9.54

10.23

10.79

9.81

58.56

57.20

52.49

52.49

4.94

4.27

7.36

6,53

36.25

35.00

35.00

35.00

9.87

9.36

11.08

9.92

49.46

38.23

38.23

38.23

8.14

8.97

8.73

8.16

Canada
overall tax rate
nominal interest rate

Japan
overall tax rate
nominal interest rate

U.K.
overall tax rate
nominal interest rate

U.S.
overall tax rate
nominal interest rate

Notes:
Tax rates for Canada apply to manufacturing firms.
1.
Overall tax rates include state and local taxes.
2.
Long-term interest rates are reported.
3.

40

Table 1
Annual Report Information

Average Values (in millions of dollars)
1986

1991

1990

1988

Assets
Worldwide

37,515

52,356

60,067

62,716

U.S.

21,900

37,214

40,549

42,897

0.58

0.71

0.67

0.68

Worldwide

8,644

18,217

21,065

22,541

U.S.

7,758

11,118

15,647

0.85

6,674
0.34

0.49

0.65

Worldwide

2,409

3,399

2,835

1,559

U.S.

1,077

1,476

1,077

181

0.45

0.43

0.38

0.17

Worldwide (U.S. and foreign)

888

1,233

1,203

771

U.S. (on worldwide income)

238

432

432

196

0.27

0.35

0.36

0.27

Worldwide

745

1,855

2,347

2,258

U.S.

647

657

1,164

1,656

Ratio U.S/Worldwide

0.82

0.33

0.46

0.68

Ratio U.S/Worldwide

Debt (short and long term)

Ratio U.S/Worldwide

Pre-tax Income

Ratio U.S/Worldwide

Income tax

Ratio U.S/Worldwide

Interest expense

41

Table 2
Summary Statistics

Number of
observations

Mean

Standard
Error

84

0.719

0.020

Parents in excess credits

66

0.706

0.024

Parents in excess limitation

18

0.767

0.037

52

0.091

0.0 14

Parents in excess credits

36

0.106

0.019

Parents in excess limitation

16

0.058

0.013

52

0.075

0.013

Parents in excess credits

36

0.081

0.0 16

Parents in excess limitation

16

0.061

0.026

52

0.115

0.020

Parents in excess credits

36

0.138

0.028

Parents in excess limitation

16

0.064

0.015

156

0.094

0.009

Parents in excess credits

108

0.108

0.012

Parents in excess limitation

48

0.061

0.011

96

0.346

0.017

Parents in excess credits

72

0.377

0.02 1

Parents in excess limitation

24

0.255

0.021

72

$401,915

$88,916

Dus/Woridwide Debt

D1/Worldwide Debt

D/Worldwide Debt

Du/Worldwide Debt

(Dn+Djap*i+Du)IWorldwide Debt

FA/WWA

FA/WWA*U.S. interest expense
Parents in excess credits

Note: U.S. debt figures are only available for eight parent corporations.

42

Table 3
Pre-TRA'86 and Post-TRA'86 debt and asset ratios

1990-1986
1986

1990

1986

1. Debt In U.S./Worldwide debt
Parents in excess credits

0.603

0.694

0.15 1

Parents in excess limitation

0.736

0.902

0.226

Parents in excess credits

0.063

0.122

0.937

Parents in excess limitation

0.037

0.072

0.945

Parents in excess credits

0.035

0.077

1.200

Parents in excess limitation

0.169

0.019

-0.888

Parents in excess credits

0.163

0.127

-0.221

Parents in excess limitation

0.109

0.060

-0.450

Parents in excess credits

0.087

0.109

0.253

Parents in excess limitation

0.105

0.050

-0.524

Parents in excess credits

0.327

0.445

0.361

Parents in excess limitation

0.328

0.277

-0.155

2. Debt in Canada/Worldwide debt

3. Debt in Japan/Worldwide debt

4. Debt in U.K./Worldwide debt

5. [(2) + (3) + (4)1/Worldwide debt

6. Foreign assets/Worldwide assets

43

Table 4
Debt growth rates by foreign tax credit status

Debt to asset ratios:

(Debt in 1991 - Debt in
1986)

1986

1991

Assets in 1986

For all parents:
Canada

0.19

0.44

5.77

Japan

0.43

0.47

0.57

U.K.

0.45

0.43

1.59

U.S.

0.26

0.37

0.31

Worldwide

0.24

0.30

0.26

Canada

0.14

0.48

1.88

Japan

0.42

0.56

1.05

U.K.

0.62

0.53

0.31

U.S.

0.20

0.32

0.15

Worldwide

0.25

0.29

0.11

Canada

0.21

0.42

6.94

Japan

0.43

0.44

0.41

U.K.

0.40

0.40

1.97

U.s.

0.28

0.40

0.39

Worldwide

0.24

0.30

0.31

For parents in excess credits
in all tour years:

For parents in excess
limitation for at least one
year:

44

Table S
Debt growth rates by foreign to worldwide asset ratios

Debt to asset ratios:

(Debt in 1991 - Debt in
1986)

1986

1991

Assets in 1986

For parents with FA/WWA
above median in 1986:
Canada

0.16

0.29

16.05

Japan

0.30

0.48

0.84

U.K.

0.38

0.46

0.40

U.s.

0.20

0.32

0.15

Worldwide

0.15

0.21

0.13

Canada

0.25

0.47

0.66

Japan

0.45

0.43

0.21

U.K.

0.28

0.28

0.02

U.s.

0.28

0.40

0.39

Worldwide

0.32

0.34

0.25

For parents with FA/WWA
below median in 1986:

Note: The data consists of four parents with FA/WWA above the median and four
below the median for 1986.

45

Table 6
Interest Allocation Rules and the Location of Debt
Dependent Variable:
Debt in Country j / Worldwide Debt
where j = Canada, U.K. and Japan

Intercept
[Benefit]*EC

[Benefit]*(lEC)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.0405
(0.5575)

-0.0659'

-0.0323
(0.0282)

1.2458'
(0.0830)
-2.945Y
(0.0665)

l.2287

EC

-0.0303
(0.6854)

FA/WWA

0.4834k
(0.0480)

(FA/WWA)*EC

0.0559
(0.8258)

(0.0285)
(0.7059)

0.2917
(0.8918)

-3.1386k
(1.5052)

-0.1822
(1.497)

0.5276k
(0.0718)

0.567Y

(FA/WWA)*(1EC)

(0.1241)
(FA/WWA)I.1*EC

0.4550k
(0.0730)

(FA/WWA)*(1EC)
-0.O855

-0.082P

(0.0184)

(0.0344)

0.2984k
(0.1323)
-0.0377
(0.0395)

Adjusted R2

.3824

.3881

.3898

F statistic

10.804

13.053

10.070

96

96

72

NMAN

No. of observations

Explanatory variables are defined in the text. Standard errors are in parenthesis.
+
indicates that the coefficient in statistically significant from zero at at least the
10 percent level of significance.

46

Table 7
Impact of U.S. Interest Allocation Rules on Effective Tax Rates for U.S. Multinationals

(1)

COUNTRY

United States

ETR with Interest
Allocation

.

(2)

ETR without
Interest Allocation

(3)
Difference (1)-(2)

21.9%

17.6%

5.3%

-Manufacturing

34.1%
41.5%

25.9%
33.9%

8.2%
7.6%

Japan

28.3%

18.0%

10.3%

United Kingdom

26.5%

17.4%

9.1%

Canada
- NonManufacturing

