                            NBER WORIUNG PAPER SERIES




                              REGIONAL ADJUSTMENT TO
                               TRADE LIBERALIZATION




                                     Gordon H. Hanson




                                  Working Paper No. 4713




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1994



I thank Dan Hamermesh, Ann Harrison, Gerald Oeitinger, Francisco Rivera-Bath, and
seminar participants at MIT and Georgetown for helpful comments. All errors axe my own.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Trade and Investment Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4713
                                                                                  April 1994

                                REGIONAL ADJUSTMENT TO
                                 TRADE LIE ERALIZATION

                                          ABSTRACT

       In this paper. I study the effect of economic integration with the United States on state-

industry employment growth in Mexico. I disentangle the effects of two opposing forces on

regional labor demand: transport-cost considerations, which, all else equal, encourage firms to

relocate their activities to regions with relatively good access to foreign markets, and

agglomeration economies, which, all else equal, reinforce the pm-trade pattern of industry

location. I fmd that trade liberalization has strong effects on industry location. Consistent with

the transport-costs hypothesis, post-trade employment growth is higher in state-industries that are

relatively close to the United States. The results on agglomeration effects are mixed.
Employment growth is higher where agglomeration in upstream and downstream industries is

higher, but not where the agglomeration of firms in the same industry is higher. The results

suggest trade liberalization has contributed to the decomposition of the manufacturing belt in and

around Mexico City and the formation of broadly specialized industry centers located in northern

Mexico. relatively close to the United States- The North American Free Trade Agreement is

likely to reinforce these movements.



Gordon H. Hanson
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
I. Introduction
       How do regions adjust to wade liberalization? In this paper. I study the effect of

economic integration with the United States on state-industry employment growth in Mexico.

I disentangle the relative effects of two opposing forces on regional labor denianck tansport-cost

considerations, which, all else equal, encourage firms to relocate their activities to regions with

relatively low-cost access to foreign markets, and agglomeration economies, which, all else equal,

tend to reinforce the pre-wade pattern of industry location.

       That international wade causes a sectoral reallocation of resources is a basic insight of

wade theory. Whether the motivation for wade is relative factor abundance, increasing returns

to scale, or imperfect competition, the wan sidon from an open economy to a closed economy

alters a nation's pattern of specialization. The effect of wade on the spatial allocation of resources

within a nation is less clear. Economist have begun topay closer attention to patterns of
regional specialization within counties, but there has been little empirical work on how the

transition to an open economy affects the location of economic activity.

       A basic theme of recent literature is that externalities tie the productivity of agents in a

location to the local agglomeration of resources. Dynamic externalities, due to knowledge

spillovers or learning by doing, figure prominently in recent theories of economic growth (Romer

(1986 and 1990), Lucas (1988). Grossman and Helpman (1991), and Young (1991)). To the

extent externalities are localized, regions with large agglomerations of firms grow relative to other

regions. Several recent studies have found evidence that is consistent with externalities. Glaeser

et aL (1992) find U.S. city-industry growth is higher in cities with relatively diverse industrial

bases; Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1993) find the creation of new patents is highly


                                                  1
localized; and Ranch (1993b) finds that wages are higher in agglomerated regions.

       Another stand of the literature emphasizes the role of market access in spatial xesowte

allocation. Krugman (1991) shows the interaction of plant-level scale economies and transport

costs can explain the formation of cities. In Ranch (1990), transport costs determine the volume

of trade within and between counties. The importance of trade liberalization is that it changes

the reference market for firms in a counuy. All else equal, we expect trade reform to shift

resources to locations with relatively good access to foreign markets. With agglomeration

economies, the size or mix of industries in a region may also affect how resident industries adjust

to trade. To the extent closed-economy industry centers have relatively poor access to foreign

markets, transport costs and agglomeration economies work in opposite directions.

       The regional effects of trade liberalization are also a subject of considerable policy

interest. The current trend towards economic integration is likely to reorganize the location of

economic activity in developed and developing regions alike. The formation of the European

Union and the fail of communism in Eastern Europe imply a substantial increase in regional

resource mobility on the European continent. The spread of trade reform throughout the

developing world has reoriented producers in these countries towards an entirely new set of

markets. Wei (1993) finds that in China the fastest growing cities are those with relatively large

export sectors. For obvious reasons, many of these cities are located in coastal areas relatively

near Hong Kong and Taiwan. Regional movements in response to trade strain existing
infrastructure and bring a dramatic realignment of relative regional fortunes. Commercial real

estate prices in Shanghai, for instance, are now comparable to those in New York and Tokyo.

       Recent changes in Mexico's trade policy make the county an ideal case study. In 1985,


                                               2
after four decades of import-substitution Industrialization, Mexico began to open its economy to

wade. The government enacted reform swiftly, eliminating most wade barriers in the following

three years. Mexico's location in North America makes wade liberalization equivalent to

economic integration with the United States. For Mexican finns, proximity to foreign markets

means proximity to the U.S. market Yet, Mexico's closed-economy production centers are

located far from the United States.             Since the 1950's, manufacturing capacity has been

concentrated in the country's Interior, around Mexico City. While foreign-market access lures

firms to the Mexico-U.S. border, the existing pattern of agglomeration works against this shift.

        I estimate the change in state-industry labor demand in Mexico before and after trade

reform as & function of transport costs to the United States, industry agglomeration, and a series

of control variables. If transport costs matter, employment growth will be high in regions close

to the United States; if agglomeration economies matter, employment growth will be high in

relatively large production centers. I study the effects of three types of agglomeration: within-

industry agglomeration, the concentration of firms in the same industry; related-industry

agglomeration, the concentration of firms in upstream and downstream industries; and industrial

diversity, the concentration of firms in a broad range of industries. No previous study separates

related-industry agglomeration from within-industry agglomeration. I do so to assess whether the

benefits of proximity to rivals differ from the those of proximity to buyers and suppliers.'

        To preview the results, I find evidence of both transport-cost effects and agglomeration

effects on post-trade employment growth. After wade liberalization, employment growth is higher

in state-industries relatively close to the United States. The closed-economy manufacturing belt


    'Porter (1990) emphasizes that Interactions between buyers and suppliers axe an important component of the
benefits firms derive from geographic concentration.

                                                      3
 round Mexico thy is breaking apart, as new industrial centers form closer to the Mexico-U.S.

 border. The North American Free Trade Agreement is only likely to reinforce this trend.

 Consistent with Glaeser et aL, I find no evidence employment growth is higher where within-

 industry agglomeration is higher contrary to their results, I find no evidence employment growth

 Is higher where industrial diversity is highet            more novel finding is that employment growth

 is higher where related-industry agglomeration is highet This is consistent with the hypothesis

 that the Mexican economy is changing from one based on a few large diversified industry centers

 to one based on a number of broadly specialized industry centers.

         The body of the paper has four sections. In section one, I review recent work in trade

 theory that relates to industry location. In section two. I describe regional-industrial employment

 growth in Mexico before and after trade reform. In section three, I give empirical results. In a

final section, I offer concluding remarks.



II. Theory
A. International Trade and Industry Location

         Most recent theories of interregional trade are based on several common elements:

increasing returns to scale, transport costs, and congestion costs. In Asilis and Rivera-Bath

(1993), Fujita (1988), ICrugman (1991), and Rivera-Baciz (1988) scale economies are internal to

firms; in Henderson (1974) and Eaton and Eckstein (1994) scale economies are external to finns.2

The mechanics of industry location in these models are relatively similar. The interaction of scale

economies and transport costs creates a centripetal force, to use ICrugman's language, that causes


    'In Rendero (1974) external economies are unspecifmk In Eaton and Eckstein (1994) external economies
are due to spillovers In the accumulation of human capital, as in Lucas (1988).

                                                       4
firms to agglomerate in industry centers. With internal economies, firms economize on both

transport costs and production costs by locating near a large market; with externai economies,

firms benefit from spilloven by locating near other &ms In their Industry. Land rents, or some

other source of congestion costs, operate as a cenfrifugal force and work against agglomeration.

To compensate workers for higher housing costs, higher commuting costs, or congestion-relaxed

disamenides in agglomerated regions, firms must pay workers relatively high wages. If
centripetal forces dominate centifu gal forces firms agglomerate in one or more industry centers.'

         Where agglomerations form depends on a country's wading position with the rest of the

world. Consider first the case of a closed economy. I use Mexico for illustrative ptnposes.

Imagine Mexico as a line segment, with the United States located to the right of the segment

(north') and Central America located to the left (south'). Suppose labor is mobile along the line,

but not across bottlers, and that land is immobile.and uniformly distributed along the segment.

Suppose also that, following the above logic, agglomeration economies cause firms to concentrate

in industry centers, but land rents prevent the formation of a single massive city. Instead, a

hierarchy of industry centers form. Figure 1 describes a spatial equilibrium in which rectangles

represent the size and location of industry centers. A large industry center forms in the middle

of the county, and centers of decreasing size form as one moves away from the middle towards

the bothers. This spatial allocation of resowtes in qualitatively similar to that derived in Mills




    'Other betoss, of comic, also contribute to agglomeration. Site-specific nantral ietnves may amact firms
to certain locations. To the extent iesow supplies ate fixed, they have no Implications f growth and can be
ignacd In the analysis that kiowa. Alwuatlvely, a location may have amenities, aich as nice beaches —
weather, that ant coumas, as In Roback (1982). AmenitIes need not be exogenous. Matsoyama and TF.h.,chI
(1993) model geographie concentration as the result of Increasing returns in non-traded goods. Again, to the extent
amenities are cont and Increasing reurns are static, neither factor has Implications (or growth.

                                                        S
and Rivera-Bath (1993). Fujita (1988). Krugman (1994), and Rivera-Bath (1988). It is by no

means the only equilibrium, but it is an intuitively appealing one.

                                                       Figure 1




Central                                                                                                         United
America                                                 Mexico                                                  States

         The composition of industry centers depends on the nature of agglomeration economies

(Henderson (1974)). 'With internal scale economies, agglomeration economies are pecuniary and

the composition of industry centers is irrelevant what matters for firms is being near consumers;

the fact industry centers also contain a large concentration of firms is not in and of itself an

attraction.     If agglomeration economies take the form of knowledge spillovers, or another

nonpecuniaiy externality, the composition of industry centers reflects the manner in which firms

benefit from proximity to one anothet Within-industry and related-industry agglomeration

economies create specialized con cenntions of firms; agglomeration economies associated with

industrial diversity create regional complexes with a wide array of activities.

         Consider the effect of opening the economy to wade. The importance of trade for industry

location is that it expands the set of markets firms save. Given the large size of the U.S. market

relative to the Mexican and Central American markets, there is a jncusium on locations at the


      Strictly speaking, none of the models cited derives a hierarchy of Industry centers as depicted in Plgure 1 (see
PujIts (1993)). Instead, there Is a sins of activity in the center of the country that tails oft in either direction. To
derive the existence of distinct Industry centers, a landscape with a discrete num bet of locations is generally Imposed.

                                                            6
right end of the line segment, near to the Mexico-U.S. lorder.' To improve access to the U.S.
market — that is, to reduce wansport costs - firms have an incentive to relocate their activities

northwards. The existing pattern of agglomeration works as an opposing force: the local
concentration of consumers and/or firms gives firms an incentive to remain where they are.

Whether or not firms relocate depends on the relative strength of these two fortes.

       In the long run, if firms have a joint incentive to move, entire industry centers may

relocate. Fixed moving costs operate as an initial barrier to relocation, but we can imagine a

variety of mechanisms through which firms coordinate their actions. Rauch (l993a) models a

situation in which developers use Industrial parks to coordinate the relocation of exit industries

in the presence of agglomeration economies. Ultimately, we expect the pattern of industry

location to reflect the relative importance of Mexicds wading parmen. Figure 2 gives one

possible post-trade pattern of Industry location, which is qualitatively tin,iIn to that derived by

Krugman and Livas (1992). Agglomeration economies again imply the formation ofahierarchy

of industry centers, now with the largest center located at the Mexico-U.S. border and industry

centers decreasing in size as one moves south.

                                            Figure 2




Central                                                                                   United
America                                      Mexico                                       States



                                                7
       The transition between the equilibrium in Figure 1 and the one in FIgure 2 takes time,

with the speed of adjustment depending on the nature of agglomeration economies. If
agglomeration economies are pecuniary, the lure of the U.S. market may be sufficiently strong

that firms move to the border as soon as they are able. In this case, adjustment to wade

liberalIzation Is likely to be rapid. In the absence of spillovem, the only ftctors dissuading firms

from relocating are fixed moving costs and the potential loss of local markets. The pull of the

local market will be less significant if firms expect their neighbors to move to the U.S. border.

       If agglomeration economies take the form of knowledge spillovers, adjustment away from

the closed-economy location pattern is likely to be more protracted. Trade makes proximity to

the U.S. market more i±ponant but it does not directly weaken the externality generated by a

given level of agglomeration. Moreover, the sectoral reallocation of resources that trade brings

may cause closed-economy industry centers to grow over the short or medium run. As

specialization redirects labor from some industries to others, agglomeration economics make

existing industry centers, all else equal, the ones most likely to benefit.



B. An Empirical Model

       The preceding discussion suggests a simple empirical approach for studying how regional

industhes adjust to wade liberalization. To the extent transport costs to foreign markets affect

firms' location decisions, we expect wade liberalization to cause a relocation of activities towards

regions with relatively good access to the U.S. market To the extent agglomeration economies

mann, we expect large agglomerations of firms to grow relative to small ones.
       I avoid the complications involved in long-nm adjustment to wade liberalization by


                                                 8
focusing on the short run! The mobility of labor makes it relatively easy for firms to adjust

regiona] employment levels in response to shocks.' I study how wade liberalization affects

regional-industrial employment by using a profit-function approach to estimate regional labor

demand. For each industry assume there exists a weli-deflned profit function ith the standard

properties (Varian (1984)). Industries may be located in any number of states. For simplicity

assume each state-industry produces goods for a single destination market (e.g., all goods pass

through a cenwal processing zone). Assume also there &e positive transport costs that take

Samuelson% Ice-berg form: of each unit of output shipped from state! to the cenwal market only

a fraction ; arrives. Trade liberalization, in addition to changing relative prices, in effect changes

transport costs to the central market By Hoteiling's Lana, the demand for labor in state! by

industry J is given by


  (1)       Lv
                 - - 8fl/R,t1p1, q)
where fl() is the profit function; L9 is employment in state-industry if; R1 is a vector of factor

prices for if, some of which vary across states and othera of which do noq p1 is the national price

of industry/s outpuq is a vector of external effects; and Wq is the wage.

        A standard problem in empirically identifying agglomeration economies is that at any




      The problem with studying long-nm adjustment Is the existence of multiple equilibria. Theory offal little
guidance in decermithng which equilibria are more likely (see Krugman (1994)).

     'To motivate, the theory, I describe the adjustment          in terms of domestic firms deciding how to adjust
the location of their activIties. It makes no difference for my jnq*a6 whether the spatial reallocation of resources
occurs through existing firms relocating their operations or through the exit of old firms and the enty of new firms.

   'In event the profit fluwdon does not exist, the regreasion equation I specify still has an interpretation as a
generic employment growth equation.

                                                         9
moment of time their effects are Indistinguishable from those of unobserved fixed factors of

production. I avoid this problems by studying the growth of regional labor demanri if'

agglomeration economies are dynamic In nature, they have implications for growth that are

distinct from those of fixed factors.' Taking logs, I assume I can reexpress (1) as


  (2)         A1n(L) - a          OA1n(w) +                         +                +
                                                  Ep1Alnfr')            yts1n(tp1)       $A1n()
where 6 Is the difference operator between time : and time t+I and the ?js we non-labor factor

prices. External effects are assumed to be positive in nature so that an increase in their

magnitude increases labor demand for given factor and output prices.                              The dynamic
agglomeration-economies hypothesis is that increases in external effects are a function of the

initial concentration of resources in a given location;


 (3)         Mn(t.,) -a +Eb,Jn() tp
where the 4's measure the resource concentrations that generate externalities and e., is an error

term associated with the percentage change in external effects.

          I consider three types of agglomeration economies: within-industry effects, where firms

benefit from being near other firms in their industxy related-industry effects, where firms benefit

from proximity to firms in upstream and downstream industries; and diversity effects, where firms

benefit from proximity to firms in a wide array of industrial activities. Within-industry effects

are the standard ones considered in the cmpidcal literature (tg., Carlton (1983), Nakamura

(1985), Henderson (1986), and Glaeser et aL (1992)). Related-industry effects are generally


        That Is, fixed actors affect the level of regional Iab demand without affecting its growth.

                                                        10
subsumed into within-industry effects or ignored altogether. I distinguish between within-industry

externalities and related-industry externalities to conol for the possibility that the benefits firms

derive from proximity to their rivals differ from those they derive from proximity to their buyers

and suppliers. The hypothesis that industrial diversity enhances growth relates to Jacobs' (1969)

concept of the cross-fertilization of Ideas between firms in different industries. The essence of

Jacobs' story is that firms in one industry learn from firms in many industries. What enhances

spiliovers is not the agglomeration of firms in the same industry but the diversity of industries

represented in a given location. In the growth of U.S. city industries. Glaeser et a!. (1992) find

evidence consistent with cxtaualities related to diversity but not within-industry externalities.

        Trade liberalization reallocates resourtes across sectors. To identify location-specific

&ctors that affect regional-industry employment growth. I need to control for the sectoral effects

of trade. I do so by reexpressing (2) in terms of deviations fim national-industry changes.

National-industry changes can be expressed as a function of industry weighted-avenge changes

in factor prices, output prices, and external effects.' If labor is the only factor whose price varies

across states, taking deviations from national-industry changes eliminates the output price and all

non-labor factor prices from the expression. Equation (2) becomes


 (4)       AIn4) - OAbi(!) + yMn(!ft) + E1.1 P,1n4-)                +      - i,
                 p                                            4
where



   'To tc this note that tin(s) - %tx,, in which c
        Jto1%SL -         /9(SLJL) - t4J4-8in(9
where m -
                                                 11
      ''p, i,-Eo,z,,. ø-L(L
tuse expression In (4) for estimation.



111. The Data

         Data are drawn from the Mexico Industrial Census. The Census is a comprehensive

survey of manufacturing establishments that provides periodic data on four-digit (ISIC) state

industhes. Mexico has 54 industhós and 32 states.'° I have collected data from the three st

recent census years, 1980, 1985, and 1988. Mexico initiated its liberalization of wade in 1985.

I have two sets of observations on changes in regional industry labor deman± from 1980 to

1985, the period preceding trade liberalization, and from 1985 to 1988, the period following the

initiation of trade reform. It would be desirable to have a year later than 1988, but more recent

census data are not yet available. The swiftness with which liberalization was enacted suggests

the initial effects of wade reform should be observable by 1988.



A. The Liberalization of Trade

        Mexico's economy was largely closed to trade from the 1950's until the mid 1980's. The

government initiated a conscious policy of wade protection in the late 1940's when it raised tariffs

and instituted a system of import licenses (King (1970)). Successive administrations expanded

wade barriers, mainly by increasing the range of goods covered by import licenses. Trade


      Than ate numerous versions of the ISIC (International Standard Indusuini Classification) code. The Mexico
Cams purport to use the United Nations Revision 2 ISIC. There are, however, subtle differences between the UN
version and the Mexican version (the tiN version, for Stance, has mote than 54 tour-digit industries).

                                                      12
baniers biased firms towards production for the domestic market Not only were fintis protected

from foreign competition, but they were at a relative disadvantage in foreign markets dueto the

fact that they had to pay artificially high prices for imported inputs. The government also used

export controls to direct production towards the domestic markei't Periodic overvaluation of the

exchange rate was an additional Incentive against exporting.

         The government decided to open the economy to trade in 1985 and announced plans to

join the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATI). There was initial skepticism over the

seriousness of the government's reformist intentions, due in part to failed liberalization attempts

in the late 1970's and early 1980's. The government moved swiftly, however, drastically lowering

most trade banters within three years. In mid 1985, the national average tariff was 23.5 percent.

and import-license requirements covered 92.2 percent of national production. By December 1987.

import-license coverage had been reduced to 25.4 percent of national production and the average

tariff had been reduced to 11.8 percent. with a.maximum rate of 20 percent Concomitant to

reform the government abolished export controls and devalued the nonirnii exchange rate.

        Table 1 shows annual weighted-average tariffs and import-license coverage by two-digit

(ISIQ industry for the period 1984-1990. In 1985, the average tariff ranged from 13.6 percent

in non-metallic minerals to 47.3 percent in wood products; import licenses were required for ova

85.0 percent of products in all two-digit Industries. The government first cut import-license

requirements. reducing average import-license coverage to below ten percent by 1987 in all

industries except food products, textiles, and metal produots. The government then began to

reduce tariffs; by 1988, the maximum tariff rate in any industry was in other industries (toys.

    U In 1980, MexIco bad export controls on 85 patent of non-oil exports (Secretariat of Trade and Industrial
Promotion, unpublished data).

                                                      13
instniments. jeweliy) at 17.1 percent. The only industry that continues to enjoy relatively high

rates of protection is metal products, due mainly to import restrictions on autos.



B. Regional Employment in Mexico

        Trade liberalization has coincided with a sectoral and spatial reorganization of employment

in Mexica Table 2 shows the average annual change in national employment by two-digit

industry for the periods 1980-1985 and l985-l988.' In the period before trade liberalization,

manufacturing employment pew at an average annual rate of 3.34 patent; in the foliowing

period, manufacturing employment declined in absolute turns at an average annual rate of 0.75

percent The post-trade employment decline was concentrated in chemicals and basic metals,

which declined at annual average rates of 7.40 percent and 8.78 patent, respectively.

        It is difficult to detect the effects of trade liberalization in national level employment

changes. Trade reform was not the only shock to the Mexican economy In the 1980's. The

county experienced a severe macroeconomic contraction in 1986 and 1987, as the government

imposed austerity measures to stabilize the economy. Changes in regional employment offer

useful clues for identifying the effects of trade reform. Holding Industrial composition constant,

Mexico's regions are subject to the same macroeconomic shocks.tJ Studying regional-industry

employment growth relative to national-industry employment growth sweeps out the effects of


        Avenge annual employment gowth ii calculated as the change in log employment divided by the time
interval In years between observations.

    "11 Is Possible Mexico's maaoeconomic shocks varied &xoss regions, but it does not seem likely. Mexico's
sbitInrb, measurn Included drastic cuts In government spending and a pe devaluation. The large cuts in
outlays came in consumption subsidies. Public spending is nuder centralized control. The federal government
collects tax revenues from the stases and determines how they will be disbursed. I am aware of no evidence which
Indicates the government favored individual nates In making spending cuts.

                                                      14
economy-wide shocks and leaves the regional effects of trade reform.

       Figure 3 plots average annual relative employment growth for state-industries in the

periods 1985-1988 and 1980-1985." Average annual relative employment growth is defined as

the annualized change In log employment for the state industry minus the annualized change in

log employment for the national Industry (Fable 5 gives variable definitions). The line in Figure

3 is a regression given by the following equation:

      Ath(W9 - 0D43 - OSfl.A,0lmL,.IL)                   1'-O.149    N-1136
                   Tir. a
where & indicates the average annual change ova 1980-85, &, indicates the average annual

change over 1985-88, L1 is employment in state-industry if. I., is national employment in industry

f, and standard errors are In parentheses. While most state industries had zero relative

employment growth in both periods, the statistically significant (at the .05level) negative slope

of the regression line indicates many state Industries had positive relative growth in the first

period and negative relative growth In the second period, or vice-versa. This is consistent with

the idea that the pattern of state-industry employment growth before trade reform differed from

that after wade reform.

       To identify broad patterns in state-industry employment growth, it is useful to summarize

employment changes at the regional leveL I group states into five regions ninning north to south

(see Figure 4): (1) the Border. which contains states that border the United States; (2) the North.

which contains the next tier of northern states; (3) the Center, which contains sates surrounding




   "The points in Figure 3 are abbreviated state names (see Figure 4).

                                                    15
Mexico Qty (4) Mexico City, which contains the two states the capital occupies; and (5) the
South, which contains all states south of the capital.

        Table 3 shows regional shares of national employment by two-digit industry for 1980 and

1988. There are three stiidng features about regional employment in Mexico. The first is the

overall geographic concentration of manufacturing. Under the closed economy, the central states,

and Mexico City in partlcular were Mexico's manufacturing belL In 1980. the Mexico City

region contained 44.4 pervent of national manufacturing employment, and the Center contained

25.5 percent. Hanson (1994) shows this pattern of industry location had existed since 1960.

        The second striking feature of the data is the variation in geographic concentration across

indus ties. In 1980. employment in food products and non-metallic minerals was spread relatively

evenly across regions. These industries include goods, such as bread, tortillas, and cement, that

are not traded over long distances, hence their location reflects the regional distribution of

population. There are other industries that are highly concentrated geographically. In textiles and

apparel, paper and printing, chemicals, metal products, and other industries, ova 75 percent of

employment is concentrated in just two regions. These industries are relatively footloose, in that

production is relatively intensive in the use of relatively mobile factors. High levels of

agglomeration in footloose industries is consistent with some sort of scale economies.

        Thethdfeanreofthedaflthatoverthel9go'stherewasadramaticshthinrtladve
employment from Mexico City to the Bort Between 1980 and 1988, the Mexico City region's

share of manufacturing employment fell from 44.4 percent to 33.2 percent, while the Border



    "The Mexico City metropolitan wta encompasses the Federal District and several conunS Des in the state of
Mexico. Though the geographical area the capital occupies in the State of Mexico a not it contains the vast
majority of the states manufacturing activity.

                                                     16
region's share increased horn 21.0 percent to 28.2 percent The overall regional employment shift

was not uniform across industries. Table 4 shows relative employment growth by region and

two-digit Industry for the periods 1980-1985 and 1985-1988. From 1985 to 1988, the Border had

manufacturing employment growth relative to the nation as a whole of 6.53 percent This growth

varied widely across individual industries, ranging from 11.74 percent in textiles and Apparel, 9.77

percent in metal products, and 9.99 percent in other industries, to -0.63 percent in food products

and -0.28 percent in basic meSs. Similarly, after 1985 overall manufacturing employment

growth in the Center relative to the nation as a whole was -2.82 patent, but the region enjoyed

relative employment growth of 5.55 percent in wood products and 2.62 percent in other

industries. Just as the Border was not uniformly attractive to all industries, the Center was not

uniformly repellent to all industries.

       The northward shift in employment after 1985 is consistent with the transport-costs

hypothesis that, in response to trade liberalization, firms shift their operations to locations with

relatively good access to foreign markets. Location, however, does not tell the whole story. The

geographic concentration of industry prior to trade reform is consistent with agglomeration

economies. The heterogeneity in regional-industry response to trade suggests that location-

specific factors other than proximity to the United States play an important mit in explaining how

regional industries adjust to trade. Snmmary statistics are insufficient to determine if
agglomeration economies axe among these factors.



IV. Results on Regional Adjustment to Trade Liberalization
       If location-specific factors such as agglomeration and distance to foreign markets matter


                                                 17
for adjustment to trade liberalization, then the rst direct way to identify these effects is to study

the growth of the same industries in different locations and verify in which locations industry

employment grows faster. The unit of analysis is the four-digit stare-industry. I study changes

in state-industry employment during the periods 1980-1985 and 1985-1988. Observations on

relative employment growth in 1980-1985 serve as a control group for identifying the location-

specific factors that affect adjustment to trade liberalization. There are 1,728 (32x54) potential

observations per time period, but not all industries are present in all locations. I have 1,205

observations for 1980-1985 and 1,247 observations for 1985-1988. I impose a simple criterion

to eliminate observations that am likely subject to extreme measurement enor, which reduces the

observations to 1.151 for 1980-1985 and 1.116 for 1985-1988."



A. Variable Definition

         Table 5 gives variable definitions and Table 6 gives variable means arid standard errors

for each time period. The dependent variable is avenge annual relative employment growtk

That there was positive relative employment growth on average in both periods reflects the fact

that in each industry a few locations (tg., Mexico City) lost a lot of employment while a large

number of industries gained some employment.

         Following equation (4). I specify relative employment growth as a function of initial

conditions in the state industry relative to the national industry,




   The retlctlons I Impose an (1) industry employment is positive In the initial period. (2) industry eniployment
remains posicive after subtracting out non-remunerated wthess (mainly family labor), and (3) positive wages are paid
toesnployees.

                                                         18
   (5) Ah4!) -             +                         + $21n(               + $In( P'h) + tih24,P)

                +
                            (L,/L                                                                  -
                                                     L)ES7 + 4171fl(                       +

                          h.J


where i indexes the state, J indexes the four-digit industry, k indexes the two-digit industry to

which J belongs, and : indexes the initial period. The first term in equation (5) is the state-

industry wage relative to the national-industry wage. I measine the wage as annual remuneration

per worker (REMIL). I use the relative wage in the initial period, rather than the change in the

relative wage, to avoid introducing simultaneity into the regression. From Table 6, the state-

industry wage was on average about half the national-industry wage, which indicates a high

degree of wage dispersion. To the extent wages reflect mrket conditions, I expect relative

employment growth to be decreasing in the relative wage)7

         The second term in (5) represents the change in transport costs.                         Prior to trade

liberalization, transport costs change relatively little across periods)t In the transition from a

dosed to an open economy the change in transport costs reflects the inclusion of foreign

consumers as a sotrce of demand. A reasonable proxy for transport costs to foreign markets is

distance to the United States, which I measure as road distance in lometers from the state




    "The Mexican government sets minimum wages by region and by industry. Mexican lab law mandates a
host of benefits and standards, including the right to union representation. — vacations, employer-paid health care.
profit sharing, and semi-annual bonuses of a specified amount.

     " Over long periods, transpt costs change a peat deal, as roads and transportation technology improve. but
It Is unlikely such developments significantly alter transport costs over horizons as shod as three or five yen

                                                        19
 capital to the nearest major border crossing (fl'9 The distance measure I use is state distance

 to the United States (T1) relative to Industry weighted-average distance to the United States

 (ZiiJ). Prior to trade liberalization, there Is no reason transport costs to the United States should

affect labor demand; hence, I expect no relation between relative distance to the United States

and relative employment growth for 1980-1985. If transport costs to foreign markets matter for

industry location after wade liberalization, relative distance to the United States will be negatively

related with employment growth for 1985-1988.

         The third through fifth terms in (5) represent growth in external effects, which by

hypothesis is a function of initial levels of industry agglomeration. The first source of

externalities I consider is within-industry agglomeration, which I measure as the share of state

employment in the Industry (LJLJ relative to the share of national employment in the industry

(L)LJ. Glaeser et aL (1992) describe this as a measure of specialization as it controls for

siuxations where the state-industry is large purely because the state is large. If within-industry

externalities are positive,! expect relative employment growth to be higher where within-industry

agglomeration is higher.

         The second source of externthdes is related-industry agglomeration. I define related

industries as those that share a given industry's two-digit classification. The two-digit
classification tends to combine industries that share direct buyer/supplier relationships or that

produce goods for timiln markets. In apparel (ISIC 3220), for instance, my measure of related

industries includes textiles (ISIC 3213), knitwear (3214), leather (3230), and footwear (3240).


    "The major border crossings sit 'fljuana-San Diego, Nogales, Cludad It-El Paso, and Nti'o Laredo-
lsedo Using distance to measure bansport costs is equivalent to essinning that land transport Is the only available
means of ferryIng goods. Plims of course have the Mter"ve of shippfng goods by sea or by air. I deal with such
issues indirectly by including fixed state effects in the regression.

                                                       20
These industhes are close to apparel In product space, and hence are likely to use thniThr

production and/or distribution technologies. Technological commonalities create opportunities

for firms to learn from one another. My measure of related-industry agglomeration is two-digit

state employment relative to four-digit state employment (LaIL,J, adjusted by two-digit national

employment relative to four-digit national employment (LJL,). If related-industry externalities

are positive, I expect relative employment growth to be higher where related-industry

agglomeration.is higher.

        The third sourte of externalities is industrial thversity I measure diversity for a state-

industry as the sum of squared state employment shares for all other industries in the state

(ESF/LJLM. relative to the sum of squared national employment shares for all other industries

in the nation (ZJLJLJI. The more even is the distribution of state (national) employment

across industries, the larger is the sum of squared state (national) employment shares. The larger

is the ratio of the sum of squared state employment shares to the sum of squared national

employment shares the more diverse is the state relative to the nation as a whole. If industrial

diversity generates positive externalities, relative employment growth will be higher where

relative diversity is higher.

       The sixth and seventh terms in (5) represent other fictors that affect relative employment

growth. Not all firms in an industry necessarily use the saint technology or operate at the same

level of efficiency. To control for such differences, I include the log of the avenge establishment

size In the sate Industry relative to the weighted-avenge establishment size in the industry as a

whole, where I measure establishment size as workers per establishment (DESfl. While large

relative size may indicate better technology or imperfect competition, it may also indicate active


                                                21
unions that force firms to operate at relatively high employment levels.

       Prior to trade liberalization, Mexico allowed off-shore in-bond assembly plants, known

as maquiladoras, to operate in special enterprise zones along the Mexico-U.S. border.

Maquiladoras assemble imported inputs for export. They are exempted from all import
restrictions, as long as they export ali of their output Maquiladozas hire a large share of women

relative tot manufacturing establishments (Wilson (l992)). The presence of maquiladoras

along the border may have created regional differences in labor-force composition. To control

for this possibility, I include the share of employment that is female in the state-industry

(FELVd/LW) relative to share of employment that is female in the national industry (FELJL,).



B. EstImation Issues

           I have observations across states, industries, and time. I control for the possibility there

alt idiosyncratic components to state-industry employment growth by allowing the enor term

in (5) to have the following stuctwe

 (6) ew,.
whaeiçbafledstatecffaflindusueffectv,isaf1xedyeareffect,andqisan
lid, random variable with mean zero and variance &. The alternative to fixed effects is random

effects.     Random-effects estimation imposes the assumption that the elements of ç,                      are

uncorrelated across states, industries, and years. Recall that not all industries are present in all

states. The unbalanced panel is due not to a lack of data on these industries but to an equilibrium




   a Indeed, assembly plants sit the vehicle through which many women enter Mexico's manufacturing labor foite.

                                                     22
process that allocates industries across states. That a given industry has zero employment in a

state reflects the combined idiosyncratic characteristics of the state and the industry, which

implies there is little basis for assuming that state effects and industry effects are uncorrelated.

In this case, fixed-effects estimation is the more prudent approach.

        The regression equation I estimate has the sncttwe of (4). in which I have in effect taken

deviations from industry weighted averages. Taking weighted-average deviations creates an error

term with the following suuctmt:

 cn         -     --                  -            +        -      +     -
 (8)
                         I                 I
where cog, is state-industry ifs share of national-industry fs employment. Taking deviations

eliminates industry and year effects, but leaves state effects and a random error term which has

zero mean but is no longer spherical?' The second tight-hand-side term in m varies across

Industries if relative state employment shares vary across industries (which we know from the

last section is true). introducing a new industry effect into the regression.

        One approach is to take deviations from stare and industry means, which would eliminate

all fixed effects. The problem with this Is that two my regressors, relative transport costs and

relative industrial diversity, vary little across industries within a state. Taking deviations from

state means would virtually eliminate these variables from the regression. Instead, I estimate the

model in the form of equation (5), and I nut each regression twice, first without controlling for

fixed effects and then including state and industry dummy variables. Given the large number of



   .   merandom aiw term       - ;oti     has mean zero and variance &(I - E,cOI). The variance differs across
Industries If the mm of suared state employment shares differs ron industriat

                                                       23
observations in the sample, using dummy variables to control for fixed effects does not

substantially reduce the degrees of freedom of the regression. I use White's correction to obtain

heteroskedasticity-consistent standard en'ors.



C. Estimation Results

C.1 The Pre-Reform Period (1980.1985)

        Table 7 gIves estimation results on relative employment growth for 1,151 observations

during the period 1980.1985. The regressions reported in the (a) columns do not include state

and industry dummies; those in the (b) columns do. Among the control variables, the relative

wage and the relative size of the female labor force are unrelated with relative employment

growth. Relative employment growth is lower where relative establishment size is higher in

eight of the twelve regressions the variable is negative and significant at the .05 leveL This is

consistent with the idea that locations with relatively large firms are either the targets of union

organizing activity or its recent victims.

        The most interesting results are for the agglomeration and distance variables. As

expected, prior to trade liberalization relative distance to the United States is unrelated with

relative employment growth. The coefficient on the variable is Significant at the .05 level in

three of four regressions; where it is significant, it is positive. Distance to foreign markets does

not affect regional labor demand when firms produce for domestic markets.

        Spiflovers between firms in the same industry do not appear to enhance growth. Relative

employment growth is lower where within-industry agglomeration is highet the variable is

      While I have — Information on the manner in which the variance is likely to differ across industries, this
may not be the only soace of heteroskedasddcy in the regression. The White correction is a general treatment

                                                      24
negative and significant at the .05 level in all regressions. The quantitative effect is not large.

From the results in column (6.b),       a   one standard deviation increase in within-industry

agglomeration (1.260) reduces annual average relative employment growth by 2.80 percent, or

one-eighth a standard deviation.

       Other t,pes of agglomeration effects are positively related with growth. Relative

employment growth is higher where related-industry agglomeration is Mgher the variable is

positive and significant at the .01 level in all regressions. The quantitative effect Is moderate.

From the results in column (6.b), a one standard deviation increase in related-industry

agglomeration (1.110) increases average annual relative employment growth by 4.72 percent, or

one-fourth a standard deviation. Industrial diversity is unrelated with relative employment

growth; the variable is significant in only one regression and in that case it is negative.

       The results for relative employment growth during 1980-1985 suggest Mexico was

undergoing a spatial reallocation of employment even before trade liberalization. One explanation

is that firms anticipated trade reform and began to relocate their activities prior to its actual

initiation. This is inconsistent, however; with the fact that state industries close to the United

States did not grow more rapidly than other sates. An alternative explanation is that Mexico's

manufacturing belt was beginning to sag under its own weight The cities in the manufacturing

belt, and Mexico City in particular; grew to enormous size between 1950 and 1980. As in the

post-war United States, congestion costs and union militancy may have encouraged firms to move

their activities out of established manufacturing regions. This is consistent with the fact that

relative establishment size is negatively related with growth. The results on related-industry

agglomeration suggest that while large industry centers in Mexicots manufacturing heartland were



                                                25
brealdng apart, broadly specialized regional industrial complexes were developing elsewhere.



C.2 The Post-Reform Period (1985-1988)

        TableS gives estimation results for 1.116 observations during the period 1985-1988. The

most sulking change from the results for 1980-1985 is that, as expected, relative employment

growth is lower in state-industries that are relatively distant from the United States; the variable

is negative and significant at the .05 level in three of four regressions? This is consistent with

the hypothesis that with the opening of the Mexican economy firms have begun to shift their

activities towards the Mexico-U.S. border, where they enjoy relatively low-cost access to the U.S.

market The quantitative effect of distance is not large, however. From the results in column

(6.b), a one standard deviation increase in relative distance (1.344) reduces average annual

relative employment growth by 3.10 percent, which is one-ninth a standard deviation.

         There no longer appears to be a negative relation between within-industry agglomeration

and growth; the coefficient on the variable is negative and significant in only one of four

regressions. It remains tue that relative employment growth is higher where related-industry

agglomeration is Mgher the coefficient on the variable is positive and significant at the .01 level

in all regressions. The findings remain consistent with the idea that Mexico is developing broadly

specialized regional industrial centers. The results on distance suggest the most favored industry

centers are those relatively close to the United States.

         Another change from the previous results is that relative employment growth is higher



       As was mentioned esrlier relative distance does not vary greatly xmas industries within a state. This implies
there Is multlcolllnearity between relative distance and state dummy variables. ft is not surprising, then, that when
state dummies are included in the regression the coefficient on relative distance is not always significant

                                                         26
what the relative size of the female labor force is highen the variable is positive and significant

at the .01 level in all regressions. This is consistent with the idea that since wade reform

Mexican firms are converting to assembly-type activities, which art relatively intensive in the use

of female labor. As before, the relative wage and relative industrial diversity are unrelated with

growth. The results on relative establishment size are more consistent than in the previous

sample; the coefficient is negative and significant at the .01 level in all regressions.

        Comparing Tables 7 and 8, it appears that after wade liberalization there was a structural

break in the pattern of regional labor demand, which would be consistent with the theories

presented In section two. To formally test this hypothesis, I combine observations from the two

samples and reest4vnste the regression, If wade liberalization has indeed caused a structural break.

the regression coefficients on the period after 1985 will differ from those before 1985. Table 9

shows results from pooled regressions? In all regressions I reject the hypothesis that regression

coefficients are the same In both periods at the .01 leveL The results on individual coefficients

confirm the preceding results: after 1985, the negative effect of relative distance to the U.S. is

larger, the positive effect of the female share of the labor force is larger, and the negative effect

of relative establishment size is larger.



C.3 Sensitivity Analysis
       To check the robustness of my findings, I re-estimate the regression equation, imposing

a number of restrictions on the sample. One possibility is that the results are driven by the

decomposition of the Mexico Oty manufacturing belt, and that in outlying regions the


   "year85 isadunimy variable that takes a value of one if the year is 1985 (the alternative being 1980).

                                                    27
agglomeration and distance effects evident in Tables 7-9 do not exist. To verify this is not the

case, I drop state industries in the Mexico City region from the sample, which in the pooled

sample reduces the number of observations from 2,267 to 2,080. Table 10 gives the results.

Coefficient magnitudes and patterns of significance are virtually identical to those in the

corresponding columns of Table 9.

       A second possibility is that the results are driven by regional variation in adjustment to

Mexico's stabilization policies In the late 1980's. Real GD? in Mexico fell by 436 percent in

l986.andzosebyL92pexcentlnl987and4.l0pattntinl988. Duetothepresenceofthe
maquiladora industry, states along the Mexico-U.S. bother where special enterprise zones where

concentrated, were oriented towards export production before trade liberalization. Producers in

interior states may have suffered a large fall in demand for their goods relative to border

producers during the period 1985-1988 due to the fact that they were primarily oriented towards

production for the domestic market What appeals to be a northern shift in regional labor

demand after trade reform may only have been the uneven effects of Mexico's stabilization

policies. To verify this is not the case, I drop industries in the Border region from the sample.

which in the pooled sample reduces the number of observations from 2,267 to 1,823. Table Ii

gives the results. Again, coefficient magnitudes and patterns of significance are virtually identical

to those in the corresponding columns of Table 9.

       So far, I have pooled all industries together. mi_is imposes the assumption that distance

and agglomeration matter equally for all industhes. Casual observation suggests this is not the

case. Some industries produce goods that are not widely waded across regions or that are

intensive in the use of relatively immobile inputs. Dropping these industries from the regression



                                                 28
should only suengthen the results. The industries I exclude are food products USIC 31), paper

and printing (151C 34), non-metallic minerals (ISIC 36). and basic metals (ISIC 37). Many food

products, such as bread, beverages, and meat, are perishable or have low value-to-weight ratios

and therefore costly to transpoit Firms that produce these goods tend to locate near large

population centers. The production of paper. non-metallic minerals, and basic metals is relatively

intensive in the use of inputs with relatively high transport costs. The remaining industries -

textiles and apparel, wood products, chemicals, metal products, and other thdusthes - are

relatively intensive in the use of relatively mobile resourves. Table 12 gives the results.
Dropping the four industries reduces the number of observations in the pooled sample from 2,267

to 1.334. Again, the Suits are virtually identical to those in Table 9?



D. Discussion

         The empirical results describe the general features of the post-wade pattern of industry

location that is emerging in Mexico. Since trade reform, there has been an overall northward

shift in the location of manufacturing activities. Mexico's closed-economy manufacturing belt

is breaHng apart, or at least diminishing in relative importance, as firms relocate their activities

to regions with better access to the U.S. market. The implementation of the North American Free

Trade Agreement will further improve Mexico's access to the U.S. market, which is likely to

reinforce finns' motivation to be near the United states.

        Acaanyanying industry relocation is a change in the composition of Mexico's industry



       In a separate set of regressIons, whose results I do not report in the paper, I allow the coefficient on relatIve
distance to vary xtoss two-digit industries. For both 1980-1985 and 1985-1988.1 fail to reject the hypothesis that
distance effects ale constant cuss industries at the .05 level.

                                                          29
cenrn The empirical results are consistent with the hypothesis that broadly spedalized regional

indus1al centers are replacing the dense concentrations of industries that dominated the Mexican

landscape under the closed economy. The shift involves both a spatial decentlinrion of

employment and a lessening of regional specialization. The fact that agglomeration is positively

related with growth is consistent with the existence of nonpecuniary agglomeration economies.

It appears the breakup of the Mexico City manufacturing belt was underway before 1985, and

hence cannot be entirely attributed to trade liberalization. Changes in tax policy. transport costs,

union-organizing activities, and cumulative congestion effects are aU candidate explanations.



IV. Concluding Remarks

       This paper studies the regional effects of trade liberalization. I focus on the opposing

forces of transport costs, which encorge firms to relocate to regions with relatively good access

to foreign markets, and agglomeration economies, which encourage the growth of closed-economy

Industry centers. The particular case I consider is state-industry employment growth in Mexico

before and after trade reform. Consistent with the transport-costs hypothesis, employment growth

after trade reform is higher in regions that are relatively close to the United Stares, which is the

major foreign market for Mexican producers. Certain types of agglomeration matter for growth.

Employment growth is higher in state-industries with large agglomerations of firms in upstream

and downstream industries; the agglomeration of firms in the same industry is negatively related

with puwth. Together the results describe the decomposition of the Mexico City manufacturing

belt and the creation of smaller, broadly specialized industry centers in Mexico's north.

       In the last fifteen years, there have been dozens of episodes of trade liberalization in the


                                                30
developing world and the formerly communist countries. The regional effects of reform have

received scant attention. My results suggest that regions differ greatly in the manner in which

they adjust to trade. Industry relocation creates additional adjustment costs that policy makers

often ignore in planning how to accommodate the opening of the economy. More generally, my

results support the idea that with economic integration national identities ate descendent and

regional identities are ascendent. As NAFTA further integrates Mexico into the North American

economy, the ties between northern Mexico and the southwestern United States will strengthen

and those between northern and southern Mexico will weaken. In such a world it increasingly

makes sense to make regions, rather than nations, the unit of analysis in international trade.




                                              31
00                                     NOR
                                                  vnz
 0,

00,    1.5 -
                                         SI,                                Mt.
                                                   MID
=                         PIP IMP                           mx
az       1—                     SIN
                          In                                     GRR
 C
 U      .5 -
0                         COA                                                                      CDA
aa                   U.                                                                  IN
                                                                                                                   £65
tsi
S       0-                       MID

C
a'     -.5 -
                                                    SIN               NOR
C
C
C
.4     —I
            —
                                                            Yuc
                                                                a
                                                                MID SON
                                                                                  SINp                   MID

 a'                                                       crc
C                                                                                        MCWX
L
S
.4
      -1.5 -
                 I                            I                   I                           I                I

                —1                           —.5                  0                           .5               1
                           Average Annual Relative Employment Growth, 1980—1985

                                                          Figure 3
                     Figure 4




                                Border Region




Region




                                                    Mexico City
                                                    Region
         Center
         1(eg 101)




                                     South Region
                                                       b
                                          Rererences

Mills. C. and L Riyen-Batiz. 1993. "Geography, Trade Patterns, and Economic Policy."
manuscript, International Monetary Fund and University of florida.

Blanchard, 0. and L. Katz, 1992. "Regional Evolutions." Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1: 1992, 1-75.

Canton, D.W. .1983. "The Location and Employment Choices of New Firms." Review of
Economics and StatistIcs 65: 440-449.

Eaton, 1. and Z. Eckstein. 1994. "Cities and Growth: Theory and Evidence from France and
J'apas" NBER Working Paper No. 4612.

Fujita. M. 1988. "Monopolistic Competition and Urban Systems." European Economic Review
37: 308-15.

Fujita, M. 1993. "Monopolistic Competition and Urban Systems." European Economic Review
37: 308-15.

Cans, G. 1985. El Proceso de IndustrializaciOn en Ia Ciudad de MExico, 1821-1970. Mexico
City: El Colegio de Mdxico.

Glaeser, B.. FL lCallal, L Sheinlen,iin. and A. Shleifer. 1992. . "Growth in Cities." Journal of
Political Economy 100: 1126-1152.

Grossman, (3. and B. Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy.
Cambddge MIT Press.

Hanson, 0. 1994. Increasing Returns and the Regional Sncture of Wages." Manuscript
University of Tens.

Henderson, J.V. 1974. "The Sizes and Types of Cities." American Economic Review 64: 640-
656.

Henderson, J.V. 1986. "Efficiency of Resource Usage and City Size." Journal of Urban
Economics 19: 47-70.

lnstituto National de Estadfstica, Geographfa e Informitica (INEGP. Xl Censo Industrial. (1981),
XII Censo Industrial, (1985).      Mexico City: INEGL Resultados Oponunos. (1989),
Aguascalientes: INEGL

Jacobs, 1. 1969. The Economy of Cities. New York: Vintage.


                                              32
za A., lbl. najtenberg, and R. Henderson. 1993. "Geographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations." Quarterly Journal of Economics   108: 577-598.

King, T. 1970. Mexico: Industrialization and. Trade Policies Since 1940. London: Oxford
University Press.

Ksugman, P. 1991. "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography." Journal of Political
Economy 99: 483-499.

Kiugman, P. 1994. "Fluctuations, Instability, and Agglomeration." NBER Working Paper No.
4616.

ICrugman. P. and ft. Uvas. 1992. 'Trade Policy and the Third World Metropolis." NEER
Working Paper No. 4238.

Lucas, RE. 1988. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development" Journal of Monetary
Economics 22: 3-42.

Matsuyama, K. and t Takahashi. 1993. Self-Defeating Regional Concentration. Manuscript,
Northwestern University.

Nakamira, ft. 1985. "Agglomeration Economies in Urban Manufacturing Industries: A Case
of Japanese Qdes? Journal of Urban Economics 17: 108-24.

Porter, M. 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York: The Free Press.

Ranch, L 1990. "Comparative Advantage. Geographic Advantage, and the Volume of Trade."
flEER. Working Paper No. 3512.

Ranch, L 1993a. 'Does History Matter Only When It Matters a Little?" Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107: 843-867.

Ranch, I. 1993b. "Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of Human Capital:
Evidence from the Odes." Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming

Rivera-Bat, EL. 1988. "Increasing Renmis, Monopolistic Competition, and Agglomeration
Economies in Consumption and Production." Regional Science and Urban Economics 18: 125-
53.

Rivera-Bat, R., and P. Romer. 1991. "Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 531-556.

Roback, J. 1982. Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life. Journal of Political Economy 9th
1257-78.

                                            33
Rorner, p. 1986. "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth." Journal of Political Economy
94: 1002-37.

Rotner, P. 1990. "Endogenous Technological Change." Journal of Political Economy 98: 871-
5101.

Varian, II. 1984. Mlcroeconomic Analysis. New York W.W. Norton.

Wel, S. 1993. "Open Door Policy and China's Rapid Growth Evidence fttm Ow-Level Da"
NBER Working Paper No. 4602.

White, H. 1980. "A Heteroskedasticity-Consis tent Covarlance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
Test for Heteroskedasticity." Econometrlca 48: 817-838.

Wilson. PA. 1992. E.rportr and Local Development: Mexicos New Maquiladoras. Austin:
University of Texas Press.

Young. A. 1991. "Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade."
Quarterly Journal of Economic: 106: 369-406.




                                           34
                                      Table 1:
  Average Tariffs and Import-License Requirements by Two-Digit Industry, 1984-1990
                                          (percent)
                 —
  Industry            1984     1985      1986     1987      1988     1989      1990
  (ISIC)
 Food            t    42.9      45.4     32.1      22.9     14.8      15.8      161
 Products        q    100.0     80.1     62.2      33.3     20.8      20.6      16.8

 Textiles,       t    38.6      43.2     40.4      26.6     16.8      16.6      16.7
 Apparel         q    92.9      66.8     38.0      31.1      2.8       1.1       1.0


 Wood            t     47.3     48.5     44.9     29.9      17.7      17.6     17.8
 Products        q    100.0     75.6     25.7      0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0

 Paper,          t    33.7      36.5     34.8     23.7       7.7      10.1       9.9
 Printing        q    96.7      54.1     11.2         9.5    3.4       4.1       0.0

 Chemicals       t    29.1      29.9     27.0     20.5      13.4      14.3     14.4
                 q    85.7      54.0     21.1      4.8       0.0      0.0       0.0

 Basic Metals    t    37.1     38.5      33.8     22.4      13.8      14.3     14.3
                 q    99.0     53.1       5.2      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0

 Non-Metallic    t    13.6      16.7     18.4     13.8       7.9      11.0     11.0
 Minerals        q    93.3     47.4       0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0

 Metal           t    43.1     46.3      30.0     20.8      14.1      15.9     16.1
 Products        q    90.7     74.8      54.7     51.4      42.7     44.1      44.1

 Other           t    40.9     42.9      40.5     27.5      17.1     18.1      18.4
 Industries      q   100.0     50.0       0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0


 - Average tariff rate. q Average share of production subject to import-license requirements.
Source: Unpublished data, Mexican Ministry of Thde and Industrial Promotion.


                                             35
    Table 2: ManufacturIng Employment Growth by Two-Digit Industry, 1980-1985

                          Average Annual Employment Growth (%)
     Industry                1980-1985             1985-1988
  All Manufacturing             3.34                 -0.75

  Food Products                 3.03                 0.09

  Textiles, Apparel             1.66                 2.21

 Wood Products                  6.10                 1.24


 Paper, Printing                1.46                 0.49

 aemlcals                      8.34                 -7.40

 Non-metallic Minerals         3.71                 -0.24

 Basic Metals                  4.42                 -8.78

 Metal Products                2.20                  0.60

 Other Industries             -7.06                  5.95


Sourte: Author's calculations based on data from Censo Industrial, various yen




                                           36
                     Table 3: Regional Shares of National Employment by Two-Digit industry, 1980 and 1988
                                                      (figurcs in paccntagcs)

                       Regional Share of Nations! Empioyment, 1980      Regional Share of National Employment, 1988

 Indusuy               Bordor   North     Centor   Mu.       South      Dada     North    Centa     MeL      South

 All Manufacturing      20.95    525      25A8      44,14     3.89      2821      6+78     2726      33.17     438

 Food Products          17.70   1039       3392     28.70     9.10       1831     10.81    35.23     25.64     9.81


 Textiles, Apparel      11.29    4.98      35.12    43.92     4.69       18.04     738     38.08     33.61     2.68


 Wood Products          19.18    14.65     20.30    36.90     8.97      25.72     17.03    24.86     20.62    11.78


 Paper. Printing        13.89    3.61      1347     65.14     3.91       18.97     6.04    16.10     54.25     4.64

 Chemicals              1439      1.78     26.31    55.73     1.60       1636      1.77    31.07     45.75     4.85


 Non-met Minerals       32.08    5.29      2325     3435      424       31.77     6.60     29.60     26.11     5.91


 Basic Metals           49.22    232       1840     29.82     0.05      40.08     7.18     23.45     29.13     0.15

 MciaI Products         26.90    2.76      18.90    50.71     0.73      46.02     4.16     1628      32.01     0.92

 Other IndustrIes       15.61    0.85      13.06    69,19     1.28      3036      2.67      8.96     55.11     2.70


Source; Authofl calculations based on data hon Ceno Mdusthal, various   yen

                                                                        37
             Table 4: Average Annual Relative Employment Growth by Region and Two-Digit Industry, 1980-1988

                      Relative Employment Growth (%). 1980-1985        Raladvo Employment Growth (%). 1985-1988

 indusay              Bocda     North     Cenca     Ma.      South     Bontez   North   Conies    Ma.      South

 AU Manufacturing       21)3     3.88      31)5     -3.76      0.33 . 633        2.10    -2.82    -348      4.87


 FOOdPXQdUCtS           1.27      1.77     01)9     -136      -034      -043    -2-24     1.11    -1.16     3.08


 Textiles, Apparel      2.34     336       3.17     -3.49     -6.89     11.74    81)9    -238     -3.10    -7.14


 Woodhoducis            4.30     4.75      0.73     -4.80     -3.40     2.61    -229      535     -1141     14.76


 Paper. Printing        2.78     6.38      5.90     -2.47     -233      5.79     634     -3.88    -1.98     997

 Chemicals             -027      .199      6.97     -449      1342      4.68     3.15    -6.08     1.61     14.73


 Non-ma. Minerals      -228      228       5.84     .4.00      4.18     347      3.62    .233     -2.67     4.15


 Basic Mcials          -3.94     15.64     5.74     -0.40     40.08     -028     8.84    -147      -0.11   -2735

 Metal Products         428      7.73       1.74    -4.79      7.69     9.77     0.75    -6.66    -735      -491

 OWes lndusSs           743      16.82     -9.11    -127      1042       9.99    999      2.62    -5.47     733


Sowcc Aulbot's calculations based on data &om CIASO Indunrial. various years



                                                                       38
                                    Table 5: VarIable definitions


(1) Relative employment growth



(2) Relative wage


(3) Relative establishment size
                                                          4/nT,

(4) Relative female share of labor fbrce



(5) Within-Industry agglomeration
                                                       1u()
(6) Related-industiy agglomeration


(7) Relative indusifial diversity


(8) Relative transport costs



           —   initial period.
       S a final period.
       I — state.
       J a four-digit indusizy.
       k       two-digit industry (to which J belongs).

       L          —
                      employment.
       REM = total remunerations.
       T1
                  - distance in kilometers from capital of state I to U.S. border.
       03*
           a
       FEL — female employment.
       EST a number of establishments.

                                                  39
                        Table 6: VarIable Means and Standard Errors

                                            1980-1985                  1985-1988
               Variable               (observations — 1.151)   (observatIons Ij1
        (an variables ale logs)
                                     Mean          Sit Em      Mean        Sit Em
Relative cijiploytnent growth         .013          .182        .004         .276


Relative wage                         -314          .689       •A31          £56

Relative establIshmentS.              -.468        1.112       -397         1.042


Relative frmale labor torve           -.204         .735       -212          .735


Witbln-bdustry agglomeratIon          -353         1.260        .182         988


Related-indumy agglomeration          .221         1.110       -325         1.185


Relative Industlal dIversity          .965          A39         .915         A20

Relative          to U.S.             -382         1342        -351         1344




                                              40
                                Table 7: RegressIon Results on Stste-Indusby ReLative Employment 0rowtb 1980-1985


Variables      (la)       (1.b)       (2.a)    (2.b)      Os)        (3.b)        (4s)       (4.b)      (5s)      (5h)       (6s)      (6b)
Relative      £032      1)015       -.0024    1)005      -.0055     -.0045      .0032       .0019     1)026     .0015       -.0048    -1)029
wage         (.0103)    (.0122)     (.0101)   (.0119)   (.0097)     (.0114)     (.0107)     (.0121)   (.0103)   (.0122)     (.0101)   (.0114)
Relative     -0491'     -.058?      -.0145    -.0184     -.0176'    -.022?      -1)491'      1)1'     -.0498'   -.058?      -1)101    -.0125
estabLish.   (.0075)    (1)079)     (.0092)   (.0112)    (.0081)    (.0093)     (1)071)     (1)083)   (.0075)   (.0080)     (.0093)   (.0109)
she
Relative      .0105     .0102       .0071     .0092       .0003     .0039       .0105       1)103     .0095      .0102      .0015     .0045
female       (.0081)    (.0081)     (.0080)   (.0079)    (.0079)    (1)080)     (.0082)     (.0081)   (.0082)   (.0081)     (1)079)   (.0079)
labor
Within-                             -1)414'   -1)41?                                                                        -.0149'   -.0222'
industry                            (1)062)   (1)079)                                                                       (1)074)   (1)096)
agglom.
Related-                                                 .0513'     .0504'                                                  .0422'    .0425'
Industry                                                 (1)064)    (1)070)                                                 (1)078)   (.0082)
agglom.

Relative                                                                        -1)007      -.0414                          .0074     -.1271'
IndustrIal                                                                      (1)127)     (1)287)                         (.0123)   (.0290)
diversity
Relative                                                                                              -1)046     .0107      .0011     1)223'
dIstance                                                                                              (1)045)   (.0101)     (1)045)   (1)097)
toLlS
Fixed          no         yes         no       yes        no         yes          no         yes       no         yes        no        yes
effects


Adj.R3         .084      .151        .126     .171       .149       .200         .083       .151      .084      .151        .151      .208
No. obs.      1151      1151        1151      1151       1151       1151        1151        1151      1151      1151        1151      1151
Indicates significance at the .05 Aevcl. 'Indicates significance at the .01   level.    Hceczoskedasdcity-consistent   szandrd ens in parentheses.


                                                                               41
                                  TibIa Is Regreulou Results.. Stata-hd.stq Relative Employment Growth, 1985-1911

 Variables                 - (ib)
               (1*)                    (2..)        (2k)       (3..)     Q.b)         (44       (4.b)         (5..)              (6..)     (610
 Relative     0239         .0225      .0213       .0276      .0176     .0227      .0246        .0304        .0175     .0285     .0140     .0247
 wage         (.0166)      (.0195)    (.0169)     (0198)     (.0171)   (.0209)    (0170)      (0195)        (.0167)   (0195)    (.0174)
 Relative     -.0797'      -.1040'     1)605'     •.0g'       0547'     flfl4b J)795b           1073'        0838'    -.1040'   -.0677'   -.0814'
 establish.   (.0134)      (.0139)    (.0144)     (.0189)    (.0133)   (0161) (.0134)
 she                                                                                          (.0144)       (0134)    (.0139)   (.0141)   (0193)
                                                                                                        .
 Relative     .0814'       (169(1'    0781'       .0690'     .0722'    .0636'     .0818'      .0695'        .0704'    .0690'
 female
                                                                                                                                .0630     .0635'
              (0159)       (0158)     (.0160)     (0)58)     (.0160)   (.0159)    (.0160)     (.0155)       (.0160)   (.0158)
 labor                                                                                                                          (.0161)   (0159)

Within-                               -.02W       -0177                                                                         .0151     £088
industry                              (0100)      (0132)                                                                        (0112)    (.0145)
*gglom.
Related-                                                     .0445'    .0463'                                                   0485'     .0514'
industry                                                     (0132)    (.0136)
agglom.
                                                                                                                                (0153)    (0147)


Relative                                                                          .0070       -0551                             .0150     -.0649
industrial
                                                                                  (0171)      (.0533)                           (.0169)   (0578)
diversity
Relative                                                                                                    -0341'    -1)303'   -1)332'   •D230
distance
to U.S.                                                                                                     (.0062)   (0131)    (0062)    (0137)

Fixed          no           yes        no          yes        no         yes       no                        no
                                                                                               yes                     yes       no        yes
effects
Mi. R'        .104         .174       .108        .175       .120       .189      .103         .174         .129      .174      .142      .189
No.obs.       1116         1116      1116         1116       1116      1116       1116        1116          1116      1116      1116
Indicates sagnincance at   mc .05    vet. •   Indicates significance as We .01 level.     Hcleroskèoasuczsy.coasssaent standard error in parCntheacs.


                                                                                 42
            Table 9r Regrenlon Results on Pooled Sample


   Variable                          (La)       (Lb)              (la)       (2.2,)
   Relative wage                 .0055        .0033          -.0054       -.0016
                                (.0102)      (.0120)         (.0101)      (.0117)
   Relative establishment
   ze
                                -.049?       -.0680'         -.0094       -.Qt
                                (.0076)      (.0081)         (.0092)      (.0110)
   Relative female laba         .0111         .0061           .0013        .0027
   force                        (.0081)      G0087)          (.0080)      (.0083)
   Wsthin-indusay                                            -.0149       -.0152
   agglomeration                                             (.0074)      (.0091)
   Related-Industry                                           .0424'       .0441'
   agglomeration                                             (.0078)      (.0082)
   Relative Industrial                                        .0145       -.0243
   dlvenity
   Relative distance to U.S.
        .                                                    6
                                                             (.0111)


                                                             (.0044)
                                                                          (.0218)
                                                                           .0296
                                                                          (.1202)
   Relative wage°year8S         .0162        .0211           .0202        .0222
                               (.0179)      (.0186)         (.0202)      (.0197)
   Relative establishment      -.0305       -.031?          -.0584'      -.0558'
   size°year85                 (.0154)      (.0146)         (.0169)      (.0170)
  Relative female labor
  force'yesr8s
                                .0696'
                               (.0177)
                                             .066t
                                            (.0172)         (.0180)
                                                                          4b
                                                                         (.0173)
  Withia-lndustzy                                            .0300        .0258
  agglomeratlon"yerg5                                       (.0134)      (.0132)
  Related-Industry                                           .0058        .0069
  agglomentlonyeargs                                        (.0173)      (.0164)
  Relative industrIal                                       -.0070       -.0011
  divenityesr85                                             (.0123)      (.0223)
  Relative distance to                                      -.033?        .034
  US'yearSS                                                 (.0075)      (.0075)
  P-statistic on yesr85
  coefficients
                               S.7t         5.77'           Sit          5.77'

  lixed effect                  no           yes             no           yes
  Mjustedk'                    .098         .136            .145         .169
  Nwnba of observations      2261         2267        2267           2267
  Indicates significance at inc 1.13 leveL lm1wtn sigI.irIr2ncc at me £1 leveL Ieteroskedasdclty-coSstent
standard atui in parentheses. year85 Is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the year is 1985.


                                                       43
         table 10: RegressIon Results Esciudlag Mexico City Region

  Variable                 (La)         (1.b)         (2.a)        (2.b)
  Relative wage           .0138         .0050        .0013        .0011
                         (.0114)       (.0133)      (.0113)      (.0129)
  Relative               •.05l3        •.O686       -.0087       -.0212
  establishment size     (.0080)       (.0084)      (.0097)      (.0115)
  Relative Ibmale         .0138        .0079         .0029        .0046
  labor force            (.0084)      (.0089)       (.0082)      (.0086)
  Within-industry                                   -.0162'      -.0155
  agglomeration                                     (.0077)      (.0099)
  Related-industry                                  .044t         .O464
  agglomeratIon                                     (.0080)      (.0085)
  Relative industrIal                                .0105       -.0155
  dlvenity                                          (.0123)      (.0230)
  Relative distance                                  .0017        .0349
  to U.S.                                           (.0045)      (.1278)
  RelatIve                .0163       .0272         .0215         .0256
  wage°year85            (.0188)      (.0195)       (.0212)      (.0205)
  Relative establish.    -.0334'      -.0356'      -.065         -.0622k
  slze'yer8s             (.0161)      (.0150)      (.0175)       (.0177)
  Relative female        .072?        .071'         .067          .0646b
  labor foive°year8s     (.0182)      (.0177)      (.0184)       (.0177)
  Withla-Indnn' ag-                                 moi'         .0241
  glomeration°year8s                               (.0140)       (.0140)
  Related-Industry ag-                              .0002         .0009
  glomeration'year85                               (.0175)       (.0167)
  Relative Indumial                                -.0057        -.0063
  dlversltryearg5                                  (.0126)       (.0246)
  Relative distance to                             •.032t        ..0332b
  U.S.°year8s                                      (.0075)       (.0076)
 P-staiistio on ycar85   6.0?         6.4?         6.06b         5g4b
 coefficient,
 Fixed effect             no           yes           no           yes
 MJusted R'              .104          .146         .151         .178
 No of observatIons      2080         2080         2080         2080
 InIv''n signdlnca at the .U Level. • indicates significance at the .01 leve
Hetavskedasdcfty-conslag standard euor in parentheses


                                                    44
         Table 1I Regression Results Exeladlag Border Region


  Variable                  (Is)          (Lb)          (2.a)        (2.b)
  Relative wage            .0029         .0053        -.0088       -.0039
                          (.0108)       (.0128)       (.0116)      (.0123)
  Relative                -L)53t        -m6t          -.0164       -.0295'
  establishment size      (.0082)       (.0090)       (.0099)      (.0119)
  Relative female          .0073         .0013        -.0011       -.0012
  mba fate                (.0090)       (.0098)       (.0081)      (.0094)
  Within-industy                                      -.0182'      -.0213'
  agglomeration                                       (.0081)      (.0102)
  Related-industry                                     .036?        .0375"
  agglomeration                                       (.0084)      (.0089)
  Relative Industhal                                  -.0083       -.0388
  diversity                                           (.0119)      (.0229)
  Relative distance         •
                                                       .0053        .0046
  to U.S.                                             (.0073)      (.1417)
  Relative                 .0102         .0120         .0177        .0229
  wage°year85             (.0195)       (.02(X))      (.0220)      (.0214)
  Relative establlsb.     -.0261        -.0256        -.0476'      -.0452'
  size"year8S             (.0174)       (.0163)       (.0187)      (.0189)
  Relative female          .0703'        .067(t        .063gb       j)613"
  laba force °year85      (.0202)       (.0198)       (.0206)      (.0201)

  Within-industry ag-                                  .0186        .0191
  glomeraiion°year85                                  (.0196)      (.0186)

  Related-industry ag-                                 £3201        .0264
  gloineradon°year8i                                  (.0148)      (.0146)
  Relative industrIal                                  .0002       -.0065
  dlvusiryearss                                       (.0138)      (.0250)
  Relative distance to                                -.0523"      -.0518"
  U.S.°year85                                         (.0125)      (.0122)
  P-statistic ce yearSS    4.38"        4.1?          4.81"          4.65"
  coefficients
  Fixed effects             no           yes           no            yes
  Adjusted R2              .106          .146         .158          .183

  No. ofobservetlons     1823         1823            1823           1823
 Indjntn significance at the 4)5 leves. - Indicates significance as the .01 Aew
Heseroskedasticityconsistem standard era in parentheses.


                                                       45
         Tab!. 12: RegreSon Rnulti on Selected IadnstrleC

  Variable                (2.a)       (2k)          (Zn)        (2.b)
  paktive wage             .0095       .0042       -.0164       -.0171
                          (.0172)     (.0215)      (.0174)      (.0206)
  Relative                -.0540'      0775b        0Q55          0234
  establislunent size     (.0109)     (.0114)      (.0140)      (.0167)
  Relative female         .0141       -.0001       -.0017       -.0053
  1ab face                (.0111)     (.0117)      (.0106)      (.0110)

  WithIn-Industry                                  -.0246'      -.0217
  agglomeration                                    (.0118)      (.0133)

  Related-Industry                                 .039?         .040?
  agglomeration                                    (.0109)      (.0112)
  Relative IndustrIal                              -.0032       -.0476
  dIversity                                        (.0180)      (.0339)

  Reithive distance         .                      -.0047        .0235
  to U.S.                                          (.0065)      (i398)
  RelatIve                -.0083       .0054        .0076        .0182
  wngeyear85              (.0280)     (.0304)      (.0306)      (.0314)
  Relative establish.     -.0192      -.0263       -.066t       -.07W
  sS°year85               (.0208)     (.0193)      (.0239)      (.0242)
  Relative female          .O7B5      .073t         .0699        .0690'
  labs foste'year85       (.0211)     (.0212)      (.0211)      (.0213)
  Within-Industry ag-                               D444         .0437'
  glomesadonyear85                                 (.0214)      (.0212)

  Related-Industry ag-                              .0042        0056
  gbnaadonyeer85                                   (.0228)      (.0219)
  Relative Industrial                              •.0064        .0 142
  dlvenity°year8i                                  (.0195)      (.0350)
                                         •
  Relativedlatanceto                               -.0400'      -.0415'
  U.S.'year8i                                      (.0110)      (.0109)
  P-statistic on yesrSS   4.6?        4.25'        4.3?         433b
  coefficients

  Fixed effects            no          yes          no           yes

  MJUSIS R'               .097        J41           .152         .169
  No. of observations    1334          1334         1334         1334
 Indicates tignificance at the .05 len, znwcates sigiuticance atihe .01 len, Heteroskedasticity-
coSstent standard en in parentheses. - Excluded industries an ISIC 31. 34 36. and 37.


                                                    46
