                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EVIDENCE ON GROWTh,
                          INCREASING RETURNS AND THE
                             EXTENT OF THE MARKET




                                     Alberto F. Ades
                                    Edward L. Glaeser




                                 Working Paper No. 4714




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1994


We are grateful to Robert Barro, José Scheinkman. Andrei Shleifer and participants at the
Harvard Growth Seminar for very helpful comments. Matt Botein and Melissa McSherry
provided excellent research assistance. We acknowledge financial support from the National
Science Foundation and the Toner/Clark Fund. This paper is pait of NEER's research
program in Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and notthose of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Papa #4714
                                                                                  April 1994

                                EVIDENCE ON GROWTh,
                             INCREASING REI1JRNS AND THE
                                EXTENT OF THE MARKET

                                          ABSTRACT

       We examine two sets of economies (19th century U.S. states and 20th century less

developed countries) where growth rates axe positively correlated with initial levels of

development to document how these dynamic increasing returns operate. We find that open

economies do not display a positive connection between initial levels and later growth; instead,

closed economies do display this positive correlation (i.e. divergence). This evidence suggests

that increasing returns operate by expanding the extent of the market (as in the big push theories

of Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989)). For U.S. states, we also find that larger markets

enhance growth by increasing the division of labor. Among LDCs, while more diversified

production increases growth, diversification is negatively associated with openness for the poorest

economies (as in the quality ladder theories of Boldrin and Scheinkman (1988). Young (1991)

and Stokey (1991)). However, and despite the negative effect that openness has on the diversity

of production and, thus, on growth, we find that openness still substantially increases growth for

these poorer economies.



Alberto F. Ades                                                     Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics                                             Department of Economics
Harvard University                                                  Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                                    and NBER
1. Introduction


  Following Allyn Young (1928), much of the recent theoretical work on economic growth builds on

increasing returns to scale in production. Unlike models based on neoclassical production functions, these

models suggest that steady-state per capita growth rates are not independent of initial conditions.' Romer
(1983 and 1986), Lucas (1988), Murphy. Shleifer and Vishny (1989), Rebelo (1991) and others use
increasing returns so that initial levels are positively correlated with later growth rates and the endogenous

portion of growth continues indefinitely. Under particular assumptions, these models suggest that the the
world's lead economy will display divergence over time and often they also predict that the cross-section
of the world's economies will also not show convergence.
   But empirical work on cross-country growth generally finds convergence, not divergence. Baumol

(1986), DeLong (1988), Barro (1991), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992) and
                                                                        Mankiw, Rozner and Weil

(1992) document patterns of convergence in cross-country and U.S. data. Across countries, per capita

GDI's do not converge unconditionally between 1960 and 1985, but they do converge once we condition

on variables (such as education) that determine the steady state level of income per capita. This evidence

would seem to contradict modern endogenous growth theory.'
  In fact, the well-documented conditional convergence of Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1992) and others is

more relevant for tests based on the neoclassical growth model. Endogenous growth models predict
unconditional, not conditional, divergence.' Most of these theories also predict that increasing returns

should operate only during specific time periods (i.e. during industrialization) or 'in specific countries.


         We use the term neoclassical to refer to production functions that display diminishing returns to
scale.
    'Growth theorists (see, for example, Romer (1986)) tend to avoid this contradiction by emphasizing
that divergence need only appear in the time series evidence of the lead economy. In many models
divergence is not predicted in a cross section.

   'Technically, the issue is whether or not savings or schooling behavior should be treated as an
exogenous variable (as Solow (1957) treats Investment), or whether they should be considered as
endogenously determined by other initial conditions. Barro (1991) takes a partial approach, treating
schooling as only a right hand side variable but treating investment as endogenouslydetermined by other
initial conditions.
 Instead of testing implications of the neoclassical growth model against the alternative hypothesis of

 endogenous growth, we proceed by testing the hypotheses of endogenous growth models against each
 other and against the alternative hypothesis that increasing returns never operate.

   Our primary question is whether increasing returns occur because higher Initial GD)' acts to increase
 the demand for national products. Recent papers such as Becker and Murphy (1993) or Murphy, Shleifer

 and Vishny (1989) predict that growth %Ilows initial wealth because that wealth creates a market for
 certain activities. According to these models, higher initial income should increase later growth rates

more strongly when an economy is closed than when an economy isopen. In open economies, aggregate
demand   is fixed by world markets and higher initial levels of income do not change effective demand.
In closed economies, national income determines demand.

   We address this question with two samples of economies that display wacondllionaldynamic increasing

returns (U.S. states in the 19th century and the 65 poorest countries in 1960).' In our country sample
we use income and urbanization to measure growth and the share of trade in GD)' to measure openness.
Across U.S. states, we use the state's levels of urbanization (following De Long and Shleifer (1993)) and

manufacturing to measure development. Nineteenth century income data for U.S. states is neither reliable

(despite heroic efforts by Easterlin and others) nor theoretically appropriate in economies with
considerable amounts of migration between states. For the states, we use physical distance to major
regional ports (and, thus, to major east coast markets)' and regional railroad development as our basic
measures of openness.'

  Across all of our samples, we find that increasing returns axe important for closed no:open economies.

This evidence suggests that increasing returns operate by expanding the extent of the market as in big



    'The importance of these samples immediately tells us about that there are places where increasing
returns do operate.

   'Such physical measures could also be used for 20th century data for U.S. states or cross-country
comparisons. However, the vastly improved nature of transportation makes reliance on geography much
less palatable in the age of the airplane, truck and high speed ocean transport. See Pred (1980) for a
more detailed discussion of these issues.

   'Regional rail has the useful attribute of giving us time series as well as cross-sectional variation.

                                                   2
push theories (Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) and Murphy, Shlelfer and Vishny (1989)) or theories where

growth derives from the division of labor (Becker and Murphy (1993)). This finding does not support

the implication of quaiity ladder arguments that openness is particularly damaging for economies at the

very bottom of the income distribution (see Stokey (1991) or Young (199!)).

  We explore ftzrther the relationship between initial levels, openness and growTh with a variety of

decompositions. For both the nineteenth century U.S. data and the world data, the division of labor spurs

growth. In the U.S. data, initial GD? and openness increase growth in part by increasing the division
of labor. For world data, initial GDP raises the division of labor, but openness deters it (as in Stokey

(1991)). However, while openness acts against growth in poorer countries by reducing the division of
labor, the overall connection between openness and growth for the poorest nations is strongly positive -

- the direct positive effects of openness overwhelm the indirect effect that works through lost diversity.

  Section Il discusses the relevant theories. Section III describes the data. Section IV presents our basic

empirical results starting with the openness/increasing returns connection. The next two sections present

our decompositions. Section VII concludes.



II. Theories of Increasing Returns


  This section presents the relevant implications of four major sets of theories of endogenous growth.



lnformatiortoi Access



  In Romer (1983, 1986), endogenous growth is obtained with an aggregate production functioo that
exhibits increasing returns that are eiternal to the investing finn. Knowledge-based growth theories may

predict that openness spurs growth because of the connection of trade to information transmission (e.g.

reverse engineering of traded goods, the Italian merchant Marco Polo, the Portuguese traders in 16th




                                                     3
 century Japan, or the innovations brought by European traders to native Americans).' But even if

 openness increases   access to a wider set of ideas for all countries,it is not obvious bow it interacts with

 growth at different levels of development. Two effects seem likely to drive the cross-effect between
 openness and initial GD?: (1) bigher human capital
                                                 could make it easier to take advantage of new ideas

 so more developed areas may benefit most from the exposure created by trade, and (2) the new ideas

 brought by trade might be less new to more developed countries. Evidence on the openness-initial GDP
 cross-effect can help determine the relative importance of these two effects but it cannot be used as a test

 for the roleof informational spillovers more broadly.



 Big Pushes


   A second theory of increasing returns is the big push theory of Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) and Murphy,

Shleifer and Vishny (1989). This theory emphasizes the importance of coordination and demand

spillovers in generating increasing returns and multiple equilibria. Technically, the Murphy a a!. models

also rely on the existence of fixed costs (and hence increasing returns) in technology, but the emphasis

of their work lies on the role that increasing levels of income play in creating a larger market for

industrialized output.

   According to the theory of the big push, within closed economies more initial wealth creates more

demand for industrialized products which in turn induces firms to pay the fixed costs of growth. By

contrast, in small open economies the demand curves facing local producers are set by world markets and

uninfluenced by local wealth.' The big push theory predicts that growth will be related to initial wealth

and access to world markets but also that the interaction between wealth and openness will be negative




    'Of course, some European innovations, such as the Inquisition, may not have been good for growth.


    'This type of effect might be part of the explanation for the smooth post-war Japanese business cycle.
This emphasis on pecuniary externalities links growth with Keynesian (1936) macroeconomics. A natural
test of the importance of pecuniary externalities for business cycles is to compare output volatility
(relative to world output) for open and closed economies.

                                                     4
as openness eliminates the linkage between initial wealth and effective demand. We also test for the

importance of the big push by checking if the extent of the market works by increasing the rate of growth

of physical capital (where fixed costs are most likely to matter).



Diversity and Specializaüon



  A third set of increasing returns theories with implications for openness emphasize the role of

specialization.   The connection between the division of labor and economic progress is typically
associated with Smith (1976). Becker and Murphy (1993) argue for the role that the division of labor

plays in increasing both the level and the growth rate of income over       time.' A finer division of labor
can speed up growth because concentration in a single task might facilitate innovation and learning by

doing (as Smith suggested). The costs of acquiring new skills might also lower as the range of tasks
involved diminishes.'0
  Smith's famous dictum is that the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market. If that is

true, growth should be connected to initial levels only in closed economies. In open economies, the
world market is what determines the extent of the market. These models predict the same negative
interaction between openness and initial wealth as the big push theories, but they also predict that the

positive effect of the extent of the market on later growth should lessen when we control for the division
of labor.




    'Becker and Murphy emphasize the importance of coordination as opposed to actual market size for
the division of labor. However, their model also allows for the standard Smithian effects of market size.
These effects become particularly close in spirit to their work when the statistical returns to scale of larger
markets are taken into account, i.e. when larger markets work by diversifying Idiosyncratic demand
shocks to particular consumers.

    '° A supposed advantage of assembly lines is the ease of training assembly line employees.

                                                      S
 The Qualisy Ladder: SpecialWng in the Wrong Products


   A final set of theories that offer predictions on the relationship between increasing returns and openness

 are the quality ladder arguments of Boldrin and Scbeinbnan (1988), Stokey (1991), Grossman and
 Heipman (1991) and Young (1991), and the 19th century protectionists List (1856) and Rae (1834).
 Quaiity ladder theories are tied to the division of labor theories in that they argue that the range of goods

produced is critical to growth, but in the quality ladder theories openness lessens diversity in production.
Divisionof labor theories emphasize the importanceoftbehigberdemand forabroader rangeof products
that comes about with increased openness; quality ladder models emphasize bow openness raises the
foreign supply of these products, and thus lessens the effective demand for the domestic production of
those products.

   Under quality ladder arguments, openness is particularly damaging for the extremely poor countries.
With free trade, less developed countries will tend to specialize in low growth activities that are intensive
in the use of natural resources or unskilled labor, thereby allowing middle income countries to reallocate
their resources away from these low growth activities)' In Stokey's words "if the industries in which
the less developed country has a static comparative advantage are industries in which there are limited
opportunities for learning, then the effect of free trade is to speed up learning in the more developed
country and to slow it down in the less developed one." Therefore, and contrary to big push and division

of labor theories, quality ladder arguments predict that initial income will be more closely associated with
later growth for open economies than for closed economies.


III.- The Data


This section describes our data sets and their construction.




    " High income countries may in fact also reduce growth as they reduce their production of high
growth products and cater more to world tastes.

                                                     6
Construction oft/ic Data Sets


  our cross-counuy data set was constructed using several different sources. The data on urbanization
were assembled by hand from bard copy, and come from the 1988 edition of the Frospeas of World
llrbwdzationi' The cross-countzy data on population and real per capita GD? are from the Barro and

Wolf (1991) data set. The trade data are from theWorld Bank's World Tables, and consists on imports
and exports of goods and non-factor services. Data on educational attainment is from Barro and Lee

(1993). The data on road infrastructure is from Canning and Fay (1992), and the land area data come
from the 1986 edition of the FAQ Production Yearbook
  For the U.S. states, we also used a variety of different sources. The data on state population.
urbanization and labor force are from the Historical Statistics oft/ic United States (1976). For population

in the state's main city, we used the 1980 Census and several issues of the Statistical Abstract oft/ic
United Stases. For some states, we used direct 19th century census data. The data on the labor force
engaged in manufacturing in 1880 and 1890 is from several issues of Statistical Abstract of the United

States. For earlier years, we used the 1840 to 1870 censuses."

  The railroad data for 1860 to 1890, and the data on distance from the state's main city to the main
regional city are from the Ssatisticoi Abstract oft/ic United Stases. For each port, the relevant regional
port was either New York, San Francisco or New Orleans, whichever was closer. The railroad data for
1840 and 1850 is from Wicker (1960). Literacy data are taken from the U.S. censuses. We had no



    12
         Data are available only for countries or areas with two million or more inhabitants in 1985.

    "A problem with the U.S. census labor force and manufacturing data is that the populatioà covered
did not remain invariant during our sample period. Thus, while the 1840 and 1870 censuses covered the
whole population, the 1850 census covered the free male labor force above 15 years of age only, and the
1860 census included free females and extended the age limit to 10 years or older. We dealt with this
problem by obtaining census estimates of the slave population. To. construct labor shares in
manufacturing, we assumed that all slaves of 15 years of age and older were In the labor force, and that
15 percent of them were in manufacturing (we based this figure on Sokoloff (1982)). Before these
corrections, Southern states displayed wild variations in their manufacturing shares. We also tried altering
our assumptions about slave labor force participation rates and shares In nianufactur'mg slightly but none
of our results seemed sensitive to these alterations.

                                                    7
 choice but using data on white literacy only as before 1860 the census provides no Information on literacy

 rates for the slave population. Finally, we gathered data on over 300 hundred occupations from the 1850

 and 1810 censuses.

   Our U.S. data thus covers the deódes 1840-1890. Data was not collected before 1840 because             of
 availability problems. We stopped in 1890 because (1) massive immigration to eastern cities potentially
 biases our results, (2) rail development had become extremely comprehensive by 1890 so variation across

 regions became less meaningfol, and (3) by 1890 the eastern states had achieved a similar level of

 development to the most developed nations incross-country
                                               our         sample. Moreover the period 1840-1890

 is typically considered the era of America's big push?



Descripilon of the Data


   Tables Ia and lb show the five fastest and five slowest growers in our cross-country sample ftioth in

tenns of GD? and urbanization) and the corresponding initial levels of the relevant variable. While the

average initial income of the fastest growers is about $ 150 (in 1980 dollars) higher than that of the

slowest growers, the group shows considerable heterogeneity. It includes both relatively well-off countries

as Malta and extremely poor ones as Lesotho. This is not the case with the slowest growers; all of them

are in Sub-Saharan Africa.

   In terms of urbanization, the distinctions are more clear-cut. The average level of initial urbanization

for the fastest growers is about double that of the slowest ones. Korea is the fastest grower on both

counts,' and only five of the twenty countries are outside Sub-Sabaran Africa. Table Ic shows the five

most and five least urbanized U.S. states in 1840, and table Id does the same thing for 1890.. Table le

shows the largest and smallest spurts in urbanization growth. Table If shows the largest and smallest

changes in urbanization over the 1840-1890 sample.




    " There is a strong correlation between urbanization and Income growth across countries. We
believe this fact supports our use of urbanization in the U.S. regressions.

                                                     8
IV. Evidence on Increasing Returns and the Extent of the Market



  There are two major ways in which our estimation differs from more standard forms, e.g. Barro

(1991): (1) we often use urbanization not income as our measure of development, (2) we focus on
unconditional not conditional regressions.



Urbanization vs. Income



  Our emphasis on urbanization (and manufacturing) over income for U.S. state data goes against the
prevailing methodology and, admittedly, urbanization is often a poor proxy for economic development."

However, the standard data source on state income levels (Easterlin (1960 used by Barro and Sala-i-

Martin (1992)) is available oniy at 40 year intervals, has measurement problems, and is in nominal dollar;

(so differences across states might not reflect local price level differences).         On the contrary,

urbanization is (1) available every 10 years, (2) a simple, reliable measure, (3) invariant with respect to

local price indices, and (4) reliably connected with economic development (see Bairoch (1988)).

  We also favor urbanization over income in the 19th century U.S. because intrastate mobility should

eliminate any welfare differences across states. The income differences that do exist should represent a

combination of unobserved heterogeneity and compensating differentials. The high incomes earned in

19th century western states are much better interpreted as a compensation for the danger of the frontier

and tediousness of life away from the eastern seaboard than as an index of economic development. Table

la shows the five least urbanized states of the U.S. in 1840. Without exception these states represent

some of the least developed areas of the United Sta;es in this period.




    U The exact model that we have in mind is spelled out in the estimating framework section of the
paper.

                                                     9
 Condirionoi vs. (Jnconditionoi C.onwrgence



   We first focus on unconditional convergence rather than on the more traditional examination of
 conditional convergence. This focus is appropriate since the four theories described above concern
unconditional increasing returns. An advantage of the unconditional regressions Is that they are less prone
to measurement error blase. When regressing GDP growth on initial GDP, measurement error creates
both the standard bias, which lowers the absolute value of the coefficient on initial GDP,1' but when
measurement error is i.i.d., it also lowers the coefficient on initial GDP by

                                        Var(Measuremen, Error)                                       (I)
                                           Var(JnifloJ GD?)

When conditional regressions are run, this second bias becomes

                                      Var(Measzjremem Error)                                         (2)
                    Vor(lnifial GD? onhQgonollzed with respect to the other controls)

Since the denominator in (6) might be substantially smaller than that in (5), the bias towards convergence

might be much higher in conditional regressions. In the case of standard growth regressions, the bias
towards convergence more than triples when going from unconditional to conditional regressions."



Estinzo.sing Framework



  The appropriate model for using urbanization as a proxy for development is one with two sectors: a
primary, unurbanized, agricultural, or low technology sector, and a secondary, urbanized, or
manufacturing one. Aggregate production in each state is given by


      This coefficient is given by

                                     Cov(GDP aonge,Ininai GD!')
                                           Var(InizjoJ GD!')
The first bias works by raising the denominator. The second bias operates by lowering the numerator.

   "This extra bias may explain why divergence appears in unconditional regressions only.

                                                  10
                                               A, (L; L41'                                            (3)

where A, is the overall level of productivity in the state, L,, and L2 are the quantities of labor in the

primary and secondary sectors, a measures the importance of the developed sector (the degree of

development), and s, represents some sort of state specific congestion. In equilibrium, the marginal

product of labor will be equalized across states and sectors, which implies that the share of total output

in the secondary sector will be given by


                                               a-                                                    (4)


Since we are primarily interested with changes in the structure of the economy, i.e.. it's development

from agricultural to urban, we need only lool at changes in the shares of population in each sector and

interpret them as changes in the coefficients of the Cobb-Douglas. More specifically, we look at


                                           a41.1ajj —f(a,1,O,)                                       (5)


where C),, represents the openness of economy I at time 1. We are particularly interested in the cross-
effect between a,, and 0,. The specific functional form that we run is

                                       a fi0+$1 cr4,.$2 O,+$ a4, O,+e,,,                             (6)


and   we are mostly interested with the sign of ,        the cross-effect between openness and initial

development. All the regressions are weighted by initial population.


World Data



 Regression (I) in Table 3 shows the raw divergence relationship for a cross-section of countries between

1960 and 1985. The countries included in our sample are all those countrieswith Incomes of 1980 USS

1,500 or less in 1960. There is a total of 65 countries in this basic sample. The relationship between




                                                    11
 initial levels and subsequent growth rates is fairly well known." Figure 1 shows this basic relationship

 visually. The coefficient of 0.019 indicates that an increase of USS 100.00 in 1960 increases the average

 growth rate by 0.19 percent per year.

   Regression (2) shows our openness measure and the cross-effect between openness and growth. As
 discussed earlier, this openness measure is flawed by Its endogeneity, I.e., trade is not exogenously
 determined. However, the results show our basic point in a powerilil way. The pure effect of openness

 on growth is moderatelypositive. A one standard deviation increase in the share of total trade to GD?
 increases the growth rate   (at the average initial level of GD? per capita in 1960 of USS 740) by 0.34
 percentage points   per year (0.2 standard deviations).
   The cross-effect between GDP and openness is very strong. For an open economy with a share of

 trade in GD? of 0.49 (slightly above the mean), there is no relationship between GDP and GD? growth.
 For a low trade, closed economy (with a trade share of 0.22, one standard deviation below the mean),
a USS 100.00 increase in the level of initial GD? raises the growth rate by about 0.19 percentage points

per year.

   Figures 2 and 3 show this result visually. Figure 2 shows the relationship between growth and initial

GDP in low trade closed economies. Figure 3 shows that such relationship does not hold for hightrade
open countries. In regression (3), we introduce continent dummies and we control for primary school

enrollment in 1960. The magnitude of the cross-effect rises once these controls are included." For a

smaller set of countries, regression (4) reproduces regression (3) but using the initial share of trade in

GD? instead of the average over 1960 to 1985. The results are consistent with those of previous

regressions.

  Regressions (S)-(7) perform the same exercise as regressions (1X3) but using urbanization rates as a
measure of development. Regression (5) shows the raw divergence relationship for the same cross-section

of countries between 1960 and 1985. The coefficient on initial urbanization indicates that, in our
                                                                                                   sample,


   "It can be seen in Figure 2 of Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1992).

    "We have also run these regressions with non-linear specifications of GD? as an explanatory
variable and the results remained almost unchanged.

                                                    12
 a :10 percent increase in the initial level of this variable is associated with 4 percentage points faster

 increase in urbanization over the period.

   Regression (6) shows that once again the cross-effect is negative and strong. For, a moderately open

 economy with a share of trade in (DP of 0.46 (3 percentage points above the mean), there is no
 relationship between initial urbanization and subsequent changes. For a relatively closed economy (with

 a trade share of 0.22, one standard deviation below the mean), a 10 percent increase in the level of initial

 urbanization leads to a 4 percent increase in urbanization over the period.

   Figure 4 displays this strong positive relationship for the closed economies in our 65 least developed

 countries. Figure 5 shows that there is no relationship between changes and initial levels for the open

 economies. Again, regression (7) verifies that our results are robust to controlling for regional and

educational variables. Regression (8) shows that our results are not sensitive to using the share of trade
from 1960 to 1985 as our measure of openness.



U.S.   Data


  Table 4 contains similar regressions for our U.S. states sample. This table shows results for a pooled

sample of states over the period 1840-1890. The decade 1860-1870 has been eliminated due to the Civil

War?' We have included fixed effects for each decade and allowed for correlation across decades in

the shocks to states by estimating a stacked set of growth regressions with SUR techniques (state specific

random effects are a particular form of this methodology with an assumed form of correlation across

decades). The SUR methodology ensures that a state's growth rate between 1870 and 1880 aid a state's

growth rate between 1880 and 1890 are not treated as independent observations.'

  Our dependent variable is the decadal change in the share of urbanized population in the state. The

first regression in Table 4 documents the basic positive relationship between urbanization growth and

initial levels of urbanization. The time dummies tell us that the 1840-1850 and the 1880-1890 decades



   r The results become substantially stronger if that decade is included.

   31 In fact there is not that mucb correlation between decadal growth rates across states.

                                                    13
 were the periods of strongest urbanization growth of the second half of the 19th century. The coefficient

on initial urbanization in regression (9) Is positive and highly significant, and indicates thata 10 percent

increase in the amount of initial urbanization leads to about I percent increase in the share of urbanized

population over a ten year period.

   Our first measure of openness is a distance dummy which takes a value of 0 if a state was within 250

miles of a major regional port (San Francisco, New York and New Orleans all qualify a major regional

ports), and a value of I otherwise. Regression (10) finds that (by this measure) openness is negatively

related to urbanization growth. A state that is far from major regional ports experiences a fall in the rate

of urbanization of 2.27 percent per decade fliolding initial urbanization constant at zero). However, a

the rate of urbanization increases, this negative effect of distance disappears. By the time initial

urbanization is at 13 percent, distance is irrelevant for growth. In other words, there is a strong positive

cross-effect between Jack   of openness and initial levels. This results are, of course, consistent with our
previous finding of a negative cross-effect between openness and initial levels for world data.

  Regression (11) repeats the experiment including a South dummy. Given the remarkable series of

events that affected the American South (shocks to cotton prices in the 1850s, the civil war,
Reconstruction, etc.), it seems reasonable to examine whether the results withstand the inclusion of this

regional dummy. The cross-effect is still significantly positive, but its coefficient drops in half. Some

of the effect we find is conceivably a result of political experiences affecting the South's performance,

but much seems to be unrelated to the South itself. In an experiment such as this one, we would expect

the inclusion of regional dummies to substantially reduce distance related coefficients (since both distance

and regional dummies are geographic variables) even if there had never been a Civil War.

  Regression (12) looks at an alternative measure of openness: the extent of rail development iothestates




    n We examined different measures of distance and found that our results were essentially robust to
alternative specifications. Our decision to look at distance as a discrete rather than as a continuous
variable is dictated by (I) our theoretical discussion that focused on a sharp difference between open and
closed economies and (2) our lack of a clear theory of distance which gives us any preferable functional
form (we found no papers that suggest a linear functional krm relating openness to growth). Small
changes in the specification of the functional form seem to make no difference In our results. The list of
 open' and closed states according to this classification are listed in Appendix 2.

                                                    14
that belong to the same census region as the state, with the exclusion of the state in question? States

surrounded by neighbors with highly developed transportation systems constituted larger potential markets

for the state in question. In addition, they facilitated access from the main production sites in the state

to major regional ports. These arguments justify using regional rail development as a proxy for state
openness. Here again we see a very powerfial negative cross-effect between openness and growth. Initial

urbanization only matters for states in regions with poorly developed railroad networks.
  Regression (13) allows the relationship between changes and initial levels to be non-linear. We use

a spline function with breaks at relatively arbitrary points (urbanization rates of 50 percent is the break

between high and low urbanization). The positive coefficient on initial urbanization is higher for low

urbaiiization rates. Both state and world data indicate this type of concavity. Even more interesting is

that the coefficient on initial urbanization is even stronger once we look at the interaction between low

urbanization and distance. The coefficient increases by 50 percent. There is no cross-effect between

urbanization and distance for high urbanization states because all of the states with more than 50 percent

urbanization rates are situated close to a major port. Regression (14) looks at an unbalanced panel. This

avoids our random effects-style methodology (that requires a balanced panel) and simply pools all the

available data together. The cross-effect between distance and initial urbanization is highest for this

regression?
  Table S shows results for changes in the share of the labor force employed in manufacturing and

changes in the share of urbanized population living in the state's largest city. The manufacturing

regressions only cover the 1870-90 decades as we do not have reliable manufacturing data for the earlier

periods. Unlike urbanization. manufacturing shares mean revert for states that are near major ports, but

display divergence for closed economy states.

  Since manufacturing seems to display strong decreasing returns at higher levels, we worried that some

of the distance/initial share connection might only be capturing the stronger positive connection between


       There are 9 census regions: Pacific, Mountain, West North Central, East North Central, Middle
Atlantic, New England, South Atlantic, East South Central, and West South Central.

      However, interpreting the standard errors Is not simple as we incorrectly treat state urbanization
changes as independent over tUne.

                                                    IS
 manufacturing and manufacturing growth at lower levels of manufacturing. To examine this possibility,

 we used a spline function in regression (16). The cross-effects were reduced but are still significant in

 these regressions. Regression (17) repeats the same experiment but using regional railroad density as a

 measure of openness. Again, the openness/initial levels cross-effect is negative and significant at all levels

of manufacturing.

   We found a positive cross-effect with distance and a negative ut insignificant) cross-effect with

regional railroad density for regressions using the change in the share of urbanized population in the

state's largest city as our left hand side variable. These regressions are interesting because we might

believe that the definition of urban place (over 2,500 inhabitants) is too restrictive to capture what is

meant by urbanized. We might also be interested in whether distance is related to local, city-specific

increasing returns.

   In connection with this last issue, these results are a further confirmation of Xrugman (1991) and

Krugman and Livas (1993). Since dynamic increasing returns exist only for cities that are difficult to

serve with external trade, it becomes plausible to believe that local demand spillovers may be driving the

growth of these cities. These regressions are also complementary of the results in Ades and Glaeser
(1993), who provide supportive evidence for Krugrnan and Livas' theory for the connection between
closed economies and urban concentration.



Summary



  These results document a negative cross-effect between initial levels of development (whether measured

by income, rates of urbanization or shares of the labor force in manufacturing) and openness. This type

of finding provides strong suppor( for increasing returns theories that build on aggregate demand
spillovers (as in Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989)) or for theories that emphasize the importance of

division of labor (as in Becker and Murphy (1993)). These findings are not supportive, however, of

theories such as Stokey (1991) or Young (1991) which argue that openness is particularly damaging fOr

less developed countries. Our main conclusion from this section is that increasing returns operate mostly



                                                     16
for less developed economies by expanding the size of the market.



V. The Division of labor, Human Capital and Infrastructure.


  In the previous section, we focused on the interaction between level of development and openness as

a means of distinguishing between theories of increasing returns, Le., these three variables tried to

establish that initial growth spurred subsequent growth by increasing the extent of the market. We will

subsequently refer to our three previous variables (initial levels, openness and the interaction) as extent

of the market variables. Here, we are interested in testing further between the basic theories by including

othervariables related to initial conditions: (I) diversity of production, (2) human capital, and (3) physical

infrastructure. Following Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1992), we examine whether the extent of the

market variables remain significant when controlling for these variables and we decompose the effect of

the basic variables into direct effects and indirect effects going through the new variables.

  The main variable that will help distinguish among the three theories is the diversity of production

variable. Both quality ladder and division of labor theories predict a strong effect of the range of

products on growth. In quality ladder models, more products suggest more high growth products; in

division of labor theories, more products and occupations suggest more division of labor. But while in

quality ladder arguments openness reduces the variety of products, in division of labor models openness

increases the range of products. We will also be looking at the possibility that human capital or physical

infrastructure are behind the connection of growth with the extent of the market.



Esrfrrtathig Framework



  The estimating framework simply uses equation (4). Instead of assuming that growth is a function of
openness and initial levels only, we assume that growth is related to initial levels, openness and other

variables that were previously omitted. However, these new variables might also be correlated with

openness and initial levels. We can then decompose our previous egisnates of the effects of openness,



                                                      Il
initial levels and the cross-effect into the direct effects and the indirect effects operating through our

previously omitted variables. More precsdy, we assume that


                                    a,J.I—aL,   '.f(Z(a,11O1j.a,,,OJ                                      (7)


where Z is the vector of variables that were omitted from (4). The particular functional form that we

estimate is


                                   $0+ôZ(cr,,O)e$1 a,,+P,                   a,, 0ç,                       (8)


where e,4 is a noise term. We also assume that

                                                                                                          (9)


The total effect of initial levels on further growth can therefore be decomposed into a direct effect of $,

and   an indirect effect operating through Z of fry,. Similarly, the total effect of openness on growth is

given by a direct effect of $2 and an indirect effect of fry,. Finally, the interaction can be decomposed
into a direct effect of fi, and an indirect effect of fry,. These effects add Up to the coefficients estimated

in (4).
  These decompositions have the interpretation of asking how much initial levels or openness work

directly on growth and how much their effects work indirectly by raising the levels of other variables that
are correlated with growth. We can then ask, for example, how much of the cross-effect between
openness and growth works directly and how much it affects growth by allowing a thinner division of

labor among tasks. We consider three possible sources of increasing returns: (I) human capital spillovers

(meant to be related to the knowledge stories outlined above), (2) physical infrastructure, and (3) the

division of labor.



World Data



  Table 6a shows the regressions used for the decompositions that we do with world data. The variables

in the Z vector are the share of the population with complete secondary schooling, a measure of diversity



                                                     18
of exports (taken from the UN Handbook of International Trade and Development Statistics') and the

road density of the country. The rarity of these variables (when combined with our already small
subset) required us to look at only 43 countries.

  Regression (24) displays our basic finding: for world data, the direct effects of the extent of the market
variables remain significant and large. Diversification of exports are also important for growth. A one
standard   deviation increase In the initial level of the index of export diversity raises per capita GD?

growth by 0.9 percentage points per year. This finding lends support both to quality ladder and division
of labor theories. On the contrary, neither initial stocks of education nor road density affect growth for

this sample?
  Regression (25) shows that more developed nations and more open nations both have more schooled
individuals (the causality with openness is completely in question) and the cross-effect is negative (as in
the case of the state data). This regression was similar to our state results for white literacy rates.
Regression (26). shows that our road networks variable seems to be unconnected to the extent of the

market.
  Regression (27) shows that (at the mean level of openness) per capita GD? is positively associated with

export diversity. Also, openness seems to have negative effects on diversity, particularly for poorer


    '   This "Hirschmann' index of diversity is given by

                                                                    3



                            EZPSPithlOOl00oQj [I
I is the country index, n is the number of commodities, m is the minimum value of the index (which is
given by the ratio of 100 into the square root of ii), x is the value of exports of commodityj. and X is
the total value of exports. A directly comparable measure to the one we use below for the state data is
not to our knowledge available.

      To keep the size of our sample at a reasonable level, we use roads density in 1970 instead of 1960.
For the smaller set of countries that have road data for both 1960 and 1970, the correlation between these
two variables is 0.98. Road density is measured as the ratio of total km. of roads to land area. The data
was taken from Canning and Fay (1993).
    ' This lack of importance of the education variable goes against most previous work, e.g. Barro
(1991). Our results differ from his primarily because of our sample. When industrialized countries are
also included in the regressions, we find that education has a much more important effect.

                                                    19
 countries. As in Boldrin and Scheinkinan (1988) or Stokey (1991), openness reduces the range of
 products sold. As we found in regression (24), this reduction of diversity in turn reduces growth. Here,
 the supply effect of openness (i.e. outside suppliers reduce product range) must be dominating the demand

 side effect (larger markets allow a larger product range). Finally, the cross-effect between openness and
 growth is positive, which suggests that trade increases diversity for more developed countries. We take
these results as providing some support for quality ladder stories. While there is a negative effect of
openness on diversification for poorer countries, the overall effect of openness on growth for these poorer
countries is strongly positive. The direct effect of openness on growth for these nations overwhelms the
much smaller indirect effect of openness on growth that operates through specialization of production.


 U.S. Data



   Data availability limits our decades to 1850-1860 and 1870-1880. Again, we look at changes in the
degree of urbanization as a function of initial urbanization, our distance dummy and the cross-effect
between the two. We are interested both in the decomposition of initial levels and in the cross-effect
between urbanization and distance.

   Our human capital variable is the white literacy rate of the state in 1850 and 1870. Our measure of
physical infrastructure is railroad density of the state in question. Our measure of specialization is a
 tixit-Stiglitz" variety index created by using occupational data hand collected from the 1850 and 1870
censuses. The specific functional form that we use for this last variable is given by



                                                 enwlo.inzenI.,                                     (10)
                             DS, ,-
                                            aggregate eraploynlenJ,,

where i is the state, and) is the occupation.

  This measure of specialization might be somewhat sensitive to the definitions used in each census to

define each category of employment. Because these definitions changed over census years, we resealed
the indices of specialization obtained by subtracting from the corresponding value for each state-decade


                                                   20
the decadal sample mean and dividing by the decadai standard deviation. Thus, our measure of
specialization keeps the same mean and standard deviation over both periods. This specialization measure

is ideal for capturing the division of labor — it strongly weights the presence of obscure professions. It

seems much less ideal for measuring quality ladder effects, but it should also be related to the range of

products being produced in a state.

  Regression (24) in Table 7a shows the results of running changes in the share of urbanized population

on time fixed effects, the extent of the market variables, physical infrastructure (measured by railroads

in the state), white literacy levels and our measure of division of labor. In these regressions, the direct

effects of the extent of the market disappear statistically. Human capital does predict later growth but

only weakly. Railroads and the division of labor are both extremely strong predictors of later itate
growth. A one standard deviation increase in the Dixit-Stiglitz diversification measure raises the change

in the share of urbanized population by about 2.5 percentage points.

  Regressions (25) and (27) show that both initial levels of urbanization and the cross-effect are

correlated with higher levels of literacy and specialization. This last regression strongly supports the

basic Smithian notion that the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market and it is through

this division of labor that growth occurs. Regression (26) shows that while local railroad density is not

related to the cross-effect, it is extremely strongly correlated with initial urbanization. The stock of
physical infrastructure (which is strongly related to later growth) thus seems to be connected to initial

levels of development, but not merely to the extent of the market. While these regressions certainly leave

room for big push theories, they most strongly suggest that growth in U.S. states was associated with the

division of labor and that this division of labor was only possible in states with either a high degree of

initial development or access to ports.

  The MI decomposition is performed in Table 7b. The positive effect of initial urbanization occurs

mainly through initial specialization and local railroads density. The negative effect of distance works

mainly through lower specialization, and somewhat less through lower human capital. In this sample.

openness increases the degree of diversification of products, contrary to the predictions of quality ladder

stories. The positive cross-effect mainly operates through increased specialization and higher levels of



                                                    21
human capital. These high human capital people then act to further growth directly through their work

and by generating knowledge spilovers.U
   The difference between these results and those In the world sample may come from the difference in
the proxy used kr specialization. In the U.S. data, the diversification measure was accurately picking
up the presence of highly specialized occupations. In the world data, the measure is more closely linked
to the degree of specialization in a few export products and it does not necessarily capture the internal
division of labor within the country? The overall conclusion of this section Is that In both samples the
division of labor sped later growth. However the samples disagree about what creates the divison of
labor. In the U.S. sample, urbanization and openness both increased the degree'of division of labor and

the cross effect between those two variables lowered the division of labor; basic Smithian notions about
the division of labor being limited by the extent of the market are strongly supported. In the world
sample. In the world sample, the arguments of quality ladder theorists are supported. The division o(
labor rises with openness only for the richer counties. Poorer countries produces a smaller range of
products when they are exposed to larger markets.


VI. Decomposing Growth In Physical Capital, Human Capital and Technology


  This subsection decomposes GD? growth into, the growth of physical capital, human capital and

technology. We are not interested here in whether or not the extent of the market variables work through
increasing initial levels of specialization or initial levels of human capital. Instead, we want to know

whether the extent of the market raises growth through (1) accumulation of physical capital, (2)
accumulation of human capital, or (3) technological progress. We are decomposing growth into these
three different forces not through the traditional growth accounting methods but, rather, using a
decomposition borrowed from the labor literature. We begin by ascertaining the effect of levels of


      The large empirical literature relating initial human capital levels and growth across U.S. areas
includes Glaeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer (1993), Simon and Nardinelli (1993) and others.
    29
       In fact, this specialization of exports in a single good may lead towards a better division of labor
within the country.

                                                   22
physical and human capital on levels of production with a cross-sectional levels rçgression. Then we use

those coefficients to decompose growth into human and physical capital accumulation and growth of the
residual (which is similar to the basic Solow residual)? We then examine bow the extent of the market

variables affect the growth of physical and human capital.



Estimating Framework


We assume that the level of urbanization or income in economy tat time t is given by


                                                  a0cA, F(114.K,,)                                 (ii)

and we specifically assume the following functional form for our regressions

                                           a11=A,+62    H,1+52 +J#                                 (12)


where H, and IC, measure human and physical capital in economy I at time:, and v is the error term in
the regression." The underlying assumption is that the level of development is restricted by the
availability of physical and human capital, and by the overall level of technology.

  116, and 6. are time invariant, we can decompose the changes in urbanization or per capita income into


                     a,,,,1 —a1,   t4,,   —A,   .6,     '..H,,) +6, (c,,.1 —K,) • p1,.1 —          (13)


  The first term in this decomposition is constant across countries orstates of the U.S. and drops out in
the regressions. The second and third terms reflect those changes in urbanization or income that are
explained by human and physical capital accumulation. The final term reflects 'the residual change.

  We then regress these individual components on our standard initial variables and examine through

which channels these initial variables affect later growth. Specifically, we regress



    r This type of decomposition is similar to Glaeser (1993).
    'tWe assume a linear specification in the logs of physical and human capital as In a standard Cobb-
Douglas technology. We do not, however, constrain the coefficients to add to one since we are not
assuming that we have accurately captured all of the factors of production.

                                                        23
                                                                                                   (14)
                                  •1-Fi-)4+)4 a,,+)4 O,,+)4 a,, O,,.4

                                 ,1-x,,,->4.>4   a,,+)4 o,,.i4 a                                   05)

and

                                                                                                   (16)
                               —v-)4.X a,,,+>4 0> a,,, O,,+C
  We   can   then decompose the effects of initial urbanization or GDP, openness and the interaction into
their different components. Thus, the total effect of initial development, openness and the interaction
between the two are given, respectively, by

                                                                                                   (17)
                                             o x.o, x+x;

                                                                                                   (18)
                                             6 )4+63 x.x;
and


                                                                                                   (19)
                                             s, x,o2 x+x;
  The intuition for these decompositions is simple. We are dividing the effect of initiai development,
openness and their interaction into their effects operating through human capital accumulation, physical

capital accumulation, and changes in productivity.

   For the purposes of this section, we combine initial development, openness and the cross-effect into

a single extent of the markeC variable. This variable is formed by taking a weighted average of these

three sub-variables. The weights come from running the basic growth regressions (i.e. regressions (I)

and (7)) for the sub-sample under examination. This combination is meant to simplify the intition.



World Darn



  For our cross-country sample, we used actual capital stock estimates from Canning and fly (1992) as

our measure of physical capital. Human capital is measured by the share of the population over 25 years



                                                     24
of age with complete primary schooling (from Barro and Lee (1993). Table Ba shows that levels of GD?

are much more associated with physical capital than with the stock of human capital. The decomposition

shown in Table Sb reveals that the extent of the market worked much more through physical than through

human capital. The results from this decomposition thus lend support to big push ideas: the importance

of larger markets lies in creating the conditions for physical capital investment rather than in providing

the incentives for Investing In human capital. However, the growth of the residual is by far the most

important channel through which the extent of the market affects growTh: almost 80 percent of the extent

of the market operates through this last channel. This finding suggests that the main effect of larger

markets is to allow for improvements in the level of technology.



U.S.   Data


  In Table 9a, regression (32) shows that both white literacy and railroad density (our measures of human

and physical capital) are positively correlated with levels of urbanization. A one percent increase in the

white literacy rate raises the level of urbanization by 1.3 percent. A one standard deviation increase in

railroad density within the state increases the share of urbanized population by 12 percent. Regressions

(33X35) are the auxiliary regressions that we use for our decomposition. This decomposition is shown

in Table 9b. We find that the effect of the extent of the market on technolOgical change explains about

less than a fifth of the total. Human capital is instead not associated with larger initial market size.

Finally, we find that most of the effect of the extent of the market operates through the accumulation of

physical infrastructure. In other words, large market size increased growth by spurring physical
investment in railroads. These results lend support again to big push arguments, which                  the

importance of investments with large fixed costs to explain increasing returns.'2

In the



       We should remind the reader that there might be something particular about this form of investment
that relates to urbanization. Since urbanization specifically measures a form of population concentration,
and railroad development specifically measures the development of transportation, an alternative
interpretation of this result is that the concentration of population leads to transportation improvements.

                                                    25
VII. Conclusion


  This paper presents a variety of evidence on the connection between initial levels of development and

later growth. We found that a positive connection between levels and later growth is muck stronger in,
closed rather than open economies. This evidence provides support to the notions that the size of the

market matters for growth because of access to global ideas, because a larger market allows for
investment in large fixed cost investments and because the division of labor is limited by the extent of

the market. The evidence does not support quality ladder type of theories, or other protectionist theories

that suggest that isolation from world markets is particularly good for poor economies.

      We found in a set of decompositions that diversity in occupations (for U.S. states) or exports (for
countries) both enhanced growth. Openness and market size increased occupational diversity in the U.S.

and   much of the effect of the extent of the market on growth seems to work through bigger markets
creating a finer division of labor. Openness and market-size did not increase diversity of exports. Just
as in Stokey (1991) or Young (1991), openness decreased the range of products for many countries.
However, we still found that cur openness variabks speeded growth for poorer countries despite the costs
associated with losing export diversity. Our last set of decompositions suggested that the extent of the
market may work through the division 01' labor, but it seems to enhance growth mainly by speeding
investment in physical infrastructure. We found our two sets of evidence supporting both division of
labor theories and theories emphasizing the role of market size in allowing for big physical investment.

      This work does cast doubt on the protectionist suggestions of quality ladder theories. While our
results do support. their idea that protectionism allows a broader range of products to be produced, our
results also suggest that protectionism has other problems which overwhelm this product range effect.
Our work cannot determine how exactly protectionism detracts from growth for poorer countries.
Potential explanations include (1) growth requires markets or (2) isolation exacerbates political problems
or (3) closedness means separation from international pools of technology, but future work will be needed

to determine which mechanism is actually in effect.




                                                   26
Figure 1. Per Capita GDP Growth 1960-85 vs. Per Capita GDP in 1960
                                                (Full Sample)

 0.07
                                           52
 0.05                                                                             76
                                                     12          .                —
                                4                    S
 O 05                           0
                  18                                                      54                     71
                                                                             S
                                           63
 0.04                                      0                                                79
                                                         38                      95101
                                .2                                                  S

 o   03 -                           _36                          106
                                      a
                                                                880
                 35                                              a
                                                                                      1
                 S                    42
 0.02        -
                     —V                                   S      p
                                                                                      S
                  29                                             114
                     S                                               a           90
 0.01                                           92        100                     S
                                                          a              69                      93
                                                                         5
                                                                                                 a
                         •5    •0 2891
                                   55           30
     0                        227 3                                                       -'U,
                                                                                            a
-0 01                          32
                         40     a
                         S
-0.02
         0                                                        1                              15   2



         Per Capita GDP Growth 1960-85 = 0.0071 + 0.0194 GDP6O
                                       (0.0040)   (0.0055)
                                           n65 R2=0.15




                                                           27
Figure 2. Per Capita GDP Growth 1960-85 vs. Per Capita GDP in 1960
                        (Low Trade Sample)

 0 . 05
                                                                    71
                                         63
 0.0.4 -                       118

                                    25
 003-                                              •          103
                                               88
               36
 0 02
                29                  45

 0 01 .
                    1139       55
                               • 28s1
     0
                           22 7
                           —             34
-0.01 -
                     40
                     w

-0.02                                               I
          0                    0.5                  1                1.5       2




          Per Capita GDP GroMh 1960-85 = 0.0060 + 0.0204 GDP6O
                                                        (0.005)     (0.0073)
                                    n32 Adj. R20.18




                                              28
 Figure 3. Per Capita GDP Growth 1960-85 vs. Per Capita GD? in 1960
                        (High Trade Sample)

 0.07
                                      52
 0.06 -                                                                76
                                                12                        I
                         4
 0.05 -           18                                           54
                                                                  I
 0.0-4        -
                              9                  36
                              I                      •                96
                                                                      I
 0.03
                                                          24 51
                                                          I
 0 . 02

                       237             92 100
 0.01
                                           I                  .                     I
                                           30
     0                                                                        IUD
                                  3
                                  I    41
                                                                              I
.001 -                  32                 I
                         I
—0.02                    I
          0             0.5                               1                         1.5   2



          Per Capita GDP Growth 1960-85 = 0.0228 + 0.0052 GDP6O
                                                              (0.0107)         (0.012)
                             n=33                Mj.R2=-0.0258




                                                     29
  Figure 4. Change in Urbanization 1960-85 vs. Urbanization in 1960
                        (Low Trade Sample)

0.3    —
                              6                                                        101
                              S

                                                         BB
0.25


               35                                 7                                          103
 0.2                                               S
                                                                   104
                              29                                    .5
                               S
                                                         83
                                                          S
                                                  40     S
o is                                              S
                                                                          61
                                   91                                      K
                         20
                27       3t
 01.                                                      5.7
                                                              K         106 rn
                                                                         K
                                              56
               43         2P
                          5*            S                         90.
                                                                  S
                S
                    11
0.05 -     5539w
           F
   0
       0                 01                 0.2          03                      0.4           05   06


 Change in Urbanization 1960-85                        = 0.0303 + 0385 Urbanization 1960
                                                         (0.017) (0.0761)
                                             n32 R2OM




                                                       30
 Figure 5. Change in Urbanization 1960-85 vs. Urbanization in 1960
                       (High Trade Sample)

04                                  52
                                    S




         23           41
         S            S

03
              3

                      .216

02
                             92
                   31 32        —                              76




                      60            105w


 0
     0        01           02           03    04   0.5   0.6   07   0.8


 Change in Urbanization 1960-85 = 0.135 - 0.179 Urbanization 1960
                                  (0.055) (0.208)
                   n=33      Adj. R=-O.0081




                                             31
                    Table Ia
             Description of the Data


State          Annual Per Capita GD?         Per Capita GD? in 1960
                 Growth 1960-1985
                                  Five Fastest Growers

Korea                     6.0                            690
Malta                     5.7                            3280

Gabon                     5.4                            804

Benin                     5.1                            595
Lesotho                   4.6                            245
                                  Five Slowest Growers
Zaire                    -1.6                            314
Somalia                  -1.3                            483
Madagascar               -1.1                            659
Zambia                   -0.9                            740
Sudan                    -0.8                            667

                   TABLE lb
             Description of the Data

Staie          Change in Percentage of             Percentage
                Urbanized Population           Urbanization in 1960
                      1960-1985
                                  Five Fastest Growers
Korea                       38                           28
Mauritania                  32                            5

Zambia                      4!                            17

Cameroon                    29                            14
                                                         45     .
Brazil                      28
                                  Five Slowest Growers
Sri Lanka                   3                             18

Guyana                      3                            29
Burundi                     3                             2
Rwanda                      4                             2

Uganda                      4                             5

                       32
                       TABLE Ic
                 Description o( the Data


State                  Total Population             Percentage Urban
                           Five Most Urbanized U.S. States In 1840
Rhode Island                109,000                        44
Massachusetts              738,000                         38
Louisiana                  352,000                         30

Maryland                   470,000                         24
New York                  2,429,000                        19

                           Five Least Urbanized U.S. States in 1840
Arkansas                    98,000                          0
Florida                     54,000                          0
Iowa                        43,000                          0
Vermont                    292,000                          0
Wisconsin                   31,000                          0

                      TABLE Id
                 Description of the Data


State                  Total Population            Percentage Urban
                           Five Most Urbanized U.S. States in 1890
Rhode Island               346,000                         85
Massachusetts             2,239,000                        82
New York                  6,003,000                        65

New Jersey                1,445,000                        62
Connecticut                746,000                         50
                           Five Least Urbanized U.S. States in 1890

Mississippi               1,290,000                        5
Arkansas                  1.128,000                        6
North Carolina            1,618,000                        7
Alabama                   1,513,000                        10
South Carolina            1,151.000                        10




                           33
                      TABLE I.
                 Description of the Data


State                Change in Percentage                 Decade

                                  Five Largest Decathi Increases
                            in the Percentage of Urbanized Population

New Jersey                       15                      1850-1860
Illinois                         14                      1880-1890

Massachusetts                    13                      1840-1850

Rhode Island                     12                      1840-1850

Rhode Island                     II                      1860-1870

                                  Five Largest Decadal Declines
                            in the Percentage of Urbanized Population
Louisiana                        4                       1840-1850

Louisiana                        2.5                     1870-1880

South Carolina                    I                      1870-1880

Mississippi                      0.9                     1870-1880

Alabama                 -        0.9                     1870-1880

                       TABLE          If
                 Description of the Data


State                Cbange in Percentage          Urbanization in 1840
                                Five Largest Changes in the
                        Percentage of Urbanized Population 1840-1890

New Jersey                       52                          II
New York                         46                          19

Massachusetts                    44                          38

Illinois                         43                          2
Rhode Island                     41                          44           .




                                Five Smallest Changes in the
                        Percentage of Urbanized Population 1840-1890
Louisiana                        -4                          30

Mississippi                       4
South Carolina                    4                          6
North Carolina                    5                          2
Arkansas                          6                          10



                            34
                                       TABLE 2a
                                 World Summary Statistics

Variable                   Obs       Mean         SW. Dev   Minimum   Maximum
Per Capita GDP in 1960     65        0.74           0.37      0.21      1.47
in thousands of 1980 USS
at PPP prices
(C D P60)

Average Per Capita GD?     65        0.018          0.018    -0.016     0.06
Growth 1960-85
(CR6085)
Openness                   65        0.43           0.22      0.09      1.22
(OPEN)
Urbanization in 1960       65        0.22           0.14     0.018     0.70
(IJRBAN6O)
Change in the Share of     65        0.14           0.078    0.032     0.38
Urbanized Population
1960-85
(URCH)
Percentage of Total        54       0.017          0.019     0.0001    0.018
Population with Complete                                         .
Secondary Education in
1960
(SSCÔO)

Capital Stock per Capita   54       1380.5         1067.1    78.10    3937.2
in 1960
(KAPC6O)
Roads Density in 1970      43        2974          18522     5.48     121600
(RDDEN7O)
Export Specialization.     43        0.48           0.18     0.008     0.844
Division of Labor
(EXPSP)




                                             35
                                                      TABLE 26
                                                World Simple Correlations


             CDP6O CR6085 OPEN URBAN® URCH•                                SSC6O KAPCS3 RDDEN7O                     EXPSP

GDP6O

Growth in      .300
GDP 60-85     (.0 15)

Openness       .158        .163
              (.207)      (.195)
Urbanized      .748        .368       .080
% 1960       (.0001)      (.003)     (.525)
Urbanized     0.088        .194       .131         .159
% Change      (.485)      (.122)     (.299)       (.206)
Secondary     0.541       0.523      0.227        0.724         0.185
Schooling     (.000)      (.000)     (.143)       (.000)        (.235)
1960

Capital       0.748       0.235      0.453        0.587         0.200       0.508
1960          (.000)      (.135)     (.003)       (.000)        (.205)      (.000)
Road          0.212       0.340      0.307        0.514         0.037       0,540       0.369
Density       (.173)      (.026)     (.045)       (.000)        (.816)      (.000)      (.016)
Division       0.083      0.448      -0.209       0.079         0.091       0.198       -0.026        0.189
of Labor      (.595)      (.003)     (.179)       (.617)        (.562)      (.204)      (.87 1)       (.225)

    Note: The significance probability of the correlation under the null hypothesis that the statistic Is zero is shown in
    parenthesis.




                                                              36
                                    TABLE 2c
                              U.S. Sununazy Statistics

Variable                Obs    Mean           SW. Dev    Minimum   Maximum
Population in 1870      29      1214            981         12$     4382
(POP7O)
Urbanization in 1870    29     0.23             0.18      0.024     0.74
(UR7O)
change in Share of      29     0.033           0.035      -0.025    0.1 07
Urbanized Population
1870-80
(1JRCH)
Local   Railroads       29     61.85           47.90       4.85    187.20
Density in 1870
(RAIL7O)
Regional Railroads      29     47.60           30.52       2.50    115.34
Density
(EXRL7O)
Land Area               29     36.43           20.59      1.058    69.322
(LAREA)
Share of Urbanized      29     0.1!            0.10        0.01     0.34
Population in Main
City in 1870
(MCITSH7O)
Change of the Share     29    0.006           0.021       -0.033   0.061
of Urbanized
Population in Main
City 1870-80
(MCITCH)
White Literacy Rate     29     0.93           0.03 1      0.85      0.98
in 1870
(WLR7O)
Occupational Dixit-     29       0               I        -1.36     1.84
Stiglitz Index for
1870
(1)570)
Share of the Labor      42     0.14            0.13       0.014     0.56
Force in
Manufacturing
(MAN70 )
Change in the Share     42    -0.007          0.030      -0.088    0.0623
of the Labor Force in
Manufacturing (1870-
80)
(MANCH)




                                       37
                                                                       TABLE2d
                                                                U.S. Simple Correlations


              p0P70 UR7O          URCI-I RAIL7O EXRL7O AREA MCIT7O MCITCH WLR7O                                          £1570      MAN7O MANCH

Populat'n
1870
Urbanized      .237
% 1870        (.215)
Urbanized      .188      .649
% Change (.329)         (.000)
Railroads      .168      .770      .849
1870          (.384)    (.000)    (.000)
Regional       .344      .480      .590        .477
Rail 1870     (.067)    (.008)    (.000)      (.009)
L a    11 d    .390     -.527      -.531       -.704      -.333
Area          (.037)    (.003)    (.003)      (.000)      (.088)
Main City      .251      .767       .335       .404        .188        -.367
PopulaCn      (.190)    (.000)     (.075)     (.030)      (.328)       (.050)
Main City      .221      .661        .724      .620        .486        -.4 16         .494
Growth        (.250)    (.000)     (.000)     (.000)      (.008)       (.024)        (.007)
White          .212      .373       .488       .318         .593       -.185          .187      .290
Literacy      (.270)    (.047)     (.007)     (.043)       (.000)      (.337)        (.332)    (.127)
Division       .313      .870       .799       .832        .653        -.527          .648      .579          .580
of Labor      (.046)    (.000)     (.000)     (.000)       (.000)      (.003)        (.000)    (.00 I)       (.001)
Manufact-      .013       .866      .704       .828          .566      -.705          .527       .637         .434         .825
wing          (.950)     (.000)    (.000)     (.000)       (.002)      (.000)        (.004)    (.000)        (.021)      (.000)
Manuf.         .151       .153      .412       .306         .254       -.242           .068      .323         .054         .286        .019
Change         (.444)    (.437)    (.030)     (.114)       (.192)      (.215)        (.729)     (.093)       (.785)       (.140)      (.924)

                   Mire: The significance probability of the correlation under the null hypothesis that the statistic is zero is shown in
                   parenthesis,

                                                                                38
                                                        TABLE 3


Dependent Variable:          Avaage Per Capiia GDP Growth                           Cbae In Urbanlzatio n
                                            1960-85                                           1960-85


                            (I)       (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)

Intercept                  .0071     -.0095    -.0191      -.0101          3.767      -7.327      -6.713    .6.037
                          (.0040)   (.0012)    (.0061)     (.0078)        (1.636)     (2.927)     (3.611)   (3.504

Per Capita GDP in          .0194      .034!     .0345         .0280
1960                      (.0055)   (.0100)    (.0096)     (.0124)



Openness'                            .0802      .1404         .0812                   49.78       32.11      17.10
                                    (.0283)    (.0216)     (.0270)                   (11.28)      (12.71)   (11.47

Per Capita GDP in                   -.0703     -.1252       -.0779                                           .


1960 Openness                       (.0357)    (.0268)     (.0289)

Urbanization in 1960                                                       .3792      .7551        .5321     .5603
                                                                          (.0709)    (.1285)      (.3828)   (.1764

Urbanization in 3960                                                                 -1.641       -1.056    -.9358
• Openness                                                                           (.4785)      (.5275)   (.4412

Primary School                                  .0139         .0146                               6.195      8.034
Enrollment in 3960                             (.0070)     (.0107)                                (4.231)   (4.894

Suh-Sabaran Africa                             .0234       -.0231                                  5,658     7.869
Dummy                                          (.0037)     (.0059)                                (2.241)   (2.700

Latin American                                  -.0058     -.0061                                  3,787     2.849
Dummy                                          (.0053)     (.0068)                                (3.225)   (3.338

Numberof                    65        65.        65            56           65          65          65           56
Observations

Adjusted R'                0.15      0.25       046           0.45         0.30        0.47        0.51      0.50


Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.
      'In regressions (4) and (8), Openness Is defined as the share of trade In GD? In 1960.




                                                         39
                                        TABL.E 4


 Dependent Variable:            (9)          (10)    (11)      (12)       (13)       (14)
 Decadal Change in the                                                             (IJobal)
 Share of Urbanized                                                        .

 Population (1840-1890)
 1840 Fixed Effect             .0382     .0419       .0748     .0248     .0457     0.0456
                              (.0059)   (.0090)     (.0084) (.0063) (.0097) (.0087)
 1850 Find Effect              .0036     .0450       .0756     .0153     .0418      .0412
                              (.0068)   (.0097)     (.0093)   (.0077) (.0138)      (.0085)
 1870 Find Effect              .010)     .0146       .0562    -.0217     .0106     .0076
                              (.0066)   (.0102)     (.0112)   (.0090) (.0112)      (.0091)
1880 Fixed Effect              .0385     .0406       .0858     .0068     .0390      .0378
                              (.0075) (.1068)       (.0122)   (.0098) (.0112)      (.0093)
Initial Urbanization          .0917      .0710       .0020     .1918               .0917
                              (.0198)   (.0223)     (.0239)   (.0317)              (.0200)
Distance Dummy                          -.0227      -.0224              -.0194     -.0224
                                        (.0109)     (.0090)             (.0116)    (.0092)
Distance Dummy * Initial                 .1122       .0870                          .2010
Urbanization                            (.0429)     (.0042)                        (.0378)
Initial Regional Railroads                                     .0007
Density                                                       (.0001)
Initial Regional Railroads                                    -.0020
Densitylnitial                                                (.0003)
Urbanization
South Dummy                                         -.0413
                                                    (.0071)
Initial Urbanization * Low                                                .0914
Urbanization Dummy                                                      (.028 1)
Initial Urbanization • High                                             .0621
Urbanization Dummy                                                      (.0223)

initial Urbanization • Low                                               .1465
Urbanization Dummy •                                                    (.0451)
Distance Dummy

Initial Urbanization • High
Urbanization Dummy
Distance Dummy

Number of Observations         116           116     116       116       116        160
Adjusted R2                   0.24       0.40       0.61      0.43       0.43      0.82
 Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.


                                             40
                                                TABLE 5

Dependent Variable: Decadal          Share of Labor Force in Manufacturing     Share of Urbanized
Change in Share of:                               (1870-1890)                 Population In Main City
                                                                                     (1850-1890)
                                       (IS)                 (16)      (17)      (18)           (19)
I8SOFixed Effect                                                                .0418          .0202
                                                                               (.0102)       (.0088)
I870FixedEffect                        .0134               -.0068   -.0214      .0119         -.0165
                                      (.0092)             (.0085)   (.0079)    (.0087)       (.0067)
1880 Fixed Effect                      .0427               .0192     .0027      .0190        -.0139
                                      (.0081)             (.0080)   (.0070)    (.0095)       (.0087)
Initial Share of Labor Force in       -.0844
Manufacturing                         (.0275)
Distance Dummy                        -.0190              -.0014                .0316
                                      (.0100)             (.0094)              (.0103)
Distance Dummy * Initial               .2048      •                                                .


Manufacturing Share                   (.0574)
Initial Regional Railroads Density                                   .0007                    .0003
                                                                    (.0001)                  (.0001)
Initial Manufacturing Share • Low                          .0648     .1195
Manufacturing Dummy                                       (.0355)   (.0697)
Initial Manufacturing Share • High                         -.0699     .138
Manufacturing Dununy                                      (.0224)   (.0683)

Initial Manufacturing Share • Low                          .1009
Manufacturing Dummy Distance                              (.0586)
Dummy

Initial Manufacturing Share * High                         .0900
Manufacturing Dummy • Distance                            (.0664)
Dummy

Initial Manufacturing Share • Law                                   -.0026
Manufacturing Dummy * Regional                                      (.0006)
Railroads Density

Initial Manufacturing Share • High                    .              -.0038
Manufacturing Dummy • Regional                                      (.0009)
Railroads Density

Initial Main City Share                                                        .0434          .1204
                                                                              (.0344)        (.0425)
Initial Main City * Distance                                                   .2527
Dummy                                                                         (.0933)
Initial Main City s Regional                                                                  -.0005
Railroads Density                                                                            (.0005)
Number of Observations                 84                   84        84        87             87

Adjusted R'                           0.06                 0.27      0.44      0.2!           0.16


                                                 41
                                                             TABLE 6a


Dependeni Variable:                           Average Per                 Share of              Roads Density           Specialization
                                              Capita 61W               Population with             in 1970                  in 1960
                                            Growth 1960-85                 Complete
                                                                           Secoradaty
                                                                      Education in 1960                 •
                                             .                                                                               .



                                                   (20)                      (2!)                   (22)                     (23)
Intercept                                        -.056 I                    -.0223                 13338.0                  1.0272
                                                 (.023!)                    (.0073)               (1692.4)                  (.0710)
Per Capita GOP in 1960                            .0472                      .0544                .1817.0                   -.3923
                                                 (.0187)                    (.0103)               (2391.7)                  (.1004)
Openness                                          .1544                      .0619                -5332.6                   -1.3944
                                                 (.0451)                    (.0282)               (6589.4)                  (.2765)
PerCapitaGDPin 1960                              -.1288                     -.0799                 8296.0                   1.1560
Openness                                         (.0492)                    (.0349)               (8131.9)                  (.3413)
Share of Population with Complete                 .1577
Secondary Schooling in 1960                      (.1889)
Roads Density in 1970                             9.8E-8
                                                 (7.4E-7)
Initial Division of Labor                         0472
                                                 (.0191)
Number of Observations                             43                         43                    43                           43
AdjustS R'                                        041                        0.50                  .0.04                     0.50

Nose: Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                            TABLE 6b

             Decomposition of the Effect on Per              Initial per            Openness              Interaction
             Capita GOP Growth of:.                         Capita GDP                                  between Initial
                                                                                                        per Capita 9D?.
                                                                               .                            and C)pemiess
             Direct Effect                                    0.0472                  0.1544                  -0.1288
             Primary Schooling                                0.0086                  0.0098                . 4.0126
             Roads Density                                    -0.0002                 4.0005                  0.0008
             IniiiaJ Division of Labor                        -0.0185                 -0.0658                 0.0546
                                                                                                    -
             Total Indirect                                   0.0051                  0.0001                  -0.0298
             Total Effect                                     0.0529                  0:1545                  -0.1586




                                                                 42
                                                         TABLE 7a


  Dependent Variable:                       Decadal Change       White Literacy        Local Railroads               Specialization
                                              in Share of        Rate (1850 and         Density (1850                 (1850 and
                                               Urbanized              1870)              and 1870)                      1870)
                                              Population:
                                             (1850-60 and
                                               1870-80)                                                                               .
                                                 (24)                   (25)                      (26)                   (27)
  1850 Fixed Effect                            -.1864                    .9498                  -17.025                 .0215
                                               (.1291)                 (.0089)                  (9.035)                (.2365)
  1870 Fixed Effect                            -.1999                   .9154                    9.044                 -.9610
                                               (.1260)                 (.0099)                  (11.923)               (.2390)
 Initial Urbanization                          -.0855                   .0641                   207.016                4.9709
                                               (.0368)                 (.0238)                  (28.508)               (.5649)
 Distance Dummy                                 .0035                  -.0467                   I 1.852                -.7118
                                               (.0121)                 (.0110)              (11.30$)                   (.2826)
 Distance Dummy • Initial                      -.0097                  3358                 -23.994                    3.7387
 Urbanization                                  (.0627)                 (.0528)              (67.188)                  (1.2313)
 Initial White Literacy Raze                    .2403
                                               (.1349)
 Initial Local Railroads Density                .0004
                                               (.0001)
 Initial Division of Labor                      .0258
                                               (.0050)
 Number of Observations                          58                     53                        58                     58
 Adjusted R                                     0.76                   0.58                      0.61                    0.73

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses,




                                                        TABLE lb

          Decomposition of the Effect on                   Initial               Distance                Iratetaction
          Decadal Chacs in the Share of                 Urbanization                                   between Initial
          Urbanized Population (1850-60 and                                                             Urbanization
          1670-80) of:                                                                      •           and Distance
          Direct Effect                                   -0.0855                0.0035                    40097
          Initial White Literacy Raze                     0.0155                 -0.0212                   0.0*07
          Initial Local Railroads Density                 0.0828                 0.0047                    -0.0096
          Initial Division of Labor                       0.1282                 -0.0184                   0.0965
          Total Indirect                                  0.2265                 -0.0249                   0.1676
          Total Effect                                    0.1410                 4.0214                    0.1579

                                                            43
                                                             TABLE 8a


 Depeadeac Variable:                            Log of Per           Change In Iog of        Change In Log     Ozange in
                                            Capita   GD? in          Peneaiage                 of Capital      residual
                                            1960   and 1985        PopulatIon with             Stock per     from regressio
                                                                 Complete Secondary             Capita            (28)
                                                                        Sefloollag             (1960-85)
                                            .
                                                                        (I%0-
                                                   (28)                   (29)                    (30)            (31)
                                                                         2.6945                 -.0693          -1.2990
 Intercept
                                                                         (.3000)                (.2154)         (.1715)
 1960 Fixed Effect                               -4.01 16
                                                 (.3061)
 1985 Fixed Effect                               4.0206
                                                 (.2990)
 Log of 1960 Complete Secondary                    .0540
 Schooling                                       (.0304)
 Log of 1960 Capital Stock per                     .5662
 Capita                                          (.0322)
 1960 Extent of the Market                                              -54.7697                32.052          56.271
                                                                        (11.416)               (8.1966)         (6.5291)
 Number of Observations                             lOS                    54                     54              54

 Adjusted R'                                       0.81                   0.29                   0.21             0.58

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                             TABLE Sb


                      Decomposition of the Effect on                       Extent of the Market
                      Log of Per Capita GD? Changes
                      (1960-85) of:
                      Growth of Human Capital Channel                                -2.96
                      Growth of Physical Infrastructure                              18.15
                      Channel
                      Unexplained Increase in                                        56.27
                      Productivity
                      Total Effect                                                   71.46




                                                                44
                                                 TABLE 9a


Dependent Variable:                       Urbanization        Decadal               Decatlal      Decadal
                                         in 1850, 1860,       Chan;e in             Change in    Change In
                                         1870 and 1880          White                 Local      Residual
                                                            Literacy Rate           Railroads     from
                                                            (1850-60 and             Density     regression
                                                              1870-80)            (1850-60 and     (32)
                                                                                     1870-80)
                                                (32)            (33)                     (34)      (35)
ISSOFixedEffect                             -1.1584            .0090                21.764        -.0026
                                            (.3357)           (.0018)               (3.364)       (.0098)
1860 Fixed Effect                           -1.1880
                                            (.3352)
1870 Fixed Effect                           -1.1568            .0127                16.049        -.0068
                                            (.3260)           (.0018)               (3.723)       (.0088)
1880 Fixed Effect                           -1.2118
                                            (.3255)
Contemporaneous                             1.3288
Wbite Literacy Rate                         (.3565)
Contemporaneous                              .0026
Local Railroads Density                    (.00026)
Contemporaneous                                               -.1279                431.80         .2025
Extent of the Market                                          (.0425)              (86.3 13)      (.2082)
Number of Observations                          116             58                       58         58
Adjusted R'                                     0.64           0.08                  0.25          -0.02

    Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.



                                                TABLE 9b

              Decomposition of the Effect on
              Decadal Changes in the Share of                Extent of the Market
              Urbanized Population (1850-60 and
              1870-80)01:
              Growth of                                              -0.1699
              Human Capital Channel
              Growth of                                                1.1221 .
              Physical Infrastructure Channel                                        I



              Unexplained                                            0.2025
              Increase in Productivity
              Total Effect                                             1.1553


                                                       45
Appendix 1: 65 country sample

Country       Country
Code          Name

               Algeria
3              Benin
4              Botswana
5              Burundi
6              Cameroon
7              Central African Republic
9              Congo
10             Egypt
ii             Ethiopia
12             Gabon
13             Gambia
16             Ivory Coast
17             Kenya
IS             Lesotho
19             Liberia
20             Madagascar
21             Malawi
22             Mali
23             Mauritania
24             Mauritius
25             Morocco
27             Niger
28             Nigeria
29             Rwanda
30             Senegal
31             Sierra Leone
32             Somalia
34             Sudan
36             Tanzania
37             Togo
38             Tunisia
39             Uganda
40             Zaire
41             Zambia
42             Zimbabwe
43             Bangladesh
46             India
51             Jordan
52             Korea
54             Malaysia
55             Nepal
56             Pakistan
57             Philippines
60             Sri Lanka
61             Syria
63             Thailand
71             Greece
76             Malta
'79            Portugal
83             Turkey
88             Dominican Republic


                                          46
89    El Salvador
90    Guatemala
ci    Haiti
92    Honduras
93    Jamaica
96    Panama
100   Bolivia
101   Braid
103   Colombia
104   Ecuador
los   Guyana
306   Paraguay
314   Papua New Guinea
118   Indonesia




                         47
Appendix 2: Open and Closed States in the 29 State Sample
            (using distance from major regional port).


Open Stases

Aiabama
Connecticut
Delaware
Louisiana
Maryland
Massachusetts
Mississippi
New Jersey
New York
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island


Cased Siases
Arkansas
Florida
Georgia
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kentucky
Maine
Michigan
Missouri
New Hampshire
North Carolina
Ohio
South Carolina
Tennessee
Vermont
Virginia
Wisconsin




                                              48
 References


 Ades, Alberto, and Edward L. Glaeser (l993) 'Trades and Circuses: Explaining Urban Giants,'
        mimeographed.

 Barro; It. (1991) 'Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics
         106:   407444.
 Barro, It. and X. Sala i Martin (1992) "Convergence," Jounwi of Politicci Economy 100.

 Barn, It. and H. Wolf (1989)   tata Appendix for Economic Growth In a Cross-Section of countrIes,"
        NEER working paper.

 Becker, G.S. and K.M. Murphy, (1992) "Human Capital and Speciaiization," Quarterly Journal of
        Economics.

Boldrin, Michele, and José A. Scheinkman (1988). 'Learning-by-doing, International Trade and Growth:
         A Note, - in Philip W. Anderson, Kenneth Arrow, and David Pines eds., The Economy as an
        Elving Complex System. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.

Braun, Juan (1993) 'Essays on Economic Growth and Migration,' Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard
       University

Canning, David and Marianne Fay (1993) 'The Effect of Transportation Netwoth on Economic
      Growth,' Discussion Paper, Columbia University, May.

Crowley, Joseph 0. (1992) 'Does Diversity of Production Affect Growth?," Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard
       University.

DeLong, B. (1988) 'Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: Comment,' American Economic
      Review LXXVIII, 1138-1154.

Easterlin, Richard A. (1960) 'Interregional Differences in Per Capita Income, Population, and Total
        Income, 1840-1950.' In Trends in the American Economy In the Mne:eersth Cetuwy. Princeton,
        N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press (for NOER).

Glaeser, E., H. KaIlal, J. Scheinkinan and A. Shleifer (1992). "Growth in Cities,' Journoiofrolfticai
       Economy 100.

Glaeser, E., J. Scheinkman and A. Shleifer (1993). "Economic Growth in a Cross-section of Cities,'
       mimeographed.

Glaeser, Edward L. (1993). 'Why Does Schooling Generate Economic Growth?', Economics Letters,
       forthcoming.

Grossman, Gene, and E. Helpman (1991). Innovation and Groi&i in the Global Economy. Cambridge,
      MIT Press.

Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970 (1976). Wash'mgton: U.S. Dept. of
        Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

Keynes, M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Inurest, and Money. New York: Harbour

                                                 49
        Brace Jovanovitch.

lCrugman, P. (1991) 'Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,' Journal
                                                                         of PolLtlcoJ Economy 99:
       483-499.

Kiugman, p. (1991) Geography and Trade. Cambridge: MIT Press.

KrugTnan P. and R. Livas (1992) 'Trade Policy and the Third World Metropolis', NBER working
       paper #4238.

List, Friedrich (1856) National System of PolitiCal Economy. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Lucas, R.E. (1988) 'On the Mechanics of Economic Development,' Journal of Monetary Economics 22:
        3-42.

Mankiw. N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. WeU (1992). A Contribution to the Empirics of
      Economic Growth,' Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 401437.

Marshall, A. (1890) Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan.
Murphy. K., A. Shleifer and It. Vishny (1989). industrialization and the Big Push,' Journal of Political
      Economy 97: 1003-1026.

Pred, Allan R. (1980). Urban Growth and Cay Systems in the United States, 1840-1880. Cambridge:
       Harvard University Press.

Pred, Allan It. (1973). Urban Growth arid the Circulation of Information: she United States System of
       Cities. I7)-l 840. Cambridge. Harvard University Press.
Rae, John (1834) Statement on Some New Principles on the Subject of Political Economy. Boston:
        Hillard, Gray.

Rebelo, Sergio (1991). 'Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth,' Journal of Pot UI cal Economy
       99. 500-521.

Romer, Paul M. (1983). 'Dynamic Competitive Equilibria with ExternaJities, Increasing Returns and
      Unbounded Growth,' Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Chicago.

Romer, Paul M. (1986). 'Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth.' Journal of Political Economy 94,
        1002-37.

Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N. (1943). 'Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South-eastern Europe.'
       Economic Journal 53, June-September.

Simon, Curtis and P. Nardinelli (1993). 'Information and the Rise of Cities,' unpublished manuscript.

Smith, Adam (1976). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. The University
        of Chicago Press.

Sokoloff, K. (1988). 'industrial Activity in Early America: Evidence from Patent Records.' Journal    of
       Economic History. Vol. 98, 8 13-842.

Solow, Robert M. (1956). 'A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,' Quarterly Journal of

                                                  50
        Economics, LXX, 65-94.
StazisticaJ Abstract of the United States, various issues.

Stokey, Nancy L. (1991). 'Human Capital, Product Quality, and Growth,' Quanerlyiossrnal     of
       EconomIcs 106, 587-616.

Summers, R. and A. Heston (1991) 'The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of International
     Comparisons, 1950-1988,' Quarterly Journal of EconomIcs 106: 327-368.
United Nations Handbook of International Thde and Development Statistics, various Issues.

Williamson, J. G. (1985) 'Migration and Urbanization,' 'an the Handbook of Dewlopmens Economics,
       Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Young, Allyn. (1928), 'Increasing Returns and Economic Progress,' Econonalclournoi, XXXVIII,
       527-42.

Young, Alwin (1991). 'Learning by doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade,' Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 106, 369-406.




                                                   51
