NBER WORKiNG PAPER SERIES

RECONSIDERING THE COSTS
OF BUSINESS CYCLES WITH
INCOMPLETE MARKETS

Andrew Atkeson
Christopher Phetan

Working Paper No. 4719

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1994

This paper is part of NBER's reseaivh program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #4719
April 1994
RECONSIDERING ThE COSTS
OF BUSINESS CYCLES WITH
INCOMPLETE MARKETS

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we measure the potential welfare gains from counter-cyclical policy in an
economy with incomplete markets. In the course of conducting this measurement, we focus on
two questions as central to the determination of those potential gains: (1) what is the likely effect

of counter-cyclical policy on the nature of the income risk faced by individuals in the economy,
and (2) what are the likely general equilibrium effects brought about as asset prices change due

to the implementation of counter-cyclical policies? In taking up the first question, we see it as
critical to distinguish whether the main effect of counter-cyclical policy is to directly reduce the
income risk faced by each individual or is simply to reduce the correlation across individuals in

the income risk that they face. We present a model of the wage and employment risk faced by

individuals over the cycle in which the levels of those risks are chosen endogenously. On the
basis of that model, we argue that the main effect of counter-cyclical policy aimed at reducing

aggregate fluctuations may be simply to remove the correlation across individuals in the
unemployment risk that they face. We then use asset price data to argue that in an incomplete
markets framework, the potential welfare gains from counter-cyclical policy are close to zero.

Andrew Atkeson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

Christopher Phelan
Depawnent of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706

1. Introduction

In Models ofBusiness Cycles, Robert Lucas (1987) puts forward a disarmingly
simple argument that the potential welfare gains from eliminating the fluctuations

in aggregate consumption associated with business cycles are, at best, extremely

small. His argument is as follows. Assume that aggregate consumption is de-

scribed by the statistical model cg = (1 + g)1z1, where z is a lognonnally
distritsated random shock and (1 + g) is a deterministic trend. Assume that there
are complete markets or perfect insurance against individual income risk, and that

consumers have identical CRRA preferences, so that individual consumption is

simply a fraction of aggregate consumption. Then ask the question, how much

would consumers pay to move to a world in which aggregate (and individual)
consumption has no fluctuations. In this alternative world, aggregate consumption

is described by the model c1 = (1 + g)t. In particular, solve for the fraction A of
consumers' current consumption stream that satisfies

Eo>)31((1+A)(1+g)1z1)7/y= /3t(1fg)t7/y.

(1)

Inteipret A as the constant fraction of aggregate consumption at each date and

state that consumers would need to be paid to give them the same utility they
obtain from the consumption stream with no aggregate fluctuations. With the
assumption that the log(zt) is distributed N(—u/2, a) we cancalculate (H-A) =
cxp((1

—

y)o/2). Using numbers like y =

0

(log utility) or y =

—4

for the

curvature of the utility flinctionand .013 for cr, the stAndard deviation of aggregate

consumption around trend, we get welfare costs of A = .00008 or .00042. That
is, we get the answer that the welfare costs of aggregate fluctuatibns are virtually
zero.

1

One concern about Lucas' calculation of the welfare costs of aggregate fluctuations centers on the assumption in his model that there are complete markets
for insuring individual income risk. In particular, ma setting with substantial idiosyncratic income risk and incomplete markets for sharing that risk, the marginal

utility of consumption for each individual in the economy can be considerably

more variable than would be the case if there were complete markets. Given
this possibility, it would seem that large welfare gains might be obtained from a
counter-cyclical policy if that policy, directly or indirectly, allowed consumers to
obtain smoother consumption streams in equilibrium.

In this paper, we measure the potential welfare gains from counter-cyclical
policy in an economy with incomplete markets. In the course of conducting this
measurement, we focus on two questions as central to the determination of those

potential gains: (1) what is the likely effect of counter-cyclical policy on the
nature of the income risk faced by individuals in the economy, and (2) what are
the likely general equilibrium effects brought about as asset prices change due to

the implementation of counter-cyclical policies? In taking up the first question,

we see it as critical to distinguish whether the main effect of counter-cyclical
policy is to directly reduce the income risk faced by each individual or is simply

to reduce the correlation across individuals in the income risk that they face. In
either situation, counter-cyclical policy will have a general equilibrium effect on

welfare if it changes asset prices. However, in the second situation, the situation
in which counter-cyclical policy simply reduces the correlation across individuals
in the risks that they face, this is the only effect such a policy will have.

In considering the likely effect of counter-cyclical policy on individual risk,

we begin with the observation that one of.the salient features of the business
cycle is that fluctuations in aggregate hours worked and aggregate wages paid

are not shared evenly across the population. That is, the income of workers
2

employed continuously over the cycle does not fluctuate veiy much in comparison

to the income fluctuations experienced by those who transit from employment

to unemployment or from unemployment to employment over the cycle. This
observation provides some justification for focusing on the unemployment risk an

individual faces as the principal individual income risk connected to the business

cycle.
In related work, Aye imrohoroglu (1989) presents a calculation of the costs

of business cycles in an environment with incomplete markets which focuses
on unemployment risk as the individual risk that would be affected by countercyclical policy. Her model does not allow any asset markets through which agents

might share their unemployment risk. Instead, she assumes that each agent has

an individual storage technology which he can use to smooth his consumption
in response to his income fluctuations. To calculate the potential welfare gains
from eliminating aggregate fluctuations, she compares agents' steady state utility
when they are faced with two different exogenous patterns of unemployment risk

- one that represents the risks that individuals face when there are business cycles
and one that represents the risks that they face when there are no business cycles.

She finds costs of aggregate fluctuations that tend to be small, but whose size is
quite sensitive to the exact specification of the individual's storage technology. We

discuss her paper and its relation to our work in some detail.
In the next three sections, we reconsider the calculation of the potential welfare

gains from counter-cyclical policy in an economy with incomplete markets. In
the first of these sections, we discuss theoretically the different effects on welfare
of counter-cyclical policies which reduce aggregate fluctuations by reducing indi-

vidual income risk directly and counter-cyclical policies which reduce aggregate
fluctuations by reducing the correlation across individuals in their income risk. In

the second of these sections, we present a model of the wage and employment

3

risk faced by individuals over the cycle in which the levels of those risks are
chosen endogenously. On the basis of that model, we argue that the main effect
of counter-cyclical policy aimed at reducing aggregate fluctuations may be simply

to remove the correlation across individuals in the unemployment risk that they
face. In this case, the main impact of counter-cyclical policy on individual welfare

is through its general equilibrium impact on asset prices. In the third of these
sections, we use asset price data in a model with incomplete markets to assess the
potential gains from removing the correlation in individuals' unemployment risk.

As a theoretical point, we show that the potential welfare gains from eliminating
the correlation in individuals' income risk in a given environment is smaller when

there are incomplete markets than when there are complete markets. On the basis

of our interpretation of asset price data in an incomplete markets framework, we
argue that the potential welfare gains from counter-cyclical policy are essentially
zero.

2. Aggregate and Individual Risk in Incomplete Markets

Under the assumption that there are complete markets for insuring individual

income risk, aggregate risk is the only risk that affects individual consumption.
If aggregate risk is eliminated, all individual consumption risk is also eliminated.

For this reason, in calculating the welfare costs of aggregate risk with complete
markets it is not necessary to consider the-direct effect of counter-cyclical policy

on the processes which generate individual income streams. All that matters
is the effect of counter-cyclical policy on aggregate income. With incomplete

markets, on the other hand, this is hot the case. With incomplete markets, the
fluctuations in an individual's consumption are determined by the fluctuations in
that individual's income and the extent to which that agent can trade his variable

income for smooth consumption through storage technologies or asset markets.
4

As a result, when calculating the welfare gains from counter-cyclical policy in an
economy with incomplete markets, it is necessary to describe more precisely how
such policies affect individuals' income risk and market opportunities. Obviously,

this can be done in a number of different ways. In the following example, we
higtilighthow one's calculation of the potential gains from counter-cyclical policy

depends on various assumptions regarding individuals' income risk and market
opportunities.

Consider a world with a continuum of agents in which, each period, each
agent faces a probability r(z) of being employed and, as a result, receiving high
income yIL and probability (1 — ,r(z)) of being unemployed and receiving low

income y', where z is an aggregate state of nature. Here z indexes the aggregate

state of the economy in that it detennines not only an individual's probability
of receiving high income, but also the proportion of individuals receiving high
income. This proportion changes over time as the aggregate state z changes, and
thus this economy experiences aggregate fluctuations.

Consider two ways that counter-cyclical policy might reduce aggregate fluc-

tuations in this economy. One method would involve reducing the variance of
individual income: in the extreme such a policy could eliminate aggregate fluc-

tuations by eliminating entirely the variance in each individual's income. A
second method would involve reducing the correlation across individuals in the

income risk that they face: in the extreme, such a policy could eliminate aggregate fluctuations by eliminating the correlation across individuals in the income
risk that they face without changing the characteristics of the income risk faced

by any single individual. For the example above, the first type of policy might
set individual income constant each period and equal to its unconditional mean

E2{ir(z)y" + (1 — tzr(z))y'}. If z were i.i.d., the second type of policy might
set the probability ir(z) constant and equal to its unconditional mean Eir(z), but

5

leave the realizations y", xi unchanged This policy would eliminate aggregate
fluctuations in income bit would leave the unconditional distributionof individual

income unchanged.
With complete markets, these two policies have the same impact on aggregate

income and thus have the same impact on consumer welfare. With incomplete

markets, these policies have different effects. To begin, assume that there are
no asset markets and that agents have no ability to store consumption, so that
individual consumption is always equal to individual income. In this case, under

the first type of policy, each agent's utility is improved to the extent that the
volatility of his individual income streams is reduced Under the second type
of policy, each agent's utility is unchanged since this type of policy does not
change the unconditional distribution of agents' income, and thus consumption,

streams. Going further, assume that asset markets or technologies for storing
consumption do exist tart that, in equilibrium, counter-cyclical policy leaves asset

prices or these technological returns unchanged. Then it is easy to show that,
under the second type of policy, agents' utility is also unchanged. Agents use asset

markets or storage technologies to transfonn income streams into consumption
streams. If asset prices or technological returns are unchanged and the distribution

of individual income streams is unchanged, then this transformation, and thus
individual utility, is unchanged.

It is clear, then, that if the main effect of counter-cyclical policy is to remove

correlations in individual risk, then the benefits of such a policy will be realized

through the general equilibrium impact of such a policy on asset prices. If asset
prices do change when the correlations in individual risk are reduced, then agents
may gain if they are able to trade their variable income for smoother consumption
at the new prices.

6

For example, one interpretation of Lucas' calculation of the welfare costs of

aggregate risk under complete markets is that it is the answer to the question:
"how much would the representative agent pay to face asset prices which clear
markets when aggregate consumption is constant as opposed to facing asset prices

which clear markets when aggregate consumption fluctuates?" When aggregate
consumption fluctuates, asset prices also fluctuate to induce agents to choose to

have fluctuating consumption. When aggregate consumption is constant, asset
prices are constant and agents choose to have constant consumption. The asset
price fluctuations implied by Lucas' model are small. As a result, he finds a low
cost of aggregate fluctuations.
Given this interpretation of Lucas' result, one concern about his calculation is

that his model is not even remotely consistent with commonly observed features

of asset price data. If the purpose of the model is to measure the amount that the
representative agent is willing to pay to move from a world with asset prices like
those currently observed to a world with asset prices which allow insurance against

all risk, it would seem important that the model with aggregate fluctuations be
consistent with a.irrently observed asset prices. In particular, when interpreted in
the context of a complete-markets, fiictionless-trading,consumption-based model
of asset prices, the equity premium is evidence that the representative consumer's

marginal utility of consumption is dramatically different at different stages of
the business cycle and thus that policies which smoothed consumption and that

marginal utility over the cycle could improve the utility of the representative
consumer substantially.

The equity premium in Lucas' model is essentially zero. To understand the
implications of the equity premium in standard versions of such models, recall that

asset prices in these models are described by a stochastic process Ate, known as

a pricing kernel, that satisfies M = Et[R.t+jMt÷i], where Rj is the gross
7

return on asset i if held from date it to date 2 + 1 and M is identified with the
marginal utility of consumption at i for the representative consumer. As surveyed
in Cochrane and Hansen (1992), the conclusion of empirical work on asset prices
using frictionless, complete-markets, consumption-based models is that the pricing
kernel, and thus the marginal utility of consumption of the representative consumer
must be extremely volatile if these models are to have hopes of matching the equity

premium. In light of the concern that models which fail to predict a large equity
premium may also fail to measure accurately the volatility of marginal utility and

thus understate the welfare costs of business cycles, we design our model for
measuring the potential benefits of counter-cyclical policy to be consistent with
the equity premium and other data on the volatility of asset returns.

This idea that counter-cyclical policy may improve welfare by changing asset prices raises the question of how Imrohoroglu (1989) finds positive gains to

removing business cycles since, in her model, she assumed that there were no
asset markets but that agents had a linear storage technology for smoothing their

income. The answer lies in the way she removes aggregate risk. She let the
probability 7r(Zt+l) that an agent is employed at date t +1 depend on whether the

agent was employed at date it. She further allowed the aggregate shock z to follow

a Markov process. In particular, she uses data on the conditional duration and
level of unemployment in booms to define a transition matrix which determines

an individuals' movements between employment and unemployment in booms.
Likewise, she defines the corresponding individual transitionmatrix for recessions.

She also uses data on the duration of booms and recessions themselves to define

a transition matrix which determinesthe evolution of aggregate state. She then
specifies a world with no aggregate fluctuations by using data on the unconditional duration and level of unemployment to calibrate a single transition matrix
determining individuals' movements between employment and unemployment.

8

One interpretation of her model is that individual employment and unemploy-

ment have two different levels of stability. One can think of an individuals' labor

market status as having four states: stable employment, unstable employment,
stable unemployment, unstable unemployment, with a transition matrix between
these four states defined implicitly by the transition matrices described above. Ag-

gregate fluctuations arise due to an assumed perfect correlation across individuals

in the stability of their employment and unemployment. In booms, everyone has
either stable employment or unstable unemployment, and in recessions, everyone

has unstable employment or stable unemployment. This interpretation suggests
that an alternative method for eliminating aggregate fluctuations in her model is

to maintain her four-state Markov process describing individuals' labor market
transitions Nit eliminate correlations across individuals in these transitions. That

is, eliminate the correlation across individuals in the stability of their individual
employment and unemployment. While both methods eliminate aggregate fluctua-

tions, sinceprices are pinneddownby the assumed storage technology, the welfare
gain to simply eliminating correlations in employment stability across individuals

is identically zero.

3. Counter-Cyclical Policy and Endogenous Unemployment Risk

We now consider the question of whether the main effect of counter-cyclical

policy is to reduce individual income risk or to eliminate correlations across
individuals in the income risk that they face. To address this question, we build
a mdde of the income risk individuals face. In our model, labor market frictions

prevent finns and workers from using the production technology to share the
risk implied by random productivity, say, by proportionally reducing the wages
received and hours worked by all agents in a recession. In our equilibrium, some

workers become unemployed and receive no income while other workers keep
9

their jobs and receive income. The extent of.wage and unemployment risk is
determined endogenously: workers trade off higher wages against a higher risk of

unemployment. Also, in this model, equilibrium wages are rigid in the sense that

anticipated, or long-term, changes in worker productivity are reflected in wage
changes, while unanticipated, or short-term, changes in worker productivity are

reflected in changes in the number of workers employed and unemployed. We
demonstrate in this model that, while a counter-cyclical policy which smoothes

out aggregate fluctuations in worker productivity does eliminate the wage risk
faced by employed workers and the profit risk faced by owners of firms, it has
no effect on the unemployment risk laced by an individual worker. Instead, this
policy simply eliminates the correlations across workers in the unemployment risk

that they face. Given that the wage risk faced by workers employed continuously
over, the cycle that we observe in the data is relatively small, we use this result to
argue that the main effect of counter-cyclical policy on workers is to eliminate the

correlations across individuals in the unemployment risk that they face.

Consider an economy with two types of agents: capitalists and workers. Time

Each capitalist is endowed with a
is discrete and denoted by t = 0, 1,2,3
production technology which transforms the labor of one worker into 9 units of
consumption, where 0 is random and cannot be verified by the workers. At each

date, the distribution of the productivity term 0 is the same for each capitalist.
Specifically, let it be uniformly distributed over [0, b(z)], where z is an aggregate
state variable. The realization of 0 is independent across capitalists. The aggregate

state; follows a Markov process with transition matrix ir(z', z). Each worker
is endowed with one unit of labor and derives no utility from leisure. Capitalists
have preferences E0 >

94 and workers have preferences Eb E /3* (4)1, where

10

At each date, each worker is matched with a capitalist prior to the realization

of the aggregate state z and the individual productivity term 0 for the capitalist.
These matches last only one period, and each period each worker matches with a
different capitalists. This rules out the possibility of long term contracts between

a capitalist and a worker. Capitalists have no ability to commit to contracts; that
is, if a capitalist and a worker match on the basis of an agreement to a wage w, the
capitalist will fire the worker rather than pay w if 0 < w is realized. In each period,

the aggregate state z is revealed only after that period's spot market trades between

capitalists and workers have been completed. This assumption, together with the

assumption that 0 cannot be observed by the worker, rules out the possibility of
workers and capitalists contracting.on a wage w that depends on the realization

of 0 or of Zt.

Further, this implies that the capitalist will not pay the worker and

the worker will not work if 0 <wi, giving the worker wage income of zero at 1.
For simplicity, assume that there are no asset markets or storage technologies so

that each worker simply eats his wages each period and each capitalist simply eats

his profits. This assumption rules out wealth effects that complicate employment

contracts. Assume that there are more capitalists than workers, so that the wage
offered to workers each period is chosen to maximize the worker's ex-ante welfare,

or solves

maxEwi(1 —
where (1 —

b(zf)(Z

(2)

is the worker's probability of being hired if the wage is w and

z' is the aggregate state realized at t.
The solution to this problem is to set the wage at \

w(z) =

l(Ezb('I))'t

(3)

where E g'y = . 1p.y7r(z', z). The worker's unconditional probability of
being employed is constant each period at
11

Nevertheless, the number of

The value of aggregate

workers employed in aggregate state z' is (1 —
output conditional on transition (z', z) is

y(z',z) (1- W(z))(b(z)

+ w(z))

(4)

Thus, the rate of unemployment and the level of output fluctuate over time as

the aggregate state changes. Note that the wage in the next period rises when
the aggregate state today indicates higher expected productivity in the next period

and falls when the aggregate state today indicates lower expected productivity in

the next period. That is, anticipated changes in worker productivity are reflected

in wages. On the other hand, unemployment in the next period rises when the
aggregate state tomorrow is lower than its expected value today and likewise falls
when the aggregate state tomorrow is higher than its expected value today. That is,

unanticipated changes in worker productivity are reflected in changes in the level

of unemployment.
Now consider the effects of a government policy that somehow sets b(z') equal
to aconstant b, and in particular, let &be the expectation of b(z') under its stationaiy

distritution. Under this policy, the wage is set to w =

the unconditional

probability an agent is employed is again 4k., and aggregate output is constant

at (4r)2 ft. Clearly, this policy eliminates aggregate fluctuations.. Wages rise on
average and the long run expected value of aggregate output and profits fall. Thus,

while this counter-cyclical policy does eliminate the wage risk faced by workers
who are employed, the unemployment risk that workers face is unchanged. That
is, this policy simply removes the correlation across workers in this risk.'

In this version of the model, it is difficult to consider the welfare implications
of counter-cyclical policy smce the implementation of such a policy changes the
division of output between the two types of agents. If one alters the model to
assume that workers have an equal ownership share in all firms and thus divide
aggregate profits between them, it is possible to consider the impact of countercyclical policy on welfare, but impossible to derive closed form solutions for
wages and unemployment risk due to wealth effects. If these wealth effects are
1

12

The preceding model is obviously stylized. To what extent does it generalize?

One clear deficiency of this simple model is that the unemployment rate is Li.d.

over time. Here we present an extension of the preceding model which predicts
serial correlation in the unemployment rate and yet still has the feature that counter-

cyclical policy simply removes the correlation in individual's unemployment risk.
Assume now that matches between capitalists and workers can last more than one

period but the productivity of a match 0 remains constant as long as that match
lasts. Let /.L(z) represent the probabilityin aggregate state z that an ongoing match

continues for one more period. Assume that workers who are unemployed enter

into new matches requesting wage w. They are employed if the productivity of
that new match B is greater than w. They remain employed at that wage by the
capitalist until that match dies, If a match dies at the end of period t, the worker

enterstheseaxthpoolatthebeginningofperiodi + 1 anddraws anewmatchwith
another capitalist. When z is i.i.d., the solution to this model can be described
by the following equations. Let V, be the beginning of period value of being in
the search pool and V(w) be the value of being employed in a match at wage to.
Then,

V(w) = u(w) + f3E[p(z)V(w) + (1 — p(z))V3]

(5)

and
V8 =

maxEz[.N.$V$

+ (1— w.j.)V(w)I.

(6)

small, then the results on unemployment risk obtained above are approximately
correct in this altered version of the model. In fact, in every numencal example
that we have tried, workers' unemployment nsk actually increases when countercyclical policy is implemented. Further, as above, wages nse and expected output
and profits fall. The impact of counter-cyclical policy on welfare is unclear. If
agents are very risk-averse, the benefits of smoothing profits outweighs the loss in
expected output and thus agents gain from counter-cyclical policy. If agents are
not very risk averse, they lose.

13

The reservation wage w' is the argmax of the right hand side of equation (6) and
is constant over time. Note that this is a standard seamh model except for the fact
that the wage a worker receives is his reservation wage rather than his productivity.
In this model,at each date t, individuals who are employed have a higher chance

of being employed at t +1 than do individuals who are unemployed at t. Likewise,

individuals who are unemployed at I have a higher chance of being unemployed

at t + 1 than do individuals who are employed at I. This serial correlation in the
individuals' employment prospects introduces serial correlation in the aggregate

unemployment rate. Thus, even though z is i.i.d., the unemployment rate in this
model is serially correlated.2
In this model it remains the case that government policies which stabilize b(z)

and p(z) simply remove the correlation in individuals risk in transiting from unemployment to employment or vice-versa. As before, the probability that an agent

in the search pool becomes employed equals 1 — wE2(1/b(z)). With quite a bit

of algebra, one can show that, again as before, the optimal w for an agent adjusts

so that this unconditional probability is constant. One leaves unaffected his unconditional transition probabilities. Thus this policy smoothes the unemployment
rate simply by removing the correlation in individuals' unemployment risk.
Our purpose in presenting these models is to demonstrate the possibility that the

main effect of counter-cyclical policy may simply be to eliminate the correlation

across individuals in unemployment risk when that risk is determined endogenously as a result of workers' and firms' strategies in the labor market. In these
models, workers choose strategies for accepting or rejecting wage offers trading
2

For example, when z takes on two values, 1 and 2, with probabilities 112 of
each realization, 6(1) = 8, 6(2) = 12, p(l) = .95, p(2) = .99, $ = .98, and
= .3, then the steady state unemployment rate is .06 and the serial correlation
in the unemployment rate is .8.

14

off higher wages for higher risks of being unemployed. Upon implementation of

a counter-cyclical policy, workers' search strategies adjust in such a way to hold
constant each individual's unconditional unemployment risk.
From here on, we proceed with the presumption that the business cycle compo-

nent of the wage risk of the employed and the profits risk of the owners of firms is

unimportant in determining the potential welfare gains from counter-cyclical policy. Instead, we focus solely on the effects of counter-cyclical policy on individual

unemployment risk. We maintain that the effect of such policies is to eliminate
the correlation across individuals in the unemployment risk that they face. In the
next section, we consider the potential gains from counter-cyclical policy achieved

through their general equilibrium effect on asset prices.

4. Asset Price Data and the Gains to Eliminating Aggregate Risk

We have argued above that calculation of the welfare costs of aggregate risk

requires calculation of the changes in asset prices that result from eliminating
aggregate risk. In this section, we use a simple model of asset prices in incomplete

markets to argue that what little welfare gains exist from eliminating aggregate

risk are due to the elimination of variability in bond returns. With aggregate
fluctuations, agents tend to want to borrow when bond returns are high and want
to lend when bond returns are low. Without aggregate fluctuations this correlation

between individuals' demands for borrowing and interest rates disappears. For
computational reasons, we abandon the model of the previous section and instead
study asset prices and aggrega7'te risk in an extremely simple production economy.

Nevertheless, this model illustrates the point that the potential welfare gains from
counter-cyclical policies which simply eliminate the correlation in individual risks

are small since the observed variation in bond returns is small.
15

Consider now a two period model of unemployment risk assuming two asset
markets: an uncontingent bond market and a stock market. Here, a share of stock is
an asset which pays an aggregate state-contingent dividend with a mean normalized

to unity. The dividend is not necessarily equal to aggregate consumption. In this
model, we introduce an explicit counter-cyclical policy based on government hiring

whose effect, like the policy in the previous section, is to eliminate the correlation

across individuals in the unemployment risk that they face. Government hiring is

financed from the sale the output of those workers employed by the government.

In choosing parameters for this model, we do not attempt to choose parameters
governing the pattern of individual unemployment risk to match direct observation

of that risk. Instead, we choose the extent of that risk so that the model generates
means and standard deviations of log stock and bond returns to match the data. We

then calculate the welfare gains from eliminating the correlation across individuals

in that risk. Our intention here is to ensure that we begin with a model which is
potentially consistent with existing asset price data. In the following section, we
remark on some of the more elaborate models of asset prices in incomplete markets

currently in the literature. Some of these models take up the question we avoid of
whether it is possible to match asset price data in a model with incomplete markets

in which the extent of individual income risk is set to match direct observations of
that risk.

Our model is an incomplete-markets model of asset prices, individual, and
aggregate risk. Let there be a continuum of agents in the model. Let time consist

of two dates t = 1,2. Assume that agents produce output and consume at dates

I = 1,2 and trade assets at date I =

1. At each date, agents either produce high

output (are employed)or low output (are unemployed). Their output is denoted

by y, j

{h,l}. At each date, a random aggregate state z1

{B, G} is drawn,

with q(z) being the probability of z. At each date, government follows a policy
of hiring gt(z) agents. Agents in government jobs at time I have high output y.
16

Agents not in government jobs at time it have probability ir(z) of having high
output and probability (1 — ir(z)) of having low output. Thus at time t, agents
have probabilityg (z) + r( z) of being employed and producing y and probability
1 — gt(z)

— lr(z) of being unemployed and producing j4. Agents have preferences
(7)

Consider the following asset market structure. After agents learn of their
employment status and the aggregate shock zi

at

date t =

1,

they trade a risk free

bond and stock. The risk-free bond is a sure claim to one unit of consumption at

datet = 2 anda share ofstockis a claim tod(z2) units ofconsumptionatt = 2,
where z2

is

the aggregate state at date I = 2. Agents are initially endowed with

zero bonds and zero shares. Both assets are in zero net supply. Let p,(z1) be
the price of the bond and p3(zi) be the price of the stock given the value of the
aggregate shock zi

realized

at date it =

1.

Let 6" (zi) denote the bond holdings at

date I = 1 of agents of type ii given aggregate shock z1 and

(z1) denote their

corresponding stock holdings. Agents' budget constraints are given

cj(zj,jj) = j' —po(zj)61'(zj)—p3(z,)d'(z,)

(8)

c2(z,,z21j1,j2)

(9)

Y'2 +b(zjj+d(z2)s"(zi)

The market clearing condition in the bond market is

(ir(z,) + g(z,))bh(z,) (1- lr(zi) - gi(z,))6'(zj)

0

(10)

w(z,) — g1(zi))s'(zj) = 0.

(11)

for the stock market is.

and

(r(zi) +

gi(z1))s"(z1) + (1 —

To measure the welfare cost of aggregate fluctuations, we calcniate equilibrium

and consumer welfare in this model first given a constant level of government
17

hiring g(z) = . We then calculate equilibrium and consumer welfare under a
counter-cyclical government hiring policy g (z) that attains the same unconditional

mean level of output as in the first policy but that also eliminates all aggregate
fluctuations. We assess the welfare cost of aggregate risk as the constant fraction

that, if added to agents' consumption stream under the first policy, would give
them the same ex-ante utility as attained under the second policy.
Certainly, the welfare cost of aggregate risk obtained from this model depends

upon the parameters chosen. We have argued that this cost depends upon the
extent to which asset prices change when aggregate risk is eliminated. We choose

the parameters of this model under the first policy to match data on the mean and

standard deviation of asset returns and aggregate consumption growtk Clearly,

when aggregate risk is eliminated, both the mean and the standard deviation of
assetT returns and aggregate consumption growth will change. We take figures

of .018 and .033 for the mean and standard deviation of the log of aggregate
consumption growth, .06 and .169 for the mean and standard deviation of log
stock returns, and .018 and .055 for the mean and standard deviation of log bond

returns from Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1993). As our base case, we choose

= 1.039,y( = .166,y4 = 1.060,s4 = .170,
r(B) = .8075, r(G)= .9325, gt(z) = = .0625, d(B) = .84, d(G) = 1.16,
q(B) = q(G) = .5. We obtain from the model .020 and .079 as the mean and

parameters,/3 = .615,y = —.35,y

standard deviation of the log of aggregate consumption growth, .068 and .169 for

the mean and standard deviation of log stock returns, and .018 and .051 for the
mean and standard deviation of log bond returns. That is, we essentially match
the target moments for bond and stock returns as well as mean log consumption
growth, while overstating the standard deviation of log consumption growth.
Under the alternative counter-cyclical policy, we set g (B) = .125, gg (G) = 0,

which sets the rate of unemployment.to a constant .0675. Under this policy, the

18

bond and the stock trade at the same constant price.

The log of aggregate

consumption growth is now constant at .020 and the bond return is .018. The
welfare cost of aggregate fluctuations is calculated by finding the number A such
that

'
'"
7.

1+A'c

"l+A'c
/ 2/ '
7.

7

(12)

where E represents the agent's consumption at date i under the counter-cyclical

policy. For our base case parameters, we find A = .0002, or a welfare gain to
eliminating aggregate risk of two one-hundredths of 1%. of aggregate consumption.

For comparison, the welfare. gain to eliminating aggregate risk in this economy

under cémplete markets is ten times greater. This measure of welfare gains to
removing aggregate risk is not sensitive to the choice of /3, but of course mean
stock and bond returns are.
•

At the beginning of this section, we argued that the low gain from counter-

cyclical policy in the model was due to the low variability of bond returns found
in the data. To see the effect of increasing the standard deviation of bond returns
on the welfare costs of ixisiness cycles we perform the following experiment.

To increase- the variability of expected Set returns in the economy with
aggregate fluctuations, we vary ir(B), the percentage of agents who axe employed

given the bad realization of the aggregate shock. This increases the variability

of aggregate consumption growth and thus the variability of bond returns. In
Figure 1 we plot the welfare gain to eliminating aggregate risk against the standard

deviation of log bond returns. For comparison, we also include the welfare gain to
elinilnating.aggregate risk given complete markets for the same range of parameter

values. The bond variability and corresponding welfare gains for the first example

The stock and bond trade for the same price because without aggregate
uncertmnty, stock dividends are uncorrelated with individual consuxnptl on.

19

base case

0.7
0.5
0.6
0.4
0.3
standard deviation of log bond returns

FIgure 1. Gain to Eliminating Aggregate Risk

presented above are marked "base case" in Figure 1. Note that it is possible
to construct examples which generate high costs to business cycles but only by
assuming large variability in bond returns.

5. Asset Pricing hi Incomplete Markets

The two period economy of the previous section is obviously quite simple.

There are several more elaborate models of asset prices in environments with
incomplete markets. In this section we discuss two of them, Constantinides and
Duffie (1992) and John Heaton and Deborah Lucas (1992), and their relationship

of our simple model to their work. In short, in the previous section, we followed
the method outlined in Constantinides and Duflie to build a model in which agents

are not exceptionally risk averse that has a large equity premium and relatively

20

smooth aggregate consumption. In constructing that model, we made no effort
to use data on individuals' income risk. Heaton and Lucas use data on such risk
in constructing their model of asset prices. We discuss the implications of their
findings in this section.
As mentioned before, in standard frictionless-trading,consumption-based asset

pricing models, asset prices are described by a stochastic process Mg(zt) known
as a pricing kernel that satisfies

1=
where

(13)

is the gross retumonasset I ifheld from iatet todatei+1 andz1 is an

aggregate state of nature. Here, Mt+i (zt+1) no longer identified with the marginal
utility of aggregate consumption for the representative consumer. Instead, the term

M11 (zgi) is identified with E[/3t(,7tr I Z], the conditional expectation of
individual consumers' marginal utility of consumption for all consumers whose
portfolio choices are interior. In such models, the highly variable pricing kernels
implied by observed asset price data can be obtained if there is sufficient variability

intheconditional variance of individuals' consumption, and thus intheconditional
expectation of agents' marginal utility of consumption, across aggregate states of
nature.

Constantinides and Duffie (1992) demonstrate a procedure for constructing

individual consumption sequences to match a wide variety of pricing kernels
under the assumption that agents have identical CARA or CRRA preferences.

Moreover, this procedure can be used to construct an equilibrium model of a
given pricing kernel by endowing each individual consumer with an idiosyncratic
income process £4 that satisfies

,j

—
— E[/3 u(y÷1)

21

I

(14)

Agents consume their income directly in equilibrium with no asset trade. Of
course, it is not necessaiy in this model that individuals be endowed with their
final consumption stream. It is simply the case that computation of the model is
much more complicated if asset trades must also be calculated.

In the context of the model economy of Constantinides and Duffie, with Mctionless trade of assets, the equity premium implies that the variance of the marginal

utility of individual consumption conditional on aggregate state z1+1 be bothhighly

variable and highly (negatively) correlated with stock returns. Thus, in this model,

the equity premium could be taken as evidence that individual consumers face
substantially more risk in recessions than in booms. In fact, it is precisely this
principle that we use in constructing our numerical example in the previous section.

As we saw in the previous section, though, evidence that individual consumers
face substantially more risk in recessions than in booms is not evidence of a high
cost of business cycles. If counter-cyclical policyeliminates aggregate fluctuations

by eliminating correlations in individual risk, then the welfare gains from such a
policy in our model are likely to be quite small.

As noted earlier, we made no attempt in cur two-period model to use data on

the income risk faced by individuals to choose. parameters. Heaton and Lucas
(1992) begin their paper with a review of several papers attempting to use data
on individual income variability to calibrate incomplete markets models of asset
prices. Finding that these earlier attempts were not successful in generating sizable

equity premia, they turn to a study of the role of trading frictions in detennining

asset prices. We suspect that models which attempt to match asset prices by
restricting the trading opportunities of agents with market frictions will deliver
lower gains to eliminating correlations in individual risk than reported here. Note

again that the gain to eliminating correlations in individual risk under autaricy is
zero. Assuming trading frictions should move agents closer to autarky.

22

6. Conclusion

In this paper, we measure the potential welfaie gains from counter-cyclical
policy in an economy with incomplete markets. In conducting this measurement,
we see it as critical to distinguish whether the main effect of counter-cyclical policy

is to reduce the income risk faced by each individual or is simply to reduce the
correlation across individuals in the income risk that they face. In the first case,
counter-cyclical policy can have a direct effect on welfare by reducing the risks

individuals in the economy face. It also can have an indirect effect on welfare
if it changes market clearing asset prices. In the second situation, in the case in
which counter-cyclicalpolicy simply reduces the correlation in individual risks,
the indirect effect of counter-cyclical policy on asset prices is the only effect such
a policy will have.

We present a model where the effect of counter-cyclical policy is simply to
eliminate the correlation across individuals in the unemployment risk that they face.

This model is based on the idea that the unemployment risk that an individual faces

is determined in equilibrium by his choice of search strategy in the labor market.
In particular, agents trade off a higher reservation wage against a higher probability

of remaining unemployed. Once agents' search strategies adjust, counter-cyclical
policy does not reduce any individual's chance of becoming unemployed, it simply

ensures that a large number of agents are not unemployed at the same time.

Given this result, we use asset price data to calculate the general equilibrium

effects of counter-cyclical policy on welfare in an incomplete markets environ-

ment. We find this effect on welfare to be near zero since, with incomplete
markets, eliminating the correlation in individual income risk does not open up

many new opportunities for agents to smooth their consumption. On the other
hand, with complete markets, eliminating the correlation in individual income risk
23

allows agents to smooth consumption completely. Thus the costs of aggregate
fluctuations in the incomplete markets economy is smaller than in the complete
markets economy for any given technical specification of an economy. Incomplete
markets imply a lower gain to eliminating correlations in individual risk in another

sense as well. With complete markets, it is difficult to generate an equity premium
without assuming a technical specification which itself might imply a high gain to

eliminating aggregate fluctuations. With incomplete markets this is not the case.

In this paper, we have not considered the extent to which government might
be able to use counter-cyclical policy to raise the long-run average level of output

in the economy and thus agents' long run level of consumption andutility In our
model of the endogenous determination of unemployment risk, counter-cyclical
policy actually lowers the long-run average level of output If policies which raise

longterm average levels of output do exist such policies certainly might produce

large welfare gains. Dc Long and Summers (1988) examine these possibilities.
Nevertheless, such gains would have little to do with "smoothing" the business
cycle.

In thinkirg about formulating policies to reduce individual risk, it may be
useful to investigate more specific steps government might take to enhance agents'

market opportunities for trading risky income for smooth consumption. Deaton
and Paxson (1993) and Attanasio and Davis (1993) present micro data that sug-

gests that individuals may face considerable idiosyncratic uncertainty over the
long term in their consumption streams. One possible reason that agents might
have difficulty insuring idiosyncratic risk is that agents may have limited commitment possibilities. In fact, in our model of endogenous unemployment risk,
the assumption of limited commitment plays a key role in preventing risk sharing.

The extent to which contracts requiring commitment are enforceable is in many
ways determined by government policy.
24

References
Attanasio, Orazio and Steven J. Davis (1993) "Relative Wage Movernent andthe
Distribution of Consumption," manuscript, Stanford University.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay (1993) "The Econometrics of Financial Markets," manuscript, Princeton University.
Cochrane, John H. and Lars Peter Hansen (1992) "Asset Pricing Explorations for
Macroeconomics," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 7, 115—165.
Constantinides, George M. and Darrell Duffie (1992) "Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers," manuscript, University of Chicago.

Deaton, Angus and ClristinaPaxson (1993) "lnterternporal Choice and Inequality," NBER working paper 4322.
De Long, J. Bradford, and Lawrence H. Summers (1988) "How Does Macroeconomic Policy Affect Output?:' Bmokings Papers on Economic Activity, 2,
433-480.
Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas (1993) "Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete
Markets on Risk Sharing and Asset Pricing," NBER working paper 4249.

imrohorolu, Aye (1989) "Costs of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and
Liquidity Constraints," Journal of PoliticalEconomy, 97(6), 1364—1383.

Lucas, Robert E. (1987) Models of Business Cycles. New York: Basil Blackwell.

25

7. Appendix: Mathematical Derivation of Endogenous Wage Model

V(w): Value of match paying w.
V,: Value of being in search pool.

By definition,

V(w) = uP + fiE4[p(z)V(w) + (1 —p(z))V1].

(15)

Solving for V(w) delivers

V(w)= 1yr+13(1-)V)

(16)

where/i = Ep(z). Again, by definition,

V3 =

—

maxEz[fr3V.

.frV(w)}

(17)

or replacing in for V(w) and collecting terms

V, = max{[wB+(1

WBW.v}
—wB)1
"JVS + 1i—$p
1—flp

(18)

where B = E(l/b(z)). Taking the first order condition of this and simplifying
delivers

Bp(1 — /3)1',

—

Bw1

+

26

—

yw'B = 0.

(19)

If one solves (17) for V3 given an optimal choice of w <with again much simplifi-

cation) one derives

1-wB
ii'
'(l—$)(l—wflBj])

V

20

Replacing for V in the first order condition (19) and simplifying delivers

w2[82fl/]7J + w[B(fl/A(1 —7) — (1

+ ))] + i = 0.

(21)

Note here that if p = 0, equation (21) implies equation (3) — the formula for
w for the simple one-period-match version of this model if one assumes an i.i.d.
distribution for z. For general p, solving for w delivers

—
— —Q3p(1

—7) —(1 + -,)) + /(f3p(1 —7) —(1 +7))2 — flTh'2
2flpy
(22)

The unconditional probability that an unemployed agent becomes employed equals

wB. From equation (22), this probability is independentof B, and thus setting b(z)

and p(z) to their mean values leaves individual unemployment risk unaffected.

27

