NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXTERNALITIES AND
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT

Vernon Henderson

Working Paper No. 4730

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1994

Support of NSF for this research is gratefully acknowledged. This first draft benefited from
comments of participants in the RSA and AEA meetings in 1993 and seminars at the
Philadelphia Federal Reserve, Harvard, flUID, and a CEPR conference in Vigo, Spain. John
Frost, Arindarn Mitra, An Kuncoro and Mark Bearsell worked as able RA's on this data
intensive project. Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4730
May 1994
EXTERNALITIES AND
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT

ABSTRACT
Using a panel data set of county-level employment in machinery, electrical machinery,

primary metals, transportation, and instruments, this paper analyzes the role of dynamic
externalities for individual industries. Key issues examined include the role of externalities from

own industry concentration (localization, or MAR externalities) versus the role of externalities
from overall diversity of the local envimnment (urbanization, or Jacobs externalities). In contrast

to previous studies, use of panel data allows us to separate these effects out from fixed/random
effects influencing industries over time.
Panel data also allow us to estimate a lag structure to externality variables, indicating how

long history matters and the time pattern of effects. A particular issue concerns whether
conditions from the immediate year or so prior to the current have the biggest impact on current

employment, or periods several years prior have the largest impact.
•For all industries both localization and urbanization effects are important. For traditional

industries most effects die out after four or five years, but for high tech industries effects can
persist longer. The biggest effects are typically from conditions of three to four years ago, in the

county and metropolitan area.

Vernon Henderson
Department of Economics
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER

The traditional industrial location literature assumes that firms move in response to
changes in the current comparative advantage offered by different locations (see Herzog and
Schlottman 1991 for a review). The existing pattern of location of firms in an industry then

depends on current wages, population, industrial composition, utility prices, tax rates, etc. of
these different localities. In contrast, a relatively new literature assumes that existing location
patterns for an industry are also strongly influenced by "history", in particular the historical
industrial environment of cities (Glaeser, Kallal, Scheinkman and Shleifer (1992), Henderson,
Kuncoro and Turner (1992) and Miracky (1992)). Historical conditions determine the

intangibles of today's economic environment. Such intangibles include the local stock of
knowledge relevant for an industry or availability of a labor force with specific acquired skills.
Generally, we can't measure these current intangibles, but we can measure their historical
determinants and calculate their impact on firm location decisions and industry employment in a
locality today.

The importance or non-importance of history is a critical issue. If history is important.
the spatial allocation of resources-- the landscape-- we see at a point in time will be largely

predetermined. Individual localities will have limited ability to influence or change what they

do, particularly in the short run. What firms choose to locate in a particular city will he
determined by the current industrial environment of that city, which in turn will largely depend
on the locality's specific history.

In considering the nature of history's role, there are also key questions. How long does
history matter -- are conditions from six or seven years ago versus one or two years ago

important? Do conditions thirty years ago matter? In essence, how tied to the past is a locality'
Second, what is the timing of the strongest impacts? Are last years industrial environment
conditions most important to today; or is there an aging, maturing, or transmission mechanism,
giving the strongest role to industrial conditions of several years ago? This paper investigates
these key questions.

Externalities are central to all discussions of the industrial environment of a locality.

Firms cluster together to better receive information spilling over from other firms, to improve
search and matches between workers and firms, to enhance the diversity of firms and local

products available and to derive benefits from local intra-industry specialization. Apart from the
general economics literature, most of these phenomena have been explicitly modeled with a

distinctive spatial flavor in the urban-economic geography literature (Fujita and Ogawa 1982,
Helsley and Strange 1990, and Abdel-Rahman and Fujita 1991). But there is a long standing

debate about whether externalities for a firm derive specifically from other firms in the same

industry locally or from the general diversity and scale of the local environment. If the former.

externalities are Marshall-Arrow-Rorner (MAR) externalities internal to an industry in a city, or
economies of locationalization. If the latter they are Jane Jacobs (1969) externalities, or

2

generalized external economies of urbanization for an industry within a city.
Consider information spillovers. The debate concerns whether a firm learns primarily

from other firms in its own industry or from firms outside the industry, whether they be
suppliers, purchasers, or folks on the cocktail circuit or at the neighborhood bar. Sometimes the

lines are fuzzy. Does a firm learn about the best suppliers for a particular item by observing what

other firms in the industry do, being told by those other firms what they do. or by being told by
the suppliers themselves what other firms do, or, in fact, all three? What about information
concerning new technologies? Who is relevant to a firm may vary by industry and stage of
product development. R&D activities may be more sensitive to Jacobs externalities, given crossfertilization of ideas across market sectors, while standardized production activities may be more

sensitive to localization economies, and spillovers of industry specific information.
There is now a second debate, which I initially posed, about whether externalities of

whatever type are primarily static or dynamic. Does the historical industrial environment matter.
or just the current environment? Work by Jaffe et al (1993) suggests that location- industry
specific information diffuses slowly over space, so that access to that knowledge binds firms to

the same location over time. A larger scale of own industry activity historically means finns
today in that locality will operate with greater intangibles, such as accumulated knowledge

(about tchnology, sources of supply of different quality inputs, etc.) than otherwise. Also, the

maturity of the social information network of a locality matters in facilitating communications
and information spillovers among local firms.
The papers by Glaeseret al. (1992), Henderson et at. (1992) and Miracky (1992) cited
earlier assert a role for dynamic externalities based on comparing employment patterns across
locations at just two points in time. The time gaps range from 10-30 years. These papers find
that industrial environments of 10, 17 or even 30 years ago causally affect location decisions and
patterns today. The reasoning is that aspects of the prior industrial structure of a city are a

3

dynamic externality for fims today, giving a strong role to history. The effects are very strong.
For example, in Henderson et al. (1992) preliminary regressions of the log of current

employment on just the log of base period employment yield coefficients of 0.85 to 0.96 for
individual industries indicating strong persistence (although unit roots can be rejected1): and.

even in the "structural" equations, coefficients remain close to ft5. But rather than this link
between the past and the present representing dynamic externalities, an alternative interpretation

is that there is a location fixed/random effect that gives rise to the role of history and high
persistence in employment patterns. The fixed/random effect captures relatively time invariant
(within a 10-30 year horizon), unmeasured location attributes. For example differences in
unmeasured regional resource endowments 'persist over time, reflecting ongoing regional
comparative advantages, so current industrial location patterns are correlated with historical
patterns simply because they draw upon the same relative endowments. Additional time

invariant, unmeasured attributes would include notions of local culture affecting the local legal,
business and institutional climate, as well as attributes of the relatively immobile, specific skill
portions of the labor force. These papers do not seriously address this problem. While, for
example, Henderson ci al. consider issues of endogeneity, there is an inherent problem with

cross-sectional work in finding instrumental variables that themselves are uncontaminated by the

fixed/random effects.
In this paper! investigate the role of dynamic versus static externalities, as well as MAR
versus Jacobs externalities. I utilize an eleven year panel for 1977-1987 of data on county

employment levels in different 2-digit manufacturing industries. Eleven years is the length of the

panel currently available. That isnt a very long history, but it will turn out to be long enough to
allow us to infer the impact of past industrial environments on employment today. By using a

Frost 0994) conducts tests for a variety of industries at the county level used in this paper.

4

panel. I can specifically model fixed/random effects and sort out whether past industrial

environment conditions matters, per se, or whether correlations over time are due to the presence

of fixed/random effects. More directly I can estimate a lag structure of the impact of past
conditions, and how long these impacts of different externality dimensions persist. This exercise
is fraught with many conceptual and statistical problems. Rather than overwhelm the

introduction with a list, I will try to deal with them each comprehensively at the appropriate
point in the paper.

The Model
The structural model focuses on analyzing either industry employment or the number of
firms in a two-digit industry in a location in any year. The model is a reduced form version of a
detailed structural form model of industrial location derived and estimated in 1-lenderson (1994)

for a single cross section. Conceptually the model is based on standard empirical work on firm
location decisions (see Herzog and Schlottmann 1991 for a review; also see Carlton 1983).

Firms in locationj in time period t have a profit function lljt = 11(Yt. Sjt. Üjt). where Yt is a
vector of arguments depicting current and historical (lagged) conditions such as prices and
externality measures. Sjt is the current employment level in locationj in time t.

is an error

term. The current supply of entrepreneurs to an industry in a locality is a function of current and

historical arguments,

The supply function is flJ1 = Fl(Gt. Sjt. djt) where as local industry

size rises, per firm profits must rise to attract more entrepreneurs. Local industry size is

determined by the intersection of the fl(.) and fl(.) functions. Solving for Sjt we get a reduced
form equation

(I)

Sjt = s(Yjt. ujt)

S

While sj is labeled total industry employment, this scale ii1eaure could he replaced hv the tutal

number of firms in the industry in the locality. I experimented with lxth measures. Yjt combines

Y and Gt and ujt combines üand dt. In a "stable" equilibrium, sign

s(s)/r) = sign

farl/a9 J, so variables favorably affecting per firm profits also favorably affect local employment
levels.

At this point, it is important to detail a more specific fonu to (I) and a hreakdo ii of the
arguments to YJt and ejt. Specifically we hypothesize that

m

m

Sjt = a + asj,t + L 5(Xj,t..t + t3Zj + fj + ejt + dt
1=1

(2)

(=0

st,t1 are lagged values of the dependent variable. For lagged values of the dependent variable,

the lag structure is specified to start at t- I and run m periods. X,t. are lagged values of other
variables -- exogenous or endogenous. For variables not directly representing aspects of the
lagged dependent variable the lag structure starts today (t-O). Such variables will include wages

and measures of locality diversity and size. t-O and perhaps t-l are "current" values: for t- I this
corresponds to a context where decisions for employment in period t are based on the best

information about current production conditions, which are the previous period's realizations.

Values for m2 represent a role for history, where prior realizations contribute to the current

environment for production. Z are time invariant variables (over an Il year period) that differ
across space (e.g. coastal location, state regulations).

In estimating equation (3), the focus is on isolating impacts of the historical industrial
environment, both MAR (localization) and Jacobs (urbanization) effects. Past employment

(sj,t() measures persistence in industry employment patterns over time which may reflect

6

current or historical MAR or localization effects. However measures of the concentration of past
own industry employment may better represent current or historical MAR effects. Conceptually
(see Fujita and Ogawa 1982) intra firm spillovers appear to accelerate with increases in the

intensity of local industry activity. Later I will detail issues on how to measure intensity of own
industry activity. Measures of diversity of overall local employment external to the own industry
are used to represent Jacobs, or urbanization externalities. Diversity is measured by HirschmanHerfindahi indices of sums of squared employment shares, as defined below.

In equation (2) the error term from (I) has been decomposed into a random/fixed effect.

fj. a time effect, dt, applying to all localities in time t, and a contemporaneous drawing. Cjt. fj
represents the influence of time invariant unmeasured characteristics of the local area which

affect RI-IS variables, in particular Sj, t-1 but also potentially certain of the

The ejt are

generally assumed to be i.i.d. across time and space. The absence of serial correlation of the eji

in the employment level equation (2) is a strong assumption, which I investigate.

Estimation of (2) presents the problem that the f are correlated with RHS variables. With

OLS estimation, coefficients will be biased. For example, a high degree of persistence in own
industry employment may be estimated not because past employment directly influences present
employment, but because of persistence in unmeasured (essentially time invariant) regional

endowments determining employments in both years. Estimation of (2) where fj are treated in
standard fixed effects estimation procedures still results in biased estiniates because the

contemporaneous error term, ejt. is correlated with any time average of Sj,t.i. To eliminate the
fixed/random effects, rather than following the standard fixed effects procedure. the equations
are first differenced to obtain

7

fli
= L a,r
'=1

lit
+L

÷ Ac + Mt

'=0

Estimating equation (3) means we lose information on the impact 1 cross- sect unit? varlitlun in
Xi's and must rely on time series variation within localities. Given the eqti;it iniis are est iin;iied by

regressing first differences on first differences, it may he surprising how stmiig the results turn
out to be. In equation (3), note L\sjt

Sjt -j,t

sj.t2 sj,t2 -j,t : ,\Cj

- e1 -

etc.

While first differencing eliminates the fixed/random effect, lw constntct ion it introduces

simultaneity problems and serial correlation, even though the Cjt arc Lid In particular .t
- sj,t.2 is correlated with

ejt - ej,t_ i. since Cj,1 I affects

1• In fact, it is rcasnriahlc

to assume also that many of the Xjti are affected by ej,1 i. Second. Ac1t = e1t - ej.t I is
correlated with ej,t i = ej,t I - ej,t.2.
To obtain consistent estimates of the parameters requires the use of instrumental
variables. I assume there are no strictly exogenous variables, hut merely pre(le(ernuned ones.

That is, there is a row vector Zj where

ElejtZjsl=O

s=l.2,...t-1

EtAejtZjsJ=O

S I,2 .,. t-2

or

For each county j, in year (for equation (3), I include in this row vector all Sjs. all X,j5. plus a
few other measures of local industrial characteristics for all years s t-2. This implies the

instrument list varies from year o year, growing as time t increases.

8

In estimation of equation (3), each year is treated as a separate equation with sample size
equal to the number of localities and cross equation constraints imposed on all coefficients other
than any constant term (differenced time dummies). The number of equations is the length of the
panel, T, minus the length of the imposed lag structure m, minus 2, or T-m-2. Of the minus 2,
one is lost in differencing and the other is lost from instrumenting. Note the longer the lag
structure the more years we lose in estimation.

The model is estimated by a GMM estimator for panel data.2 Under conditional
homoscedasticity, the estimates are a generalization of three stage least squares (Hayashi 1992),

or full information instrumental variables estimation of Brundy and Jorgenson (1971), which
allows for a variable instrument list by yea1and accounts for the (serial) correlation across years
in the error terms. The estimation procedure also accounts for heteroscedasticity through a
White-type correction of the variance-covariance matrix. The estimates are efficient in terms of
use of instruments, and coefficients and standard errors are consistently estimated under the
maintained assumptions.

First differencing the level equations eliminates not just the fixed effects, but also the
constant term and time invariant variables. To recover these I insert the estimated coefficients
from equation (3) into equation (2) to obtain

m
5jt -

m
cX Sj,t( - Z cXj,t

= a + iZj + fj + ejt for t=m+l, ... T. I then average

(=0

over the T-m-l years. This gives an estimating equation where
2

TSP econometrics package contains such an estimator.

9

m

B (jt

-£

e=i

m

-

6 e Xj,t_e)/(T-m-1).

Bj=a+13Zj+f+ë
Provided the fj and

are orthogonal

(4)

to each other, equation (4) may be estimated by ordinary

least squares to obtain estimates of a and 13. treating fj as a random effect and f + i

as a

composite i.i.d. error term. In actual estimation of equation (3) we have also time fixed effects.
These are Mt; where dt is the time dummy for the level equation. The dt for t=O, ...T are solved

T

for in obtaining B in (4) by imposing the normalization that

=

0.

t=0
The Data

The sample consists of 11 years of complete data for the 742 urban counties of the USA,

covering the years 1977-87. Counties are not agglomerated into MSA's since that would lose
valuable information. Instead some measures are constructed for both the county and, when
relevani, for the surrounding metro area. About three quarters of the counties are in a multicounty metro area. (About half of MSA's and PMSA's are single county ones.) Using both
county and metropolitan area measures as variables relevant to employment in a county may
suggest that the assumption that the ejt in equation (2) are i.i.d. across space is too simple.
Rather ejt may be correlated for all counties within a metropolitan area. Some simple diagnostics
on the residuals indicated this may not be a problem in the estimation of equation (3)•3
Specifically for each year. I calculated êji in equation 3 and thcn grouped thcsc county-level residuals by
metro area. 11 these error terms are correlated within metro areas, the mean L within each metro area should
systematically diffcr from the overall mean in each year. I conducted F-tests for each year for industries 35 and

10

The basic data set is from County Business Patterns [CBP] which in our version records

employment, number of firms and wages for all 1, 2, and 3-digit industries. The data I use have
been treated by the Center for Governmental Studies, Northern Illinois University (Gardocki and
Baj, 1985), to give point estimates for employment in those cases, where for disclosure reasons,
employment is reported in interval form. These data were kindly given to me by Bill Miracky.
Almost alt counties at the two digit level in CBP's data report exact numbers; but, where

disclosure is an issue they report employment in intervals, using a fairly fine classification. The
Northern Illinois State numbers are an improvement over using mid-point values of the intervals
in estimation. It accounts for overall state employment and average firm sizes in constructing
point estimates. To ensure that use of this data is not a problem, I also estimated the model using
the number of firms as the Sjt measure in equations (2) and (3), where then sjt is not subject to

any censoring by CBP's. The number of firms data do suffer from a small numbers or integer
problem, where, for example, the number of plants in a locality for transportation and primary
metals averages about a dozen. Nevertheless, the results are qualitatively very similar.
CBP data are supplemented with county data from the 1977 and 1982 City and County

Data book, on education, taxes, land area, etc. In addition I have data on state right-to-work
laws, coastal location, annual state population, and annual average state electricity prices for
industrial users. The CBP data are used to construct annual county wage rates (in all other
industries than the own industry), annual measures of concentration and diversity for the county

and metmpolitan area in various dimensions (see below), and annual measures of local economic
activity (e.g. county civilian employment, county manufacturing employment, and

corresponding numbers for the surrounding metro area).

36. In only I of 6 cases could I reject the hypothesis that the group means were collectively the same as an overall
mean. For that one case, the F-value was just 1.32, allowing us to barely reject the hypothcsis at thc .047
significance leveL

11

I constructed panels for primary metals, machinery, electrical machinery, transport
equipment and instruments. The panels for each industry are balanced, requiring positive

employment in all years. Sample sizes are respectively 454, 674, 508, 402 and 509 of the 742
counties, accounting for balancing and missing data (two counties). Of the remaining counties
for an industry, some have zero employment in all years, a large portion have either clearly
missing values or a scattered year here or there where minimal employment occurs, and another
significant portion have entries that appear to represent long term exit and entry or shorter-term
episodes of significant entry and exit.4 Unfortunately the data are not perfect (!) and besides
obviously missing values (e.g., a firm recording zero employment in one year and 4,000-6,000
in the other ten years), there are many episodes that appear to involve either temporarily losing
track of a firm or firm SIC reclassifications. For machinery and electrical machinery, there
appear to be respectively 3 and 55 episodes of sustained entry (starting with zero in 1977 and

then initiating sustained employment at some point) and 5 and 11 episodes of sustained exit. In
addition, there appear to be roughly 3 and 32 counties which have multiple (non-sustained) entry
and exit episodes. For machinery and electrical machinery we thus have 2-13% of counties in
total with valid entry-exit episodes that are omitted in the balanced panel. These are not
enormous fractions but the phenomenon is exciting. A separate paper will analyze exit and entry
for partIcular three digit industries where there is much more turnover.

For example for electrical machinery, 53 counties have zero employmcnt in all years. 42 have missing data.
38 have recordings of 1 year of minimal activity and 98 have what appear to be valid entry-exit episodes (55
entry, II exit and 32 multiple episodes). Missing data entries typically involve Counties with (large) employment
in all years except one, a recording of the (positive) number of firms ror that year, and a blank for employment.
Minimal activity is typically a county with zeros in all years except one, and a recording of one firm with 1.7
employees for that one.

12

Emnirical Results

In this section I present the main results, the estimates of equation (3). In the next

section, I will present results on equation (4), pertaining to the impact of time invariant
variables. This section is broken into three parts, preliminaries reporting some diagnostics,
results on the main industrial environment variables, and results on market variables.

Preliminaries
I estimate equations (3) and (4) foriive 2-digit capital goods industries: primary metals,
machinery, electrical machinery, transportation, and instruments. These industries, in contrast to,
say, non-metallic minerals and metallurgy, are the capital good industries which products are
widely traded across cities and in which localities absolutely and relatively specialize. All level
variables (employment, population, and price measures) are in logs and hence equation (3) is in
growth rates (differences in logs). Diversity measures (see below) are not transformed to logs.
Hausman-type tests (Hayashi, 1992) were carried out on different instrument lists to test
for the time when variables become predetermined. In particular in (2), I assume ejt are i.i.d.

over time, so that in (3) ejt are only correlated with isj,t1 and possibly
and

i. Thus all

for ( 2 may be used as instruments. But if the cit are themselves correlated over

time, then ejt will be correlated with earlier 'Sj,t..i or

in which case for example, Sj,t2

or Xj,t2 would be inappropriate instruments for all industries.5 In Hausnian-type tests I did not

While the Hausman test suggcsts that ejt is not correlated with i.Sj,t.2. (implying that Cj,t. is not correlated
with Cj,t2 and hcncc Sj,t.2). the cstimatcd covariance matrices are not fully supportive of a simple i.i.d. proccss
for the ejt. In theory, the simple correlation coefficient bctwccn Cj,t Cj.t - Cj.t and Cj,t. I = Cj.t. I - Cj,t.2 Should
be .0.5, if the variances of
arc the same across years. Typically the coefficients arc -0.1. But the estimation
does not assume equal variances across years. or (given White-correcuons) even across counties.

13

come near to rejecting the hypotheses for all industries that either including sj,t2 as an
instrument or including Sj,t2 and all Xj,t..2 as instruments yield the same results (by

tests) as

excluding them as instruments. Thus for efficiency reasons we include 5j,t2 and XJ,t2 as
instruments.
In terms of a lag structure we set m=6, or look back seven years from the current. Then
for an eleven year panel T-m-2=3, or, in estimation of equation (3), three years are covered.
Evidence for moving the lag structure beyond four or five years is not that strong. Pseudo-F tests
on the value of the objective function under different lag structures suggest for two of five
industries that adding a sixth year Onto a five year structure does not improve the value of the

objective function. I used a lag structure of six years because I wanted to explicitly look at as
long a structure as possible in the data. I was uncomfortable about losing further degrees of
freedom by going to seven years. As we will see, with a few notable exceptions for particular

industries, most effects tend to peak by (=4 and disappear for (=5or 6. Further, the lag pattern
seems to differ noticeably across variables, making it difficult to impose exogenous uniformity
to the lag structure, such as geometric or Pascal, so as to estimate infinite lag structures.6

Industrial Environment Variables

The set of tables in Appendix A contains the coefficients for equation (3). The variables
are broken into two groups, although the separation is not strict, as discussion will reveal. The
first group contains variables measuring the condition of the industrial environment, current or

have
6 note that in esumauon the variables are Iirst diffcrcnccd. Variables in the vectors
and
simple correlation coeflicienis which always have absolutc values less than 0.30 and XJ.t and Xj.t.2 have
correlation coefficients less than 0.13 and typically around 0.05. That is. there is fairly low multicollinearity
among lagged regressors. Thus shutting down thc lag structure at m=6, may result in limited bias tO the
coefficients 6. ... &,, even ii lagged cflccis persist beyond m=6.

14

past, and includes lagged own industry employment and Hirschman-Herfindahl indices of
diversity of the industrial environment external and also internal to the industry. The second
group contains variables that control for market conditions, such as wages and scale of activity
in the metropolitan area or state, as measured by total employment or population, reflecting local
demand for the product. We start the discussion by looking at the industrial environment

variables.

Past Own Industry Employment. Previous work suggests that the level of current employment
in an industzy is strongly affected by past own industry employment levels andThe concentration

of that activity (Henderson et al. 1992 and Miracky 1992). Two questions arise from that work.
Does the association between past and current employment levels reflect causation, perhaps
through dynamic externalities; or does it reflect, say, the presence of a fixed/random effect?
Second, how can we measure concentration?

In Table I, I present some representative results for electrical machinery that demonstrate
an initial puzzle. On the left hand side of that Table are the coefficients for lagged own industry
employment in the county going back seven years, and the coefficients for a typical
concentration measure, the share of total county employment devoted to the own industry. The
coefficients on lagged own industry employment are little affected by the presence or absence of
the concentration measure.
Table 1 suggests that, after differencing out the fixed/random effect, the coefficients on
lagged own industry employment don't simply diminish further from 1 or 0.5. They actually
become negative, although modest in magnitude. Why is this? From work on plant turnover
(Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson 1990) and from raw simple correlation coefficients in the data,

there is a ready answer. The Sj,t..t are negatively correlated over time. A positive shock in i-i
generates firm births in that period, but most new firms die out almost immediately in the next

15

6.129*
(1.054)

.130*

.121

(.450)
1.920*
(.548)

.035*
(.012)

-.023'

-.069'

lag 6

tor Ii:

= .06

(emN) =
)ln (emp.1)

(JIn

+

at conc=.031

21conctl

mean concentration .031
mean employ 3000 (In (3000)=8)
mean In (employ) 6.6

(.011)

.006
(.012)

.011

(.025)

-.114'

(.029)

-.071'

(.031)

-.102'

(.037)

-.149'

(.038)

-.378'

(.075)

-.605'

In (own md.
employ)
Yll)

= .25 at

Inemp = 8

=
+
In
In (emp..1) ill 2y empt.l

ln (emp1)

2.354'
(.563)

-.573
(.431)

2.508*
(.670)

(.012)

-.068'

(.025)

lag 5

lag 4

lag 3

lag 2

lag 1

(ii)

concentration
own IndJtotal
employ (2l)

In (own md.
emp.)

1

Electrical Machinery

Table

2

.0070*
(.0029)

.0059*
(.0026)

.0085*
(.0029)

.0097*
(.0035)

.033*
(.0040)

.053*
(.0089)

(?2l)

In (own mnd.emp))

few periods, as predicted by a Jovanovic (1982) model of learning. So a high birth rate in t-l is
followed by a high death rate in t. Note the negative correlation applies to changes in s, not
levels (i.e., some births survive, so levels in t are higher because of births in t- 1). Our estimated

coefficients have a levels (equation (2)) interpretation. However, to estimate the level
coefficients by first differencing Out the fixed effects and dc-emphasizing the cross-sectional

variation in the data, we accentuate the Jovanovic phenomenon (which is not explicitly part of
the model), complicating the interpretation of the results.
There is a further result in the left hand panel of Table I that higher concentration has a
positive ameliorating effect on this Jovanovic process. The coefficients of past concentration are
generally positive, large, and significant. So increased employment also increases concentration
and at high concentration levels that generates benefits more than sufficient to offset the

Jovanovic effect. For electrical machinery for (=1, a 1% increase in last years employment nets
a .06% increase in employment today at average concentration levels (.031 share). At very high

concentration levels such as 0.2 to 0.25 shares, a 1% increase in own industry employment last
year would result in a 1.1 to 1.4% increase in employment today.
Upon consideration, I decided that concentration in Counties of fixed geographic size is

better measured by a non-linear representation of the level of own industry employment. A
concen&ation of 50% of a labor force of 2,000 doesn't represent much opportunity to accumulate

local industry knowledge relative to a concentration of 5% of a labor force of 200,000. By
focusing just on own industry employment,.the impact of total county employment can then be
separated out and evaluated on its own. Also, I measure MAR effects at the level of the county,
not the overall metro area, since your "immediate' neighbors are the ones whose information
spills over onto you. Experimentally, own industry employment in the rest of the metro area
controlling for all other variables (see below) has little impact on own industry county
employment for all industries and I dropped it as a variable in the main results, but footnote its

16

impact here.7

On the right hand side of Table 1 for electrical machinery, I reformulate the overall

impact of past own industry employment as a quadratic. Inspection reveals that at low own
industry employment levels the negative Jovanovic effect dominates while at higher levels, what

I interpret to be positive MAR (localization) externalities dominate. For electrical machinery the
turning point (depending on the lag point) appears to be about a log employment of 5-6.5, or
actual employment of 150-700. At mean employment of about 3,000 per county in electrical
machinery at (=1 a 1% increase in employment last year generates a .24% increase in
employment today.

Coefficients for all industries for th quadratic formulation are reported in Table Al in
the Appendix for all industries. The general pattern is the same for all industries as for electrical
machinery. However for machinery, primary metals, and transport equipment coefficients are

generally insignificant at =5 and C=6, so no significant effects persist beyond (=4. Table 2 in
the text presents a summary of the results. On the LHS of Table 2 the impact of last years (1=1)
employment on this year is calculated for different employment levels. As we know from the
quadratic, effects increase (become more positive or else less negative) as county own industry
past employment rises from 300 through 3,000 to 30,000. For most industries maximum county
own industry employment is about 60,000.
On the R.HS of Table 2, the time pattern or lag structure to past employment is presented.

Only the direct effects are presented; the indirect effects of increased employment at (=6 include

For example a 1% permanent increase in own industry employment in surrounding counties (see Table 3 and
discussion below for details on this conceptual experiment) for machinery, clcctrical machinery, primary metals,
transport equipment and instruments, results over a six year period in perccntagc changes in own industry county
employment of 0, -.02, -.01, -.04, and -.12, respectively. Over the years initial small negative impacts
(competition?) offset small later positive impacts (externalities), with net minimal negative impacts. In terms of
statistical signifleance, electrical machinery and primary metals arc strongest, but those net impacts (-.02 and -.01)

are truly minimal!

17

*

.17

(-.11)

-.06

-.01

.01

(0)

jJ

.10

(-.01)

.02

(-.10)

1

.03

14

Since one of the coefficients at Ii for instruments is not close to being statistically significant, I present the results for 12.

.06

-.06

instruments'

.03

-.02

(0)

.08

0

-.08

transport equIp.

.01

.05

.01

-.01

.14

-.01

-.15

primary metals

.24

.15

0

electrical
machinery

.02

J2

(at 3000)

direct lagged Impacts

.49

.04

.13

-.06

machinery

.04

ii

30000

QQ

direct impact (Ii) at:'

Prior Own Industry Employment

Table 2

j,Q

(.02)

.03

0

(.01)

the impacts on employment levels in intervening years and their own impact on today. All

impacts are evaluated at the typical mean employment of 3,000 (or 8 in logs). Given we have a
quadratic estimated by regressing first differences on first differences, while there may be some
considerable numerical imprecision, it is surprising how strong the results are. Table 2 indicates

that (I) for all industries significant effects persist to (=4; (ii) for only one industry is the largest
effect at (=1; (iii) for all industries but one effects are either insignificant or small at (=5 and
(=6; (iv) for the high-tech instruments the strongest effects persist at (=5 and (=6; and (v) for
the other partially high-tech industry, electrical machinery, while effects at (=5 and 1=6 are
small (respectively .02 and 0 at employment of 3,000) they are statistically significant. For
higher employment levels such as 30,000 for electrical machinery at (=5 and (=6, the direct
lagged impacts would be more noticeable (.05 and .04 respectively).
In summary, for standard industries, MAR effects persist from conditions up to five years
ago, with typically a strong effect remaining at f=4. For more high tech industries significant
effects persist through to the maximum length of our lag structure, (=6, or seven years prior.
Even after differencing out fixed/random effects, industrial environment conditions from seven
years ago affect employment directly today in high tech industries.

The lag structure itself is of particular interest. Because there is a quadratic fomulation
(in contrast to other variables analyzed below), it is not easy to directly summarize the lag
structure for past own industry employment, beyond what I have already stated. However there
is one critical result. For most industries initial impacts are smaller than impacts from four or

five years ago ((=3 and (=4). How could this be the case? For example, suppose we utilize an
accumulation of (local) knowledge interpretation. Presumably knowledge depreciates. Thus we
might think that an increase in knowledge (represented by an increase in own industry
employment) from four years ago ought then to be less beneficial than a ceteris paribus increase
from one year ago. The lag structures in Table 2 suggest otherwise. That means there is a lag

18

process within the county and metro area in terms of either the transmission of knowledge across
firms or the maturing of ideas before firms act upon information. Not only may it take an
entrepreneur some months to learn of a specific new "development" locally (information

received or created and revealed by another local firm), but it may take many more months
before a firm acts upon new information, while it observes and determines that such information
is useful. Note this is all in the realm of dynamic externalities. Firms in locations without this
historical accumulation of knowledge have no such information to filter and act upon and are
disadvantaged at those locations.

Finally I note that direct plus indirect effects are typically larger than direct effects;An
increase in employment at, say, (=5 not only directly impacts employment today, but also
indirectly impacts today's employment by stimulating employment levels at (=1, ... 4, which in
turn each affect employment at intervening time periods.8 For example, the total impacts of an

increase in employment from 3,000 at (=5 in electrical machinery and in instruments

respectively are J (vs. a direct effect of .02) and

(vs. a direct effect of .10). For instruments

indirect effects are minimal and negative, (given the negative coefficients at (=1 and (=3),
whereas for machinery they are relatively large and positive.

The External Environment. Jacobs effects, or related economies of urbanization, derive from
the diversity and related scale of the urban environment which surrounds an industry. Diversity
in that environment, for example, enhances knowledge accumulation as producers in an industry

can draw upon a greater diversity of ideas from other industries, through interacting with a
greater diversity of local suppliers (including suppliers of labor, entrepreneurial and R&D
8 If we denote by at, ...

a as the direct net (in a quadratic) effects on employment today of increases in past

at =5 is as +2a1*a4 + a3(2a2 +
3a12) + a2(4a13 .1- 3a1a2) + a15. This is an approximation given everywhere we evaluate employment eflects at
3,000 workers.
employment evaluated at 3,000, the total impact of an employment increase

19

services) and purchasers. To measure diversity of the surrounding environment, I calculated a
variety of Hirschman-Herfindahl indices (HHI) for employment in other 2-digit industries.
While there is no completely satisfactory way to measure diversity, the HHI has the virtue of
being a recognized, standard measure. In terms of different HHIs, I calculated indices for allmanufacturing and for all industries, for both the county and the MSAIPMSA the county is part
of. For example, for manufacturing in the metro area, the 1-11-Il is the sum of squared shares of

each 2-digit manufacturing industry (other than the own industry) in total (all other)
manufacturing employment in the metro area. An Hi-I! index measures lack of diversity, in the

environment surrounding the own industry. For 19 other 2-digit manufacturing industries, l'[HI
takes a maximum of 1 if remaining employment is concentrated in just 1 other industry and a
minimum of .0526 if it is uniformly distributed across all 19 other industries.

Given that the different HHI measures are strongly correlated, that they only iiiperfectly
measure what we have in mind conceptually, and that results are based on annual changes in
I-U-il (which are typically quite small), there is a limit to how well I can sort out what is the

relevant diversity measure. Ultimately I settled on diversity in all other industries for the MSA
the county is part of. This corresponds most closely to Jacobs notions of urbanization -- the

benefits of greater diversity of the entire metro area foran industry. Results with an HHI just for
manufacturing for the MSA are very similar. Results for HHI measured at the MSA level did
seem to dominate measures at the county level (in terms of what generally survives as significant

coefficients especially beyond =3). Results with HHI's for both manufacturing and all industries
or for both MSA and county levels generally yielded one set of signs for one measure and the
opposite set for the other, but no consistent pattern across industries and suggested significant
mu kicollinearicy.

For the HHI for all other industries in the MSA, in Table A2 in the Appendix, two thirds
of all coefficients have the expected negative sign. An increase in HHI is a decrease in diversity

20

which under a Jacobs hypothesis hurts own industry employment. It is clear from Table A2 that

coefficients on our first differenced measure bounce around. To get a better view of overall
effects and the lag structure I report two other results. First in Table 3 I sum coefficients over the
lag structure, which tells us the direct impact on current own industry employment of a
permanent increase in HI-Il. The effects are large. A one standard deviation permanent increase

in HHI decreases current own industry employment by 24-74%, depending on the industry.
Diversity appears most important for high tech electrical machinery and for primary metals
where surviving employment has been focused in newer non-ferrous, ("space age") alloys.

For the lag structure from Table A2, for machinery, primary metals, transport equipment
and instruments, the negative HHI effects appear to peak at (=3 or 4, often starting positive and
ending positive or small. Only for the high tech industries of instruments and electrical
machinery are there strong negative effects at both (=5 and (=6. For other industries effects at

(=5 or (=6 are small, of perverse sign, and/or statistically insignificant. Given the lack of smooth
movement from one lag to the next in coefficients, to get a better sense of the lag structure, I
also imposed and estimated an Almon lag structure for this variable. Results are reported in

Table A6, for either a cubic or quadratic lag structure for the industry. A cubic was chosen if
adding the cubic term improved the results. For a cubic the impact at any lag is

8, = (X() + aiS + (x252 + cx3S3 (,S=O, ... 6.

(5)

The as are reported in Table A69, part a. Of the 18 reported coefficients, all are either

For an Almon lag the RHS variables take the form
m
m
m
m
+
cZ(JL Z(+ al!Jz(+ a2Z (2Z( a3E (3zf
(=1
(=0
(=0
(=0

Given RHS variablcs arc first diffcrcnccs, the explanatory variables corresponding to this Almon lag structure for

21

machinery
elect. mach.
primary metals
transportation equip.
instruments

machinery
electrical mach.
primary metals
transportation equip.
instruments

-6.5
-6.0
-8.0

-16.5
-18.4

-.27
-.66
-.74
-.24
-.32

s.d. Increase

-.21

-.63
.95
-.76

(1.30)

1.83
.83
1.02

Wages

.04

-.04
-.46

-.45

-.20

s.d. increase

.38

-.59
-1.0
-.08
-.66
.08

1

HIll (internal)

.90

Total (other)
MSA employ

1

HHI (external)

1=0

6

IMPACT OF A ONE-TIME PERMANENT INCREASE

Table 3

HHI: EXTERNAL

Figure 1

(8€ for time €=O, ... 6 from Almon Lags)

Primary Metals
-

Machinery
-

6

—2
—4
—6

Instruments

Transportation Equipment
10

1

7.5
5

—1

2.5
—2
—2.5

—3

—5

—4

Electrical
—2
—4

—6

Machinery

l\34>6

statistically significant or have t-statistics over 1.9. These coefficients give a very clear lag
structure to this measure of diversity external to the industry. This lag structure is graphed in
Figure 1.

Figure 1 plots the 8e's from "=0 to 6 in equation (5) for the a's reported in Table A6. I
start with machinery, primary metals, transport equipment, and instruments. The pattern is
similar for these industries and is U-shaped. Starting today ((=0) HHI effects are either small
negative or positive; they rapidly become (more) negative peaking in negative values somewhere

between t=i and (=4; then the effects diminish (become less negative) so that at (=5and (=6
they typically have relatively small positive or negative values. In Figure 1, for these four
industries the biggest negative value at C=61s for high tech instruments (-1.24), the other

negative value is for machinery which fluctuates around zero after (=3. If we sum the lagged
effects at the discrete time points 0, 1 ... 6, we get sums similar to those reported in Table 3. In
summary, in Figure 1, for those four industries diversity matters, starting small, peaking

somewhere between C=l and =4, and then diminishing at six or seven years out. Only for
instruments does a strong negative effect seem to remain at /=6.
For electrical machinery, consistent with the original lagged coefficients in Table 2A, the
pattern is different - an inverted-U. Effects start negative, diminish, and then accelerate (become

more negative) with time. As noted earlier, seven years out, for the two high tech industries
only, the historical external industrial environment significant affects today.

Similar to the effects of own industry concentration, the effects of diversity start small or
even positive, and then peak at years further back. The reasoning is also similar, as for own
industry concentration. An increase in local diversity (decline in I-il-lI) improves the local stock
1983 are for exampicuoA + aiB + a2C + a3D where
A. HH185 . HH178, B HH184 + ... + HHI79 - 6HH178
C. HH184 + 3HH183 + 5HH182 + ... + 11 HH!79 - 36HH178, and
D. HH184 + 7 HH183 + 19HH182 + ... + 91 HH179 - 216HH178

22

of knowledge but there is a diffusion process where it takes time for knowledge to spread and an
"aging" process where firms want to observe if new information is good. So the effect on current
employment of knowledge increases is greatest from knowledge changes of several years ago.

In looking at Figure 1, it is also natural to ask why there are positive effects (for
transportation, instruments and machinery) of HI-I! increases (diversity declines) at (=0. I think
this occurs because at /=O (only) we are inadvertently picking up competitive effects of other
industries on the own industry. An increase in today's HHI probably occurs because some other
industries contract in the MSA, perhaps helping own industry expansion.

Internal Diversity. Apart from diversity e*ternai to an industry, internal diversity may also
matter. For any sub-sector, interaction with a diversity of other sub-sectors may be
informationally important and greater diversity within an industry indicates a greater variety of
intra-industry specialized functions are being performed. The inclusion or emission of this
variable has little impact on coefficients of other variables, so its inclusion creates no problems. I

experimented with a measure of internal diversity at the metro area level which is the sum of
squared employment shares of the 3-digit sub-categories in corresponding 2-digit employment.10
Since it is own industry employment, I start the lag structure at 1=1, not today (1=0).

Results are reported in Table A5. If greater diversity enhances productivity, an increase
in the internal HHI will decrease it. Indeed in Table A5, three quarters of the coefficients are

negative. In Table 3, the coefficients summed over the lag structure are negative except for
instruments and quite large for machinery, electrical machinery, primary metals, and
transportation. This sum indicates the direct impact on current employment of a permanent
10 Again, consistent with Jacbos, I measure HHI at thc metro area level. Also measures at the county level
were problematical in some counties because three-digit cmploymenLs were not rcported. Moreovcr reporting at
the mctro area lcvcl tends to be more accurate (fewcr numbers reported in interval form and then massaged to get
point estimates).

23

increase in HHI.

This internal HHI measure is the only variable in equation (3) where expected (in this

case negative) effects persist for all industries at both (=5 and =6, although most coefficients at
that lag time are not statistically significant. Eyeballing the coefficients in Table AS indicates a
variable lag structure across industries. To get a better sense of the lag structure I also estimated
an Almon lag structure for internal diversity. The results are reported in Table A6, part b.
Results in Tables A5 and A6 are reasonably similar and Almon lagged coefficients

from

equation (5)) sum up to similar numbers as those in Table 3. Note however the coefficients of
the Almon lag structure are often statistically weak. Only for the high tech electrical machinery
and instruments, does the Almon lag structure seem strong enough to graph. In Figure 2 there is

a convex relationship where negative effects fizzle out by (=5 or l'=6.

Interuretation and Summary for Industrial Environment Variables. Past own industry
employment and locational diversity matter for capital goods industries. Employment
composition and intensity from 6 or 7 years ago appear to matter most for the more high tech
industries of instruments and electrical machinery. Only for these industries do strong effects of
past own industry employment persist at both C=5 and (=6. These are also the only two

industries where external HHI remains strongly negative and significant for both (=5 and (=6
(Table A2). For other industries these two effects tend to evaporate beyond (=4.
The results generally indicate that both own industry concentration in a county and
diversity in employment of the surrounding metro area are important for an industry. That
suggests a tension for an MSA in maintaining a strong industrial environment. Cities, counties
and metro areas are all highly specialized in manufacturing activities, reflecting the benefits of
concentration. But having an otherwise diversified metro area employment base is also
important.

24

In terms of lag structures my basic interpretation of these results is that history matters.

Industrial conditions from 6 or 7 years ago can effect strongly productivity and hence
employment today, even after removing persistence in relationships due to fixed/random effects.
By raising productivity and profits today, history dictates a larger scale of industry operation
(employment) today in the locality. Moreover direct effects from four or five years ago are more
important than effects from last year, suggesting an aging, maturing and/or transmission
mechanism.

Overall, the interpretation of the results is that there is strong evidence of dynamic
externalities. However there is a caveat. Suppose history doesn't matter and there are no dynamic
externalities. We still might get a lag structtIre in equation (2), because of expectations formation
or because of delays in firms responding (by expanding employment) to improved static
conditions. Now such lag structures typically look very different than those in Figures 1 and 2.
For lagged responses to static conditions, we typically expect big initial impacts which rapidly
taper off. We can test for this by picking current market variables where we expect no dynamic
externalities and investigating whether they have any lag to their response and, if so, whether it

is markedly different from Figures 1 and 2.Il If it is, we may reasonably infer that Figures 1 and
2 deal with non-static phenomena. I turn to this next.

11 Data on productivity might allow us to directly sort this out, since lagged variables then would only mailer if
they reflectcd dynamic cxtcrnalitics, but such data arc unavailable in CBP data and strongly censored in the
Census of Manufacturing.

25

Figure 2

HHI: INTERNAL

(6 for time £=1, ... 6 from Almon Lags)

Electrical Machinery

—0.

—0.1
—0.

Instruments

—0.025
—0.05
—0.075
—0.1

Market Conditions

I have two primary variables representing market conditions -• the scale of the local
metro area market representing local demand for these industrial products and the wage rate. We
start with the scale of demand measure.

Market Scale. I measured market scale variously by state population, employment in the metro
area, and employment in the county. From experimentation it seemed that including more than
one measure wasn't helpful and metro area scale dominated the other measures in terms of
consistency. State population is poorly medsured on a year to year basis and our qualitative
results are not sensitive to the choice of metro versus county level employment.
The results for metro area employment in Table A3 are quite striking. For machinery,

electrical machinery, primary metals, and instruments, at either (=0 or (=1, there is a large initial
scale effect, where a 1% increase in last year's metro area employment (other than the own
industry) increases own industry employment today by 1.05 to 1.45%. Thereafter for machinery
and primary metals, any remaining effects are small. We graph the actual coefficients in Figure 3
for machinery, primary metals, and instruments. As Figure 3 strongly suggests the reaction to an
increase in scale of local market demand for machinery and primary metals is essentially

immediate (at (=0 or (=1) and thereafter basically disappears. There is no long adjustment lag to
current market conditions. For instruments some individual effects beyond (=0 or I are large but
they fluctuate in sign, with no consistency to the pattern and they are dominated by the initial
impact. The pattern for electrical machinery is similar to that for instruments in Figure 3. The
final industry, transportation, doesn't contradict the others. It's just that metro area scale effects
for it are smaller, which is not surprising since its products tend to be mostly exported from
cities.

26

Figure 3. MARKET SCALE: METRO EMPLOYMENT

machinery

primary

metals

1.2

1.0 G
•

6

.4
.

.
0

•

0

•

I

*

I

—

•

p

6

0

0

-.2

instruments
1.5

I.0

0

.5

0

•

•

0

-0. 5

.

G

s

-

—t
6

Further evaluating the lag structure, Table 4 part a, row two indicates, the sums of the
remaining coefficients (apart from the largest one, given in the first row) are collectively
significantly smaller than the initial major impact for all industries. Further there is no
consistency in the sign of the residual impact. But perhaps most telling is the fact that, in strong

contrast to the industrial environment variables, for market scale, for four of the industries, no
industry has two significant coefficients of the same sign for the four years from (=3 to (=6.
Moreover for three of the five industries, pseudo F-tests indicate that the value of the objective
function doesn't change significantly if we truncate the lag structure for this one variable at 1=1.
In summary, there appears to be little evidence of a consistent lag structure of firms
adjusting to the (static) market condition of 'altered market size. There is only consistent
evidence of a large initial (/]=O, 1) positive impact. This is in contrast to the impact of industrial

environment conditions, where conditions from (=3 to (=6 matter in a very strong consistent
fashion, suggesting the presence of dynamic externalities.
Finally if we sum coefficients in Table 3 we get the impact of a permanent increase in
metro area size. There are sizable long run impacts for transport equipment, as well as
machinery, primary metals and instruments, with elasticities averaging over one.

Wages. Wages are the wages in the county for workers in all other industries -- total payroll
divided by total workers. Despite the fact that we are regressing first differences in employment
on first differences in wages, I do indeed find fairly consistent negative wage impacts in four of
the five industries. Only instruments represents a perverse case, perhaps reflecting the absence of
a separate wage variable for highly skilled workers. Elasticities of the direct effect of a
permanent increase in wages on employment for primary metals, electrical machine!)', and
transport equipment in Table 3 are reasonably near -1, ranging from -.63 to -.95. For machinery
this magnitude is much smaller and individual coefficients are also small.

27

2

1=4

6

I=0

late sum

ö1: early sum

-.21

.02

Machinery

.32

.72

-.67

-.15

sum of remaining
coefficients

-.57

-.29

-.17

-.35

PrimaryMetals

Electrical Machinery

(b) Wages

(.51)

1.11

Transportation
Equipment

1.05

Metals

Primary

1.05

Electrical
Machinery

highest coefficient
In JO or Ii

Machinery

(a) Metro Area Employment

Table 4

-.83

.09

Transportation Eauioment

-.43

1 .45

Instruments

For wages, in contrast to metro area employment (market scale), the lag structure is
different. As Table 4, part b reveals immediate impacts are minimal and significant employment
adjustments today can remain from wages changes six or seven years ago. Impacts of wage
changes within the last three years are much smaller than impacts from four to seven years ago.
Wage, like market scale is a contemporaneous market condition; and, if there is a lag structure to
its impact, couldn't that be evidence of long lags in market adjustment to (static) conditions?
However there is a fundamental difference with wages, suggesting that these effects are
institutionally, not market driven.
Responses to changes in market scale or static industrial environment conditions can be

immediate as new firms come into businesor existing finns hire more workers. Responses to
changes in local market wages are delayed by union contracts, which fix wages facing firms
within the own industry for a discrete time period. That is, for heavily unionized industries,
effective wages do not respond to changes in the going wage rate in a locality. The response
comes when contracts are renegotiated and those negotiations are themselves based on the prior
recent history of wages. So a firm's effective wages may be based on a contract negotiated three
years ago, and those negotiations will have been based on local wage conditions for the several
years prior to that time. Moreover part of the response to changes in effective wages is to adjust
capital-labor ratios, which again is delayed by irreversible capital investments and technology
turnover. It is instructive to note that by far the largest delayed impacts in Tables A4 and 4 are
for primary metals and transport equipment. Relative to our other industries, these are industries
which are traditionally highly unionized and whose production is characterized by large
investments in fixed plant.

28

Results ror Time Invariant Variables

In the previous section I presented results for equation (3), based on estimating first
differenced equations. The first differencing eliminates the time invariant variables in equation

(2), which do vary cross-sectionally. To recover these, we estimate equation (4) by OLS, where
the dependent variable is B, the estimated average residual from the reinstated level equation
(2). Results are reported in Table 5.
Two versions of equation (4) are presented in Table 5. The first column for each industry
reports truly exogenous variables -- land area, regional dummies, and a dummy for coastal
(ocean or Great Lakes) location. The second column adds in other explanatory variables such as
a dummy for being in a multi-county MSA, 1980 college educational attainment, and median
value of owner-occupied housing in 1980 (as a proxy for land prices). These additional variables
could be correlated with the random effect fj now in the error term of equation (5), if such a
term is county or MSA-specific, rather than just industry-county specific.12 To conserve on
space, I discuss only the second column results.

The results are similar across industries. For the truly exogenous variables, in general
being in a coastal MSA with access to shipping and different climatic conditions helps
employthent, as does having a larger land area and hence less congested conditions. Compared to
the West (the basic constant term), the Northeast still has higher employment levels in
machinery and electrical machinery, and the mid-West also has higher machinery employment.
Despite relative growth in the 1970's and 1980's the South remains significantly less

12 Again, there is an issue in evaluating whcther standard error estimates are unbiased, given possible intrametro area correlation in the random effects. Following the procedure in footnote 2, there appears to be more of a

problem for our random effects than for the differenced contemporaneous error terms. For industry 35, a
hypothesis of equal means for the error terms grouped by metro area is decisively rejected. For industry 36. we
accept the hypothesis of equal means, but just.

29

-.903'

Region South

N
674

.14

.038
(.065)

1983 state corporate

tax rate

-.128
(.306)

dummy: state right-towork law

value)

674

.26

-.705
(.512)

In (median housing

.133
(.251)

508

.06

(.049)

-.103'

(.187)

508

.13

.050
(.425)

(.016)

.055'

-.653'

(.097)

-.165

-.169
(.336)

(.325)

-.028

454

.06

.036
(.091)

-.295
(.496)

(.174)

.693'

-.073
(.509)

1.10'
(.518)

.706
(.556)

.691'

(.206)

-.330

-13.77
(1.55)

Metals

454

.27

(.703)

-4.01'

.051
(.028)

(.302)

-2.65'

.174
(.161)

(.566)

-1.38'

-.124
(.538)

-.578
(.556)

.164
(.197)

(7.62)

34.63'

Primary

(.344)

(.127)

.290'

(4.62)

10.01'

(.234)
.095
(.019)

college education

-.120
(.094)

(.277)

-.596'

-.464
(.282)

.340
(.309)

(.122)

.336'

(.730)

11.04'

Electrical
Machinery

-1.77'

.470'
(.116)

.674'
(.117)

-.342
(.407)

1.16*
(.392)

1.13'
(.428)

.283
(.154)

4.32
(5.56)

% adults WI at least

dummy: multicounty MSA

in (land area)

.588
(.363)

Region Mid-West

(.352)

.710
(.400)

(.155)

.328'

(.908)

-3.92'

Region NE

Dummy: MSA
on coast

Constant

Machinery

Table 5

509

.05

.024
(.070)

.042
(.350)

(.129)

.322'

-.246
(.354)

.404
(.371)

-.059
(.414)

(.164)

.541'

(.997)

-3.07'

509

.12

(.579)

-2.59'

(.023)

.076'

(.246)

-.829'

.125
(.132)

(.437)

-1.12'

-.256
(.427)

-.787
(.452)

(.171)

.800'

25.91
(6.26)

Transport
Equipment

402

.09

,024
(.080)

(.400)

.131

.427'
(.132)

-.745
(.413)

-.368
(.419)

.580
(.442)

.408'
(.186)

-3.94
(1.04)

402

.14

-1.20
(.682)

(.025)

.094'

(.285)

-.794'

(.139)

.400'

-.815
(.521)

-.304
(.496)

.619
(.511)

(.198)

.540'

7.99
(7.38)

Instruments

industrialized in capital goods employment. These regional dummies may proxy for regional
resource endowment considerations, regional public infrastructure investments geared to specific
industries, and cultural and institutional factors interacting with long term labor force
characteristics.

For the other three variables, results were very similar across industries. Multi-county
MSA's are less involved in capital goods production, being more oriented to service activities.
Counties with higher quality labor forces are more attractive to industries, and higher land prices
hurt capital goods employment (which are relatively land intensive).
Finally we experimented in the bottom panel in separate regressions with two state level
variables. The 1983 state corporate tax rate has generally the expected negative sign but is only

significant for one industry. The dummy for state right-to-work laws has no significant nor
consistent impact. This is surprising since state right-to-work laws create a labor market
environment favorable to firms. But states may only pass such laws if they have otherwise poor
inherent conditions for attracting manufacturing.

Conclusions

To maintain strength in a particular industry a county wants concentrations of
employment in that industry, yet it also wants a surrounding diverse industrial base. Diversity
tends to raise productivity and hence employment in a city's particular concentration of
production and export activity.

In this process history is critical. Increased concentrations of own industry activity appear
to affect employment levels for five years afterwards and longer for high tech industries. For

diversity measures, affects appear to persist beyond the seven year horizon examined in this
paper for high tech industries. Given the rapid adjustment to contemporaneous market scale or

30

demand, these long lags and the lag pattern suggest a presence of dynamic externalities.
Conditions four or more years ago typically have a greater direct impact than conditions last
year, suggesting the presence of an aging, maturing, and/or transmission mechanism..

31

References

Abdel-Rahman, H.M. and M. Fujita (1991), "Specialization and Diversification in a
System of Cities," University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
Barro, R. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1991), "Convergence Across States and Regions,"

Brookings Paners on Economic Activity, 1.
Becker, G.S. and K.M. Murphy (1992), "The Division of Labor, Coordination

Costs and Knowledge," Ouarterlv Journal of Economics, 107, 1137-1160.
Blanchard, 0. and L. Katz (1992), "Regional Evolutions," Brookings Paoers on
Economic Activity, 1, 1-75.
Brundy, J. and D.W. Jorgenson (1971), "Efficient Estimation of Simultaneous

Equations Systems Using Instrumental Variables," Review of Economics and Statistics,
53, 207-224.
Canton, D. (1983), "The Location and Employment of New Firms," Review of

Economics and Statistics, 65,440-449.
Dixit, A. and J. Stiglitz (1977), "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product

Diversity," American Economic Review, 67, 297-308.
Dunne, T., M.J. Roberts and L. Samuelson (1990), "The Growth and Failure of U.S.

Manufacturing Plants," Ouarterlv .Tournal of Economics.

Frost, J. (1994), "An Examination of Levin and Lin's Unit Root Test for Panel Data,"
Brown University mimeo.

Fujita, M. and H. Ogawa (1982), "Multiple Equilibria and Structural Transition

of Non-Monocentric Urban Configurations," Regional Science and Urban Economics,
16, 161-196.

32

Gardocki, B.C. and J. Baj (1985), "Methodology for Estimating Non-Disclosure in
County Business Patterns Data," Center for Governmental Studies, Northern Illinois

University, mimeo.
Glaeser, E., H. Kallal, J. Scheinkman and A. Schleifer (1992), "Growth in Cities,"

Journal of Political Economy.
Hayashi, F. (1992), "Comment," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 10,
15-17.

Heisley, R.W. and W.C. Strange (1990), "Matching and Agglomeration Economies

in a System of Cities," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 20, 189-2 12.
Henderson, J.V. (1994), "An Econometric Model of Industrial Location," .lournal of

Urban Economics.
Henderson, J.V., A. Kuncoro, and M. Turner (1992), "Industrial Development in
Cities," NBER Working Paper No. 4178.

Herzog, H.W. and A.M. Schlottmann (1991), (eds.) Industrial Location and Public
Policy, Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.

Holtz-Eakin, D., W. Newey, and H. Rosen (1988), "Estimating Vector Autoregressions

with Panel Data," Econometrica, 56, 1371-1395.
Hsaio, C. (1986), Analysis of Panel Data, Cambridge University Press.
Jacobs, Jane (1969), The Economy of Cities, Random House.
Jaffe, A.B., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson (1993), "Geographic Localization of

Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations," Ouarterlv Journal of

Economics.
Jovanovic, B. (1982), "Selection and the Evolution of Industry," Econometrica.
649-670.

33

Keane, M. and D. Runkle (1992), "On the Estimation of Panel Data Models with Serial

Correlation When Instruments Are Not Strictly Endogenous," Journal of Business and

Economic Statistics, 10, 1-9.
Levin, A. and C.F. Lin (1992), "Unit Root Tests in Panel Data," San Diego Discussion

Paper (92-23).
Miracky, W.F. (1992), "Technological Spillovers, the Product Cycle and Regional

Growth," MIT mimeo (November).

34

(.0028)
.019'
(.0027)
.018'
(.0028)
-.0086'
(.0027)
.00045
(.0022)

-.145'
(.030)

-.226'

-.196'

.034
(.027)
.0036
(.019)

15

16

14

13

(.030)

(.027)

.010'

(.090)

12

.021'
(.0083)

-.301'

Ii

Machinery
In (emp)
(In (emp))2

Al

.0059'
(.0026)
.0070'
(.0027)

-.071'

-.114'
(.025)

(.029)

(.031)

.0085'
(.0029)

(.0035)

.0097*

.033'
(.0040)

.053'
(.0089)

-.102'

(.037)

-.149'

(.038)

-.378'

(.075)

-.605'

Electrical Machinery
In (emp)
(In (emp))'

Lagged Own Industry Employment

Table

(.020)

-.059'

-.037
(.027)

(.028)'

-.276'

-.093
(.028)

.0058'
(.0026)

.0022
(.0032)

.024'
(.0029)

(.0030)

.0064'

(.0039)

.028'
-.394
(.038)

.031'
(.0062)
(.046)

-.501'

Primary Metals
In (empi
(In (emp))2

16

15

14

13

12

Ii
.018
(.0095)
.0073*
(.0033)
.0086*
(.0029)
.013*
(.0030)
-.0017
(.0028)
.0022
(.0025)

..288*
(.077)

.l36*
.l04*

.142*
(.027)
.022
(.025)
-.018
(.024)

Transport Equipment
In (emp)
(ln(emp))2

(.027)

(.029)

Al (Continued)

(.024)

-.158'

(.026)

.203*

(.022)

.132*

(.024)

.129*

(.028)

.36l*

(.062)

.260*

.016*
(.0028)

.019
(.0029)

.0090*
(.0027)

.0072
(.0026)

.026*
(.0031)

.094
(.0079)

Instruments
In (emp)
(In (emp))2

LaggedOwn Industry Employment

Table

16

15

14

13

12

Ii

10

.031

(.559)

(1.52)

555*

1.79
(.992)

-.117
(1.70)

.10.26*
(1.47)

-6.78'

.980
(1.27)

-.622
(.950)

.1.28*
(.504)

2.52*
(1.24)

.4.86*
(1.14)

.7.03*
(1.39)

(1.88)

-2.73
(1.55)

-.829
(.969)

(2.54)

2 .18

.9.32*
(2.21)

Primary Metals

6.10*
(1.43)

-2.67
(2.54)

-2.28
(2.50)

.685
(1.28)
-1.39
(2.00)

Electrical Machinery

Machinery

External Hirschman-HerfindahlIndex

Table A2

16

15

14

13

12

ii

10

-2.76
(1.49)
5Q4*
(1.33)

-3.26k

8.34*

-2.20
(1.90)
3.48
(2.30)
1.59
(1.98)

(.761)

.942*

(1.32)

.514
(1.29)

-2.08
(2.00)

(2.31)

4.18*
(1.99)

-.669
(2.50)

!I1trUmefltS

-7.41
(4.19)

8.97*
(3.84)

Transport Equipment

External Hirschman-Ilerfindahl index

Table A2 (Continued)

.040
(.171)
-.389
(.160)
.882*
(.193)

.498*
(.176)

-.126
(.110)
-.022
(.025)

.139*
(.025)

14

15

16

-.081

13

(.206)

.638*

(.124)

.056
(.135)

.160
(.280)
1.05*
(.438)

-.070
(.324)

(.251)

1 .05

12

Ii

10

Electrical Machinery

Machinery

Metro Area Employ(all other Industries)

Table A3

.0079
(.026)

.019
(.071)

(.166)

-.215

.333
(.186)

.304
(.199)

1.11*
(.345)

.268
(.271)

Primary Metals

.938*
(.194)

-.133

16

15

14

.129
(.238)

•.486*
(.217)

(.202)

.266
(.170)

.411*
(.185)

13

(.199)

.227
(.275)

(.207)

.301

(.174)

.695*

.567*

(.396)

2

- .669

.145*
(.364)

.168
(.482)

.509
(.428)

Instruments

Ii

10

Transport Equipment

Metro Area Employ(all other industries)

Table A3 (Continued)

.174*
(.072)
-.113
(.065)
-.265
(.074)
-.155
(.005)
.073
(.082)

-.061
(.042)
-.016
(.046)
-.057
(.063)
-.074
(.097)
..078
(.018)

12

13

14

16

15

(.075)

.214*

-.125
(.073)

.012
(.042)
.070
(.079)

Ii

10

Electrical Machinery

Machinery

Wages

Table A4

-.059
(.157)

..400*
(.162)

-.113
(.075)

-.083
(.070)

-.162
(.086)

..135
(.058)

(.047)

.011

Primary Metals

16

15

14

13

12

Ii

ID

.111

(.098)
.073
(.075)
-.072
(.096)
-.159
(.088)
1.16*
(.14)

.155
(.088)

.121

-.087
(.075)
-.018
(.086)
-.041

(.112)
-.329
(.171)
..462*
(.146)

(.095)

.031

Instruments

(.126)

.054
(.079)

Transport Equipment

Wages

Table A4 (Continued)

-.233'
(.059)

-.237'
(.049)

-.160'
(.062)
-.080
(.061)
-.035
(.056)

.080
(.074)

-.159'
(.055)

-.142'
(.055)

-.220'

-.106
(.061)

12

13

16

15

(.074)

(.092)

14

-.266'

(.124)

Electrical Machinery

-.041

Ii

Machinery

InternalHlrschman-HerflndahlIndex

Table A5

-.056
(.065)

-.099
(.068)

(.058)

.025

.147'
(.056)

-.026
(.081)

-.066
(.148)

Primary Metals

16

15

14

13

12

Ii

.098*
(.048)
-.038

.093
(.070)
-.090
(.070)

(.069)

.147*

-.095
(.065)

.033
(.062)

-.085
(.065)

-.055
(.049)

(.051)

.172*

(.04 5)

.216*
(.108)

Instruments

333*
(.170)

Transport Equipment

Internal Hirschman-HertindahlIndex

Table A5 (Continued)

-.059
(.111)
-.086
(.052)
-.0011
(.0027)

-.117
(.115)
.097
(.057)

-.0011
(.0024)

a0

(.0016)

.0037*

.019

•.205*
(.060)

-.188k
(.083)

a3

a3

..252*
(.064)

2.15*
(.593)

2.03*
(.839)

a2

.0025
(.0015)

.5.98*
(1.64)

(.0023)

.0055*

(.020)

..681*
(.186)

3•59*
(1.18)

-4.58
(2.35)

.4.28*
(1.54)

ui

(1.63)

1 •75*

(.0035)

.0046

(.030)

-.051

.076
(.098)

-.304
(1.66)

4.02*
(1.61)

-14.75
(4.36)

11.54
(3.20)

Transport Equipment

(b) Internal HHI

Electrical Machinery

-3.52
(1.84)

Machinery

ao

Primary Metals

(a) External HHI

Almon Lag Structure for DiversIty Indices

Table A6

.0034'
(.0011)

(.0028)

-.013k

(.041)

-.063

.129
(.091)

(.125)

•547*

(1.05)

4.09*

3.68
(1.89)

Instruments

