                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ANTICIPATIONS OF FOREIGN
                            EXCHANGE VOLATILITY AND
                                BID-ASK SPREADS




                                      Shang-Jin Wei




                                 Working Paper No. 4737




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1994


An earlier version of this paper was issued as an International Finance Discussion Paper.
Number 409, August 1991, by the Federal Reserve Board. I have received very helpful
comments from Stanley Black, Paul Boothe, Hall Edison, Jeffrey Frankel, David Gordon.
Dale Henderson, Takatoshi Ito, Steven Icamin, Maurice Obstfeld, David Parsley, Kenneth
Rogoff, David Romer, Andrew Rose, Richard Stern and seminar participants at the University
of Virginia and the Federal Reserve Board. I alone am responsible for any errors in the
paper. This paper is part of NBER's reseamh program in International Finance and
Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4737
                                                                                 May 1994
                              ANTICIPATIONS OF FOREIGN
                              EXCHANGE VOLATILITY AND
                                  BID-ASK SPREADS


                                         ABS1'RACr

       The paper studies the effect of the market's perceived exchange rate volatility on bid-ask

spreads. The anticipated volatility is extracted from currency options data. An increase in the

perceived volatility is found to widen bid-ask spreads. The direction of the effect is consistent

with an option model of the spread, but the magnitude is smaller. Anincrease in trading volume

of spot exchange rates also widens the spread. The omission of the trading volume, however,

does not bias the estimate of the effect of the volatility on the spreads. Althoughthe spread-

volatility relation implied by the option model of the spread is close to linear, some foim of

nonlinearity can still be detected from the data.




Shang-Jin Wei
Kennedy School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
                                                 1


1. Introduction



        Bid-ask spreads and other microstructure of foreign exchange trading are understudied.

Notable exceptions are Glassman (1987), Boothe (1988), Black(1989) and Lyons (1993). Among

those studies on the bid-ask spreads, the a post standard deviations in foreign exchange rates

are typically used as a measure of exchange risk1. Presumably, when one talks about the effect

of exchange rate risk on the transaction costs, one is thinking of the effect of the market's

nerception of the risk. Therefore, an important extension to be made is to examine directly the

impact of the market's ex ante perceptions of exchange rate risk on the bid-ask spread.

       This paper makes four main contributions. First, we derive a theoretical relationship

between the spread and market's anticipated volatility. The key idea is to express the spread as

a portfolio of options. Copeland and Galai (1983) also relate the spread to options. However,

their model is an equilibrium one, and the spread in their model depends on, among other

things, the percentage of traders who are liquidity traders. In contrast, our model links the

spread with options from a different perspective. Consequently, we are able to derive a spread-

volatility relation without the need to specify an equilibrium model.

       Second, we are able to examine the effect of the market's & awe anticipation of

exchange rate volatility on the bid-ask spread, as opposed to the effect of the a post exchange

rate volatility that has been examined in previous papers. This measure of the market's

anticipated volatility is extracted from observed option data on foreign currencies. The data used

in the paper cover four major exchange rates: the British pound, German mark, Japanese yen

and Swiss Franc, all in units of the U.S. dollars, from February of 1983 to February of 1990.
                                                  2
 Because we   have a measure of the market's perceived risk, we can decompose cx post exchange

 rate volatility into anticipated and unanticipated components. Then, we can examine whether

 the two components have differential effects on the bid-ask spread.

        Third, previous studies acknowledge the potentially important impact of trading volume

on bid-ask spreads, but do not examine it directly because of a laàk of data on spot market

trading volume. This paper utilizes actual trading volume of the spot exchange rate for one of

the currencies, and thus is able to assess explicitly the effect of trading volume on the

spread-uncertainty relationship.

        Fourth, the relationship between the bid-ask spread and exchange rate volatility could,

in principle, be a non-linear one. Previous studies either have run linear regressions without

justifying the choice of functional form, or have not dealt with possible non-linearities beyond

taking some simple (and arbitrary) transformations of the variables in linear regressions. The

spread-volatility relation in our model appears to be nonlinear in its general form, but the results

of simulations turn out to be very close to linear. This may provide a theoretical justification for

the linear functional specifications. However, nothing guarantees that the empirical relationship

is indeed linear. Therefore, we also apply a nonparamethc method to study the possible

nonlinearity in the spread-volatility relationship.

       The next section provides a simple theoretical model demonstrating that the spread tends

to widen as the market's perceived exchange rate volatility goes up. Section 3 describes the data

source and the methods used in extracting the market's anticipated volatility and in computing

the percentage bid-ask spreads. Section 4 reports the empirical findings (linear regressions)

concerning the effect of anticipated volatility on the spreads. The empirical effects of
                                                 3

unanticipated volatility and spot trading volumes are also discussed. Section 5 is devoted to

studying the nonlinearity in the spread-volatility relationship. In particular, the locally weighted

regression technique is used to determine whether the functional relation between the spread and

volatility varies with volatility.   Concluding remarks are provided in Section 6.



2. Theoretical discussions



       A bid quote is the price at which customers can sell foreign currency to a specialist,

whereas an ask quote is the one at which customers can buy foreign currency from a specialist.

The difference between the ask and bid quotes is the spread. The bid-ask spread is an important

part of transactions costs for international trade and investment A widening of the spread

decreases the profit of a firm and thus discourages it from engaging in international trade or

investment (See Appendix A for a formal demonstration).

       What are the effects of increased exchange rate volatility on the bid-ask spread itself?

There have been several qualitative reasons proposed for the determination of the spread. Part

of the spread covers overhead costs (e.g. staffing and office supplies) incurred by specialists.

To analyze how the perceived exchange rate volatility can affect the bid-ask spread, Black(1989)

develops a simple model in which the spread is proportional to the ratio of exchange rate

volatility to expected trading volume. To reach this result, it is assumed that liquidity traders'

buy and sell orders have the same mean, that speculative traders' demand functions are exactly

linear in the prices and that dealers are risk-neutral. These assumptions appear stringent

       The model in this paper relates the spread to a portfolio of options. Copeland and
                                                  4

Galai(1983) pioneered the use of options theory in a model of bid-ask spreads. But my model

and theirs link the spread with options from different perspectives.             In Copeland and
Galai(1983), the offer to buy at the bid by a specialist is thought of as a put option with the

strike price equal to the bid quote. Similarly, to a trader, the offer to sell at the ask is a call

option with the strike price equal to the ask quote. Because the options always have positive

values, and because the announcement of the bid and ask quotes are free of charge, the bid and

ask quotes yields a net loss to a specialist. To derive a spread-volatility relation, Copeland and

Galal need to specify an equilibrium model with heterogeneous traders. The specialist's loss

from offering options (the bid and ask quotes) without charge can be compensated by the

expected gains from trading with liquidity traders. In this story, assumptions on the preferences

of specialists, speculators and liquidity traders are needed. The resulting spread-volatility

relationship depends, among other things, on the proportion of traders that are liquidity traders

and the preferences of the market participants.

       This paper presents a second way of linldng the spread with options. I will argue that the

size of a spread is equal to the values of a call option and a put option. In contrast with the first

view, the call option here has a strike price equal to the bid quote, and the put option has a

strike price equal to the ask quote. In this story, the model is completed by using the options

analogy alone. Because options are priced by a no-arbitrage argument, this model thus eliminates

the need to specify an equilibrium model.

       As in any economic model, to make the idea explicit, I have to make some audacious

assumptions. First, assume that the central rate of exchange, E, is some "true" exchange rate.

Information about this true rate is revealed to specialists only through trading. In other words,
                                                   5

specialists do not have private information. Second, when a specialist announces a pair of bid

and ask quotes, she is committed, for the next T minutes, to buy at the bid and sell at the ask.

She can only change the quotes after some transaction?.

           To illustrate the idea, let us look at Figure i. A customer in the foreign exchange market

may view a specialist's bid and ask quotes as options. Consider someone who buys a foreign

currency at the ask, E+O.Ss. She makes a profit (in domestic currency) as E goes up, and loses

money as E goes down. However, her loss has a lower bound, because she can sell the foreign

currency back to the specialist at the bid, E-O.5s, as long as the bid-ask quotes have not been

changed. The payoff diagram for this position resembles that of a call option.

           Consider now a trader who has just sold a unit of foreign currency to a specialist at the

bid, E-O.5s. Her profit increases linearly as E does down, and decreases linearly as E goes up.

Her loss also has a lower bound, since she can buy back the foreign currency from the specialist

at the ask, E+O.5s. This is an implicit put option'.

           In Figure 1 the dotted line and the solid line are the payoff diagrams of the associated

call and put options, respectively. The value of the announcement of the bid-ask quotes is equal

to the call, plus the put, and minus the spread. We know that the announcement is free of

charge. Therefore, the bid-ask spread must equal to the values of the call and put options.

           To summarize, announcing a pair of bid and ask prices by a specialist is equivalent to

selling,   for the price of s, a put option with a strike price equalto the ask quote, E+s12, and

simultaneously selling a call option with a strike price equal to the bid quote, E-s12.

       In order to derive an explicit expression, more assumptions are needed. (I) I treat the

spread as a (short-lived) European option. I have already assumed earlier that when a spread
                                                        6
 is announced, the specialist is committed to do transactions at theses prices for the next T

 minutes. Here, I assume further that T is exogenous. (2) The effective domestic and foreign

 interest rates, for these T minutes, are zero. (3) Other assumptions of the Black-Scholes formula

 are satisfied.

         The assumption of an exogenous T is motivated to apply the Black-Scholes formula. In

 examining the spread-volatility relation numerically, we will vary the value of T from 10
 seconds to 5 minutes. They do not make a qualitative difference. The assumption on zero interest

 rates is not essential either, since the qualitative feature of the model is preserved with nonzero

 interest rates.

         Let p=s/E be the percentage bid-ask spread, and a be the market anticipated exchange

rate volatility over the time interval between when the bid-ask spread is announced and when

it is changed. Then, we have the following result.



Lemma: (The oDtion model of the suread The relationship between thepercentage spread, gt,

and   the anticipated volatility, a, is given by the following equation:
           =   (N(h1)-Q-p/2)NQi,)) + {N(h1)-l-(1 +p/2)[N(h0)-l]}
where              h4         [-ln(1-p/2)+O.5o'T]I[o'P-5J,

                   h4     =
                   h,,1
                          = [-ln(I +p12)+0.5a2TJ/[aT°33,

                   h,,2 = [-ln(1+p/2)-O.5a2TJ/[o'l°-'],

and N(.) is the cumulative distribution function of a normal random variable.
                                                 7

[Proof]: Let C and P be the valueof the call and put options associated with the bid-ask spread.

From figure 1, we see that O=C+P-s. Or, p=s/E=CIE + P/E. The terms in the first curly

bracket is the Black-Scholes' value of the call option (divided by the central rate of exchange

E), and the term in the second curly bracket is the Black-Scholes' value of the put option.

       The lemma gives at least two impressions. First, we may think that an increase in

perceived volatility widens the spread since the values of both the call and the put options are

increasing functions of the volatility. However, this result is not as straightforward as the above.

The complication arises from the fact that the the percentage spread, p, also appears on the right

hand side of the equation; it is not obvious that the two are necessarily positively associated.

Second, the relationship between the spread and the perceived volatility, in principle, is
non-linear. In fact, no simple transformation (e.g., logarithmic transformation) is able to make

the relationship linear.

       Since it is difficult to express p as an explicit function of the volatility, we turn to

numerical simulations. Based on the lemma, for a given value of p, the value of the volatility

can be solved by the Newton-Raphson method. Appendix A records the values of volatility

corresponding to different values of the percentage spreads. The range of the percentage spread

is chosen so that it encompasses the actual range of the spreads observed in the data. We try

four different values for the duration of the bid and ask offers: five minutes, two minutes, thirty

seconds and ten seconds.

       Figure 2 plots the results of the simulation. First, we note that the spread is a
monotonically increasing function of the volatility. In other words, the option model of the

spread does imply that the spread unambiguously widens as the anticipated volatility increases.
                                                8

Second, perhaps more surprisingly, the relationship between the spread and the volatility is close

to linear. This provides a theoretical justification for using linear regressions in the empirical

sections. However, whether there is a nonlinear relationship in the data will be formally

investigated later in the paper.



3. Estimating the anticipated volatility and bid-ask spreads


        The key variable that we desire to obtain is a measure of the market's & ante estimate

of one-month-ahead exchange rate volatility. It is usually difficult to obtain a measure of market

expectations. However, based on observed option trading on foreign currencies, we can get a

reasonably good estimate. Lyons(1989) and Wei and Frankel(1991) have also extracted such

measures for purposes which are different from each other and different from the current paper.



       The basic idea is the following. To price a currency option properly, market participants

use some version of the Black-Scholes formula. The inputs needed for the formula are

time-to-maturity of the contract, interest rates in the two countries, the current spot exchange

rate and an estimate of the future volatility over the lifetime of the option contract. The market

estimate of the volatility is the only variable unknown to an econometrician. All the other inputs

are readily available from newspapers or the indenture of the option contracts. By solving a

nonlinear function, we can obtain an estimate of the market's anticipated volatility of the
exchange rate in question.

       We obtain these measures of anticipated volatility for four exchange rates: British pound,
                                                 9
German mark, Japanese yen and Swiss franc, all in units    of US dollars. The estimation method

and thejusfification for the choice of the option formula are detailed in Wei and Frankel(1991).

The source of the data is described in Appendix B. Because the option contracts, by regulation,

always expire on the third Wednesday of each month, we chooseoptions that are written on the

third Wednesday of each month. The implied standard deviation (isd) from the options can be

thought of as a market's anticipation of the average daily volatility over the lifetime of the

contract (typically a month in this sample). The estimates of the market's anticipated volatility

are plotted in Figure 3a.

       The realized volatility is computed from daily exchange rates from the third Wednesday

of the month to the third Wednesday of the following month. It is the sample standard deviation
of the changes in logarithms of daily exchange rates. Such a measure of realized volatility is

consistent with the definition of the market anticipated volatility that is used in option pricing.

The unanticipated volatility is the difference between the realized volatility (rsd) and the

anticipated one of the corresponding month. The realized volatility for the four currencies are

plotted in Figure 3b.

       The percentage bid-ask spreads for the four exchange rates are the actual bid-ask spreads

as percentages of the ask uote. Alternatively, we could compute the bid-ask spreads as

percentages of the middle rates; it makes little difference with respect to the empirical results

in the next two sections. The data are the closing quotes in the London market on the day the

options are written. Figure 4 plots the percentage bid-ask spreads. By inspecting Figure 4, we

suspect that one of the observations (August 17, 1988) on the spread for the dollar/pound rate

may be an outlier. In the empirical testing, we will make sure that no result is entirely driven
                                                  10

 by this single observation.



 4. EmpIrical results: Does volatility widen the spread?



LH.A. Market anticipated volatility and bid-ask spreads

        To examine the effect of anticipated volatility on percentage bid-ask spreads, we run the

following regressions:



          psprea4=c+bisd+;

where pspread is the percentage bid-ask spread, and isd is the market perceived one-month-ahead

exchange rate volatility implied by the currency options data.

          Note that such a regression does not prove or disprove any causal relationship, bin does

indicate correlation, which is what the model predicts. To take advantage of the similar

structure of the regressions for the four exchange rates, I use the seemingly unrelated regression

(SUIt) technique. The basic results are summarized in Table I. Panel A presents the estimation

results when no cross-equation parameter constraints are imposed. We first note that the
intercept terms for the four currencies axe all positive and statistically significant. Glassman

(1987) argues that the intercept gives an estimate of the cost-overhead component of the

transaction cost, which includes costs of office supplies, staff salaries etc., that are not directly

related to risks in foreign exchange transactions. The point estimates of theintercepts range from

0.032 per cent for the German mark to 0.057 per cent for the Swiss Franc. [A fomal chi-square
                                                 11

test rejects the null hypothesis that the intercepts are equal.)

         Second, the slope estimates are positive for all the four currencies. They are statistically

significant for the British pound and Japanese yen at the five percent level, for the German mark

at the ten percent level. This indicates that, as our model predicts, increases in the perceived

volatility of the exchange rates are associated with widening of the bid-ask spreaxls. As noted

before, one of the observation on the bid-ask spread for the pound (August 17, 1988) appears

to be an outlier. We carry out an 01_S regression for the pound omitting this observation and

find that the sign and significance of the estimates are not changed, although the point estimate

becomes slightly smaller. This means that the result for the pound in Panel A is not driven by

that one observation. We omit the result of this regression to save space.

         Since the point estimates of the slope coefficient in the unconstrained estimation are

quite close, we perform an explicit WaJd test on the hypothesis that all four slope parameters

are equal. Under the null, the statistic has a CM-square distribution with 3 degrees of freedom.

The critical value at the five percent level is7.815. Since the value of the statistic in the sample

is only 0.956, we do not reject this null hypothesis. In fact, three individual t-tests also fail to

reject pairwise equality of the four slope parameters. To improve the efficiency of our
estimation, we redo the SUR procedure after imposing the restriction that the slope parameters

are equal in the four equations. The results are in Panel B of Table 1. The point estimate for

the coefficient associated with the market's anticipated volatility is 2.670, and is statistically

different from zero at the five percent level.

         Before October 1985, option contracts were only available at four maturity dates: the

third Wednesdays in March, June, September and December. The monthly series of the market's
                                                   12

 anticipated volatility thus contain observations from contracts with overlapping time periods.

 This could cause serial correlation in the error terms of the above regressions. To make sure

 that this does not contaminate our results, we redo the SUR estimation in the subsample that

 excludes data from overlapping contracts. Again, because a CM-square test fails to reject the

 hypothesis that the slope parameters are the same for the four currencies, we impose this

 constraint in our estimation. The results are reported in Panel C. As before, the slope

 parameter for the market's anticipated volatility is positive and statistically significant at the five

 percent level. The point estimate (3.242) becomes somewhat larger.

          We repeat the above regressions after taking a logarithmic transformation of the

anticipated volatility. This serves two purposes. First, it indicates whether the spread-volatility

relationship in table 1 is robust to a small perturbation of the model specification. Second, it

facilitates the quantitative interpretation of the estimates. That is to say, we are able to say by

how much the bid-ask spread changes in response to a one percent increase in the market's

perceived volatility.

          Table 2 presents the results of this exercise. In the unconstrained SIJR estimation, the

parameters associated with the market's anticipated volatility are positive for all four currencies

and statistically different from zero at the ten percent level for three of theexchange rates. A
Chi-square test once again fails to reject the hypothesis that the slope paramters are the same in

the four equations. [The value of the Wald statistic is 0.717, well below the critical value at the

five percent level.] When this parameter constraint is imposed in the estimation, the slope

parameter has a point estimate of 0.0151 and is statistically different from zero at the five

percent level. Based on this point estimate, we conclude that a one percent increase in the
                                                13

market's perceived exchange rate volatility is associated with a widening of the bid-ask spread

by about 0.0 15 percentage points.

         As far as the direction of the spread-volatility association is concerned, the positive

estimates of the slope parameter in Table 2 are good news for the option model of the spread.

We now go one step further to compare the magnitude of the association implied by the lemma

with these point estimates. The second half of Appendix A computes the theoretical response

of the spread to changes in volatility. When the anticipated volatility increases by one unit, the
increment of the spread varies from 69.67 percentage points, if the spread is assumed to last for

five minutes, to 12.73 percentage points, if the spread lasts for 10 seconds. In comparison, the

actual response in Table I is between 2 to 4 percentage points. Therefore, the model seems to

have overpredicted the response.

         Examine now the percentage response reflected in the estimation in logarithms. For

a one percent increase in the volatility, the model predicts that the spread widens by about 0.084

percentage points. According to Table 2, the actual increase in the spreads is about 0.015

percentage point. Again, the model has oveipredicted, though the difference between the

theoretical and empirical responses is much smaller. Of course, economic models should not

be taken too literally. Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind that the option model of the

bid-ask spread does not capture all the aspects regarding the spread-volatility relationship.

         It should be pointed out that the market-anticipated-volatility could have been measured

with error5. This error-in-variable problem can potentially give rise to a downward bias in the

estimated response of the spread to a given change in the anticipated volatility. Unfortunately,

this problem is not resolved in this paper as we not aware of any good instruments for the
                                                 14

 anticipated volatility.   Nevertheless, we may derive some sense of plausibility for the
 measurement error to be an explanation for the gap between the option model and our point

 estimates.

          Suppose our measure of the anticipated volatility (or its logarithm) is equal to the true

 anticipated volatility (or its logarithm) plus an error term which is independent of the error term

 in the original equation and of the true volatility, then the size of the bias is positively related

 to the ratio of the variance of the measurement error and the variance of the true anticipated

 volatility (See, for example, Johnston, 1984, p430). If the measurement error is large such that

 its variance is the me as that of the anticipated volitility, then the true response of the spread

 to a given change in the volatility would be twice as large as the point estimates here. This

 would still be smaller than the prediction of the option model. Indeed, in order for the model-

predicted spread-volatility relationship to match up with our point estimates in Table 2, the

variance of the measurement error is required to be at least four times as big as the variance

of the true anticipated volatility. This seems implausibly large. To summarize, the option

model does predict correctly the sign of the spread-volatility relationship, but may overpredict

the magnitude of the association.

         One may worry about the impact of possible non-normal distributions of the error

terms. We note first that in a large sample, the slope estimator is consistent andasymptotically

normal. In a small sample, however, nothing guarantees a priori the performance of the

estimator. Wei and Frankel (1991, Table 5) have conducted simulation exercises to examine the

effect of nonnormality on the point estimate and size of the t-test. With a sample size of 85,

they have considered a wide range of non-normal distributions for the error term, the skewness
                                                   15

parameter of the error term varying from -6.2 to 6.2, the kurtosis parameter from 3 to 113.

Even with this wide range of non-normality, the point estimate of the slope parameter and the

struea size of the i-test in an OLS regression are hardly affected. This indicates that our results

here are not likely to be an artifact of non-normal error terms.



Ill. Anticipated versus unanticipated volatility

         Given a measure of the market's a ante anticipation of volatility, we can decompose

the a post exchange rate volatility into anticipated and unanticipated components. The
difference between the & post volatility and the market's anticipation is defined to be the

unanticipated volatility. With this decomposition, we can examine their possibly differential

effects on the bid-ask spreads. One expects that the effect of exchange rate volatility comes

entirely from the anticipated component, since the dealers should choose bid-ask spreads based

on their perception of exchange rate volatility in the near future. We first run the following type

of regression:



         pspread, = c + b1 isd + b2 (rsd+risd.) + ç



where pspreadis the percentage bid-ask spread on day I, isd1 is the market's anticipation on day

 of the one-month-ahead exchange rate volatility, nd÷1 the a post volatility of the following

month starting from day I. The results are in Table 3.

         Panel A of Table 3 presents the result of an unconstrained estimation. The point

estimates of the intercept terms and the slope parameters are quite close to the corresponding
                                                    16

 ones in Table 1. The parameter estimates of the unanticipated volatility are not statistically

 different from zero for any exchange rate, as expected.

             A Wald test is performed on the hypothsis that the two slope parameters are the same

 across the four equations. The statistic has a Chi-square distribution with 6 degrees of freedom.

 The value of the statistic in the sample is 2.352, which is well below the critical value at the five

percent level (12.59). Hence, the null hypothesis is not rejected.

             In Panel B, the two slope parainters are restricted to be equal across the four equations.

The slope parameter for the unanticipated volatility is not statistically different from zero, while

that for the anticipated volatility is 2.393 and significant. Panel C reports the estimation result

over the subsample that excludes contracts with overlapping maturities. [A Chi-square test fails

to reject the hypothesis that the slope parameters are the same for the four currencies for this

subsample.J The qualitative results are the same as in Panel B, although the point estimate for

the anticipated volatility is slightly larger (2.990).

          We repeat this set of regressions with logarithmic transformation of the right-hand-side

variables:

         pspread =      c   + b1 logçisdj + b2 [log(rsd,1)-log(isdJ] + ;
The results are reported in Table 4.          In the unconstrained SUR estimation, none of the

parameters for the unanticipated volatility has any effect on the bid-ask spreads at even the

twenty percent level. In comparison, all four parameters for the anticipated volatility are

positive and two of them are significantly different from zero at the ten percent level. In the

two constrained regressions over the whole sample and over the subsample of non-overlapping

observations, the parameters for the unantieipate4l volatility are not different from zero at even
                                                  17

the twenty percent level, while the parameters for the anticipated component are statistically

greater than zero at the five percent level. Based on the constrained SUR estimations, we

conclude that a one percent increase in the anticipated volatility widens the bid-ask spread by

about 0.015 to 0.016 percentage points.

          Previous studies on the effect of volatility typically use &post volatility as a proxy for

market's anticipated volatility. Doing.so would not alter point estimate of slope parameter if

market's anticipated volatility is an unbiased estimate of the & post realized volatility.
Unfortunately, Wei and Frankel(1991) have shown that the unbiasedness hypothesis is rejected

for the four exchange rates. Therefore, the magnitude of the effect of the market's anticipated

volatility on the bid-ask spread need not be reflected by the point estimate of the parameter

associated with measures of ex post volatility.



rn.C. The effect of trading volume on bid-ask spread

         The literature suggests that, in theory, the trading volume of spot exchange rates has

an effect on the bid-ask spread. Most suggest that the relationship should be negative in the long

run(Copeland and Galai, 1983; and Black, 1989), although it could be positive in the short

run(Cope!and and Galai, 1983).

         Due to lack of the data, few previous empirical studies have actually included the spot

trading volume in their regressions. Glassman(1987, footnote 4) even suggests that "such data

probably will never be available since the trading does not take place in a centralized

marketplace and since banks resist revealing what they perceive to be confidential information

about their business". Interestingly, spot trading volume is available for the interbank yen/dollar
                                                 18

 trading in Tokyo. The data is obtained from Nihon Kazai Shibun (Japanese Economic Daily).

 This provides a chance to examine directly the impact of the spot trading volume on the spreads.

          In her study, Glassman(1987) cleverly uses the volume of currency futures trading at

 the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as a proxy for the volume of spot currency trading. She finds

 that the coefficient estimate on the proxy of spot volume is generally positive. The question is

how well the trading volume of the futures contracts approximates that of spot trading. As noted

by Cilassman herself(1987,p482), the growth rate of the futures trading was more than 200%

higher than that of the spot trading during the period 1977-1983. Consequently, the movement

of the two may diverge substantially from each other. Therefore the effect of spot trading

volume may not be adequately reflected by estimates derived from futures trading volume.

          Black (1989) uses three years of annual data on spot trading volume of seven

currencies: 1980, 1983 and 1986. He then calculates the annual average of the daily spread and

the annual standard deviation of daily percentage changes for these three years. With a small

sample of 21 observations, the spot trading volume variable enters a regression of the spread

on volatility with a negative sign and a t-statistic equal to 1.31. The sign of the volume variable

is opposite to what Glassman (1987) obtained.

         One may want to improve the Black's result for two reasons. First, the sample in his

study is very limited. Second, the interaction among the spread, volatility and trading volume

is likely to be short-run in nature, and may not be adequately reflected in annual average data.

         With seven years of monthly data on the actual spot trading volume, this paper hopes

to provide more insights on the issue. It should be clear that the data in this section have their

own limitations. The main one is the slight mismatching in time and space for the spread (from
                                                 19
London market) and volume (from Tokyo market) variables. The maintained assumption here

is that the spot trading volumes are highly positively correlated across the major dollar/yen

markets. The following results should be cautiously interpreted with this qualification in mind.

         Table 5 presents the results of regressions for the Japanese yen, with the spot trading

volume included as an additional explanatory variable. To avoid possible simultaneity problem,

each regression is also nm with one month lagged values of the trading volume used as the

regressor. Panel A reports the estimation results with the anticipated volatility and spot trading

volume in levels. The parameter estimate for the trading volume is about 0.00013 to 0.00015.

It is statistically significant at the ten percent level for the whole sample with the lagged trading

volume and significant at the fifteen or twenty percent levels in other instances.

         Panel B reports the estimation with the anticipated volatility and trading volume in

logarithms. The parameter estimates are positive and statistically different from zero at the

fifteen or twenty percent levels. These results offer some support for the positive association

between the spread and volatility and suggest that using futures volume as a proxy does give an

qualitatively correct answer6. Based on Panel B, a one percent increase in the trading volume

leads to a widening of the spread by approximately 0.005 percentage point. This estimate of the

effect of the volume appears much larger than the estimate obtained using futures volume as a

proxy for the spot volume (Olassman, 1987, Table 1).
         Another thing that we can learn from Table 5 relates to the effect of omitting the spot

trading volume. The point estimates in Panels A        and B   of Table 5 are very close to the

corresponding ones in Tables 1 and 2 (the yen equations in the unconstrained SUR estimation

with the whole sample). Indeed, one cannot reject the hypotheses that they are the same at the
                                                  20
 five percent level. This suggests that the omission of the spot volume variable does not seriously

 bias   the parameter estimation for the market's anticipated volatility.



 5. EmpIrical results: Is there a nonlinear relation?



            The simulation exercise on our option model ofthe spread-volatility association implies

 a   nearly linear relationship. But the relationship in the actual data could potentially be non-

 linear. This section is devoted to investigating the possibility of nonlinearity. The basic tool
used is locally weighted regression.

            Locally weighted regression (LWR) is a procedure for fitting a regression surface to

data through smoothing in a moving avenge ftshion. Suppose jt = g(x) + e, where x is a

p-dimentional vector, and g is a smooth (and possibly nonlinear) function of the independent

variables. eisa normally distributed disturbance term. LWR
                                                                provides an estimate of g(x) at any

value C. The estimate of g at C uses a fraction, f, of observations whosex, values are closest

to xt. That is, a neighborhood of the independent variables is defined. Each point in the

neighborhood is weighted according to its distance from C; points close to C have large

weight, and points far from x have small weight. A linear or a quadratic function of the

independent variables is fitted to the dependent variable using weighted least squares with these

weights. The resulting estimate of g(x) is taken to be the value of this fitted function at C.

Cleveland and Devlin(1988) provide a comprehensive discussion of thisprocedure.

           If the functional relationship between the spread and the anticipated volatility depends

on the size of the volatility, LWR is ideal to capture this. In choosing the fraction of data, 1, to
                                                21

do the local fitting, one faces certain tradeoffs. As f approaches one, the estimated regression

surface tends to a regular linear regression. The sampling variability is reduced, but the chance

of detecting nonlinear relation is also reduced. On the other hand, as f moves away from one,

the flexibility of the regression (and thus the chance of finding the nonlinearity) increases, but

the influence of the sampling enors on the estimates also increases. To balance the flexibility

with low sampling errors, we pick f=O.98, 0.90 and 0.85 respectively.

         Figure 5 reports the smoothed scatter plots resulting from applying the LWR procedure.

Each plot has the estimates of the regression surface on the vertical axis and the anticipated

volatility on the horizontal axis. The four columns correspond to the four currencies, and the

three rows correspond to the three values of the I From Figure 5, we may notice two things.

Pint, the positive association between the spread and the anticipated volatility are profound.

Furthermore, for most of the data range, the relationship between the two appears to be linear.

This is certainly consistent with the option model of the bid-ask spread. However, there is some

systematic nonlinear pattern in at least three currencies. The slope of the curves appears to be

smal!er in the lower tails. This becomes more obvious as we choose smaller fractions of

observations to do the local fitting. Therefore, the bid-ask spreads become less elastic when the

anticipated volatility is low: Although there is no formal statistical test available for this

particular pattern of non-linearity, the similarity of the pattern in the three of the four exchange

rates suggests this to be a systematic phenomenon. This feature of the data is not well captured

by the option model the bid-ask spread (the lemma).
                                                22
6. Conclusions



          This paper studies whether and how the perception of foreign exchange risk may affect

the bid-ask spreads in foreign exchange market. In the theoretical section, we have derived a

model of the spread-volatility relationship which is solely based on a no-arbitrage argument.

Based on the model, numerical simulations indicate that an increase in the volatility widens the

spread. Furthermore, the spread-volatility relationship derived from the simulations is close to

linear.

          The empirical part of the paper has sought to make further contributions, The key
variable used in the empirical part is a measure of the market's anticipated volatility of foreign

exchange. It is extracted from observable currency option trading for four major currencies from

February of 1983 to February of 1990. There are three major empirical findings. First, the

bid-ask spread in foreign exchange does increase as the market's perception of the volatility

increases. This is consistent with the option model of the spread. Based on the constrained SUIt

estimations in Section 4, a one percent increase in the volatility typically leads to a widening of

the spread by 0.015 to 0.016 percentage points. This magnitude of the point estimate appears

to be smaller than that implied by the option model of the spread. Furthermore, the a post

realized volatility in foreign exchange rates is decomposed into unanticipated and anticipated

components. The regression results show that the unanticipated component of volatility does not

have any impact on bid-ask spreads.

          Second, the effects of spot trading volume on the spread and on the possible bias of the

volatility parameter are examined. The spot Wading volume (of dollar/yen) is positively related
                                                 23

with the bid-ask spread. The parameter for the volatility variable is unaffected by the addition

or omission of the trading volume variable. This suggests that omitting the trading volume may

not generate much bias in the estimation of the spread-volatility relation. These findings lend

direct support to the results by Glassman(l987), who uses a proxy for the spot trading volume.

          Third, the locally weighted regression technique is employed to investigate whether the

relationship between the spread and the volatility is nonlinear in the data. It is found that the

relationship is indeed nearly linear for most of the data range. However, nonlinearity is still

there: in plots of the regression surface against the volatility terms, the slopes for smaller values

of the volatility are smaller for three currencies. Therefore, when exchange rate volatility is

small in the market's perception, the bid-ask spreads are much less responsive to changes in the

volatility.
                                                 24
Appendix A:

Bid-ask Spread and Incentive to Engage in International Trade



         This appendix illustrates that a widening of the spread decreases the profit of a firm in

international trade, thus discouraging it from engaging in the trade. Consider a firm that uses

both domestic and foreign inputs and exports all of its output to the foreign market. Let Wdbe

the domestic price of the domestic input, p and w1 be the foreign price of the output and

imported input. Let E be the central rate of exchange (units of domestic currency per unitof

foreign currency) and s be the bid-ask spread. E-s/2 and E+s12 are the bid and ask prices

respectively. We use 7(5)       r(E, s, p, Wd, w) to denote the profit function of the firm.



Result: The profit function 7(s) is decreasing and convex in s.



[Proofj: Define (y,xj,x,) to be the profit-maximizing production plan for the exchange rate- price

vector (E,S,P,Wd,WJ, and (y',xf,x1') the corresponding optimal plan for (E,s',p,wd,wj. The

profit function is

         r(s)= (E-s/2)py - (E+s/2)w,x, -wJxd.
         It is easy to see that the profit function is decreasing in s. Let C >   s, then

         r(s) > (E-f/2)py - (E+s'I2)w1x -wdxd

                     (E-s'12)py' T (E+s'/2)w,x,' -wx1'
               = 7(5'), as was to be shown.
         The first inequality comes from the assumption that C >s. The second inequality
                                               25

follows from the definition of     x1',x') as the optima] plan for (E,S',P,Wd,W:).

         To show that     r(s) is also convex in s, define s"ts+(14)s', where O t I. We
need to show that r(?) S tx(s) + (1-t)r(s').

         By definition,

         r(s')= (E—s"/2)py" — (E+s"I2)w1x" — Wax;
              = t((E-s/2)py'-(E+sI2)wxf-w4x'] +

                 t((E-s12)py-(fl4-s/2)w1x,.-w4xJ + (I-t)[(E-s'/2)py'-(E--s'I2)wfx,wdxg']

              = ti(s) + (14)r(s), as was required.
                                                         26

Appendix B:

Simulation Results Based on the Option Model of the Spread.



            This appendix presents some simulation results on the relationship between the

percentage bid-ask spread and the anticipated exchange rate volatility.



   Al. Values of a (implied by the lemma) corresponding to values of p.

   percentage             volatility a          volatility.            volatility a              volatility a
   spread (lOOjt)         (r5    minutes)       (1=2 minutes)          (1=30 seconds)            (1=10 seconds)

      0.001               0.000014              0.000023               0.000045              0.000079
      0.005              0.000072               0.000114               0.000227              0.000393
      0.009              0.000129               0.000204               0.000409              0.000708
      0.04               0.000581               0.000899               0.001798              0.003147
      0.06               0.000871               0.001363               0.002725              0.004672
      0.08               0.00116                0.001817               0.003634              0.006294
      0.10               0.00145                0.002271               0.004542              0.007867
      0.12               0.00172                0.002725               0.005450              0.009440
      0.14               0.00201                0.003179               0.006359              0.01113
      0.16               0.00230                0.003597               0.007267              0.01259
      0.18               0.00259                0.004088               0.008261              0.01416
      0.20               0.00287                0.004542               0.009084              0.01573


   Notes:
      (I) Based on the lemma, for a given value of p, a value of, is computed using the Oauss•Rapbsoo method.
      (2) The volatility a is on per day basis. ,s is the percentage bid-ask spread.
      (3)1' is the time duration of the bidas1c spread. 5 minutes, 2 minutes, 30 seconds and 10 seconds
      correspond to r— iaas, limo, iasso and 1/8640, respectively.

   A2. The response of the spread p (implied by the lemma) to changes in volatility a.



   Aver,n rewonse of the nercentase spread (l00.i) to p one unit chanee in the volatility:
   Time length          cr—s minutes)        cr—i minutes)           (1=30 seconds)          (F— 10 seconds)
   Response             69.67                44.11                  22.05                    12.73

   Averne response   of the Dercentaie svread (IOOs) to a one percent cban2e in the volatilitr
   Time length           (F5 minutes)           (1—2 minutes)         (1'—30 seconds)        (flrlO seconds)
   Response              0.0848                 0.0839                0.0846                 0.0844
                                               27

Appendix C. Data sources

     The data on four exchange rates (the British pound, German mark, Japanese yen and Swiss
Franc, all in units of US dollars) are used in this paper. The sample periods for all the data are
from Februaiy of 1983 to Februaiy of 1990.

      Daily soot exchange rates and the bid-ask sprcads: The daily spot exchange rates used to
compute the realized standard deviations for the four currencies are the daily closing bid quotes
on the London Market. The units for the four exchange rates are units of US dollar per unit of
foreign currency.The monthly series of the percentage bid-ask spread is computed from the
closing quotes on the third Wednesday of each month on the London Market. The percentage
spread used in the paper is defined as 100(ask-bid)/ask. The source is Data Resources, Inc.

     Options data: The currency option data are used to extract the market's anticipated
one-month-ahead exchange rate volatility. They are the closing quotes on the third Wednesday
of each month on the Philadelphia Exchange. By regulation, currency options always expire on
the third Wednesday of each month. The source is various issues of the Wall Street journal. The
other aspects of the selection criteria of the option data are:
      (1) Call options that are closest to being at the money.
      (2) If possible, contracts that mature in the following month. Otherwise, contracts with the
next nearest maturity.

     Trading volume of the spot dollar/yen rate: The trading volume of the spot dollar/yen
exchange rate is the volume of interbank transactions in Tokyo on the third Wednesday of each
month. The source is Nikkei Telecom.
                                                 28

References




      Bates, David S., 1988, 'Pricing options under jump-diffusion processes,' Rodney L. White

Center working paper 37-38, October.

      Black, Stanley W., 1989, 'Transaction costs and vehicle currencies', iMP working paper,

WP/89196, November 21.

      Boothe, Paul, 1988, 'Exchange rate risk and the bid-ask spread: A seven country

comparison'. Economic Inquby, July, Vol.26, 485-492.

      Cleveland, Williams S. and   Susan     J. Devlin, 1988, 'Locally weighted regression: An
approach to regression analysis by local   fitting'. Journal of the American Statistical Association,

September. No.403. 596-610

      Copeland, Thomas and Dan Galai, 1983, 'Information effects on the bid-ask spread'.

Journal of Finance, December. Vol.38, No.5.

      Cilassman, Debra, 1987, 'Exchange rate risk and transactions costs: Evidence from bid-ask

spreads'. Journal of International Money and Finance, June. 479490.

      Glosten, lawrence, 1987, 'Components of the bid-ask spread and the statistical properties

of transaction prices', Journal offlnance, December. Vol.XLJJ, No.5.

     Lyons, Richard, 1988, 'Tests of the foreign exchange risk premium using the expected

second moments implied by option pricing'. Journal of Iruernational Money and Finance, March.

Vol. 7,No. 1,


     Lyons, Richard, 1993, 'Tests of microstructural hypotheses in the foreign exchange market,'

unpublished, U.C. Berkeley and NEER.
                                              29
     Johnston, John, 1984, Econometric Methods, third edition.   McGraw-Hilt.

     Melvin, Michael, and Kok-Hui Tan, 1991, 'Foreign exchange market bid-ask spreads and

the market price of social unrest,' unpublished.

     Merton, Robert, 1973, 'Theory of rational option pricing', Del/Journal of &onornics and

Management ScIence. No.4. 141-183.

     Wei, Shang-Jin and Jeffrey Frankel, 1991, 'Are the forecasts of exchange rate volatility

implicit in options prices excessively variable?' NBER Working Paper 3910, November.
                                   31'
   Endnotes

1. Lyons (1993) employs an unusual one—week—long data set of
transaction prices and inventories. His focus is on the effect of
inventory on prices as opposed to the spread-volatility
relationship.   Melvin and Tan (1991) examined possible links
between foreign exchange bid—ask speads and social unrest.

2. Many people may think that bid—ask spreads or transaction costs
in foreign exchange markets are economically unimportant. A recent
study by the European Economic Commission (1990) has challenged
this view. According to its estimate, the transaction costs are on
the order of 0.25—0.4% of EC's GDP per annum. The bulk of the
transaction costs comes from bid—ask spreads and other fees paid to
banks.

3. In reality, a specialist certainly does not have to trade at her
quoted bid and ask prices. However, refusing to trade at the quotes
too often is considered bad for reputation. Therefore, quoted bid
and ask prices are usually honored by a specialist.

4. An alternative interpretation replaces the central rate E in the
above story by the actual quotes. To obtain the result on the
implicit put, consider someone purchasing the foreign currency at
the ask quote. Her payoff depends on the movement of the next bid
quote (in stead of E). Just as in the previous story, the payoff
diagram resembles that of a call option with strike price equal to
the bid. Similarly, for someone selling foreign currency to the
specialist, her payoff depends on the movement of the next ask
quote (in stead of E). It is still a put option with the strike
price equal to the ask quote. When we evaluate the value of the
spread, the resulting spread—volatility relationship is exactly the
same as before. I thank David Gordon for pointing this out.

5. There are two principle reasons for the errors—in—measurement.
First, the relevant anticipated volatility for the theoretical
model is for the next few seconds or minutes after a given quote of
the bid and ask prices, not for the next month. On the other hand,
the error from this source is probably not very large since the set
of new information regarding the next few seconds or minutes is
likely to be close to that regarding the next 30 days.
      The second reson for the measurement error that the Black—
Scholes (or Garman—xohlhagan) formula may not be the correct model
to price currency options because the exchange rate volatility
could be stochastic. Bates (1988) discusses the option pricing
problem when the exchange rate follows a mixture of jump and
diffusion processes. While the Black—scholes formula     may not be
the best model to price currency options, there is one   defence for
our approach. Some financial consultants specializing    in currency
products as well as currency option traders have told    me that the
Black—Scholes model is what is relied upon by the option traders to
price currency options at least until recently. Regardless of what
is the best model to price options in theory, the Black-Scholes
formula is probably the most relevant model to use in order to back
out market-anticipated volatilities.
6.   It should be pointed out that if the volume variable is
measured with error, the point estimate could be downward biased.
      We have also run the regression with a specification similar
to that in Black(1989). The result is as follows (standard errors
are in parentheses):
      psprd, = 0.0276 + 7.50 isd)volume, ÷ 3.2771sd1+ 0.000Ilvoluin;
            (0.0108)   (22.69)   (1.979)   (0.00015)
                                                       adj.R2=0.034 DW=2.35
      This result is close to those in the text. In particular, the
volume variable enters with a positive sign. Qualitatively similar
results are obtained when one—period lagged value of the volume
variable is used or a subsample excluding observations from
overlapping contracts is used.
                         Table 1: Percentage spread and the anticipated volatility in levels
                                                 1983:2• 1990:2
                                           pspread, — C + b lad1 + ç


A. Unconstrained StIR estimation, whole ample         (N-85)

Currency                  c                           b                         adj.R2             DW

     BP                   0.0424'                     4.014'                      0.05             1.85
                         (0.0119)                    (1.878)
     CM                   0.0320'                     2.0721                      0.04             1.73
                         (0.0072)                    (1.080)
     3?                   0.0368'                     3.049'                      0.04             2.27
                          (0.0085)                   (1.455)
     SF                   0.0566'                     2.353                       0.02             1.71
                          (0.0120)                   (1.744)


B. Constrained SUR estimation, whole sample 04=85)


Currency                  c                           b                         adj.R'             DW

     BP                   0.0504'                     2.670*                      0.051            1.86
                          (0.0060)                   (0.791)
     CM                   0.0283'                                                 0.040            1.73
                         (0.0052)
     3?                   0.0388'                                                 0.042            2.27
                         (0.0046)
     SF                   0.0547'                                                 0.020            1.72
                         (0.0058)


C. Constrained StIR estimation, excluding data from contacts with overlapping maturities (N =64)


Currency                  c                           b                         adj.R2             DW

     HP                   0.0459'                     3.242'                      0.047            1.91
                         (0.0075)                    (1.018)
     GM                   0.0268'                                                 0.068            1.70
                                                               .

                         (0.0064)
     3?                   0.0364'                                                 0.048            1.50
                         (0.0055)
     SF                   0.0497'                                                 0.012            1.25
                         (0.0069)


Notes:
(1) Standard errors are in parentheses.
(2) ' denotes that the estimate is statistically different horn zero at the five percent level.
(3) S denotes that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the ten percent level.
                         Table 2: Percentage spread and the anticipated volatility in logazithms
                                                  1983:2 - 1990:2
                                              psprea4 — C + b Iog(isdj + e


  A. Unconstrained SUR estimation, whole sample (N-85)


  Currency                     c                              Lu
                                                                                   adj.R2            DW
                            0.2879'                           0.02349'               0.048            1.86
                            (0.0596)                       (0.01147)
       GM                   0.1156'                           0.01384'               0.048           1.73
                            (0.0360)                       (0.00671)
       IV                   0.1287'                         0.012471                0.030            2.26
                            (0.0425)                       (0.00718)
       SF                   0.1509'                         0.01558                 0.022            1.70
                           (0.0625)                        (0.01127)


 B. Constrained SUR estimation, whole sample (N 85)


 Currency                   c                              b                      adJ.R2            DW
       BP                   0.144'                         0.0151'                  0.048            1.87
                           (0.024)                        (0.0046)
       GM                   0.122'                                                  0.048            1.73
                           (0.024)
      71'                   0.133'                                                  0.030           2.25
                           (0.025)
      SF                    0.148'                                                 0.022             1.70
                           (0.024)


C. Constrained SUIt estimation, excluding data from contracts with overlapping maturities (N =64)


Currency                   c                              b                      .dJ.R2             DW
      EP                   0.146'                         0.0158'                  0.040     .      1.92
                          (0.028)                         (0.0054)
      GM                   0.128'                                                  0.077            1.71
                          (0.028)
     JY                    0.237'                                                  0.036            1.50
                          (0.029)
     SF                    0.150'                                                 0.010
                                                      .                                             1.25
                          (0.028)


Notes:
(1) Standard enors are in parentheses.
(2) • denotes that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the five percent level.
(3) I denotes that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the ten percent level.
             Table 3: Differential effects of the anticipated and unanticipated volatility on the spreads
                                                    1983:2- 1990:2
                                   psprtad1 — c + b isd + b3 (rid,,1 - isdj +e,


A. Unconstrained StIR estimation, whole sample (14-85)


Currency                   c                                                                adj.R'          DW

     BP                    0.044'                3.785%                -0.140                 0.051         1.86
                          (0.013)               (2.201)                (1.074)
     GM                    0.032'                2.152%                 0.824                 0.042         1.74
                          (0.008)               (1.267)                (0.487)
     iv                    0.043'                1.795                 -0.658                 0.053         2.29
                          (0.009)               (1.750)                (0.526)
     SF                    0.057'                2.370                  0.044                 0.021         1.70
                          (0.013)               (2.104)                (0.818)


B. Constrained SUR estimation, whole sample (N=85)


Currency                   c                                                                adj.R2          DW

     UP                    0.0500'               2.393'                -0.t95                 0.050         1.86
                          (0.0064)               (0.935)               (0.348)
     CM                    0.0280'                                                            0.038         1.74
                          (0.0056)
     JY                    0.0386'                                                            0.044         2.26
                          (0.0049)
     SF                    0.0543'                                                            0.021         1.72
                          (0.0062)


C. Constrained SUIt estimation, excluding data from contracts with overlapping maturities (P4=64)


Currency                   c                     b1                    b2                   adj.R'          DW

     UP                   0.0470'                2.990'               0.384                   0.051         1.92
                          (0.0081)              (1.106)               (0.656)
     CM                   0.0286'                                                             0.082         1.67
                                                                                  .
                          (0.0070)
     iv                   0.0380'                                                             0.038         1.50
                          (0.0062)
     SF                   0.0517'                                                             0.016         1.27
                          (0.0078)        •




Notes:
(1) Standanl errors are in parentheses.
(2) • denotes that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the five percent level.
(3) I denotes that the estimate is.statistically different horn zero at the ten percent level.
              Table 4: Differential effects of the anticipated and unanticipated volatility on the spreads
                                                    1983:2 - 199th2
                            pspnad, — c + b1 logfssd.) + b [log(rsd,,1) - log(isdJI + e,


 A. Unconstrained SUR estimation, whole sample (MaSS)


                            c                                                               adj.R2            DW

       BP                   0.188k                0.0231                0.0002                0.048            1.85
                           (0.064)               (0.012)               (0.004)
       GM                   0.127'                0.016'                0.001                 0.065            1.76
                           (0.036)               (0.007)               (0.001)
      JY                    0.107'                .0.010               -0.001                 0.039           2.32
                           (0.040)               (0.008)               (0.001)
       SF                   0.152'                0.016                 0.0002                0.022           1.70
                           (0.064)               (0.012)               (0.002)


 B. Constrained SUR estimation, whole sample (N —8$)


                                                                       b1                   adj.R'            DW

      BP                   0.149'                0.0160*               0.000!                 0.046           1.86
                          (0.027)                (0.0052)              (0.0008)
      GM                   0.127'                                                             0.045           1.75
                          (0.027)
      TI                   0.137'                                                             0.033           2.25

      SF                   0.153'                                                            0.023            1.70
                          (0.027)


C. Cqnstrained StiR estimation, excluding data from contracts with overlapping maturities (N=64)


                                                                                                          •
Oarraicy                   c                     b3                    b2                  adj.R2             DW
      BP                   0.142'                0.0150'              -0.0019                0.041            1.92
                          (0.033)               (0.0063)              (0.0043)
      GM                   0.1230                                                            0.084            1.69
                                                                                                      .
                          (0.032)
     1?                    0.1330                                                 .          0.033            1.51
                          (0.033)
      SF                   0.1460                                                            0.012            1.25
                          (0.032)


Motes
(1) Standard errors are in parentheses.
(2) • denotes that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the five percent level.
(3) S denotes that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the ten percent level.
                  Table 5: Trading volume, anticipated volatility and the spread (Japanese Yen)
                                                 1983:2 - 1990:2




A. OLS estimation in levels                          psprea4 — e    + b lad, + b2 volume, +;                OR
                                                     psprea4—c+b1isd,+b,volum.1+;

                 c                                                                     adj.R2               DW

whole            0.028P            3.6444             0.00013+                          0.044               2.34
sample          (0.0101)          (1.62*5)           (0.00009)

                 0.0313            3.04301                            0.000151          0.042               2.33
                (0.0097)          (1.6857)                           (0.00009)

excluding        0.0348            2.4447++          0.000I3++                          0.023               1.52
overlapping     (0.0102)          (1.7591)           (0.00010)
contracts
                 0.0353            2.0710                             0.00016+          0.041               1.52
                (0.0094)          (1.778)                            (0.00010)




B. 01.5 estimation in logarithm                      pspread, — c + b, log(isd,)   + b2 log(volutnej + e,        OR
                                                     pspread, c + b Iog(is4) + b, log(volume,.1) +        a,



Sample           c                                                                     adj.R2               DW

whole            0.1201            0.015381          0.00413++                          0.027               2.31
sample          (0.0413)          (0.0081)          (0.00313)

                 0.1052'           0.0129+                            0.00466+          0.027               2.3!
                (0.0431)          (0.008!)                           (0.00310)

excluding        0.08521           0.00949           0.00498++                          0.017               1.52
overlapping     (0.0444)          (0.0080)          (0.00373)
contacts
                 0.0812            0.00878                            0.00501++         0.024               1.51
                (0.0468)          (0.0081)                           (0.00367)



Notes:
(1) Standard enors are in parentheses.
(2)', I, + and + + denote that the estimate is statistically different from zero at the five, ten, fifteen and
twenty percent levels, respectively.
Payoff




    0                          E-s/2                                         E+s/2         Exchange Rate

                                                                   ,

                             Impricil call
                                                  ,,                             put


    S


                                    Figure 1: Spread as a portfolio ol options




               T.5 minules                      T. 2 minutes                 Tao seconds       Tcl 0 Seconds
    2
    C                                  2



    C

I                                                              F
                                                               I
    C
    C.
         0.0    0.0010 0.                  Oj     G0 0004              0.0     04 0.0       0.0 05         00)5
                                                 tdaS2i*.                     I—s               -WI—


          Figure 2: spread—volatility relation: Simulation results
          Figure 3a: Market's anticipated exchange rate volatility
                extracted from options data (1983:2—1990:2)


                                                 2.11 ./,.wct. P.iitmaf
      C
      q
      C
0.




      0
          I       INS     INS    IS      'NJ          IS                     is

      C
      C
                                                 v0ii.'/ Cefl"?'
Vt°


                  1564    ISIS   155      10(7        10(1      IS           INS




                                                 Dot 7 Jece            Yen
a3
SAl
'-4 0

h

          'SC     INS     ¶565   10(6     lOll        .0(6       ¶5          '5



      C
      C
                                                 Do(ra/cas Fra.e.c


U-.




          INS     1564    INS     '666    ¶967        10(5       INS         1966
           Figure 3b: Realized exchange rate volatility

                            (1983:2—1990:2)

                                               Polto.r(edtfc4 R,na4
C
q
C


I
     in              tt         in       in?                  en.        en




                                               De.la.vfc..r,,.__. t.'k
C
C




     lg      SI      IOU        elM     1017     1011         'leO




0
0
0
00

I
     in.     1114    '11$      In.      ¶967     1968         1119       in



C
0




            1114                        1167    lOll         1019        en
               Figure 4: Percentage bid—ask spreads in the

                 foreign exchange market (1983:2-1990:2)



C
 'A




        I;               iI;6    I;..    17        N               fl

-Sc 9




 E      1.3      1014    'US     INS     1017     INS      11S           -




 'I

 vs

                                 INS     1017     INS       INS    INS
        INS      1014     INS




 20
                                  ISIS    1557.    ISIS     ISIS   INS
         INS      INS     INS
                                   Figure 5: smoothed scatter plots

                                    by locally weighted regressions

                                                                      a

                                           Gri                   •1                  :i- V                            SF
                                                             a
a                                                                         a
C
                        I          a                                      I.
I                                                   //                                                    I                    /
                                                / I
                                                                          I!                              I
I1
               I ii                I        / II                          I
                                                                                    .2.
                                                                                             I            I
                                                                                                                    .1'
                                                                                                                           I


         00 0 0-010                       0.004          00                                                          0m4 0. 0.012
         bfl.tSd.Xd.t.0JIS             bsn(nSd. r.d. I. OSSfls               b-ba — I. 0$.                         bCWsftd. SIMM. I • 0i$u

                                                                      = o.qg)

            89                                                   I    a
                                                                                     Jy                        o SF
     C
     C                                                       a
a
C                                  0
                                                         I                a
                                                                          a
                                                                          C                               C


                                                  // I
1                                  IC                                     I                               II
I    C
                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                               0
I                                                                                                .

I    a
     S
     C
                I                  IC II                                  I                   /           I                /
                                                                                         —J.
         0- 0-0%      0.010               0.004          0-0
                                                                                    ..
                                                                                   0.0       0        .
                                                                                                                     Ø% 0 0.012
                                                                                                                   Io..nSbd. SIMM. I •
         o.nitb.Id.bppd.I•0JSJSZ       blnhIatd.rcopd.I• 03Ss                      bsnt4frpSpd.I.0S5fl.




a                                  a
                                   a                                      a                               a
C                                  C                                                                      C

                                                                          I                               II
I                                  I
                                                                                                          I

I                /                 I                                      I                               I

     C
            NJ                                                                 I
         0X2   O6 0.010                   0.004          tS                                                          0.004 0fl 0.012
         b.ni(X&tpPWd. I. 0AS)k          .uga*d.gmpSM. 1.0.15)11                   bwn*td. hp.* I •                b.StSfSd. sflpd. I • 0JS)1s
