                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               INSIGNIFICANT AND
                        INCONSEQUENTIAL HYSTERESIS: THE
                          CASE OF U.S. BILATERAL TRADE




                                     David C. Parsley
                                      Shang-Jin Wei




                                 Working Paper No. 4738




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         May 1994

We would like to thank David Romer for very helpful discussions. We have also itceivéd
useful suggestions from Menzie Chinn, Avinash Dixit, Timothy Lane. Wooheon Rhee, Hans
Stoll, an anonymous referee, and numerous seminar participants. Part of this research was
supported in part by the Dean's fund for Faculty Research of the Owen Graduate School of
Management at Vanderbilt University. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in
International Finance and Macroeconomics and International Trade and Investment Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4738
                                                                                       May   1994



                                 INSIGNIFICANT AND
                          INCONSEQUENTIAL HYSTERESIS: THE
                            CASE OF U.S. BILATERAL TRADE


                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper casts doubt on the validity of the hysteresis hypothesis as an explanation of

the persistent U.S. trade deficits in the 1980s. We propose two tests to investigate two different

implications of the hypothesis. The first implication is that cumulative changes in exchange

rates, in addition to current exchange rate levels, are important determinants of trade flows. The

second implication is that foreign exporting firms' perceptions of exchange rate volatility will

affect their decisions to enter or exit the market. We find little support for either aspect of the

hysteresis hypothesis.




David C. Parsley                                                   Shang-Jin Wei
Owen School of Management                                          Kennedy School of Goveninznt
Vanderbilt University                                              79 JFK Street
Nashville. TN 37203                                                Cambridge. MA 02138
                                                                   and NBER
I Motivation

     The extended dollar appreciation, and subsequent steep depreciation,

during the 1980s has been cited as the proximate cause of sluggish   adjustment
of trade volumes and prices.       This idea presents a new twist to the

now—traditional view that exchange rate variability is itself caused by

sluggish adjustment of prices. The new view is that the structure of demand

and supply In trade may be characterized by hysteresis (Dixit 89a, 89b;

Krugman and Baldwin 89). Actual empirical examination of this hypothesis is,

however, quite limited.

     Hysteresis has been defined as the failure of an effect to be reversed

once the cause of the disturbance is removed (Dixit 89b). In models proposed

by Baldwin and Krugman (89). and developed in Dixit (89a. 89b) the existence

of sunk costs has important implications for equilibrium real exchange rates

and trade flows.      In these models, the combination of exchange rate

uncertainty and sunk costs produce hysteresis in trade flows because firms'

entry/exit decisions are tied to some critical levels of the exchange rate.

Without sunk costs revenue fluctuations would be unimportant because firms

would enter in profitable periods and exit in unprofitable periods.         In

hysteresis models competitive strength, or the ability to export, becomes

dependent on the past history of the exchange rate.      Large exchange rate

swings, then, entail welfare costs, since productive resources within the

society must be reallocated. Given the prevalence of sunk costs, and the

empirical observation that exchange rates are highly variable, we might

suspect hysteresis to be highly applicable to contemporary events.

     Behind the facade of novelty, the ultimate implications of hysteresis

are fundamental. In addition to implying that the direction and composition

of real trade flows are somewhat arbitrary, some experts have implicated the
current exchange rate system as a promoter of these path dependencies.

Indeed, Krugman (89) has argued this point to the extent of advocating an

eventual return to a system of fixed exchange rates. The large exchange rate

swings of the 1980s and the persistent trade imbalances do present a prima

fade case for the potential importance of hysteresis. Often, however, more

traditional explanations for these events exist.         Given that alternative

explanations frequently entail significantly different policy prescriptions.

a careful empirical evaluation of this phenomenon is warranted.

         In this paper we focus on two aspects of the hysteresis hypothesis which

have testable implications. The first is that cwznlative changes in exchange

rates are important determinants of trade flows; i.e., under the hypothesis,

the effect of an exchange rate change on trade flows depends on the past

history of exchange rate changes.      This contrasts with the traditional view

that exchange rates matter only in levels.           The second implication of

hysteresis derives from an analogy with financial options.        In particular,

the hypothesis posits that because of sunk costs and uncertainty, a firm's

perception of the sustainability of the current exchange rate will affect its

decisions to enter or exit the market. Far example, if the firm becomes less

sure of the future course of the exchange rate, the option value of the

'wait—and—see" strategy rises. This implies that as exchange rate volatility

increases, the response of trade flows to exchange rates, will fall. These

features of the hypothesis motivate the econometric tests we employ in this

paper.

     The rest of this paper is organized as follows.          Section II offers

several reasons why the hysteresis hypothesis has not been adequately tested

in existing studies. Section III describes the data we employ. Section IV

develops fully, two testable implications of the hypothesis before presenting

the results of these tests. Section V concludes.



                                         2
II. The Hysteresis Hypothesis

     The hysteresis idea is most easily illustrated with an example. Figure

1 depicts the relationship between exchange rates and imports.        Suppose the

real exchange rate (home currency per foreign currency) is           Along import

schedule 1K0 a domestic currency appreciation (to e.g., s1) is associated

with higher imports since exports become more profitable from the foreign

firm's perspective.     However with hysteresis, there exists some critical

level of the real exchange rate, x0, such that a further appreciation (to

e.g.. s) will shift the import schedule to 1M1.         This shift occurs because

at real exchange rates below x0 it is profitable for new foreign firms to

enter the market, and/or for existing foreign firms to expand.1

     Once foreign firms have expended these sunk costs, a depreciation from

   back to s will not cause these firms to exit. As a result, imports will

be permanently higher, i.e., only a sufficiently large depreciation will

shift the import schedule back to 1K0.          Note that the effect need not be

limited to 1K, i.e.. beginning from 1K1, an appreciation beyond x1 will

shift the import schedule further, to 1K. This effect is termed hysteresis.


                                <<<   Figure   1 )>>




     Surprisingly,   empirical tests of the hysteresis hypothesis are few. The

only attempts that we are aware of seem to suggest that hysteresis is

unimportant (Baldwin 88, Krugman and Baldwin 89), but this may be the result

of deficiencies of the tests employed.           It is likely, however, that the

dearth of explicit tests is attributable both to the assumed outcome of the

test and to some general difficulties that must be overcome prior to testing.



     Expansion may take the form of investment in marketing networks or
distribution channels as well as expansion of physical production processes.



                                         fl
     One barrier to testing relates to the impreciseness of the theoretical

predictions. Notably, the hypothesis states that a sufficiently large change

in the exchange rate will alter the equilibrium relationship between trade

flows and exchange rates, but it does not specify just how large a change in

the exchange rate must be to induce such structural adjustment.          Another

difficulty in testing is the lack of appropriate data. During the 1980s, the

large swing in the international value of the dollar took almost a decade,

yet the recent floating exchange rate period has a history of less than two

decades. Presumably, the number of candidate episodes is quite small.

     An additional explanation for the lack of empirical tests comes from a

different direction altogether.       In particular, we suspect there may be

strong priors regarding the outcome of the test, e.g. •   a break is apparent in
a time series graph of the exchange rate and trade flows. Figure 2 presents

such a chart;     it plots quarterly real imports and the trade—weighted

exchange rate based on data from Citibase (series GIMQ and EXVUS,

respectively).   In the chart, imports generally rise as the dollar rises;

however, imports continue to rise after the dollar falls.       Thus, one might

conclude that the divergence signals an obvious structural break.          This

conclusion, however, is simply unwarranted since in the figure. we have not

controlled for other determinants of imports (e.g., income, and seasonal

factors) which might account for the strong upward trend.2




                               <<<   Figure   2 >>>




2
     In an earlier version of this paper, (Parsley and Wei, 91). we plot one
example of a de—trendeci imports series against the real exchange rate where
no clear break in the relationship is apparent.




                                        4
III.     Data

       To isolate hysteresis effects it is Important to focus the empirical

examination on disaggregated volume data to the extent possible. This serves

several purposes. First, the use of disaggregated data minimizes measurement

error in the dependent variable that is introduced either when import values

are deflated with norunatched price indexes or when there are quality changes

in the aggregate bundle.      Second1 the use of bilateral data avoids the

measurement error introduced when 'trade—weighted" exchange rates are used.

Furthermore, endogeneity is less of an issue in a disaggregated context.

Finally, a focus on disaggregated cases allows hysteresis effects to surface

in certain commodities only, or in trade with particular trading partners.

       In this paper we examine the hypothesis using two different commodity

level data sets available on a monthly basis.3 The first is volume data for

bilateral U.S. imports of homogeneous chemicals from Canada. The chemicals

were: benzene, toluene, boric acid, phosphoric acid, carbide, uranium oxide.

methylene chloride, perchloroethylene, ethylene oxide, propylene oxide, and

acetic acid. The range for this data set is 1980:01 to 1988:12. The other

commodity data set consists of volume data on five Japanese exports to the

U.S., namely: ball bearings, bicycles, bolts, nuts, and screws.      The range
for this data set Is 75:01 to 87:12.

       These quantity series have several virtues. First, fixed costs and thus

hysteresis effects, are likely to be important for these products. Secondly.

the U.S. was the largest export market for each product considered; in fact,

for bolts, nuts, and screws, the U.S. has been nearly the total export



     A complete description is given in an appendix.    In ?arsley and Wei
(91), we also examine two aggregate data sets: the bilateral imports of 12
OECD countries from the U.S., and the U.S.' s imports from these countries.




                                       C
market.4      This implies that third country effects will be minimized.5

Finally, these commodities are extremely homogeneous (with the exception of

bicycles).     Hence, errors caused either by quality change or by improperly

deflated value series will not exist.


IV.      Empirical Tests of the Hysteresis Hypothesis

Test   1: The Asysxaetry Hypothesis

     There are three interdependent aspects of the hysteresis hypothesis
relevant for constructing our first test. First, exchange rate changes must
be "large" before structural shifts such as those depicted in Figure 1 can
occur.      That is.   exchange rates may    vary in the range     to    without

triggering the shift from 1M0 to               Second, given that exchange rates

evolve over time, there is a sense in which history (or the evolution of the

exchange rate) matters. That is, with exchange rates beginning in the range

s to s, we could move to Ill only if the price of foreign exchange fell

below x in some previous period. Third, and this is the key aspect, there

is an asymmetry in the response of trade flows to exchange rates;

specifically, some exchange rate changes will produce different effects than

others of equal magnitudes.       This is the case at the points of shift in

Figure 1. We combine these implications with insights in Dixit (89a) to form

our first test of the hysteresis hypothesis.

       Dixit (89a) has formalized these intuitive propositions and observed

that, In effect, there is a zone of inaction around the current exchange rate



     The average (1973—87) percent of Japanese exports going to the U.S. by
product are:  ball bearings. 28%; bicycles, 61%; bolts, 87%; nuts. 81%; and
screws, 78%.
     If the U.S. market were not large, then developments in other markets
(e.g., changes In non—dollar/yen exchange rates) might induce changes in
Japanese exports to the U.S. not related to changes in the yen/dollar
exchange rate.



                                        F,
within which entry or exit will not occur.                 This situation is described as

hysteresis by Dixit. More interestingly, once exchange rates breach these

bands, we get a structural change;                    it is this path dependency that is
central to our first test.               In particular, combining the implications above,

the model implies that the effect of a depreciation following successive

depreciations will be fundamentally different from the effects of a

depreciation following a series of appreciations.

       We model this asymmetry as follows. First, define Vt to be equal to the

cumulative change in exchange rates over some period Ut), or:


                           =        —
       Vt =
                   j0s_        st       s__   ,
                                                                                (1)


Then define a dummy variable, D. that indicates whether the most recent

change in the exchange rate is in the same, or opposite, direction from the

change over the last r periods, that is:


                     1 iftst andVt >0
       D       =    —1   lfs t andVt <0                                         (2)
           t                                                       -

                     0   otherwise


Then, the measure of phase is:



        t
               =   DtsV
                   t. tt                                                         (3)



where s = the real exchange rate (domestic currency/foreign currency).

       Now consider a depreciation following successive depreciations. Vt and

thus           will be positive. The asymmetry hypothesis predicts then, that in an

equation describing the behavior of imports, the coefficient on                  will be

negative.          This is because successive depreciations lead to exit, and thus

the entire import schedule shifts inward. Similarly, an appreciation after a




                                                  7
substantial cumulative appreciation will yield the product AsV >          0, but now

    will be negative.         The hypothesis still predicts the sign of the

coefficient on       will be negative since the sequence of appreciations should

induce entry of foreign firms. Note that the dummy insures              will be zero

when the sign of the most recent exchange rate change is opposite that of the

cumulative change.     In the estimations below, we choose r to be 24 for the

sake of preserving degrees of freedom; that is, we assume that information

about exchange rate trends in the most recent two years is sufficient to
                                 6
identify   hysteresis effects.

     As Rose and '(ellen (89) note, standard two—country models of trade

assume that the volume of imported goods demanded depends positively on real

domestic income and negatively on the relative price of imported goods.

Thus, after adding our measure of the phase, the augmented trade equation

(In logs) would take the form:

     IMP = constant      +   seasonals   +            +   B(L)aincome       (4)
                                             A(L)tp
                                ÷ ,.Lt   + Ct
     Equation    4 is the basic trade equation estimated across all commodities.

Our proxy for real income is industrial production in the importing country.

    is the change in relative prices;               in the chemical equations we use

relative unit value indexes, and in the equations using imports from Japan we

employ export price indexes specific to each commodity, denominated in

dollars. Both measures are superior to bilateral exchange rates.7

     In all estimations the order of the lag polynomials A(L). 8(L) was set



6
     Setting    r = 36 yielded virtually identical results.

     Two problems commonly plague the use of unit value indexes: changes in
weights and in the quality of products composing the indexes (Kravis and
Lipsey 74). The regressions here do not suffer from these problems because
they are product by product and because the products themselves are highly
homogeneous.



                                                0
    to three and each equation also included monthly dummies.    Unit—root tests

were performed (not reported) on all variables in the combined data set and.

with the exception of chemicals, these tests could not reject the unit—root

null hypothesis. Consequently, the Japanese bilateral trade equations were

estimated in log—first differences and the chemicals equations were estimated

in log levels.

        Table 1 presents the OLS estimates of gz. the coefficient on V'   and the

associated heteroscedasticity—consistent standard errors for each equation

estimated.      The Japanese bilateral trade equations were estimated using a

correction for first order autocorrelated errors. At the 10 percent level of

significance, the restrictions implied by this procedure could be rejected in

only one equation.        Finally, the range of estimation for the chemicals

equations was 1982:01 to 1988:09, and for the Japanese bilateral trade

equations the estimation period was 1978:03 to 1987:12.          The table also

presents estimates of the sum of the coefficient estimates on the

contemporaneous and first three lags of .         The idea is to incorporate a

longer time dimension for the decision process to enteror exit.6

        The point estimates of z reported in Table 1 are predominantly negative

as predicted by the hypothesis.        Unfortunately however very few of these

estimates are statistically different from zero; in one case the estimate is

statistically significant and positive.       What evidence that exists for the

importance of asymmetric effects of exchange rate changes comes from the

chemicals equations.      However, this evidence is clearly less than universal

since statistically significant effects are limited to only three chemicals.

This conclusion holds across both asymmetry measures considered. For product

exports from Japan the point estimates are consistently negative, however


8
        We thank a referee for suggesting this interpretation.




                                         0
only one of ten estimates in the table is statistically different from zero.

To summarize, the strongest claim that can be made is that most of the point

estimates have the sign predicted by the theory.

        One possible explanation, for these weak results is that trade in

chemicals may be driven by long term contracts, so that imports are not

responsive even to a succession of appreciations or depreciations.      In any

case, the conclusion we draw from this test is that hysteresis effects, even

if they are present, are not a pervasive phenom!non for the commodities

studied. 9

                               <<<   Table   1 here >>>


Test 2: The Option Value Hypothesis
        We develop an alternative test in this section that focuses on a

different implication of the hypothesis; namely, the influence of uncertainty

on the firm's decision to enter or exit the market.       Test 2, like test 1.

relies on the conditional nature of the response of trade flows to exchange

rates; however, test 2 explicitly allows that response to vary each period.

        According to the "option value" interpretation, the zone of inaction

widens as the exchange rate becomes more volatile. An increase in volatility

makes it more likely that any change in the level of the exchange rate is

temporary, and hence it is less worthwhile to incur the costs to enter or

exit.     In other words, the value of the "wait and see" option rises (see

e.g., Dixit 89b).

        We test this aspect of the hypothesis by first estimating a stochastic

parameter version of equation 4, that is, the intercept term in that equation

is allowed to exhibit shifts (as suggested by Figure 1) at each sample data



     These conclusions are reinforced in aggregate bilateral U.S. trade data.
See Parsley and Wei (91).



                                         10
point.        We then relate the resulting estimated 'tlme—series" coefficient

vector to measures of real exchange rate uncertainty.                 The option value

interpretation then, implies that changes in the (time varying) intercept

will be inversely related to exchange rate volatility.

        Thus, the specification for the test is:



        k$Ha+tE
          t     (a
                t t+k           )   +   c
                                         t                                    (5)



where         is a time series of estimated coefficients,                  is expected

exchange rate volatility over the next k periods, based on information at

time t.       We use two measures of uncertainty: first, the standard deviation

of log real exchange rate changes; and second, the standard deviation of the

k-period real exchange rate changes.               For each of these measures we use a

naive forecast that uses only lagged real price changes, and an cx post three

month ahead realized volatility.             The latter forecast will differ from cx

post volatility by a purely random error under rational expectations.

     According to the option value interpretation t, will be negative. Once

we specify the stochastic nature of the shifts in the coefficients, the

actual estimation of the (time—varying) response of imports to exchange rates

is most efficiently handled by the Kalman filter. The Kalman filter is a set

of equations which allows these coefficients to be updated as new information

becomes available. Since our exercise here is not one of forecasting, we use

"smoothed" Kalman filter estimates of the stochastic shifts; these smoothed

estimates use information in the entire sample in constructing the time

varying parameter estimates. See Newbold and Sos (85), for a description of

how these smoothed estimates are constructed.

     The specification of the model is the following.


          =     + z''   +   e                                                (6)




                                              11
           =      +
                       Ut


where y is imports, z is a Ic — vector of other relevant explanatory

variables, and i is the corresponding Ic —               vector of coefficients; we assume
the elements of             to be nonstochastic.10 The random walk assumption (equation

7) captures the hysteresis implication that changes in the response of

imports to the exchange rate are "structural" or persistent to the extent

these changes involve entry and             exit.
         For identification we impose some additional restrictions:


                                  2

                   N                                                                 (8)
         (:t}
           t
              -
                        [Q      [OeIt iii
                                       a]).


i.e. •    the disturbances in both equations are serially uncorrelated, mutually
independent, normally distributed, with zero means and constant variances.

The three equations (6), (7), and (8) fully define the stochastic parameter

regression model.              Given the observations on
                                                                      zj1        •    we   can

estimate the constant coefficients in.the system, (y, o2. s?), and a

time—series of the intercept coefficients, ($}.                   These estimated fl's are

then used in testing the option value aspect in equation 5.



                                      <<C Table 2 here >>>


         Table 2 presents the results using the Kalman filter coefficient

estimates for those chemicals with enough data to perform the test, and for

the bilateral commodity trade with Japan.                    In the table we present four


10
         The variables included in the vector z are the same as those used in
equation 4 except             is omitted.




                                                    12
measures of exchange rate volatility. Two measures are "naive and two are

"rational".      The naive measures are extrapolated from past values of

variability, and the rational measures use ex post realized variability. The

naive neasures thus assume the firm's information set contains only the past

history of exchange rate variability, while the rational measures assume

perfect foresight.     Variability for both measures (naive and rational) is

defined as the standard deviation of the lcth difference of the real exchange

rate; where two values of Ic were chosen as a further robustness check.1'

Finally, after obtaining the Kalman filter estimates of the constant

coefficients in equation 4, we regress them on these measures of exchange

rate uncertainty.

     The evidence presented in Table 2 is unsupportive of the hypothesis that

hysteresis effects are important for trade flows.   In particular, none of the

coefficient estimates is statistically significant and relatively few have

the sign predicted by the hypothesis. Furthermore, this conclusion is robust

to all four measures of exchange rate uncertainty.       Thus we conclude that

even the qualified interpretation given to the statistically insignificant

evidence in Table 1 is not confirmed by the results from test 2.

     It is now possible to offer an interpretation of the combined results of

the two tests.      Broadly, test 1 asks the question:     in terms of import

response to exchange rate changes, does history matter? Test 2 asks: Does

the zone of inaction depend on exchange rate volatility?           Our results



     Another proxy for exchange rate uncertainty we tried was to fit an ARCH
model to the residuals in a random walk (with drift) specification for each
bilateral exchange rate series.   This procedure would generate an ex ante
conditional forecast of exchange rate volatility appropriate if the exchange
rate actually followed a random walk process and expectations were formed
rationally.   However attempts to fit an ARCH model to these data proved
unsuccessful; ARCH effects seen not to be present at the monthly frequency.
Another way of measuring ex ante volatility is to use volatility implied by
currency options, as in Wei (1990.



                                      11
indicate that a negative answer is appropriate for both questions.

V. Sunnary

     Exchange rate swings, such as the one experienced by the U.S. dollar

during the 1980s have generated considerable controversy about their causes

and their effects.      One line of research into their effects emphasizes the

importance of sunk costs in the investment decisions of firms. According to

this view, a large exchange rate cycle can have lasting effects on trade

flows.     Such path dependency of trade on exchange rates is labelled as

hysteresis.

     The possibility of hysteresis has been demonstrated in several

theoretical papers and has, in turn, added intellectual force to proposals to

limit exchange rate movements. Empirical examination of this issue; however,

has not kept pace with the theoretical developments. This paper contributes

to bridging this gap.

     This paper focuses on two testable implications of the hypothesis of

hysteresis in trade.      We test data at a commodity level where hysteresis

effects are more likely noticeable, and where econometric and measurement

difficulties are minimized.      The first test looks for asymmetries in the

response of imports to exchange rates.         In particular we ask whether

cumulative changes in exchange rates are an important additional determinant

of trade flows.      We find little statistical support for the asymmetry

hypothesis in the data. Our second test focuses on the option value of the

investment decision.        According to this interpretation, increases in

uncertainty raise the value of a wait—and—see option.           As volatility

increases, trade flows become less responsive to exchange rate changes. The

results from this test again do not support the existence of hysteresis

effects.




                                        In
                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY


Baldwin, Richard, 1988, "Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect",
     American Economic Review, pp. 773—85.

Baldwin, Richard, and Paul Krugman, 1989, "Persistent Trade Effects of Large
     Exchange Rate Shocks", Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 635—54.

Bank of    Japan, Price Indexes Annual,   various   issues.
Citibank, N.A., Citibase economic database (machine—readable magnetic data
     file),    New York, N.Y.

Dixit, Avinash, l989a, "Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange Rate
     Pass—Through". Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 205—28.

Dixit, Avinash, i989b, "Entry and Exit Decisions Under Uncertainty".
     Journal of Political Economy. pp. 620—38.

International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, various
     issues.

Japan Tariff Association, Japan Exports and Imports: Corinodity by Country,
     various issues.

Kravis, Irving, and Robert Lipsey, 1914, "International Trade Prices and
     Price Proxies", in The Role of the Computer in Economic and Social
     Research in Latin America, Nancy Ruggles, ed. • pp. 253-66.

Krugman, Paul, and    Richard Baldwin, 1987, "The Persistence of the   U.S. Trade
     Deficit",    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 1—43.

Krugman, Paul, 1989, Exchange Rate Instability, The MIT Press.

Newbold, Paul, and T. Bos, 1985, "Stochastic Parameter Regression Models",
     Sage University Papers: Quantitative Applications in the Social
     Sciences, Sage Publications.

Parsley, David, and Shang—Jin Wei, 1991. "Insignificant and Inconsequential
     Hysteresis: The Case of U.S. Bilateral Trade" • Owen financial
     Markets Research Center, working paper *91—36, Vanderbilt University.

Rose, Andrew, and J. Yellen, 1989, "Is There a J—Curve?", Journai of Monetary
     Economics, pp. 53-68.

U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. imports: Schedule A, Commodity by Country,
     various issues.

¶4ei, Shang—Jin, 1991, "Anticipations of Foreign Exchange Rate Volatility
     and Bid-Ask Spreads". International Finance Discussion Papers. U 409,
     Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
                                     Data Appendix



        The data sources are the following.          U.S. Industrial production and

consumer prices are from Citibase.         The bilateral exchange rates used are

period—average       values from International Financial Statistics.     The source
for   the U.S. tmports of chemicals is U.S. Imports: Schedule A, Conaodity by

Country, U.S. Department of Commerce.         Both quantity and value series are

used.     Due   to   missing values only eleven of the twenty—three homogeneous

candidate chemicals initially chosen were actually used.              For the same

reason, we examine only U.S. imports from Canada of these chemicals: The

source for U.S. imports of the five commodities from Japan is Japan Exports

and Imports: Commodity by Country published by the Japan Tariff Association.

Finally, the source for the relative price variables for these commodities is

Price Indexes Annual, published by the Bank of Japan.
     Figure 1: Hysteresis in the Relationship
     Between Imports and the Exchange Rate

S
           IM0
so
                       1M1
5




x



                                                Imports
6.90 -
            Figure 2: Imports and Weighted Average Exchange Rate
                                                                                      - 5.10


6.25 -
                                                             /'I                        5.00


                                                                                      - 1.90

6.00-                                                  /                                       r
                                                     I-,                              -1.80
                                                 /
9.79   -                                                                              . 4.70
                                                                                               I
           \/                                                             •1
                                                                                      • 1.60
5.50

                             — \__•i.III
                                                                               I,      1.50

5.25 -                                                                                - 1.10
           1971   1976   1978        1980       982        1984    1986        1988
                         Inçu-ts            E,SxrgeRote
                  TABLE 1: ESTIMATES OF ASYMMEThY IN THE
               RESPONSE OF. IMPORTS TO EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES


  CHEMICALS                      ..        PRODUCTS
 FROM CANADA        is         Eis        FROM JAPAN

 BENZENE           080        .225        BEARINGS     —.004    —.002
                 (.141)      (.134)                    (.008)   (.010)
 TOLUENE          .020       —.070        BICYCLES     —.001    —.003
                 (.044)      (.087)                    (.009)   (.011)
 BORIC ACID       .031        .000        BOLTS        —.007    —.008
                 (.070)      (.112)                    (.009)
                         C            •
 PHOSPHORIC      -.215       -.537        NUTS         —.011    —.006
                 (.081)      (.189)                    (.009)   (.011)
                         S            S                                 S
 CARBIDE        —.219        —.365        ScREWS       —.052    —.107
                 (.050)      (.051)                    (.030)   (.035)
 URANIUM OX.    -.012        —. ois
                 (.012)      (.017)
                         S
 METHYLENE      —.110         .053
                 (.036)      (.035)
                                      C
 P-CHLORETH     —.057        —.141
                (.038)       (.027)
 ETHYL OX.       .071        —.111
                (.100)       (.088)
 PROPYL OX.      .015        —.005
                (.022)       (.031)                       .
                         C            •
 ACETIC ACID     .031         .066
                (.007)       (.008)


Standard
• indicates significant at the .01 level.

Entries in the table are estimates of jL in equatIon 4. The lag
lengths for the polynomials Mi). 8(1) were set to 3. The chemicals
equations were run In log level, as opposed to log first differences.
The entries reported in the second and fourth colusns refer to the ..=
of the estimated coefficients on the contemporaneous and first three
lags   of the I variable.
          TABLE 2: EFFECTS OF UNCTAINTY ON THE
      COEFFICIENTS FROM A TIME VARYING PARANErD1 MODEL


   canitc#is
                             Ic   =1                        k =3
   FROM CANADA      naive         rational          naive     rational

   URANIUM OX.        4.37             —2.12         .833           .396
                     (2.89)            (3.02)       (1.49)         (1.58)
   METIffLENE       -17.1               9.29         4.96        .841
                    (24.1)             (24.4)       (12.3)      (12.6)

   PRODUCTS
   FROM JAPAN

    BEARINGS        —.013               .076        —.036        .021
                     (.100)            (.099)       (.051)      (.051)
    BICYCLES        —.162               .195        —.124        .025       •
                    (.088)             (.132)       (.068)      (.073)
    BOLTS            .024               .004        —.072      —.049
                    (.123)             (.124)       (.063)      (.063)
   NUTS              .020               .132        —.072      —.038
                    (.107)             (.107)       (.055)      (.057)
   SCREWS            .444          -.394             .089          .202
                    (.342)         (.333)

Standard errors are in parentheses.
Entries In the table are estimates of 0 in the following regression:


   IAI= a . 0t+k +                              +


Where O
          t+k
             the standard deviation of the kth difference of the log
                =
real exchange rate series.   In the table, two value, of k are cho.en;
k=l, and k=3; m was chosen to mitigate the effect, of autocorrelation
in the residuals, m4 for all equations.
