                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE EFFECTS OF MINIMUM WAGES
                          ON EMPLOYMENT: THEORY AND
                             EVIDENCE FROM THE UK




                                     Richard Dickens
                                     Stephen Machin
                                      Alan Manning




                                 Working Paper No. 4742




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1994


The authors would like to thank Danny Blanchflower, David Card, Alan Krueger and
participants in seminars at Dartmouth, Manchester and Princeton for helpful comments, the
ESRC for financial support and the Department of Employment for giving us access to the
New Earnings Survey microdata. The results reported and the views expressed here do not
necessarily reflect those of the Department of Employment, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
                                                                 NBER Working Paper #4742
                                                                                May 1994

                          THE EFFECFS OF MINIMUM WAGES
                           ON EMPLOYMENT: THEORY AND
                              EVIDENCE FROM THE UK

                                        ABSTRACT

       Recent work on the economic effects of minimum wages has stressed that the standard
economic model, where increases in minimum wages depress employment, is not supported by
the empirical findings in some labour markets. In this paper we present a theoretical framework
which is general enough to allow minimum wages to have the conventional negative impact on
employment, but which also allows for the possibility of a neutral or a positive effect. The
model structure is based on labour market frictions which give employers some degree of
monopsony power. The formulated model has a number of empirical implications which we go
on to test using data on industry-based minimum wages set by the UK Wages Councils between
1975 and 1990. Some strong results emerge: minimum wages significantly compress the
distribution of earnings and, contrary to conventional economic wisdom but in line with several
recent studies, do not have a negative impact on employment. If anything, the relationship
between minimum wages and employment is estimated to be positive.


Richard Dickens                                           Stephen Machin
Centre for Economic Performance                           University College London
London School of Economics                                London WC1E 6BT
Houghton Street                                           UNITED KINGDOM
London WC2A 2AE                                           and Harvard University
UNITED KINGDOM

Alan Manning
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
I. Introduction
         There is an enormous body of research, both theoretical and empirical, on the

employment effects of minimum wages', but, on the whole, there is very little interaction

between the two sides of the literature. This is likely to have a number of disadvantages.

First, many theoretical models used to inform thinking about the likely effects of minimum

wages have predictions that are at variance with what is seen in reality. A good example of

this is the inability of some theoretical models to explain the existence of a spike in the

empirical wage distribution at the legal minimum. Secondly, empirical investigations without

a theoretical framework run the risk of using procedures and making inferences which may

seem plausible but do not necessarily stand up very well to theoretical scrutiny. For
example, it is sometimes argued that looking at workers or firms with very low wages is a

good way of researching the employment effects of minimum wages. But, in the model that

we present in this paper, following this approach will lead to a negative bias in the estimated

impact of minimum wages on employment.

         In this paper, our aim is to present a theoretical framework which is flexible enough

to make predictions about the effects of minimum wages that are not obviously at odds with

reality, but that can also be used to inform empirical work. We think that a satisfactory

theoretical model must satisfy a number of criteria. First, it must be general enough for

minimum wages to have either positive or negative effects on employment. Too often, the

only theoretical models used are competitive ones in which the only empirical question is not

"do minimum wages reduce employment?" but "how much?". This is particularly important


     l
         See Brown, Gilroy and Kohen (1982) for a fairly comprehensive survey of the US
         evidence to that date.
                                               1
 given that a large and growing batch of recent studies (Card, 1992a, 1992b; Katz and

Krueger, 1992; Machin and Manning, 1992; Card, Katz and Krueger, 1993; Card and

Krueger, 1993) all claim that minimum wages may actually increase employment (at least

for relatively small changes in the minimum wage), a prediction which is totally at odds with

the vast majority of the theoretical models used.2 The most common theoretical model used

to generate positive effects of minimum wages on employment is a monopsony model, and

this is the approach we adopt here, albeit in a different way to the "old-style" textbook

monopsony model.

        Monopsony is currently not a popular model of the labour market. For example, it

has been claimed that "there is little evidence that it is important in modern-day low-wage

labour markets" (Brown, Gilroy and Kohen, 1982, page 489) although exceptions are
sometimes noted (the most commonly cited exception is the US market for nurses: see

Sullivan, 1989). One should note that this viewpoint is very much based on the company-

town example of monopsony which is cited in many labour economics textbooks. There are

other theoretical routes whereby employers can establish a degree ofmonopsony power and

our model is based on one of these. We present a model based on the notion that there are

substantial frictions in the labour market and this means that the labour supply to an

individual firm will not be perfectly elastic which means that firms, to some extent, possess

some degree of monopsony power.'

        Our second requirement is that we think any theoretical model should be able to


    2
        A notable exception is the efficiency wage model of Calvo and Wellisz (1979).

        See Machin, Manning and Woodland (1993) for an attempt to document the extent
        of monopsony power in a low wage labour market.

                                             2
explain the spike in observed wage distributions at the minimum wage. Our model of a

labour market with frictions naturally produces this prediction. One should also recognise

that there are other competitive explanations of this phenomenon, notably that firms adjust

non-wage compensation or that the labour markets studied are made up of many different

sub-markets a fraction of which have wages equal to the minimum (Teulings, 1991). In this

paper we do not address whether the spike is better explained by these theories than ours

although it should be noted that Hoizer, Katz and Krueger (1991) claim that minimum wage

jobs do not offer the same level of utility as "surrounding" jobs, and Katz and Krueger

(1992) and Card and Krueger (1993) found that few fast food restaurants reduced non-wage

benefits when confronted with an increase in the minimum wage.

       In the next section of the paper we outline our theoretical model of a labour market

characterised by frictions. We show that there is generally an optimal minimum wage and

discuss the factors that determine this optimum. In section m, we then consider the

implications of our model for empirical work on the employment effects of minimum wages.

We argue that many cross-section studies are completely worthless and that the so-called

"impact studies" may also have problems. In contrast, time-series and panel studies emerge

more favourably. In section IV we extend some of our earlier empirical work (Machin and

Manning, 1992) and look in some detail at the employment effects of the minimum rates of

pay set by the UK Wages Councils using panel data from the 1970s and 1980s. Finally,

section V offers some concluding remarks.




                                             3
fl.The Model

        In this section we present a simple model of a labour market with frictions which is

general enough to allow minimum wages to have either a positive or a negative effect on

employment, and produces predictions about the effects of minimum wage legislation on the

distribution of wages that are at least outwardly consistent with what we observe. Assume

firm i has a marginal revenue product of labour curve given by:


                                     MRPL, =                                              (1)

where L is employment and A is a shock to the MRPL which reflect demand or productivity

shocks. If the labour market was perfectly competitive then the elasticity of the labour

demand curve would be (lIE).

        Turning to the labour supply curve to the firm, we assume that the fraction of

aggregate labour supply, L, arriving at firm i, L1, depends on the wage offered, W, a supply

shock, B,, and the distribution of wages F(W) according to some function:

                                       =                                                  (2)
                                               W,B,F()).L

While (2) is very general, it does not lead to an analytically tractable model. So, in the

theoretical section, we assume that the average wage is sufficient for the effect of the wage

distribution on the labour supply to a firm and, in particular that the labour supply is of the

form:


                                           =   I.Io.L                                     (3)
                                               IB,W)

where W is the average wage. (3) can be thought of as analogous to the Dixit and Stiglitz


                                                4
(1977) specification of the demand curve facing an individual firm in models of monopolistic

competition. The assumption that labour supply to a firm depends only on its wage relative

to the average is a strong one; in general, other features of the wage distribution may also

be important. In the current model, the effect of the assumption that labour supply depends

only on the average wage means that a rise in the minimum wage has the same effect on the

wages paid by all firms paying above the minimum. This is an assumption that we seek to

investigate later on.

        If the labour market is perfectly competitive then 0 = 0 but if 0 > 0 the market is,

to some extent, monopsonistic. It is the potential of this which allows minimum wages to

raise employment. It is somewhat unconventional to assume the existence of monopsony

power in labour markets. However, the presence of labour market frictions means that

employers cutting wages do not instantaneously lose all their workers and, as such, it is

plausible to assume they have some local monopsony power.4 It is worth stressing that this

source of monopsony power is very different from the usual company-town example of

monopsony (indeed, a good example of this is that it is probably the case that smaller firms

are more likely to be characterised by frictions: see Burdett and Mortensen, 1989, for more

details).

        B is a firm specific labour supply shock which could represent differences in the non-

pecuniary attractiveness of work in different firms.         An alternative, more general


        Some arguments along these lines are presented in more detail in Machin and
        Manning (1992) and Machin, Manning and Woodland (1993). One can debate
        whether this monopsony power exists only in the short-run. Our model, which is
        static for analytical convenience, cannot address this issue, but because workers are
        continually leaving and entering the labour market it is not unreasonable to believe
        that some firms do have some monopsony power in the long-run.
                                              5
interpretation, is that it represents differences in the wages paid in different firms necessary

to prevent shirking or differences in the bargaining power of workers in different firms. It

is the existence of this shock that ensures that the model generates a distribution of wages

even if the labour market is perfectly competitive.

       Finally we assume that aggregate labour supply is given by L =              C' =   0 means

that, although an individual firm can raise its labour supply by raising its wage, this is

entirely at the expense of other firms. On the other hand, if ' > 0, then aggregate labour

supply also increases. Defining i = 1-4'6 and rearranging (3) we have:

                                     W = 4.eBWLo                                             (4)

First, let us consider the equilibrium when there are no minimum wages. Each firm chooses

the level of employment where the MRPL equals the marginal cost of labour which, from

(4) is given by:

                                                                                             (5)
                                MCL1 =      (1   +   e)LBWL
Equating (5) and (1) gives employment in firm i as:


                                                         O
                                                 AILO°                                       (6)
                                           (1 +O)BW

and from (4) the wage is:

                                                                 II                          (7)
                            W=     (1 +

       (6)   and (7) are easy to understand. Revenue shocks, A, have a positive effect on

employment while supply shocks, B, have a negative effect. In contrast, both A and B are


                                                 6
positively related to wages although, as we would expect, A only has an effect to the extent

that the labour market is not perfectly competitive (where 0 > Ø)•5 The distribution of

wages depends on the distribution of (A4, B4) across firms. For analytical convenience we

assume that these shocks are joint log-normally distributed. In what follows it is convenient

to transform the shocks into two other shocks. First define:


                                                                                        (8)
                                            A1B,
and then define:

                                            =
                                                BX,"                                    ()
where p is defined by E(in B4 in X4) = plnX.. By construction, X and V4 are independent.

Using (8) and (9) to replace A and B by X and V we can derive:


                        =
                                           _L .i !1
                                                  °
                                                               -      8                 1
                   L1       [W-(l+O)-1]eV,          °x,


                              =
                                  [i
                                           1!.
                                       (1+O)}0W6cX, = W0W°X
                                                               1!.                      11


where W0 and U are defined to be the other terms on the RHS of (10) and (11). X can be

thought of as a firm-specific wage shock. Because of the existence of the employer-size

wage effect (see Brown and Medoff, 1989) we have strong reason to believe that p < 1 so

that there is a positive correlation between wages and employment. If we observed a labour




       It should be noted that there is considerable empirical evidence that wages do depend
       on variables related to firm and industry productivity even in the non-union sector
       (e.g. Nickell and Wadhwani, 1990; Dickens and Katz, 1987) which is consistent with
       the monopsony model.

                                                7
market in the absence of minimum wages we would observe a scatter of points about a

positively sloped line relating the log wage to log employment.

       Now consider what happens if a minimum wage of W is introduced. This means that

a firm can be in one of three qualitatively distinct regimes. In the first, which we will call

the Unconstrained Regime, the firm pays a wage above the minimum and the employment

and wage rates of (10) and (11) continue to be relevant. Note that if z     0, the change in

W caused by the minimum wage will mean that the set of firms initially paying above W

will not be the same as the ones now paying above W and that although the unconstrained

firms pay above the minimum they are still affected by it. For an unconstrained firm we

have something like the situation depicted in Figure 1 where MRPLI represents a firm in this

regime. From (11), a firm will be in this regime if:


                                                                                        (12)


For a firm with X slightly below X,., say with MRPL2 in Figure 1 it is optimal to pay W

and accept all workers forthcoming at this wage. We will refer to these as supply-

constrained firms. Employment in these firms can be found by substituting W1 = W in (4).

Using (12) to write W in terms of X.,. we can derive the following employment rule for

these firms:


                                                    -1
                                 L, w                °
                                                         x'                             (13)


By comparison of (13) with (10) we note that, for a given level of W, employment in these

firms will be higher with the minimum wage than without. The explanation for this is

simple. A firm initially paying slightly below VP has MRPL> W; a slight increase in the

                                             8
wage then increases labour supply while still ensuring it is profitable for the employer to

employ these extra workers. Consequently, we know that employment must increase for

firms in this situation.

       But if the MRPL curve is sufficiently low then the firm will be in a situation where

it is not profitable for the firm to employ all the workers forthcoming at W. We will refer

to these firms as demand-constrained. These firms choose employment so that MRPL = W

which is depicted by MRPL3 in Figure 1. Using (8) and (9) to eliminate A4 from (1) and

using (12) to write W in terms of X.. we can derive:

                                         i.        1     •—+
                                                          e
                                                               —                     (14)
                                  L1   w°u,(1 +O)X1
as the employment rule for firms in this regime. A firm is in this regime when the marginal

revenue product of the labour supply at W is less than W. By manipulating (1) and (4),

this occurs when:



                           XI <   W14J w
                                         __
                                              =   (1 +
                                                          -
                                                         0)    =   X
                                                                                      (15)


The employment level of firms in this regime will rise with the introduction of the minimum

wage if X is close to X. but will fall if X1 is very low. This can be readily understood by

inspection of Figure 1.

        We can now summarize what happens to wages and employment in each firm in the

presence of minimum wages:




                                              9
Unconstrained:                If       X>




                                                                e
                                       L,             u,w0,x1
                                                  -e
Supply-Constrained:           If       (1 +O)'X, c              <   X,   W= W         and

                                                               .1 -
                                       L1             U,We.eX1e x:
                                                          -e
Demand Constrained:           If       X, <      (1   +O)°'X, ,     W    W and
                                                                      ! !1,!
                                                                         0
                                                                                 -!
                                            L1         U1W°(l+O)X1
                                                                      j_
                                                                      ° !1,! -J.
                                                                             e
                                                  =
                                                       U,W° (1 + 0)

We can gain some insight into the employment effects of a minimum wage by considering

Figure 2. Assume, for simplicity that i = 0. The line LL gives the average relationship

between employment and X1 before the introduction of a minimum wage. Now suppose a

minimum wage is introduced that induces a cut-off point X.1. between the unconstrained and

supply-constrained regimes. Only employment in firms with X, below X are affected; let

us denote the new level of employment in these firms by the dotted line. For all supply-

constrained firms, employment is raised. Employment gains start to fall once we enter the

demand-constrained firms and are negative for the firm with the lowest X,. It should be

obvious from this that we cannot tell, a priori, the effect on total employment except in some

special cases. If 0 = 0 the labour market is perfectly competitive, the supply-constrained

                                                 10
regime disappears and all demand-constrained firms suffer employment losses. But as long

as 0 > 0 some degree of minimum wage legislation can raise employment. The picture of

Figure 2 needs modification if ,z     0 as then LL itself moves with the minimum wage but

the basic ideas remain the same.

         Another point that should be noted is that it is reasonable to believe that a minimum

wage affects different firms in different ways; in our model low productivity firms are likely

to reduce employment while higher productivity firms are expected to increase it. This has

some implications for empirical research that we will discuss below.

         It should also be apparent that there is some optimal" minimum wage which

maximises employment.6 There is some interest in finding out how high is the optimal

minimum wage and how it varies with the parameters of the model. Not surprisingly, the

optimal minimum wage depends on the average values of A and B which will change over

time with the general level of productivity in the economy. But we can also use the model

to compute the optimal level of two other measures of the intensity of minimum wage

legislation; the proportion of workers paid the minimum (which we will call the spike) and

the ratio of the minimum to average earnings (which we will call toughness). In the

Appendix, the following result is proved.

Result

         Employment relative to the level in the absence of minimum wage can be written as

a function of {€,0,p,cr,z} and either the spike or toughness.

Proof: See Appendix.



    6 It should be noted that employment maximisation is not necessarily the same as
         welfare maximisation in the current model but the latter is complicated to calculate.

                                              11
       This result shows that one can say something about the likely effects of a minimum

wage on employment once one makes assumptions about a relatively small set of parameters

describing the economy. To give some idea of the likely optimal minimum wage and the

employment benefits from it we conducted some simulations. These should be thought of

as illustrative only as the real world wage distribution does not seem well-modelled by the

log-normal .

       As a base case we made the following assumptions about parameters. For the

sensitivity of wages to employer size we used 0=0.2. For the standard deviation of wages

in the absence of minimum wages we assumed o=0.3. For the elasticity of the labour

demand curve we assumed E=0.5 which is a compromise between the evidence that the

labour demand elasticity is one and the value that one would expect given a Cobb-Douglas

production function and the share of labour in output. Finally, we start by assuming that

=0 and p=O so that there are no knock-on effects. For this base case the optimal spike

is 12% which corresponds to a toughness measure of 66%. However the employment gains

relative to not having a minimum wage are very small, being in the order 0.5% and the

average wage gain is 0.8% although, of course, the wage gain for those affected is
considerably larger. In general, employment is not very sensitive to the minimum wage in

our base case and employment is effectively constant for a wide range of minimum wages.

      We then investigated the sensitivity of these conclusions to variations in the


      In an earlier version of this paper (Dickens et al., 1993) we also estimated
      employment effects of minimum wages based on the Meyer-Wise (1983a, 1983b)
      approach of predicting employment effects by trying to estimate what the wage
      distribution would look like in the absence of a minimum wage. Results proved very
      sensitive to distributional assumptions and assuming log-normality of pay distributions
      of Wages Council workers proved to be very unsatisfactory.

                                            12
parameters. These results are presented in Table 1. First, we consider variation in 0, which

measures the elasticity of the labour supply curve to the individual firm. Not surprisingly,

as the labour supply curve becomes more inelastic and the extent of monopsony power

increases, the optimal minimum wage increases. We next consider a rise in the variance of

wages. In this case low dispersion of wages is associated with high optimal minimum wages.

This is not surprising because the optimal minimum wage differs across firms. If there is

little dispersion in wages one can "fine-tune" the minimum wage to what is desirable for the

small range of wages whereas if dispersion is high a minimum wage that is good for some

will have undesirable effects for others. One implication of this is to have different

minimum wages for different groups of workers. Next we consider the effect of the knock-

on parameter jz. Not surprisingly the higher this parameter the larger will be the effect of

the minimum wage on wages higher up the distribution and the lower the employment effect.

Hence the optimal minimum wage decreases as i increases.

       Finally, we consider varying the elasticity of labour demand. The optimal minimum

wage is increasing in the elasticity of demand although the effects are very small. The

intuition for this is the following. If labour demand is completely inelastic then employment

will be the same whatever the level of the minimum wage. The possibility for employment

gains only arises once there is some elasticity in the labour demand curve. However, it is

also the case that employment become more sensitive to the minimum wage as the elasticity

increases which means that an inappropriate minimum wage may have large effects on

employment. We also considered varying p but this seemed to have little effect on outcomes

and we lack any intuition about what its effects should be.

       We have discussed how we can use the theoretical framework described above to

                                             13
discuss the question of the optimal minimum wage. We now show how we can use it to

inform empirical work on the employment effects of minimum wages.




III. Empirical Implications

         In this section we consider what light the theoretical model proposed above can shed

on empirical approaches to the analysis of the employment effects of minimum wages.



a.       Longitudinal Studies

         The implications of the theoretical model presented above can be summarised in the

following equations:




                                Lft = L    (4 4 (W;/W))                                 (23)



                                                                                        (24)
                                (W,/W11)
                                           =
                                               w(4        w;)
In (23) and (24) the subscript jt denotes economic agent j (individual, industry, region, firm

etc.) in period t, A denotes the demand shock, B the supply shock, W the minimum wage

and W the average wage. We choose to condition employment on the toughness of the

minimum wage (defined W/W)' rather than the level of the minimum wage because a given



     8
         This is the minimum wage variable used in most empirical studies where it is
         sometimes weighted by the fraction of workers covered by the minimum.
                                               14
level of the minimum is likely to have a different effect on employment for different levels

of (A, B) so that a highly non-linear empirical specification would be essential if the effect

of the minimum wage was to be summarized merely by the level.

       One implication that emerges immediately from (23) and (24) is that looking for the

employment effects of a minimum wage in a cross-section where there is no variation in the

minimum is basically a pointless exercise. Some U.S. studies have adopted this methodology

and claim it to be valid by arguing that minimum wages should have less of an effect in high

wage states. Freeman (1980, page 8) concluded that studies that do this provide "at most a

weak test of the effect of the minimum" but we feel that is too generous. If there is no

variation in W, the employment equation (23) is unidentified. If some element of A is

excluded from the employment equation this will tend to lead to negative estimated effects

of the minimum on employment as a high A raises average wages and employment in the

labour market. However, if some element of B is excluded then this will tend to lead to

positive estimated employment effects as a high B raises the average wage and depresses

employment. Either will clearly reflect a spurious correlation between employment and

minimum wages.

       This means that, not surprisingly, one needs some variation in the minimum wage to

estimate its employment effects. This variation can be over time or across a group of

industries at a point in time or ideally has both sorts of variation. We use data satisf'ing

these criteria in the empirical analysis below where we use panel data on industry-based

minimum wages and employment from the UK in the 1970s and 1980s (see also Neumark

and Wascher, 1992, who use US panel data by state). It should also be apparent from the

discussion that it is crucially important to control properly for demand and supply shocks or

                                             15
alternatively that toughness should be instrumented using variables which affect the minimum

but are uncorrelated with those shocks.



b.     Impact Studies

       These studies originated in investigations of the employment effects of increases in

the US federal minimum wage (e.g. Lester, 1960) and the method has recently been revived

by Katz and Krueger (1992) and Card and Krueger (1993). They look at how the effect of

a change in the minimum wage differs across firms in the fast-food industry. If a negative

(positive) correlation between the increase in wages and employment growth is found it is

concluded that minimum wages reduce (increase) employment. Inspection of Figure 3 should

show the potential dangers with this inference. Suppose there are no changes in the

distribution of demand and supply shocks across firm and there are no knock-on effects.

Then the model described above predicts that the introduction of a minimum wage will lead

to employment gains for firms that have to raise their wages only slightly to the minimum

and falls for those firms that have to increase their wages the most.

       It should be noted that the relationship between wage growth and employment change

is non-monotonic so that there may be a negative or a positive correlation between wage

growth and employment growth9 but, whatever the result, this tells us nothing about the total

employment effects of minimum wages for which we need to add up the employment gains

and losses across firms i.e. we need to integrate the area between the two lines in Figure 3

(weighting by the distribution of X). For example, if all the firms were on the downward


       Matters are complicated by the fact that the relationship between wage growth and
       employment growth is non-monotonjc so that a linear relationship is inappropriate.

                                             16
sloping portion of the line in Figure 3 but above the horizontal axis one would find a

negative correlation between wage change and employment change but the net employment

effect of the minimum wage is positive. Often impact studies are not able to add up the

employment changes across firms that are due to the minimum wage as they have no way

of controlling for aggregate industry demand or supply shocks that may be affecting all firms

at the same time as the change in the minimum wage. However, it should be noted that the

study of Card and Krueger (1993) does allow for this by considering characteristics of a

similar labour market which was unaffected by the changes in the minimum as a control.

       The above discussion has been in terms of the introduction of a minimum wage, but

a similar problem arises if we consider the effect of increasing the minimum wage. As long

as the increase in the minimum is not too large, for firms that increase wages from the old

to the new minimum we would expect to find some negative and some positive employment

effects.

           In this section, we have argued that there are some potential problems in interpreting

the results of impact studies. The problem arises because our theoretical model predicts that

different firms will respond in different ways to changes in the minimum wage whereas this

approach has implicitly has to assume that all firms will respond in the same way. Such an

approach is sensible only if the competitive model is correct. The bias is likely to be

towards finding a negative correlation between wage and employment growth, a bias that is

likely to be particularly large if one focuses on the lowest wage firms. Given this, it is

perhaps surprising that Krueger and Katz (1992) and Card and Krueger (1993) fail to find

such an effect, and it is possible to argue that their conclusions may understate the positive

effect of the minimum wage on employment.

                                                 17
       In this section, we have discussed a number of ways of empirically estimating the

employment effects of minimum wages. In the next section, we try to implement these

approaches using information on the UK system of minimum wages, the Wages Councils.




IV. The Waaes Councils

       The Data

       The Wages Councils were established by Winston Churchill in 1909 to protect the pay

of workers in the so-called 'sweated' trades. They set minimum wage rates in a number of

different industries. Over the years, the number of industries covered first increased (to a

peak of about 60 covered sectors in the early 1960s) and then decreased and by 1992 the 26

remaining Wages Councils set minimum wages for approximately 2.5 million workers in low

paid sectors (mostly in hotels and catering, retail, clothing manufacture and hairdressing but

also in a number of very small industries). Until the 1986 Wages Act, the Councils

generally set a myriad of minimum wages differentiated by age, occupation and region but

since 1986 set only a single rate. The 1993 Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights

Bill abolished the remaining 26 Councils so that from 1993 there is no form of minimum

wages in operation in the UK. One of the Government's arguments for abolition was based

on the claim that the minimum rates of pay set by the Councils were bad for employment

(see Dickens et a!., 1993).

       The best source of information on workers covered by the Wages Councils is the

annual New Earnings Survey (NES). This is an employer-reported 1% sample of all workers

who pay National Insurance contributions conducted in April each year. We have access to

                                             18
the data for the years 1975 to 1990. There are two ways of identifying workers in Wages

Council industries from the NES. First, employers are asked whether workers are covered

by a Wages Council agreement.         Secondly, we can use the detailed industrial and

occupational information to work out who should be covered. Typically, the numbers

obtained using the first method are less than the numbers obtained by the second method and

there seems to be some degree of misclassification. For this reason, we prefer the numbers

obtained from the second method.'° Only the relatively large Wages Councils have enough

workers in the NES for the data to be considered reliable; the ones used in this study are

reported in Table 2. A potential problem is that the 1986 Wages Act removed people under

the age of 21 from the coverage of the Wages Councils. However, it seems that the adult

minimum rates are still exerting a strong effect on youth wages (which is reminiscent of the

US finding of Katz and Krueger, 1992, that the youth sub-minimum is rarely used), so we

use total employment in the Wages Council industries in our empirical analysis.

         A further concern is that the NES undersamples part-time workers as workers only

pay National Insurance if they earn more than a certain amount (56 per week in 1993). So

we also used employment figures derived from the Employment Gazette (EG). These have

the advantage that they include part-time workers but have the disadvantage that the map

between the industries and Wages Councils is not perfect. Table 2 summarizes our
employment data. We present average employment based on both NES and EG figures and

the correlation between the two. As can be seen, the correlation is low in some cases




                Having said that, in some earlier work (Machin and Manning, 1992) we
    10

                report some results using the former numbers and reach very similar
                conclusions to those reported below.
                                             19
(though this only seems to be a serious problem for the Councils we do not follow through

the entire 1975-90 sample period) so it is important to check the strength of our results using

both measures; we are careful to do this below.

       For our wage variable we use the basic hourly wage. To construct toughness, our

preferred measure of the impact of the minimum wage defined as the ratio of the minimum

to the average wage, we also need a measure of the minimum wage in force at any particular

time. After 1986 this is straightforward as a single rate was set but, prior to that date, we

used the lowest adult minimum rate. The average level and change in toughness for each

Wages Council is reported in Table 2 and the median toughness in each year is plotted in

Figure 4. As can be seen, toughness of the minimum wage increased in the 1970s but

decreased in the 1980s with the arrival in 1979 of a Government hostile to the idea of

minimum wages.



       The Effect of the Wages Councils on the Wage Distribution

       In this section we investigate the effect of the minimum rates set by the Wages

Councils on the distribution of wages. There are a number of reasons for being interested

in this. First, some commentators have expressed doubts about whether the Wages Councils

have any effect at all because of lack of enforcement. Secondly, we would like to have some

idea of the effect of the minimum wage on wages further up the wage distribution.

       We investigated this by estimating first-differenced regressions of the log hourly wage

at each decile in the earnings distribution on the log of the minimum hourly wage, together

with year dummies (the regressions are weighted by the employment numbers in each

industry-year cell). The results are reported in Table 3. As would be expected, the effect

                                             20
of the minimum wage on earnings levels is strongest at the lowest deciles of the distribution.

Effects are estimated to be insignificantly different from zero for the median and higher

deciles in the distribution. As the bottom row of the Table testifies, there is a positive

significant impact on the average wage.

       Given that the minimum has a considerably smaller effect on higher earnings, raising

the minimum wage would have the effect of strongly reducing the dispersion in earnings, a

result that was also found in an earlier piece on the British Wages Councils by Machin and

Manning (1992). For example, a first-differenced regression of the gap between the 90th and

10th percentiles of the log wage distribution on the log of the real minimum and time

dummies produced a coefficient (standard error) of -0.293 (0.096) suggesting a 10% increase

in the real minimum would reduce the 90-10 log hourly wage differential by some 2.9%.



       The Effect of the Wages Councils on Employment: Panel Data Estimates

       In this section we investigate the relationship between employment and minimum

wages using our panel on the UK Wages Councils between 1975 and 1990. We want to

estimate an employment equation like that described in (23) above. Issues regarding the

appropriate specification of the employment function raise the question of how to properly

control for demand and supply shocks. We think of most supply shocks as coming from the

aggregate labour market, so model these by including year and Wages Council dummies.

Modelling demand shocks is somewhat more tricky, mainly because most Wages Council

workers are employed in service sector industries for which we have no information on

variables that we might expect to shift the revenue function (e.g. prices). We follow two

strategies to try to control for demand shifts. First, we do have data on industry sales which

                                             21
will be related to the industry shocks, A, through the revenue function R=A.L' so we

include (appropriately instrumented) sales variables in our employment functions. Second,

we allow for different employment trends in the Catering, Clothing and Retail sectors to

control for sector-specific employment changes.

       So, for Wages Council j in year t, the model to be estimated is of the form:

                                                                                         (25)
        Lft=fJ+81(W/Wp) +827'JME,+Ô3SALESft+645EC7'ORft+Uft
where f is a Council-specific fixed effect, TIME denotes a set of year dummies, SALES is

the log of sales, SECTOR denotes a set of linear trends for Catering, Clothing and Retail and

u is a random error. To eliminate the fixed effects we first-difference equation (25) to yield

the employment growth equation

                                                                                         (26)
             61   A(W;,   Wft) + 62 ATIME + 83 1SALESft + 84 tJSECTORft +


       Equation (26) forms the basis for the empirical work, though we also present some

further generalizations below.

       In Table 4 we present a set of results based on estimating variants of (26) using the

employment measure from the New Earnings Survey as the dependent variable. We report

seven specifications that differ in their estimation method and in their inclusion of controls

for supply and demand shocks.

       Column (1) is a simple least squares regression of the change in log(employment) on

the change in log(toughness) plus a set of year dummies. The coefficient on the toughness

variable is estimated to positive and significantly different from zero with a t-ratio of 2.30.

Hence, the basic correlation between employment changes and changes in the toughness of


                                             22
minimum wages is not in line with the conventional viewpoint. Rather, it contradicts it

directly and there is a positive association.

       In the toughness specification of the bite of the Wages council minima that we adopt

in this paper, there is an implicit assumption of equal and opposite regression coefficients on

the minimum and average wage variables in the estimated employment equation. If the real

minimum and the real average wage are included as separate arguments, their coefficients

and standard errors are estimated as .473 (.191) and -.167 (.230) respectively. A formal F-

test of their restriction to the toughness variable has a p-value of 0.296 suggesting that the

restriction is not rejected by the data.

       In columns (2)-(4) of Table 4 we include different specifications of the demand shock

variables (sector-specific trends, sales growth or both). In column (2) we include dummy

variables for Clothing and Retail Councils (i.e. which are picking up employment trends in

the first-differenced models). Their estimated coefficients are both estimated to be negative

and significant suggesting slower employment growth over the sample period than in the

Catering sector. The coefficient on log(toughness) is, however, barely altered by their

inclusion and remains positive and significantly different from zero.

       In columns (3) and (4) we control for sales growth (which is deflated by an aggregate

price index to convert it to real terms) in our employment growth equation. It is evident that

we cannot simply enter the contemporaneously dated sales variable as it is jointly determined

with the dependent variable. We thus followed two routes, the first instrumenting current

sales growth using the log of real sales dated (t-2) (with the coefficient in the instrumentation

equation allowed to vary in each cross-section) and the second to simply include sales growth




                                                23
dated (t-2) as.a regressor." Controlling for sales does not affect the nature of the reported

results. Whilst sales is significantly associated with employment in the instrumented version,

the coefficient on log(toughness) remains significant and positive in both specifications.

There is clearly very little comfort here for those who claim that the Wages Council

minimum pay rates were bad for employment in the 1975-90 time period.

        In the remainder of the Table we use the log of the real minimum wage dated t, t- 1,

and t-2 as instruments for the log of toughness. This is to ensure that the employment

variations come through the minimum wage changes and not through average wage changes.

In all cases, the coefficients remain similar to those in columns (1)-(4) (they actually rise by

a small magnitude) and remain significant at the 10% level or better. The validity of the

choice of instruments also cannot be rejected: for example, in the column (5) model, a

formal Sargan instrument validity test produced a x2(2) statistic of 2.52 for the over-

identifying restrictions provided by the instruments which lies well beneath the 5% critical

value of 5.99.

        Hence, the specifications in Table 4 present evidence that, counter to the conventional

economic model, increases in Wages council minimum rates of pay were associated with

improved employment in the 1978 to 1990 time period. There is no evidence whatsoever

for the notion that minimum wage effects on employment were negative, and in statistical

terms we can comprehensively reject a null hypothesis of an employment-minimum wage

elasticity in the -.1 to -.2 range which was cited as typical of the earlier time-series based



    l   The reason for dating at (t-2) is that the MA(1) error induced by the first-differencing
        of the employment equation means that sales growth dated (t-l) is not independent of
        the error term.
                                              24
evidence by Brown et a!. (1982).

         We conducted various tests of the robustness of these results. First, we used total

employee hours as our dependent variable. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 report hours

specifications that produce similar results to the analogous specifications in Table 4. In both

cases   the coefficient on the minimum wage variable is estimated to be positive and of similar

magnitude to those reported in Table 4, though the effects are a little less precisely

determined.

         Still concering possible discrepancies due to hours differences, we also considered

whether our results could be explained by the under-sampling of part-time workers in the

NES. We did this in two ways. First, we included a variable measuring the minimum

number of hours that had to be worked to earn more than the National Insurance lower

earnings limit. We constructed two variables of this type; in one we divided the weekly

earnings limit by the minimum in the Wages Council concerned while in the other we divided

by average earnings. At no time did this variable alter the sign or magnitude of the

measured minimum wage effects.

         We also considered whether our results hold for alternative measures of employment,

and report estimates using employment data from the Employment Gazette in columns (3)

and (4) of Table 5. Again the results are very similar. In column (3) the impact of

toughness on employment is positive and significant with a t-ratio of 2.00. The estimated

coeffcient on log(toughness) is somewhat smaller than before, but this is not surprising if the

employment measure includes some workers who are not covered by the Wages Councils.

When the toughness variable is instrumented it loses significance, although it retains a

positive sign with an asymptotic t-ratio in excess of unity ('t' = 1.26).

                                              25
        On the basis of the results in Tables 4 and 5 we conclude that our findings are

relatively robust across alternative employment measures and to various specification changes

and robustness checks. However, despite the fact that the models reported in Tables 4-6 do

not appear to suffer from model misspecification via omitted dynamics (see the serial

correlation tests), there is an issue of whether our results are contaminated by not considering

the potential for dynamic minimum wage effects on employment (see Neumark and Wascher,

1992, who argue that minimum wage effects on employment may persist across time

periods). To this end our final set of empirical results are dynamic employment functions

that allow for minimum wage effects dated back to (t-2) to affect employment.

       We report six dynamic employment functions in Table 6. The equations differ in

their dependent variable (the two employment variables and the total employee hours

variable) and in whether or not toughness is instrumented. Whilst there axe some noticable

differences in the nature of the estimated employment functions (e.g. lagged dependent

variables have a more important impact for the EG variable) they still paint an unambiguous

pattern. Minimum wage effects are estimated to positive, and significantly so in some

specifications. There remains no evidence of any negative impact of minimum wages on the

employment patterns of Wages Council workers. Of course, it should be noted that we have

only investigated the effect of the Wages Councils on employment in the affected industries;

it is possible that employment in other industries is affected but it seems rather implausible

and unlikely to think that these indirect effects could overturn the direct effects. Irrespective

of specification and data definition, the effect of minimum wages on employment is always

estimated to be non-negative and in many cases to be positive.

       These results contrast markedly with Kaufman's (1989) study of the employment

                                               26
effects of the Wages Councils sc it is probably worth commenting on differences between

our study and his. First, there is a difference in the sample period used; most of his results

are based on the 1970s. Secondly, the sample of Wages Council industries used are

different. Kaufman concentrates on small manufacturing industries and excludes several of

the large service-sector industries notably retail and catering. Curiously, he also seems to

have included two industries in his sample, jute and paper box, in which the Wages Councils

were abolished in 1969 yet almost all his observations come from the 1970s. We believe that

our sample covers the vast bulk of workers in Wages Council industries so is likely to

present a much more accurate picture of the effect of Wages Councils. Finally, there is a

difference in methodology. Kaufman starts from the premise of the competitive model and

adopts empirical specifications designed to find the negative effects predicted by that theory.

We believe that prejudging the issue in that way is extremely dangerous and could well

account for why his results differ from ours.



V. Conclusion

       The late 1980s and early 1990s increases in the US federal minimum wage have

generated a renewed interest in the economic effects of minimum wages. This has become

even more the case since a number of recent empirical pieces based on these increases have

reported very unconventional results, with minimum wage increases either not affecting

employment or even raising it. Given the long-standing presumption in economics that

minimum wages depress employment then it has proved somewhat difficult to provide a

reasonable theoretical explanation of such findings.

       In this paper we have presented a model of the labour market which we have argued

                                             27
can be usefully used for thinking about the likely effects of minimum wages on the labour

market. We have not attempted to test our model against competing alternatives but we

believe that it is intuitively plausible and it can do quite well in explaining the stylized facts

about the effects of minimum wages. Using this theoretical framework, we have evaluated

a number of possible empirical approaches to looking at the effect of minimum wages.

Implementing the approaches that we favour to examine the effect of minimum wages in the

UK, we find strong evidence that they have compressed the distribution of earnings and

probably raised employment, the latter being a result that would be regarded as anomalous

in a competitive model but one that can easily be explained in our framework.

       Of course, the results reported here cast severe doubt on the UK Government's claim

that the recent abolition of the Wages Councils in its 1993 Trade Union Reform and

Employment Rights Bill could be justified on the grounds that they have traditionally

hindered employment. According to our results it seems that the only likely impact of

abolition will be increased inequality of earnings, coupled with no employment gains.




                                               28
                        Apoendix: Derivin2 A2areaate Emølovment

       In this Appendix we show how we can derive a relationship between employment, the

spike and toughness which depends only on the following parameters of the model:

       a)       e, the elasticity of the marginal revenue product of labour.

       b)       0, the inverse of the elasticity of the supply curve facing the firm.

       c)       o, the standard deviation of log wages in the absence of minimum wages.

       d)       t, the knock-on effect of the minimum wage further up the wage distribution.
       e)       p. the correlation between the wage shock and the labour supply shock.

The derivation of these results is rather tedious, relying on results about the means of

truncated log-normal distributions (see Maddala, 1983) but there is nothing difficult about

it.

       First, consider the derivation of total employment. If we have a minimum wage W

that induces (X+,X.) then average employment among unconstrained firms is given by:


                                                   (   !\1(Z,_a(1P
                                                       0        \0                      (a1 )
            L1 = E(LIIXI > X,) =   W°'.E(U).EX1            )        —
                                                                1



                lnX -lnX
where z, =                  where lnX is the mean of lnX and o is the variance of lnX.
                    a



For supply-constrained firms average employment is given by:

where lnZ=z and Z=(ln(X/X))/o.

For demand-constrained firms average employment is given by:


                                              29
                    L11 =   E(L1IX..<XcX.) =


                             ( .LE       .z
                                                '. o               I
                                                                                   _____
                                                                                           (a2)

               W°'E(U)EXI
                                0
                                      ) z0•
                                                '          0   /            0 /e    204




                                                      =
                            LmE(LiIXi<XJ
                        '                                                                  (a3)
                                      +0)°z_. ' z(z_0P
                                                              aI2(1-p),!\
                                                     0 +!)) .e'
           W04E(U?EX1 °         J(1
                                                                 0 L/

Combining them we have that average employment L is given by:

                    L [1 — (z.)].L,      +                             +
                                                                           X(zJ.L          (a4)
                                              [(z.)—(zJ].L,,
which is a function of z and the average wage W. We will show that the proportion of

workers being paid the minimum and the ratio of the minimum to the average wage is also

a function of z. The proportion of workers being paid the minimum is given by:

                                                    [1 -
                                  s = 1—                                                   ( )
                                                           L

which is a function of z÷ as claimed above.

       Now consider how we can compute the average wage. A fraction s of workers are

paid W. Consider the average wage in unconstrained firms. We cannot take a simple

average of (10) as that would give us the average wage across firms. The average wage bill

for an unconstrained firm is:

Dividing by (al) gives us the average wage among unconstrained firms, W1:

Now W = (l-s)W1 + sW which from (aS) can be written as:

Using (12) to write W in terms of W and z we can use (a8) to derive an expression for W

                                                30
                         E(WL1JX>X.) =


                          -&)t !.°              1 —'Z(z,—o(l +__i)) 2(Ip)
                                                                         1—            (a6)

                 WOE(U?W °' E(X         )E(X?                                 e
                                                           1 — .I'(z.)




                             (!.i.i)
                                _E1_
                     W — WW°Xe 2 S _________________
                                                   1—(z,— a(l—P))
                                                                                       (a7)
                                            1 —(z,—a(1
                         =We           2 0 ____________


                                                       1   —(z,—a(1           0
                 W = W s+(1—s)e                    .                                   (a8)
                                                           1—(z,— U(l—P))

that can be substituted into (a4) to give an expression for employment in terms of z.. alone.

       Similarly toughness is (WIW) which, using (aS) and (a8) can also be written as a

function of z.




                                             31
References

Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond (1991) "Some tests of specification for panel data:
       Monte Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations", Review of
       Economic Studies, 58, 277-98.

Brown, Charles., Curtis Gilroy and Andrew Kohen (1982) "The effect of the minimum wage
      on employment and unemployment", Journal of Economic Literature, 20, 487-528.

Brown, Charles and James Medoff (1989) "The employer size-wage effect", Journal of
       Political Economy, 97, 1027-1059.

Burdett, Kenneth and Dale Mortensen (1989) "Equilibrium wage differentials and employer
       size", forthcoming Review of Economic Studies.

Calvo, Guillermo and Stanislaw Wellisz (1979) "Hierarchy, ability and income distribution",
       Journal of Political Economy, Part 1, 87, 991-1010.

Card, David (1992a) "Using regional variations in wages to measure the effects of the federal
       minimum wage", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46, 22-37.

Card, David (1992b) "Do minimum wages reduce employment? A case study of California,
       1987-89", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46, 38-54.

Card, David and Alan Krueger (1993) "Minimum wages and employment: A case study of
       the fast food industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania", Princeton University
       Industrial Relations Section Discussion Paper No. 315.

Card, David, Lawrence Katz and Alan Krueger (1993) "Comment on David Neumark and
       William Wascher, "Employment effects of minimum and sub-minimum wages: Panel
       data on state minimum wage laws", Princeton University Industrial Relations Section
      •Discussion Paper No. 316.

Dickens, William and Lawrence Katz (1987) "Inter industry wage differences and industry
      characteristics", in Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard (eds.), Unemployment and the
      Structure of Labour Markets, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Dickens, Richard, Paul Gregg, Stephen Machin, Alan Manning and Jonathan Wadsworth
      (1993) "Wages Councils: Was there a case for abolition", forthcoming British Journal
      of Industrial Relations, December 1993.

Dixit, Avinash and Joseph Stiglitz (1977) "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
        Diversity",  American Economic Review, 67, 297-308.



                                             32
Freeman, Richard (1980) "Economic determinants of geographic and individual variation in
      the labor market position of young persons", in R.Freeman and D.Wise (eds.), Ihe
      Youth Labour Market Problem: its Nature. Causes and Consequences.

Hoizer Harry, Lawrence Katz and Alan Krueger (1991) "Job queues and wages", Ouarterly
       Journal of Economics, 106, 739-68.

Katz, Lawrence and Alan Krueger (1992) "The Effect of the Minimum Wage in the fast food
       industry", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46, 6-21.

Kaufman, Roger (1989) "The effects of statutory minimum rates of pay on employment in
     Great Britain", Economic Journal, 99, 1040-1053.

Lester, Richard (1960) "Employment effects of minimum wages", Industrial and Labor
       Relations Review, 13, 254-64.

Machin, Stephen and Alan Manning (1992) "Minimum Wages, Wage Dispersion and
       Employment: Evidence from the UK Wages Councils", Discussion Paper No.80,
       Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics, forthcoming
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review.

Machin, Stephen, Alan Manning and Stephen Woodland (1993) "Are workers paid their
      marginal product? Evidence from a low wage labour market", Discussion Paper
      No.93-09, University College London.

Maddala, G. (1983) Limited-dependent arid qualitative variables in econometrics, Cambridge
      University Press.

Meyer, Robert and David Wise (1983a) "The effects of the minimum wage on the
       employment and earnings of youth", Journal of Labor Economics, 1, 66-100.

Meyer, Robert and David Wise (1983b) "Discontinuous distributions and missing persons:
      the minimum wage and unemployed youth", Econometrica, 61, 1677-1698.

Neumark, David and William Waseher (1992) "Employment effects of minimum and sub-
     minimum wages: Panel data on state minimum wage laws", Industrial and Labor
     Relations Review, 46, 55-81.

Nickell, Stephen and Sushil Wadhwani (1990) "Insider forces and wage determination",
       Economic Journal, 100, 496-509.

Sullivan, Daniel (1989) "Monopsony power in the market for nurses", Journal of Law and
      Economics, 32, S 135-S 178.




                                           33
Teulings, Coen (1992) "The effect of minimum wages on wage distribution and employment
      using non-discrete factor production functions", unpublished, University of
      Amsterdam.




                                         34
                Figure 1
           The Three Regimes
Wage                      MCL          Labour
                                       Supply



       *
  W


                                       MR
                                            Pt1


                                       MRPL2
                                       MRPL
                               Employment
      4-.
      C
      C)
       E
      >
      0          -J             x
      E
      w
      C
      0
      ci)

                                ><
c'J
 a)   E
 D) E
IL C
                                ><
      a)
      4-.
      0
      4-.
      C)
      ci)

      w
      ci)
      -c                   -J
      I—




            -J




                      36
                            FigUre 3
             The Effect of Introducing a Minimum Wage
 Change in
Employment




        0
                                                  Change in
                                                    Wage
                                        Figure 4

                          The Toughness of the Wages Councils:
            Median of Ratio of Minimum to Average Hourly EarnIngs, 1975-1990



      .75




Cl


>




I

     .55
           1955                igho                ighs               igdo
                                         Year




                                          38
                                                                     Figure 5

                        Changes In Log(Employment) and Changes in Log(Toughness)


               .3 -
                                                        S
                                                                     I
-s             .2   -                                                                 .
as
C                                          S.       S           .S                             .
E
                                            .                   I. .
0>5                                                             .
0.             .1
                    —                .                      .                 .
E                                                                                         S
a.)                               .5. 5                     S

                                                                                          .S
0)
0
0I
               0-                                           S.
C
C
                                  S•
                                       •
                                                       • ••. .5
                                                    .. •5                                      0
U                             •
                                   •



                                                ..:..                •            .
           —.1—
                          S
                                       S        •                                     S
                                            .a
                                       .
                                                    . .
           -.2-
                    -.5
                                                        change Iog(min/ave wage)
      Notes.
               Based on New Earnings Survey data described in Table 2. The regression line is
               from a regression of the change in log(employment) on the change in the
           • log(minimum/average) (standard errors in brackets):

               Change in log(employment) = .026 + .305 Change in log(minimum/average)
                                         (.006) (.137)
      2.       An analogous regression estimated by robust regression methods to downgrade the
               importance of potential outliers was:

               Change in Iog(employment) = .022 + .226 Change in log(minimum/average)
                                           (.006) (.099)




                                                                         39
                         Table 1
       Simulations of the Optimal Minimum Wage

                The Effects of Variation in 0
 C      optimal           optimal         employment   wage
         spike           toughness           gain      gain
0.05      0.0                0.0                0.0    0.0
0.10      0.2               40.3                0.0    0.0
0.15      3.8               55.9                0.1    0.2
0.20     12.1               66.3                0.5    0.8
0.25     21.9               73.5                1.3    1.9

                The Effects of Variation in u
 r      optimal           optimal         employment   wage
         spike           toughness           gain      gain
0.1      72.9               98.2                8.2    6.7
0.2      34.1               86.8                2.2    3.1
0.3      12.1               66.3                0.5    0.8
0.4       3.3               44.0                0.1    0.1
0.5       0.7               25.5                0.0    0.0




                           40
                                      Table 1 (continued)

                                  The Effects of Variation in u
          z               optimal            optimal        employment            wage
                           spike           toughness           gain               gain
         -0.5              30.7               79.0                1.6              3.2
          0.0              12.1               66.3                0.5              0.8
         0.5                3.7               55.3                0.2              0.1
          1.0               1.3               48.5                0.0              0.0

                                  The Effects of Variation in

                         optimal            optimal         employment            wage
                          spike            toughness              gain            gain
          1.0              12.4               66.7                0.3              0.9
          2.0              12.1               66.3                0.5              0.8
         3.0               11.9               66.0                0.6              0.7
         4.0               11.7               65.8                0.7              0.7

Notes.

1.       In all tables only one parameter is varied from the base case. In the base case we use
         the parameters o=0.3, z=0.0, E2, 0=0.2.
2.       The numbers given refer to percentage points.




                                              41
                                             Tab'e 2
                                   Summary of Wages Council data


Wages Council                           Average      Average        Average       Correlation
                                       Toughness    Employment,   Employment,   between NES and
                                                       NES            EG            EG series

Councils in Sample 1975-1990

Licensed Residential                    0.6049          503         103906          0.3814
Establishment, Male

Licensed non-Residential                0.6481          461         126438          0.4749
Establishment, Male

Unlicensed Place of Refreshment,        0.5965          311         77544           0.9697
Male

Licensed Residential                    0.7996          636         167569          0.7355
Establishment, Female

Licensed non-Residential                0.8864          748         258456          0.8253
Establishment, Female

Unlicensed Place of Refreshment,        0.7898          425         130788          0.9619
Female

Councils in Sample 1975-1981

Clothing Manufacture, Male              0.5104          313         49586           0.73fl
Retail Food & Allied Trades, Male       0.5552          1348        223186          -02326
Retail Trades (Non-Food), Male          0.5180          2537        406471          -0.0882

Clothing Manufacture, Female            0.7766          1441        212557          0.9346

Retail Food & Allied Trades,            0.8617          2238        382114          -0.2035
Female

Retail Trades (Non-Food), Female        0.8044          5322        850657          -0.2761

Councils in Sample 1982-1990

Clothing Manufacture, Male              0.4446          236         41433           -0.3014

Retail Food & Allied Trades, Male       0.5839          1579        245478          -0.2044

Retail Trades (Non-Food), Male          0.4982          2531        357456          0.9206

Clothing Manufacture, Female            0.7186          1137        164689          -00274

Retail Food & Allied Trades,            0.8805          2824        465733          0.6364
Female

Retail Trades (Non-Food), Female        0.7688          5117        760478          0.7828




                                                   42
                                             Table 2 (continued)

         Wage, Council                        Average Change      Average Change in      Average Change in
                                                    in            Log(Employment),       Log(Employmcnt),
                                              Log(Toughness)            NES                      EG

         Councils in Sample 1975-1990

         Licensed Residcntial                      0.0063               0.0173                 0.0134
         Establishment, Male

         Licensed non-Residential                  0.0114               0.0237                 0.0203
         Establishment, Male

         Unlicensed Place of Refreshment,          0.0249               0.0617                 0.0503
         Male

         Licensed Residential                      0.0001               00437                  0.0172
         Establishment, Female

         Licensed non-Residential                  0.0084               0.0537                 0.0277
         Establishment, Female

         Unlicensed Place of Refreshment,          0.0264               0.0769                 0.0373
         Female

         Councils in Sample 1975-1981

         Clothing Manufacture, Male                0.0060               -0.0307                -0.0387
         Retail Food & Allied Trades, Male         0.0267               0.0415                 -0.0003

         Retail Trades (Non-Food), Male            0.0216               0.0345                 -0.0115

         Clothing Manufacture, Female              0.0074               -0.0330                -0.0442

         Retail Food & Allied Trades,              0.0233               0.0510                 -0.0096
         Female

         Retail Trades (Non-Food), Female          0.0137               00352                  -0.0104

         Councils in Sample 1982-1990

         Clothing Manufacture, Male                -0.0144              -0.0060                -0.0106

         Retail Food & Allied Trades, Male         0.0085               -0.0108                0.0078

         Retail Trades (Non-Food), Male            .0.0115              0.0235                 0.0257

         Clothing Manufacture, Female              .0.0154              -0.0134                -0.0166

         Retail Food & Allied Trades,              -0.0053              0.0056                 0.0159
         Female

         Retail Trades (Non-Food), Female         -0.0111               00180                  0.0140
Notes.
1.       The 1975-81 and 1982-90 Councils arc treated separately as a consequence of the 1980 change in the Standard
         Industrial Classification (i.e. pre-1980 and post-1980 definitions did not match after the change) which was
         adopted in the New Earnings Survey data in 1982.
2.       NES refer, to New Earnings Survey and EG to Employment Gazette.
3.       Toughness i defined as the ratio of the minimum hourly wage to the average hourly wage.


                                                         43
                                            Table 3

                   Effects of Minimum Wages on the Wage Distribution

                                   Dependent variable:
                        Aith percentile I average of log real hourly earnings distribution




             Dependent Variable            Coefficient (standard         Test for
                                            error) on Log(real            Serial
                                          minimum hourly wage)          Correlation
             AlOth percentile                     .231 (.058)              -.698
             A20th percentile                     .252 (.067)              1.288
             A30th percentile                     .146 (.054)               .318
             MOth percentile                      .089 (.051)               .042
             b.SOth percentile                    .014 (.045)              -.084
             Zi60th percentile                    .017 (.050)              -.024
             A70th percentile                     -.023 (.052)              .625
             A80th percentile                     -.062 (.062)             1.213
             A90th percentile                     -.062 (.090)             1.434

             Aaverage                              .128 (.048)             1.153


Notes:

1.       Sample size: 204; Estimation period: 1976-90. Regressions weighted by
         employment in industry-year cell.
2.       Heteroskedastic consistent standard errors in parentheses.
3.       Time dummies included in all specifications.
4.       Serial correlation test is an N(0, 1) statistic for first-differenced panel data models
         as described in Arellano and Bond (1991).




                                             44
                                               Table 4

                              Minimum Wages and Employment in
                          18 Covered Wages Council Industries 1978-90,
                             New Earnings Survey Employment J)ata

                                       Dependent Variable:
                                     ALog(Eniployment, NES)JI

                             Log of Toughness not instrumented       Log of Toughness instrumented
                                                                      using Log of Real Minimum
                                                                         Wage dated t, t-1, t-2
                           (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)

     Log(Toughness)        .313      .298        .409       .288      .540       .436        .455
                          (.136)     (.139)     (.189)     (.144)    (.234)     (.247)      (.274)
     Retail sector                   -.032      -.023      -.031                -.032       -.032
                                     (.008)     (.007)     (.009)               (.009)      (.014)
     Clothing sector                 -.066      -.031      -.065                 -.063      -.024
                                     (.009)     (.014)     (.010)                (.009)     (.007)

     Log(Sales)                                  .506                                        .465
     (Instrumented)                             (.251)                                      (.253)

     Log(Sales2                                             .060
                                                           (.209)
     Year dummies          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

     Serial Correlation   1.658       .367      -.446       .438      1.556      .319       -.366

Notes.

1.         Sample size: 138; Estimation period: 1978-90.
2.         Heteroskedastic consistent standard errors in parentheses.
3.         The serial correlation test is an N(O, 1) statistic for first-differenced panel data
           models as described in Arellano and Bond (1991).




                                                  45
                                                Table 5

                        Minimum Wages and Employment in
                    18 Covered Wages Council IndustrIes 1978-90,
             New Earnings Survey Employee Hours Data (Columns 1 and 2)
             and Employment Gazette Employment Data (Coliimnc 3 and 4)

                                      Dependent Variable:
                            ALog(Total Employee Hours, NES)jt (Columns 1 and 2)
                            aLog(Employment, EG)JI (Columns 3 and 4)

                                   Log of          Log of         Log of          Log of
                                toughness not     toughness    toughness not     Toughness
                                instrumented    instrumented    instrumented   instrumented

                                    (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)

          1og(1'oughness           .338             .417           .143            .152
                                   (.193)          (.287)         (.072)          (.121)
          Retail sector            -.026           -.026          -.017           -.017
                                   (.008)          (.008)         (.004)          (.004)
          Clothing sector          -.016           -.017          -.042           -.041
                                   (.012)          (.012)         (.008)          (.008)

          Log(Sales),               .709            .633           .216            .201
          (Instrumented)           (.228)          (.233)         (.191)          (.182)
          Year dummies              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes

          Serial Correlation       -.270           -.183           .686            1.556

Notes.

1.       As forTable 4.




                                                  46
                                                    Table 6

        Dynamic Employment Functions: Minimum Wages and Employment in
      18 Covered Wages Council Industries 1978-90, New Earnings Survey Data
     (Columns 1-4) and Employment Gazette Employment Data (Columns 5 and 6)

                                        Dependent Variable:
                         4Log(Total Employment, NES) (Columns 1 and 2)
                         ALog(Total Employee Hours, NES) (Colsimn.c 3 and 4)
                         ALog(Einployment, EG) (Columns 5 and 6)

                        Log of         Log of           Log of         Log of         Log of         Log of
                       toughness       toughness        toughness      toughness     toughncss     Toughness
                          not        instrumented          not       instrumented       not        instrumen-
                      instrumented                    instrumented                  instrumented       lcd

                          (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)

 Log(Toughneu)           .430            .342             .270           .197           .085          .023
                        (.211)          (.275)           (.186)         (.261)         (.055)        (.063)

 Log(1'oughneu)1          .136           .240             .129           .300          -.028         -.061
                        (.095)          (.144)           (.015)         (.132)         (.064)        (.070)

 M.og(ToughneIs.i         .144           .298             .207           .448           .113          .203
                        (.061)          (.122)           (.112)         (.178)         (.036)        (.076)
 Retail sector          -.028           -.027            -.020         -.025           -.011         -.009
                        (.008)          (.009)           (.008)        (.008)          (.003)        (.003)

 Ctothrng sector        -.038           -.032            -.010         -.008           -.024         -.019
                        (.019)          (.018)           (.014)        (.015)          (.006)        (.005)

 Sales growth            .432            .355             .498           .455           .102           .107
 (Instrumented)         (.245)          (.238)           (.148)         (.173)         (.088)        (.086)

 Dependent               .194            .165             .270           .150           .606          .627
 variab1c,              (.188)          (.190)           (.166)         (.175)         (.232)        (.246)

 Dependent              -.239           -.156             .034         -.011           -.023          .010
 varjabIe2              (.149)          (.161)           (.149)        (.144)          (.276)        (.294)
 Year dummies            Yes             Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes

 Serial Correlation      1.554          1.092              .264         .347           -.473         -.748


Notes.
I.       As forTable 4.
2.       Due to bias on coefficient on lagged dependent variable dated (t-1) in first-
         differenced panel data models it is instrumented using values of itself dated (t-2) as
         instruments (with coefficients in the instrumenting equation allowed to differ in
         each cross-section).



                                                      47
