                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       PRECEDENT AND LEGAL ARGUMENT IN
                           U.S. ThADE POLICY: DO THEY
                       MA1TER TO THE POLiTICAL ECONOMY
                            OF THE LUMBER DISPUTE?




                                      Joseph P. Kalt




                                 Working Paper No. 4749




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1994


This paper has been prepared for the conference on The Political Economy of Trade
Protection, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 1994. This draft is preliminary
and for comment only. I have served as an economic consultant to the Governments of
Canada and British Columbia in the "Lumber III" trade dispute and have benefitted greatly
from access to the documentary record in that proceeding. Any errors or omissions are solely
my own, as are the preliminary views set forth. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4749
                                                                                   May 1994

                        PRECEDENT AND LEGAL ARGUMENT IN
                            U.S. TRADE POLICY: DO THEY
                        MATFER TO THE POLITICAL ECONOMY
                             OF THE LUMBER DISPUTE?

                                          ABSTRACT

       For more than a decade, the United States and Canada have been engaged in a rancorous
dispute over trade in softwood lumber. Through three successive rounds of administrative
litigation before the U.S. Department of Commerce, the U.S. sawmill industry has sought to have
countervailing duties imposed upon Canadian lumber imports. The U.S. interests argue that
Canada subsidizes its sawmills by providing timber from public forests at below-market prices,
and by restricting exports of Canadian logs.
       The trade war over lumber is waged primarily in the hearing rooms of the Department
of Commerce. The rules of war are set down in the legal criteria and precedents of U.S.
countervailing duty (CVD) law, and both the U.S. and Canadian interests have invested heavily
in legal armaments. This study examines whether, and to what extent, the institutional
framework — the legal rules, standards and precedents — of CVD law influences the success or
failure of the contending parties.
        Two alternative theories of political economy are tested. Capture Theory dc-emphasizes
the role of institutional settings of the kind at work here: The outcomes of political action are
determined by the stakes and organization of rent-seeking parties, and the quasi-judicial
regulatory proceedings of the Department of Commerce are mere Stiglerian theater. The New
Institutionalism, on the other hand, posits that the structure and form of such proceedings are
conditioning constraints, with the capacity to significantly influence the outcome of rent-seeking
battles. Applying pseudo-regression Boolean techniques to a set of the actual legal issues argued
before the Department of Commerce, this study finds more support for Capture Theory than for
the New Institutionalism. An issue with large stakes is never lost by the politically-favored party,
even when legal precedent and the burden of argument is against the party's interest.



Joseph P. Kalt
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
           PRECEDENT AND LEGAL ARGUMENT IN U.S. TRADE POLICY:
     DO THEY MAUER TO ThE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF THE LUMBER DISPUTE?

                                                by

                                       Joseph P. Kalt'
                                Kennedy School of Government
                                     Harvard University


I.      INTRODUCTION: APPLYrNG RATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY TO THE U.S.-
        CANADIAN LUMBER DISPUTE

               Efforts by interested parties to secure trade protection are frequently carried out

in the U.S. through the quasi-judicial regulatoty framework of countervailing duty (CVD) law,

as administered by the Department of Commerce (DoC). This framework structures at least the

form and content of the arguments for and against requested CVD protection. At the same time,

however, interested parties have other venues through which to make their case -- Congress, the

White House, political channels within the Department of Commerce, and other potentially

involved agencies. Parties who participate in the Department's litigation process often confess

to perceptions that the process is a charade; that the hearings and filings before the Department's

International Trade Administration (ITA) and International Trade Commission (ITC) have no
influence on the ultimate policy outcomes. Instead, it is averred, the policy outcomes are driven

by interest group politics, leaving the litigatory apparatus to serve merely as beside-the-fact

packaging for decisions made elsewhere and through different, "purely political" processes. If

this portrayal is true, the nation pays a higb cost for "packaging."

                  This study tries to get at the questions of whether and how the quasi-judicial

regulatory process by which CVD law is administered affects the success or failure of parties

petitioning for protection. The research posits two primaiy, and one subsidiary, theories of the

role that institutional structure plays in determining regulatory outcomes. These competing

theories are then examined — tested to the extent possible -- in the context of a particular set of

cases that have been flowing into the Department of Commerce in recent years. These cases

make up the on-going disputes over trade in lumber and logs — the so-called "timber trade wars"

-_   that have been raging between the United States and Canada for a decade.2 As of 1992, the

U.S. had imposed countervailing duties on Canadian softwood lumber imports on the grounds that

the Canadians provide publicly-owned trees to loggers at subsidized prices, and that Canadian

log export restraints (LERs) subsidize the prices that Canadian sawmills pay for raw logs.

                  In order to get leverage on the concept of "institutions," this research focusses on

the role that a particular legal institution — legal precedent — plays in determining the subgame

successes and failures that contending parties have as they tussle over such matters as the

applicability of CVD law, the definition of the relevant product and geographic markets affected

by allegedly countervailable foreign subsidies, and the measurement of the magnitude of alleged


      2         Kalt, J., "The Political Economy of Protectionism: Tariffs and Retaliation in the
          See
          Timber Industry" in R. Baldwin, Trade Policy Issues and Empirical Analysis, (University
          of Chicago Press: NBER, 1988).
                                                   2
subsidies (and the attendant size of a countervailing duty). Legal precedent is treated as a costly

"entry" barrier that litigants face when trying to exert political influence. Resources are expended

by competing parties to defend or breakdown precedents in a stochastic process of "take your best

shot [via legal argument] and hope you hit the bull's-eye." What arguments work and why?

               Section H of this paper discusses alternative theones of the political economy of

the administrative process of economic policymaking, focussing on so-called "capture theQry" and

"neo-institutionalist" explanations for the role of legal proceedings before the Department of

Commerce's ITA. Section III then provides a brief background on the issues and stakes in the

U.S.-Canada lumber dispute.       Section IV discusses the testing methodology and specific

hypotheses regarding the determinants of successful pleadings before the ITA. This section also

sets out the specific arguments regarding a set of 14 key issues disputed by the contending parties

in their arguments to the ITA. Section V implements the empirical tests, making use of newly

developed methods for determining the informational content of small sample, dichotomous

"cases." Section VI summarizes findings and pursues ramifications.


II.    COMPETING THEORIES OF THE ROLE OF INSTITUTIONS IN POLITICAL
       ECONOMY

II.A   Capture Theory and the New Institutionalism

               At some risk of caricature, economic theories of rational political economy (or

what used to be called the "economic theory of regulation") are currently pulling scholars into

two broad camps: Capture Theory (CT) and the New Institutionalism (NI). Under the former,

it is argued that political outcomes can be predicted and explained by a combination of two

primary economic factors: (I) the differential stakes that contending parties have in a particular


                                                 3
law or regulation, i.e., where the rents are; and (2) the differential costs of effective political

organization that contending rent-seeking interest groups confront as a result of standard Olsonian

forces of free riding.3 Within this framework, regulatory outcomes and processes are "captured"

by successful interest groups who wield the most effective political influence, where "influence'

is usually measured by either votes delivered to politicians or votes-plus-campaign-contributions

delivered to politicians.

               The New Institutionalism does not deny that the two prirnaiy factors underlying

CT are indeed important (if not strictly "primary"), but adds a third fundamental explanatory

factor to efforts to understand political outcomes. This factor is the institutional context -- laws,

procedures, precedents, regulations, voting rules, etc. -- that forms the playing field upon which

contending rent seekers meet. NI lays claim to every bit as much economic rationality in the

modeling of political actors as does CT, but argues that institutional structure constitutes binding

constraints, or at least conditioning costs, that limit the range of actors' investments in political

outcomes and hence play determinative roles in political outcomes.4 Thus, to understand why,

for example, the U.S. moved in 1992 to impose tariffs on imports of Canadian lumber, and why

the tariff structure and rates are what they are, NI asserts it is necessary to understand the formal




       The classic statements here are from the Chicago School: Stigler, G., "The Economic
       Theory of Regulation," Bell J. of Econ.. Spring 1971, 3-21; Pelt.zman, S., "Toward a More
       General Theory of Regulation," J. of Law and Econ.. August 1976, 211-40; Becker, G.,
       "Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political Influence," Ouart. J. of Econ.. August
       1983, 371-98.

       See, e.g., North, D., Institutions. Institutional Change, and Economic Performance
       (Cambridge Univ. Press: Cambridge, 1990); Bates, R., "Contra-Contractarianism: Some
       Thoughts on the New Institutionalism," Politics and Society, 16, 1988, 387-401; and the
       writings of the "rational political economists" (md. Fiorina, Shepsle, Alt, et a!.).
                                                 4
institutional setting through which the U.S-Canada lumber dispute has been mediated.

               A fundamental divergence between CT and NI arises over the issue of the

endogeneity (and speed of endogeneity) of political institutions. CT tends to view institutions

as ephemeral: political actors have the ability to change political institutions; and if a capturing

interest group needs an institution changed in order to garner wealth through political influence,

support-seeking political actors will change that institution. NI, on the other hand, views political

institutions as more exogenous: certainly they can be changed, but in any particular case (say,

of regulatory agency behavior), it is costly to change institutions and such costs make institutions

"sticky." This stickiness reflects rational commitment on the part of agents (e.g., Congress) to

a governmental structure that can substitute for perfect monitoring by principals (i.e., voters and

interest groups), but which is therefore imperfect and open to inertia, principal-agent-subagent

slack, ideological considerations, etc.

               In a nutshell, it is CT which argues, e.g.: "It doesn't matter who is President or

if we reform Congress; policies will be driven by the underlying economic interests of effectively

organized interest groups." NI responds: "Those interest groups have to work through an

institutional context that cant be changed overnight and will make them more or less powerful

in influencing the President or Congress or an administrative agency."

               As these theories play out in investigation of a particular class of political actions,

such as decisions of the ITA and the ITC regarding trade protection for U.S. lumber interests,

they carry testably different implications. According to CT, institutions such as legal proceedings

are "Stiglerian theater": the real gime is being played out behind the scenes of the hearing rooms

by interest groups and support-maximizing politicians. Legal rulings and such matters as


                                                 5
precedent may be a language by which the game is explained or justified after-the-fact to appease

the press and the public, but is not determinative of outcomes. NI would hold, however, that

such institutions as precedent, standards of evidence, and burdens of proof mailer: Agency

decision makers and the judges can't simply ignore precedent, evidence, or procedure, no matter

how much political clout the beseeching interest group has. If a group does not have a good

argument by which to satisfy or overcome precedent, or meet its evidentiary burden, it runs the

risk of losing before the agencies and the courts.


I1.B.   Research Design

               These descriptions of Capture Theory and the New Institutionalism present them

as sharply distinct, alternative hypotheses. As in many contexts where the demands of research

are to isolate testable differences in hypotheses, however, the differences here are drawn too

starkly. The added ingredient of NI — the determinative role of institutional structure -- is not

at odds with the rational, choice-theoretic underpinnings of CT, and CT defenders might surely

agree that in any particular instance of economic policymaking, institutions can matter. The link

is suggested above: the principal-agent problem readily generates institutional structure as a

constraint on agents that principals (such as members of the Congress) rationally adopt when they

are "captured" every bit as much as implied by CT, but can only imperfectly monitor how well

their agents (such as the regulatory agencies) are doing at the kind of constituent support

maximization that underlies CT.5

               Recognizing these intersections of CT and NI, the tests proposed here must be


        The nature of such support maximization is worked out for the case of no principal-agent
        slack by, e.g., Peltzman, op. cit. and Becker, op. cii.
                                               6
thought of more modestly than 'testing CT versus M. Rather, the objective of this study is to

see whether the added ingredient of NI — the institutional structure of the legal proceedings by

which CVD decisions are made in the U.S. — adds significantly to our understanding of the

political economy of the particular case of the U.S.-Canada lumber dispute.

               The discussion of sections I and II.A suggests the outlines of a research design by

which to understand whether and how the quasi-judicial litigatory process of CVD law

administration influences the success or failure of requests for protection. Specifically, the

research results reported below attempt to systematically examine a moderately-sized sample of

actual legal arguments made before the ITA in the U.S.-Canadian lumber dispute in order to test

whether or not success in making an argument can be systematically explained as a function of

determinants of the severity of the beseeching partys precedential burden or other contextual

aspects of the legal proceedings (per NI theory). Or, alternatively, is success or failure unrelated

to apparent precedential burdens and institutional context of the legal proceedings (per CT

theory)?
               The testing of NI against CT in the case at hand begins with identification of

salient attributes of the CVD legal proceeding before the ITA, and then tests whether variation

in those attributes across a range of issues argued before the ITA provides explanation for

variation in ITA decisions -- where "variation in ITA decisions" refers to whether the "winner'

in a particular argument is the pro-CVD party (US. lumber interests) or the anti -C VD party (the

Canadian parties). Under U.S. law (conditioned by various Trade Acts and U.S. participation in

the GATT), parties seeking to establish tariff protection for U.S. industries under the rules

governing countervailing duties do so by initiating a legal petition before the International Trade


                                                 7
Administration. The ITAs core responsibilities in CVD proceedings is to determine whether, in

fact, the targeted foreign government is engaging in a countervailable subsidization of its home

industry and, if so, by how much (commonly measured as the net reduction in cost realized by

the &ibsidized sector). On a separate legal track, the International Trade Commission has the

responsibility of determining whether the U.S. industry of interest has been injured as a result of

the asserted countervailable subsidy. Should a party prevail at the ITA and the ITC,
countervailable duties are then normally imposed unless blocked by the President under oversight

executive powers reserved to the office under U.S. law.

               Upon acceptance of a CVD petition for consideration, legal proceedings are
launched whereby the ITA first gathers information regarding the nature (e.g., legal origin,

method of payment, and level of production) and extent (e.g., magnitude and coverage within and

across industries) of any purported subsidy by a foreign government. Interested parties typically

include the U.S. industries which compete with the allegedly-subsidized foreign industries, the

affected foreign industries, and the foreign government.6 The ITA itself can be a party to the

dispute by self-initiating CVD inquiries. Although the particular vehicles of participation can

depend upon legal criteria of standing, interested parties typically have the ability to participate

in the formal hA proceedings, providing information and legal and substantive argument through

the written submissions, provision of data, and oral statements of expert witnesses, industry

participants, and legal counsel. Following a round of initial submission and consideration, the



    6
        Interestingly, U.S. consuming interests are typically absent from formal ITA proceedings -
        - in keeping with the predictions of CT that the very wide dispersal of their interests and
        low per capita stakes leave them unable to overcome Olsonian free rider problems and
        become a cohesive interest group.

                                                 8
ITA issues a Preliminaiy Determination to which parties with standing can reply. Following

replies and further consideration, the ITA then typically issues a Final Determination. As a result

of the Free Trade Agreement between Canada and the U.S., Final Determinations in CVD

proceedings such as the lumber dispute are referred for appeal and review to a five member bi-

national panel.

               I wish to focus here on the Final Determination phase of CVD proceedings,

wherein the International Trade Administration of the Department of Commerce makes its key

rulings and sets forth and imposes specific duties. To this point in CVD proceedings, the ITA

is the key adjudicator of parties' disputes, with its procedural, policy, and evidentiary standards

codified in law and precedent. In most cases, the key decisions leading to imposition of

protective tariffs on behalf of domestic industries are made at this level, a doctrine of "deference

to the agency" makes it very difficult for an appealing party to overturn the ITA's findings,

particularly on matters of factual evidence.

               The doctrine of legal "precedent" sits at the institutional heart of ITA (and other

regulatory agency) legal proceedings. When prior rulings of the agency or appellate bodies

overseeing the agency have established particular procedural, policy, or evidentiary standards,

such standards play central roles in determining the burdens and natures of proof that a party

must satisfy in order to justifiably prevail in an argument. Precedent (and th doctrines of

legislative intent and due process upon which it is based) thus conditions the ability of a party

to win an argument. Where precedent has established a high burden of proof for a party, for

example, the likelihood of prevailing declines. Where precedent has created a strong legal

principle, securing a ruling contrary to that principle is less likely.


                                                 9
               Within the framework of the New Institutionalism, precedent can be represented

as exerting two kinds of influences on the outcome of regulatory policymaking. First, for a given

precedent, a party seeking a ruling contrary to that precedent should require particularly strong

arguments.    "Strong," here, is contextual; and "should" means "jf NI is adding to our

understanding of the outcome of the policy process." If the precedent, for example, concerns

evidentiaiy thresholds (which can range from a standard of a "more than a mere scintilla" of the

evidence to "beyond a reasonable doubt"), the party to whom precedent assigns the burden of

proof should require more clear-cut, fewer controvertible facts which fit that theory, and/or clearer

exposition in order to win the argument at issue as the height of the burden increases.

               Second, precedents, themselves, can vary in strength. U.S. administrative law

changes over time. Congress modifies underlying legislation; appellate bodies clarify or modify

previous rulings; administrative agencies exercise latent discretion; and so on. Experience in the

administrative law process, however, indicates inertia and variation in the mutability of various

precedents. Within the New Institutionalism, precedents should be "stronger" -- i.e., harder for

an opposing party to overcome, or easier for a supporting party to uphold -- the longer and more

frequently that have withstood previous challenges and been reaffirmed by appropriate authorities,

and the more clear is the underlying legislative intent and/or directive.

               In short, relative to Capture Theory, the New Institutionalism predicts that:

       NI-I. For a given precedent, variation in the ability of a party to overcome that
               precedent or meet the burden of that precedent should be positively related to the
               strength of that party's arguments.
       NI-2. Variation in the ability to overcome precedents or meet the burdens of precedents
              should be positively related to variation in the strength of relevant precedents.

With the kinds of definitions of "strength" discussed above (and elaborated below), these two

                                                10
hypotheses form the testable difference between CT and NI in the context at hand.

                Under strict CT, variation in the success or failure of a party's arguments should

not depend on contextual attributes of the institutions of precedent. Rather, variation in the

success of arguments ought to be related to the stakes of the contending parties:

        CT-I. The decision maker should be more likely to award a victory to an argument the
               larger the stakes of the beseeching party, independentof the strength of the party's
               arguments and the strength of the precedent at issue.7

In the proceeding under examination, on any given issue, it is the case that the magnitude of one

party's gain is (to a first approximation) also the opponent's loss; stakes are generally of equal

but opposite sign from the contending parties' perspectives Across issues, however, stakes differ

in their magnitude. An issue such as the veiy existence of a countervailable subsidy is an all-or-

nothing matter, while disputes over measurement of marginal adjustments to a purported subsidy

put less at stake for the contending parties. Within the kind of equalize-support-at-the-margin

version of CT developed by Peltzman* and Becker9, support-seeking principals (and their agents)

faced with support-offering constituents of unequal political clout should secure support from

disparate parties by arriving at regulatory decisions that differentially favor the more influential

party, but that do not cut the less influential party completely out.'° This perspective on


        Much of the research that is focussed on Capture Theory (as well as NI) is directed at
        variations in the ability of potentially-affected interest groups to organize and exert
        influence. In the present context, the hurdle of organization has already been overcome;
        the parties are already in the hearing room exerting whatever influence they have.
    r   See   Peltzman, op. cii.

        See Becker, op. cii.
    10 This is the litigation analogue to the optimizing equilibrium demonstrated by Peltzran,
       op. cii., wherein the support-maximizing decision maker equates the marginal support
                                                 11
argument CT-i is implemented below.

              These competing hypotheses, NT-I and NT-2 versus CT-I, about how the ITA

legal process works form the core of the analysis undertaken here. An illustration is helpful to

explain the framework. The U.S. lumber industry has long argued that the Canadian federal and

provincial governments provide the rights to cut trees ("stumpage" rights) at below-market prices

to Canadian loggers, and that this constitutes a countervailable subsidy to lumber production in

Canada. Economists testifying on behalf of the Canadians (e.g., Wm. Nordhaus of Yale

University) and economists researching the matter independently (e.g., myself) have argued that

the evidence and the theoty indicate that to the extent Canadian stumpage may be below-market,

the consequence is merely an inframarginal transfer of Ricardian and Hotelling rent to loggers.

The supply of logs and hence lumber is left unchanged. U.S. lumber producers, therefore, face

no incremental competitive pressure from Canadian lumber producers and are not harmed by

Canadian stumpage policy.

              This argument has never gotten anywhere at the ITA or the ITC. It appears to be

misunderstood and dismissed as irrelevant theorizing by university economists.             Such

appearances, however, do not justify any general conclusions regarding as to how the quasi-

judicial CVD process operates or as to which arguments take hold and which do not. In order

to draw generalizable conclusions in this regard, systematic evidence must be garnered from a



       gained from a decision favorable to group A to the marginal support lost as a result from
       group B.
       Kalt, J., "The Political Economy of Protectionism: Tariffs and Retaliation in the Timber
       Industry" in R. Baldwin, Trade Policy Issues and Empirical Analysis (University of
       Chicago Press: NBER, 1988). This research was undertaken and published prior to any
       engagement with any party to the lumber dispute.
                                               12
framework which isolates alternative determinants of what makes one argument take hold, while

a another falls on deaf ears.

               Below I identifr a set of central, stakes-bearing issues that have been adjudicated

by the ITA in the latest round of the U.S.-Canada trade dispute. These issues can be categorized

according to who — the U.S. petitioners or the Canadians — has won each of them as of the ITA's

Final Determination, reached in May 1992. This creates a dichotomous winner-loser variable by

which to gauge the outcome of the legal proceedings. For each of the arguments in the data set,

I then code the stakes at issue in the argument for their magnitude, and code the argument of the

winning party for its consistency with precedent, its analytic or theoretical straightforwardness,

the strength of the winner's evidence, and the ease of exposition entailed by the winner's

argument. (These concepts are given more delineation below).

               The objective is to create a data set that can be analyzed under the pseudo-

regression Boolean techniques pioneered by R.agin.'2 These techniques permit dichotomous data

sets representing panels of cases to be reduced to their logical meaning in terms of necessary and

sufficient conditions in a manner that continuous variable econometric techniques, familiar to

most economists and political scientists, are unable to do. If the cross-case tests for the two

central hypotheses, NI-I and NI-2, listed above are borne out, the results will be consistent with

an NI view of the regulatory process. If their is no coherent pattern to the hypothesized
explanatory factors except the stakes at issue, the results will be most consistent with CT theory




    12
         Ragin, Charles C., The Comparative Method, (Berkeley: Univ. of Calif. Press, 1987).
                                                13
(per CT-I).13



ifi.      "LUMBER III": HISTORY AND ISSUES

                 The United States and Canada have been engaged in a long running dispute over

softwood lumber imports from Canada into the U.S. These imports compete directly with lumber

supplies produced in the United States, with sawmillers, in the Pacific Northwest region of

Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and British Columbia most notably, going head-to-head for sales in

North America and the Far East. In both the U.S. and Canada, the public Sector OWnS vast forest

resources that are provided to private sector loggers at fees known as "stumpage." As noted, U.S.

milling interests have long complained that they pay market value for stumpage under auction

procedures used in U.S. public sector sales, while Canadian formula-based stumpage is below

market. Moreover, allege the U.S. interests, provincial and federal export restraints on log

exports restrict the ability of foreign buyers to purchase logs in Canada for export and cause the

prices paid for Canadian logs by Canadian sawmillers to be lower than they otherwise would be.'4

Both alleged below-market stumpage and depression of log prices below free-trade levels are

asserted to constitute countervailable subsidies to Canadian lumber producers.



HI.A Lumber I, II, and III

                 The first round of the timber trade war -- "Lumber I" -- was commenced by a



       ' A third theory, Contractarianism (per the Buchanan tradition) might predict that the "truth
          will out" and that the correctness (absence of ambiguity) of an argument would be the
          only or the dominant explainer of Won and Lost.

          Ironically, the United States has log export restraints of its own.

                                                  14
CVD investigation of Canadian stumpage launched by the Department of Commerce in 1982.

Lumber I ended with a final negative determination by the Department of Commerce (DoC) in

1983, with the DoC finding that stumpage rights were allocated in a way that failed to satisfy the

technical legal criterion of "specificity" (which requires that a subsidy be provided to a specific

enterprise or industry, or group of enterprises or industries, in order for such a subsidy to be

countervailable.

               Lumber II arose in 1986 in response to a petition for investigation by the Coalition

for Fair Lumber Imports (CFLI), a trade organization and lobbying group representing
(predominantly) small and medium-size U.S. sawmill companies. CFLI again sought to

countervail the Canadian stumpage system. The Department of Commerce found on Preliminary

Determination that the Canadian stumpage system was both "specific" (in the sense described

above) and "preferential" (i.e., it "distorted" the marketplace for lumber by affecting the supply

schedule of Canadian lumber). DoC set the countervailing duty rate for Canadian lumber imports

at 14.5% ad valorem. The Lumber LI CVD was effectively preempted, however, when escalating

retaliatory threats by the Canadians compelled the U.S. and Canada to enter into a Memorandum

of Understanding (MOU). The Lumber II MOU obligated Canada to impose a 15% fee on

softwood lumber exports to the U.S.'5

               In 1991, Canada and a number of its provinces concluded that the MOU had been

satisfied, and lifted the 15% export fee. The DoCs ITA immediately launched Lumber III, an

investigation into the possibility that Canadian stumpage continued to constitute a countervailable




    '   SeeKalt, op. cii., for a discussion and calculation of the international welfare effects of
        Lumber II.
                                                15
subsidy. At the invitation of the ITA, the Coalition for Fair Lumber Imports filed submissions

arguing that Canada's log export restraints (LERs) also constitute a countervailable subsidy by

Canada to its lumber producers. Various Canadian parties, led by the various provinces' forestry

ministries, in turn intervened to plead their case as to why neither the stumpage system nor log

export restraints constituted countervailable subsidies.      The ITA found on Preliminary

Determination in March 1992 that both Canada's stumpage system and its LERs were

countervailable, and set a CVD at 14.48% for lumber imports into the U.S. from all of Canada

except the (volumetrically insignificant) Atlantic provinces. Following rounds of written and oral

submissions by CFLI and the various Canadian governments, the ITA issued its Final

Determination in May 1992.

               On Final Determination in Lumber ifi, the ITA found both Canadian stumpage and

the LER$ to be countervailable, and set an ad valorem CVD of 6.5 1% for all Canadian lumber

imported into the U.S. from Alberta, B.C., Ontario and Quebec. This CVD was a mixture of

asserted stumpage and LER countervailable subsidy findings, with all affected provinces found

to have stumpage subsidies. Only B.C. being found to have subsidies emanating from log export

restraints; reflecting the geography and heterogeneous forest types of B.C., the asserted LER

subsidy applied only with respect to logs produced along the dominant coastal regions of B.C.

Following the Final Determination, Lumber Ill went before a bi-national panel for review and

remand. The panel remanded the Final Determination back to the ITA for reconsideration and

supplementation on a number of legal and evidentiary issues. The ITA then issued a

Determination on Remand, raising the CVD to 11.54%, with the increase coming primarily from

the ITA's conclusion that the entire Province of B.C. constituted an integrated relevant log market



                                                16
and was thereby subject to the asserted LER subsidy.

                  The magnitude of the CVDs arrived at by the DoC may suggest that the stakes in

the lumber dispute are small. However, duties on the order of 5%-l5% translate into hundreds

of millions of dollars annually. Lumber II, for example, concerned only stumpage, yet it has

been estimated that its CVD would have produced (i.e., but for the MOU) tariff revenues of more

than $340 million per year for the U.S., and net gains for U.S. lumber producers of more than

$400 million per year." In the case of Lumber ifi, the stakes are summarized in Table 1. The

ITA's Final Determination estimates that the CVD would offset subsidies totalling close to $400

million per year.




    16
         See   Kalt, op. cit.
                                                 17
                                          Table I
                       ITA ESTJMATES OF COUNTERVAILABLE
                                      SUBSIDIES:
                               FINAL DETERMINATION
                              (Millions of Dollars per Year)
                                                         Log
                Province                 Stumpage       Export        Total
                                                       Restraints
                Alberta                      $5.1          $0          $5.1

                B.C.                       $145.7        $205.2      $350.9
                Manitoba                      $0           $0          $0

                NW/Yukon                      $0           $0          $0
                Ontario                     $34.3          $0         $34.3

                Quebec                        $0.1         $0          $0.1

                Saskatchewan                  $0           $0          SO

                TOTAL                      $185.2        $205.2      $390.4




              In December 1993, the bi-national panel completed its review of the ITA's

Determination on Remand and effectively found that neither Canadian stumpage nor B.C. LERS

could be countervailed on the basis of the case developed by the ITA. The CVD was rejected

and the matter remanded back to the ITA primarily on the grounds that it had not been shown

that stumpage and the LERs were "specific in the sense described above. As this is written, the

ITA is preparing another Determination on Remand in response to the panel's December 1993

findings. The dispute over Canadian softwood lumber imports goes on.



HI.B Framework for Boolean Representation of the Legal Arguments in Lumber Ill


                                              18
               The legal proceedings engendered by Lumber ifi have undoubtedly increased the

demand for logs in the world — by increasing the demand for paper. Hundreds of thousands of

pages of legal briefs, official rulings, expert reports, hearing transcripts, correspondence, and data

reporting have been produced and reproduced as the parties have argued their respective

positions. In the course of the proceeding, a multitude of arguments have been put forth and

debated. These arguments range from the legal and technical to the substantive and factual.

Among the many arguments afoot, however, the focus of the proceedings in Lumber III has

ended up being concentrated on a modest number of key matters. I now turn to a discussion of

these for purposes of arriving at Boolean codings of their NI-attributes and CT-relevant attributes

—
    precedential status, analytic straightforwardness, evidentiary strength, expositional hurdles,

stakes, etc. I begin with an introduction to the applicable Boolean psuedo-regression techniques.



HI.B. I Boolean Logic and Pseudo-Regression Techniques

               Following the framework of section II, in the case at hand, we would like to see

if and to what extent the success of an argument made in the legal context of the ITA's CVD

procedures depends on such variables as the strength of the argument's analytic underpinnings,

the strength of the precedent it encounters, the quality of the evidence in its favor, the stakes

riding on it, etc. Such an analysis encounters significant methodological difficulties. Not the

least of these is the creation of a metric by which to measure otherwise vague concepts such as

the "strength" of precedent, or the "quality" of evidence. For social science researchers

accustomed to continuous and naturally metered data (a good thing) and training that emphasizes

the ideal of large sample sizes leading to quantitative measures of confidence etc. (a good thing,


                                                 19
but only one quadrant of the philosophy of scientific method), measurement in a context of

qualitative "cases" is commonly a dead end for production of useable research results. Indeed,

in the legal contexts, questions such as "why did that party win its case?" are typically relegated

to discursive case studies, to be published in law journals.

                  Pioneering (and prize-winning) methodological developments hold some promise

for enabling the scientific researcher to isolate the useable information contained in comparative

and qualitative "case studies." These methods of "Boolean Analysis" have been given modern

social science impetus by (especially) Charles C. Ragin, and rely on the rules of logic and

Boolean mathematics to parse out the useful information contained in such contexts.1'

Notwithstanding unsettled questions regarding the epistemological relationship of these methods

to more familiar methods of classical and Bayesian statistics, these methods do provide rigorous

insight into the information content of otherwise qualitative cases.

                  The Boolean Analysis undertaken here relies upon the rules of logic to isolate

qualitative causes of a dichotomous outcome. At its core, Boolean Analysis relies on logic of

the following form to reach conclusions regarding the causal role of alternative postulated

explanatory factors: suppose two causes, A and B, are postulated as explanations of an event,

Y. A and B occur in various combinations of "presence" and/or "absence", and sometimes Y

occurs. In an otherwise well-specified model of causation that identifies A and B as possible

causes, if A is always present when Y occurs, but Y occurs with B present and with B absent,

B can logically be eliminated as a necessary ingredient in the causation of Y. If the researcher

can specify causal factors and determine their presence or absence across multiple instances of


    ll   See   Ragin, op. cii.
                                                20
 Y and not-Y, scientific information is gained through Boolean (presence/absence) logic of this

 form.

                Boolean Analysis proceeds by coding an outcome of interest for Yes/No (zero/one)

results. In the   case at hand, for example,   it is possible to examine the various arguments in

Lumber III and determine objectively whether or not CFLI (or, alternatively, the Canadian

parties) won or lost a particular dispute. Possible causal factors in determining when an outcome

(e.g., "Win") occurs are then coded (zer&one) for their presence or absence in each observed

instance in which an outcome occurs. (This "measurement" of "right-hand side" variables is the

more difficult problem, and is taken up below.) The resulting coding can be represented            a
                                                                                        by
Boolean Summary (or Truth) Table of the kind illustrated below.

                       HYPOTHETICAL BOOLEAN SUMMARY TABLE
                        (Upper Case = Presence; Lower Case = Absence)

          OUTCOME                       FACTOR — A or a                  FACTOR — B or b
                Y                                a                                B
                Y                                A                                B
                y                                a                                b



               In this summary, Boolean Analysis would code the outcome Y in the first case
(row) as Y =   aB.   The second case would be coded as Y = AB. Multiplication in Boolean

analysis is read as "and", while addition is read as "or". Thus, we can say that Y = aB + AB;

i.e., Y occurs when either "a" and "B" are present together or "A" and "B" are present together.

If this is a well-specified model of the causation of Y, the result that Y = aB + A.B can be further

reduced by factoring to Y B(a + A) =        B. In other words, B is a necessary and sufficient


                                                21
condition to cause Y, and it doesn't matter whether A is present or not.

               The expression from the illustration to the effect that Y =B is a "prime implicant."

Prime implicants indicate necessary and sufficient conditions in the following way:

               Y=B                    B is both necessary and sufficient.
               Y = A +B               A and B are each sufficient, but not necessary.
               Y AB                   Both A and B are necessary, but not sufficient.
               Y = A(B+C)             A is necessary, but not sufficient.


               Note that Boolean Analysis of dichotomous factors is a form of "pseudo-

regression." This derives from the fact that, when two states, a and A, are both present when Y

occurs and other factors are constant across the relevant observations (i.e., B is present along with

a and A), there is clearly a collinearity problem — Y occurs with both A and not-A. Just as with

standard multiple regression techniques, the Boolean Analysis assigns a coefficient of "zero" to

the Ala factor because no causation can be attributed to it. Similarly, as with standard regression

techniques, the validity of results from Boolean Analysis are dependent upon the outside-the-data

specification that the researcher brings to the evidence. Specification bias can plague Boolean

Analysis just as it plagues more familiar statistical approaches to isolating the effects of

individual independent explanatory factors. Such bias could arise in the illustration if, for

example, there were a left-out factor, C, such that the accurate prime implicant was Y = aB +

AB + AC. In this circumstance, rejection of A as a causal factor in explaining Y would have

been erroneous: A plays a causal role when it occurs along with C.

               For researchers accustomed to large sample, continuous variable analyses and

hypothesis testing, the most obvious disadvantage of Boolean Analysis is the absence of

quantitative measures of confidence in expressed results. At the same time, however, Boolean


                                                22
Analysis utilizes the rules of logical contradiction to arrive at epsitemologically valuable

conclusions.I* Indeed, when problems of specification bias are not present, the ability of Boolean

Analysis to yield statements regarding necessary and sufficient conditions represents an advantage

over more familiar quantitative techniques (which focus primarily upon the marginal contributions

of multiple variables).

                As noted above, the coding of "left-hand side" variables in a case such as ITA's

Lumber III Final Determination is largely objective and straightforward. It entails identifying the

"winner" of a particular argument in the proceeding, as this is indicated in the actual ITA

decision. Determining the presence or absence of particular possible causal factors that might

explain an argument's success or failure, on the other hand, requires more judgement, and

intensive reading of the appropriate legal records. Such investigation has required me to make

certain qualitative assessments regarding, e.g., the straightforwardness of the economic theory of

natural resource rent, but is bolstered by the fact that the final determinations enunciated by the

ITA frequently provide direct discussion of such matters and the direction of influence on its

findings. These yield the key "right-hand side' variables necessary for completion of an actual

version of the hypothetical Boolean Summary Table shown above. The resulting variables and

their expected influences (or "signs"), according to the ITA (by both direct assertion and

argumentpassim) and bolstered by the reasoning from the NI interpretation of legal proceedings



    "   Not to get too Kantian about the matter, but in so doing it might be argued that Boolean
        techniques in some circumstances can produce results that are more reliable than familiar
        quantitative methods provided the problem of specfIcallon bias is not present. Of course,
        this qualifier regarding: specification bias is equally applicable to the familiar techniques
        of quantitative analysis. See, e.g., Learner, E., Specification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference
        with Non-Experimental Data (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1978).
                                                23
discussed above, are:

        1.     Precedent: Having precedent on one's side increases the likelihood of winning
               an argument. See discussion above. In the Boolean Analysis which follows this
               factor is referred to as P/p.
       2.      Straightforward Theory: Having a straightforward theory (e.g., an economic
               explanation or theory) improves the likelihood of winning an argument.
               Apparently, having to resort to complicated or exotic theories to make one's case
               reduces credibility (where "complicated," "exotic," etc. refers, in part, to being
               outside the familiar modes of reasoning of the ITA). Examples discussed below
               include the concepts of general equilibrium and natural resource rent, which
               modify familiar supply-demand reasoning. In the Boolean Analysis which follows
               this factor is referred to as T/t.
       3.      Evidence: All else equal, having the preponderance of evidence on one's side
               increases the likelihood of winning an argument. In the Boolean Analysis which
               follows this factor is referred to as E'e.
       4.      Ease of Exposition: All else equal, the likelihood of winning an argument
               increases with the ease with which it can be communicated. This is sometimes
               related to, but is not the same as, having a straightforward theory. An example
               from below is the Law of One Price, which is relatively easy to express as the
               intersection of a supply and a demand curve, but which is quite complicated to
               explain in application to real world factual contexts (owing to the introduction of
               considerations of the Law's underlying pre-conditions related to transactions costs,
               quality differentials, cross-elasticities, and the like). In the Boolean Analysis
               which follows this factor is referred to as XJx.

In addition to these factors, CT suggests that the stakes riding on an argument can influence the

likelihood of winning. In general, the ITA could not be expected to refer to this since the justice

it administers is "blind." Nevertheless,

       5.      Stakes: Assuming CT, the likelihood of the winning argument being made by the
               more influential party increases with the stakes at issue in the argument. In the
               Boolean Analysis which follows this factor is referred to as S/s.



III.B.2 The Arguments in Lumber Ill



                                               24
                 I now turn to coding the foregoing factors for a set of 14 actual and salient

arguments that parties have contended over in Lumber ifi. The arguments and the results of the

coding are set forth in Table 2. The Table also indicates the winning party in each argument as

reflected in the ITA's Final Determination. Recalling that the Lumber III investigation was

initiated by the Department of Commerce, the proceeding has presented a recurring difficulty in

distinguishing between the DoC's role as advocate and its role as adjudicator. Indeed, this has

led to formal claims of bias on the part of the Canadian parties.'9 The resulting ambiguity is

reflected in the "DoC/CFLI' designation of winner as applicable in Table 2. For each of the

issues that follow, the Of I codings shown in Table 2 are derived from the written record of the

Lumber III proceeding. A brief summaly of each issue is provided here.

1.       Rent Theory: As discussed above, the economics of natural resource harvesting have

         played an important role in the Canadian response to allegations that the Canadian

         stumpage system subsidizes the production of lumber by Canadian millers. Obviously,

         the stakes here are very large (see Table 1); if the Canadians were to prevail in

         demonstrating that the effects of below-market stumpage were entirely inframarginal, the

         stumpage CVD would be unsupportable. Moreover, the only concerted evidence to test

         the inframarginality of Canadian stumpage pricing was that developed by Nordhaus on

         behalf of the Canadian parties.      The economic theory of rent, however, is not
         straightforward, nor easily communicated. There apparently is not strong precedent one

         way or the other as to the applicability or legitimacy of rent theory in CVD proceedings.



     "   The   primary claim arises as a result of the fact that ITA has employed a former
         spokesperson for CFLI in the Lumber III investigation..

                                                25
2.        LER as Subsidy: So-called "border measures," such as log export restraints have had an

          unsettled history in the administration of U.S. CVD law. Prior to a single ruling in 1990,

          border measures had been held to be noncountervailable. This placed the DoCICFLI at

          a precedential disadvantage in its arguments for the countervailing of Canada's LERs. In

          fact, the DoC had to go so far as to argue that: "Administrative agencies, however, are

          authorized to depart from a long-standing and consistent practice...[and] the Department

          concludes that the [pre-1990 case] determinations finding border measures in general to

          beper se noncountervailable pursuant to U.S. law were wrongly decided..."2° Clearly, the

          stakes were all-or-nothing, and the DoC/CFLI was compelled to labor hard to muster what

          evidence it could in its favor (eventually appealing to its interpretation of Congressional

          intent). Exposition by the eventual winner, DoC/CFLI, was similarly impeded; and the

          theory as to why border measures are or ought to be countervailable is not straightforward

          — at   either the ITA or in the broader context of GAIT and trade — as they confront

          difficult issues of national sovereignty and measurement.

3.        Market Distortion: In some prior proceedings, the DoC had indicated that CVDs are

          justified only when another country's alleged subsidies to domestic processors distort the

          results of the marketplace in an inefficient direction. In the case at hand, Canadian LERs

          may, in fact, improve world resource allocation. Evidence is consistent with the


     20
          Note that I do not intend to be asserting the rightness or wrongness of the positions taken
          by the parties on this or any other matter listed here. Rather, as this instance indicates,
          relative to many other issues in the proceeding, the DoC was having to argue very hard
          in order to make its precedential points; i.e., the precedential burden in practice did not
          favor its arguments. The quoted passage is from U.S. Department of Commerce,
          International Trade Administration, Final Countervailing Duty Determination: Certain
          Softwood Lumber Products from Canada, May 15, 1992, pp. 176-77.

                                                  26
           conclusion that U.S. log export restraints and Japanese barriers to trade in lumber (of

           which Japan is nevertheless a major importer) artificially prop up (especially) Japanese

           demand for Canadian logs. Canadas LERs counteract this distortive result effect.
4.         LER Price Change: In the initial stages of the Lumber III proceeding, the CFLI, in

           particular, maintained that the asserted subsidy realized by B.C. sawmills as a result of

           LERs should be measured as the difference between a measured foreign price of logs and

           a measured Canadian domestic price of logs. Precedent, however, seems to support the

           view that a countervailable subsidy must be measured by difference between the price that

           Canadian millers would pay for logs absent the LERs and the price they presently pay.

          Because of general equilibrium effects when a border measure is imposed on an

          intermediate product2' and the large-country position of Canada in wood fiber trade, it

          would generally be expected that foreign log prices would come down toward Canadian

          domestic prices in the absence of LERs — making the CFLI measurement contrary to

          precedent.

5.        General Equilibrium Effects — Their Existence: As noted, economic theory (and

          evidence in Lumber Ill) indicates that the context of Canadian LERs makes it highly

          likely that general equilibrium effects (between log markets and lumber markets) play

          significant roles in determining log prices. Although the measurement of the quantitative

          differences between partial and general equilibrium prices for logs absent Canadian LERs

          is complicated in theory and difficult to demonstrate and explain, the existence of general


     21
          See, e.g., Wiseman, C.A. and R. Sedjo, "Effects of an Export Embargo on Related Goods:
          Logs and Lumber," American Journal ofAgriculiural Economics, August 1981, pp. 423-
          429.

                                                 27
          equilibrium effects is relatively straightforward and easy to communicate (e.g., "The LERs

          may not affect total log demand in B.C.; they may only affect where the Japanese have

          the logs that they buy milled.")
6.        General Equilibrium Effects — Their Measurement: See above. Both the theory of

          the proper structure of a model able to capture general equilibrium effects and the

          implementation of such a model for the purpose of measuring the no-LER price of

          Canadian logs is complicated and difficult to describe in the context of the ITA's legal

          proceedings. Based on what evidence is available, the magnitude of the stakes is likely

          to be perceived as large by the ITA.

7.        Causation Tests: Because border measures are indirect in their potential effects, the

          Canadian LERs' effects on Canadian millers' costs are not directly observable (as they

          would be if, say, subsidies were paid in cash to millers). Nevertheless the ITA is under

          a burden to demonstrate a "direct and discernable" impact of the LERs on Canadian

          sawmillers' costs. In the previous border measure case of 1990 (noted above), the ITA

          employed regression analyses of the differences between foreign and domestic prices to

          meet its burden. Notwithstanding the resulting precedential implications and the all-or-

          nothing stakes, the ITA in Lumber III eschewed its previous approach (and evidence

          generated therefrom).

8.        Other Provinces: Although other provinces besides British Columbia are subject to



     22
          See,   for example, Wiseman and Sedjo, op. cit., and Moschini, G. and K.D. Meilke,
          "Production Subsidy and Countervailing Duties in Vertically Related Markets: The Hog-
          Pork Case Between Canada and the U.S.," American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
          November 1992, pp. 951-61.

                                                 28
       LERs, they are relatively minor participants in the marketplace for wood fiber. Moreover,

       both straightforward theory and accompanying evidence seem to indicate that LERS in the

       other provinces are not generally economically binding (e.g., some are net importers of

       logs themselves). The implications are bolstered by the "direct and discernable" standard

       noted above, and by the ease of exposition.

9.     Law of One Price: In lieu of hypothesis tests and statistical measurement of the

       magnitude   of price effects attendant to LERs, the ITA relies on a partial equilibrium
       spreadsheet model that utilizes elasticities of supply and demand for an aggregated foreign

      log-only sector and a Canadian log-only sector to calculate a unique price at which

      foreign and B.C. log prices would be equated in the absence of Canadian LERs. This

      approach is justified by what DoC/CFLI refers to as the "universally accepted Law of One

      Price;" and despite considerable evidence that the conditions required for the Law to hold

      in the strong form adopted by the ITA do not apply even within "free traded regions (such

      as western Washington). Without the Law, however, the DoC/CFLI would run the risk

      having no mechanism for identifying and calculating an asserted subsidy. In its favor, the

      DoC/CFLI have ease of exposition when compared to the Canadians' need to turn to more

      complicated theories that presumably sound like quibblings as about qualifications to the

      Law (see above).

10.   Relevant Market/i: As noted above, the ITA's Final Determination in Lumber Ill found

      that logs in the interior of B.C. were not in the same relevant market as the rich

      forestlands of the coastal region (as a result of species heterogeneity, limited cross-

      elasticities of demand, and high transport costs). The Canadian's case for this conclusion


                                              29
      was built up from detailed evidence and extensive discussion of theory and evidence. In

      their favor, the "direct and discernable" burden faced by the DoC/CFLI created a

      favorable precedential for the Canadian view: the ITA's spreadsheet model used to

      identify and measure a subsidy to coastal B.C. log prices was built only for the coastal

      region. The stakes surrounding the treatment of the interior of the province are large;

      upon including the interior in its eventual Remand Determination, ITA raised the

      calculated value of the countervailable LER subsidy from the figure shown in Table I to

      more than $450 million per year.

II.   Relevant Market/2: The exclusion of interior logs from the subsidy calculation under

      the Final Determination represents the only identifiable case in which the Canadian

      interests have prevailed before the ITA on an argument with large stakes. While the

      ITA's eventual reversal in its Remand Determination is outside of the "Final
      Determination" framework upon which I am primarily focussed, it is included in Table

      2 and discussed below.

12.   Export Preparation Costs: In general, precedent recognizes that it is appropriate that

      any comparison between foreign and domestic log prices for purposes of identifying and

      measuring an asserted countervailable subsidy be adjusted for intervening costs and

      quality differences that would sustain cross-border price differences even in the absence

      of LERs (see the next argument below). Through a complicated and hard (for the

      Canadians) to explain and measure process of sorting logs for export, certain costs are

      borne that arguably require accounting for in the ITA's calculation of asserted subsidies.

      Nevertheless, the incremental stakes in the issue do not appear to be overwhelming, and


                                             30
        the hA can rely on the precedent of deference to the agency's expertise" in ignoring

        export preparation costs in its calculations.

 13.    Transport Costs: In light of the precedent mentioned above, the Canadian parties have

        been successful in arguing that transport costs should be deducted from foreign-derived

        log prices in any attempt under the LER analysis to arrive at log prices netted back to

        domestic B.C. markets. The resulting adjustments are relatively minor.

14.     Company Exclusions: Under CVD precedent and law, individual companies can be

       exempted from a countervailing duty if they can be shown to be outside the affected

       sector or do not use the particular item (B.C. logs, in this case) that is allegedly being

       subsidized. Such exclusions are not quantitatively important, and the Canadian parties

       have generally been successful in proving up particular companies for exclusion.



IV.    RESULTS

               Having constructed Table 2 from considerations of the foregoing form, it now

provides the basis for a Boolean Analysis of the determinants of successful arguments before the

ITA. I proceed by converting the indicated zero/one designations to the upper case/lower case

notation indicated above and in the Table, and then factoring the resulting expressions into prime

implicants. Thus, for example, the first case (Rent Theory) in Table 2 becomes:

                      DoC/CFLI Win = pSteX

while the second case (LER as Subsidy) becomes:

                      DoC/CFLI Win = pStex

In words, the first case says that the DoC/CFLI won the argument under conditions in which


                                                31
precedent was not particularly in its favor and the stakes were large and the applicable theory

was complicated and available evidence did not favor the DoC/CFLI and the DoC/CFLI found

it relatively easy to exposit its argument against the Canadian position. Phrased this way, it is

clear why individual case studies have such a difficult time yielding clear results; with so many

NandsN isolating why the DoC/CFLI won the Rent Theory issue is not possible. But this points

to the potential value of the full Boolean Analysis.

                 Upon fully factoring Table 2, the resulting prime implicant for designation of a

winning argument is:
                        Win = pSt + PsX[tE + Te]


This is the complete summary of Table 2, and reflects the process of logical reduction described

above.1' In words, the prime implicant for Win says:

        A winning argument before the ITA has either precedent running against it (p) and a
        complicated theory (t) but large stakes (S); or it has precedent in its favor (P), low stakes
        (s), and easy exposition (X), and either a combination of a complicated theory (t) but an
        easy to tell story (E) or a simple theory (1') with a hard to tell story (e).

                 At first impression, some of these results may appear contradictory or difficult to

interpret. For example, the first term in the prime implicant (pSt) says that a winning argument

has precedent running against it and weak evidence behind it, but large stakes. This result should

not be interpreted to mean that this combination makes for a winning argument, or a higher

likelihood of a winning argument than say a combination of pST (which has a simple theory on



   1'
        The case of Relevant Market/I is treated as an aberration or outlier for the reasons noted
        above.


                                                 32
 its side, when compared to pSt). Rather, the Boolean implicant must be interpreted as merely

 saying that, when the analysis removes all logical redundancies from Table 2, it is left with pSt

as the logically minimum conditions observed when a win arises despite a lack of supportive

precedent. The cases under investigation are insufficiently rich to distinguish further between p,

S, and t as determinants of a "win" — just as particular quantitative analyses can turn out to lack

sufficient data to overcome problems of collinearity among explanatory factors.

                Closer inspection of the process of factoring and reduction that produces the prime

implicant for Win above reveals that the cases in Table 2 that produce the first term (pSt) in Win

are entirely cases in which DoCICFLI is the winning party. Similarly, the cases which produce

the second term in Win (i.e., PsX[tE + Te]) are entirely cases in which B.C. and the Canadian's

are the winners of the argument. From this observation comes the key findings of this study.

               Just as in the case of familiar large sample, continuous variable regression

methods, the researcher may come to the Boolean Analysis of Table 2's data with supportable

prior beliefs concerning such matters as the permissible signs of the effects of independent

variables, the proper structural form of specification, and, of course, the basic specification of

causal explanatory factors to be included in the analysis. Thus, consideration of the fact that the

first term in Win (pSt) arises solely from cases in which the DoC/CFLI prevails before the ITA

at the point of Final Determination and reasonable expectations as to the causal meaning of

explanatory factors, permits further reduction of pSt to produce a prime implicant for "DoC/CFLI

Wins". Specifically, the "p" in pSt is only reasonably interpreted (through the kinds of prior

considerations set forth in sections II and III) as a factor to be overcome in pressing an argument.

The same interpretation applies tot--the absence of a simple theory in the argument in question.


                                                33
In short, p and t impede the ability of the DoCICFLI to win and argument. Hence, the prime

implicant for a win by the DoCICFLI reduces to:

                       DoC/CFLI Win S

In words: based on the cases we are able to observe and capture in Table 2, the only cases in

which we observe the DoC/CFLI winning are large 'stakes cases in which the magnitude of the

stakes allowed the DoC/CFLI to overcome institutional impediments to a winning argument.

This finding is the prediction of Capture Theory. It says, contrary to the New Institutionalism,

that in at least the cases represented here, no evidence is found that large stakes will not permit

the influential, capturing party from overwhelming institutional blockades such as the absence

of supportive precedent or the absence of a non-complicated theory for one's argument. Having

weighed in heavily in my own prior research against straightforward Capture Theory24 and in

favor of the New Institutionalism,' I am surprised by these findings. They could not have been

deduced by ruminating on the various instances of ITA decision making represented by Table 2 -

- i.e., without application of the Boolean Analysis.

               The New Institutionalism is not wholly rejected, however. The second term in

Win, as noted, arises from cases in which the Canadian parties prevail in their legal arguments

before the ITA. Paralleling the prime implicant for DoC/CFLI Win and imposing the priors that

neither complicated theory nor weak evidence assist in winning an argument, the prime implicant




    24 E.g., Kalt, J.P. and M.A. Zupan, "Capture and Ideology in the Economic Theory of
       Politics," American Economic Review, June 1984, pp. 279-300.

    25 E.g., Cornell, S. and J.P. Kalt, "Where's the Glue?: Institutional and Cultural Foundations
       of American Indian Economic Development," Faculty Research Working Papers, John F.
       Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, May 1991.
                                               34
for B.C. Win from Table 2 is:

                       B.C. Win = PsX[tE + Tel        PsX[E + T]

This result says that, if the Canadians (as the less influential party in the CT sense of influential -

- see above) are to win an argument, they require not only small stakes (s), but also institutional

support in the form of supportive precedent (P), easy exposition (X) and either strong evidence

(E) or a straightforward theory (1').




                                                 35
                                                 Table 2

                 BOOLEAN SUMMARY OF THE AFRIBUTES OF OBSERVED WINNTh1G ARGUMENTS
                               Th THE U.S.-CANADIAN LUMBER DISPUTE
                                      (Affirmative = I; Otherwise = 0)

                          WINNER     PRECEDENT        LARGE        APPLICABLE      EVIDENCE   WINNER
                                      FAVORS          STAKES    THEORY STRAIGHT-    FAVORS    EASE OF
ISSUE                                 WINNER                       FORWARD         WINNER     EXPOSI-
                                                                                               TION
                                      P-I; pO         S1; v.0       T1; t'0         E1; e0    X1; x0
RENT THEORY               DoC/CFLI      0                  1           0              0          1



LER AS SUBSIDY            DoC/CFLI      0                  1           0              0         0
MARKET DISTORTION         DoC/CFLI      0                  1           1              o          I
LER PRICE CHANGE            B.C.         1                 0           1              1          1

G.E. EXISTENCE              B.C.         1                 0           I              1          i
G.E. - MEASUREMENT        DoC/CFLI      0                  1           0              0         0
CAUSATION TESTS           DoC/CFLI      0                  I           0              0         0
OTHER PROVINCES             B.C.         1                 0           1              1          I
LAW OF ONE PRICE          DoC/CFLI      0                  1           0              0.         I
RELEVANT MARKET/I           B.C.         I                 I           0              0         0
RELEVANT MARKET/2         DoC/CFLI      0                  I           0              0          I
EXPORT PREP. COSTS        DoC/CFLI       1                 0           0              0          I
TRANSPc'!Ur COSTS           B.C.         i                 0
COMI'ANY EXCLUSIONS         B.C.         I                 0           I              I          I
