                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CHANGES IN THE STRUCFURE
                         OF FAMILY INCOME INEQUALITY
                           IN ThE UMTED STATES AND
                          OTHER INDUSTRIAL NATIONS
                                DURING THE 19805




                                  McKinley L Blackburn
                                    David B. Bloom




                                  Working Paper No. 4754




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 MassachusettS Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1994



                                               visiting scholars at the Russell Sage
This paper was prepared while the authors were                                comments.
Foundation. They wish to thank Tony Atkinson and So! Polachek for helpfulThis  paper is part of
Melissa Binder and John Higgins provided excellent research assistance. those of the authors
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Reseaith.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4754
                                                                                 May 1994

                            CHANGES IN THE STRUCTURE
                           OF FAMILY INCOME INEQUALITY
                             IN THE UNITED STATES AND
                            OTHER INDUSTRIAL NATIONS
                                  DURING THE 19805


                                         ABSTRACT
                                                        income inequality in the United States,
       We examine the detailed structure of family
                                               the 1980s. In each of these countries we find that
Canada, and Australia at various points during
                                     married couple families and that the increases are closely
income inequality increased among
                                                                                      the United
associated with increases in the inequality of husbands' earnings. However, only in
                                      husbands' earnings also associated with an increase in
States is the increased inequality of
                                                                                          with
ucation-earniflgS differentials. In addition, increased earnings inequality is associated
                                                                                United States and
increases in both the variance of wages and the variance of labor supply in the
                                                                                  Evidence of an
Canada. but only with an increase in the variance of labor supply in Australia.
                                               is also found for France and the United Kingdom,
increase in married-couple income inequality
but not for Sweden or the Netherlands.
                                                                                            United
         For married couple families in Canada, Sweden. the United Kingdom. and the
                                                                                  with an increased
 States, we find that increased inequality of family income is closely associated
                                                                                             of this
 correlation between husbands' and wives' earnings. A more detailed examination
                                                                                             cannot
 correlation in Canada and the United States suggests that the increase in this correlation
                                                                                       labor market
 be explained by an increase in the similarity of husbands' and wives' observable
                                                                                  in the way those
 characteristics in either country. Rather, it is explained partly by changes
                                                                                              in the
 characteristics translate into labor market outcomes and, more important. by changes
                                                                              market outcomes.
  interspouSal correlation between unobservable factors that influence labor

                                                                     David F. Bloom
  McKinley L. Blackburn                                              Department of Economics
  Department of Economics                                            Columbia university
  University of South Carolina                                       New York, NY 10027
  Columbia, SC 29208                                                 and NBER
     Family income inequality in the United States increased during the
                                      with respect to a wide range of
1980s. This fact, whose robustness
                                         has been amply demonstrated (see, for
measurement strategies and techniques

example, Blackburn and Bloom 1987; Karoly 1993), has received considerable

                                       Discussion of whether increased
popular attention in recent years.

dispersion in the distribution of family income reflects fundamental changes
                                                     changes in family structure
in the distribution of economic opportunities.
                                       members, or more temporary shifts, such
and the economic behavior of family
                         associated with business cycle fluctuations and
as those that might be

changing patterns of foreign trade, has been especially fertile ground for

popular analysis and commentary.

     Another well.established fact is that the recent increase in family
                                                                           in
 income inequality has been closely paralleled by a corresponding increase
                                                                        and
 the inequality of annual earnings, especially among men (see Blackburn
                                                 Although economists have yet to
 Bloom 1987; Burtless 1990; Karoly 1993).

                               for this increase in earnings inequality,
 agree on a full explanation
                                                                     of wage
 investigators have shown it to be connected with a sizable widening

 differentials among workers with different levels of educational attainment
                                      for example, Blackburn 1990; Juhn, Murphy,
 and labor market experience (see,
                                        has also documented empirically several
  and Pierce 1993). Recent research
                                         differentials and shifts that have
  links between the widening of these
                                       labor market outcomes, such as union
  occurred in variables that affect
                                                across sectors, and patterns of
  density, the distribution of employment
                                               Bloom, and Freeman 1990. 1993; Bound
  educational attainment (see Blackburn,
                                        1989; Murphy and Welch 1988).
  and Johnson 1992; Katz and Revenga
                                                       individuals may not provide a
       increased wage inequality measured across
                                        income inequality measured across families.
  complete explanation for increased


                                           I
Indeed, despite its seeming simplicity, family income is a relatively complex

economic variable that depends only in part upon individual wages. Family

income can include the earnings of more than one family member, and can also

include income that is not earned, for example, transfer payments and asset

income. In addition, individuals' total earnings are determined not just by

their earnings per hour, but also by the number of hours they work. Thus, in

proceeding from the study of individual wage inequality — which has a strong

theoretical and empirical foundation in labor economics —   to   the study of

family income inequality, one is necessarily led to consider theories of

family formation and family labor supply. Although we have not attempted to

develop and estimate a structural model of total family income that is

compatible with all these bodies of economic theory, they will guide and

enrich the structure of several of the empirical analyses we report below.

     The first objective of this paper is to deepen our understanding of the

increase in family income inequality that occurred in the United States during

the l980s. We do this by exploring the structure of family income inequality,

with an emphasis on identifying how that structure nay have changed during the

1.980s. In particular, we analyze family income on a source-by-source basis,

focusing on the variability and relative magnitude of different income

sources, and the correlations between the magnitudes of those sources. Our

attention is restricted to families headed by married couples with a

prime-aged husband, a population that the research literature has accorded

much less attention than it has female-headed families with children or

families headed by elderly individuals. Our analysis permits us to consider

whether the increase in income inequality among married couples that occurred

 in the l9SOs in the United States reflects, among other things, changes in the

distribution of outcomes in the labor market, changes in the labor supply



                                      2
behavior of husbands and wives, or an increase in the similarity of husbands'

and wives' labor market outcomes.

     One of the key empirical results that emerges from our analysis is that

increased income inequality in the United States in the l980s is associated

with a sizable increase in the correlation between husbands' and wives'

earnings. We take this finding as the jumping-off point for a further

analysis in which we seek to identify the roots of this change. For this

analysis we focus on the correlation of the natural logarithm of earnings

across spouses. Given that this correlation can increase because of an

increase in the correlation of husbands' and wives characteristics that

determine wages earned and hours worked, or because of changes in the

regression weights associated with those characteristics, we also fit and

analyze some simple wage and hours equations for husbands and wives.

     The final objective of this paper is to measure income inequality among

married couples in several other industrial countries at different points in

the 1980s and to explore the nature and stability of the economic structure

generating inequality in those countries. By means of this analysis, we hope

to determine whether increased income inequality among married couples is

primarily a United States phenomenon. We also hope to make and interpret

cross-country comparisons of changes that have occurred in the structure     of


 family income inequality.

     We also performed detailed analyses of the married-couple income

 distributions for Canada and Australia. We were able to obtain appropriate

microdata for both these countries that would allow us to study how the

 structural components of income inequality changed in these countries in the

 early 1980s. We also present results for four European countries — France

 the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom —   using   data from the



                                      3
Luxembourg Income Study (LIS). Unfortunately, the lack of information on

labor supply in these data keeps us from performing the same type of analysis

of earnings inequality as we are able to perform for Australia, Canada, and

the United States.

      Although we offer limited evidence on the extent to which the Australia,

Canada1 and the United States are representative of a broader set of

industrial countries with respect to the substantive matters under study, we

do think these countries provide the basis for some interesting comparisons.

For example, all three countries experienced net employment shifts during the

1980s from goods production to service industries. In addition, male labor

force participation declined slightly in all three countries, while female

labor force participation increased. Marriage and fertility rates also

declined in all these countries during the l980s. However, the national

unemployment rate decreased in the United States, but increased in the other

two   countries.   Also, union density was considerably lower and declined at a

much faster pace in the United States than in Canada and Australia throughout

the 1980s. Finally, changes in real government expenditures on welfare and

social security varied widely among the countries on a per capita basis.

      Thus, there seems to be enough (but not too much) diversity among the

three countries to suggest that cross-national comparisons might shed some

light on the importance of different economic circumstances and institutions

in the determination of income inequality. Unfortunately, the data sets we

analyze are generally not sufficiently comparable to justify making

cross-national inequality comparisons at a point in time. However, we do feel

comfortable comparing countries in terms of changes in inequality, because the

data sets for each country are comparable over time.




                                        4
I. The Income Source Composition of Family Income Inequality
     Several recent studies of income dispersion in the United States have
focused on the distribution of income across families. This literature
            defines the family to be a unit that consists of two or more persons
generally
related by blood or marriage who live together. Some studies also include

unrelated individuals —    individuals   living alone or with other individuals to

whom they are not related — as separate family units (see, for example,

Blackburn and Bloom 1981; Karoly 1993). In this paper we analyze only

families headed by married couples. Hence, our results pertain to only a

segment of either definition of the total population of families. This

restriction facilitates our decomposition of income inequality into

contributions from various sources of income, which helps us in investigating

the influence of the growth in two-earner couples on overall income

 inequality. The pattern of change in inequality over the period we are

 considering is reasonably similar for all families and for married-couple

 families in the three countries we examine.1

      Table I presents three measures of total income inequality among married

 couple families in the United States and Canada in 1979 and 1987, and in

 Australia in 1981/82 and 1985/86. The samples used for this and later tables
                                              husbands between the ages of 25 and 64.
 are restricted to married couples with
                                                              across countries at a
 As a general rule, the comparability of these measures
                                                      comparisons to changes in these
 point in time is questionable, so we limit our

                               time.2 The results for the United States and
 measures of dispersion over




 tFor evidence on this point pertaining to the United States and Canada, see
 Blackburn and Bloom (1993). Changes in the selection process by which
 individuals enter the married state may, of course, be responsible for
 increases in inequality, but we do not examine this possibility here.
                                                                       similar
 2As the manner of collection and the quality of the data appear very

                                          S
Australia show increases in dispersion in the early 1980s using all the three

measures. For Canada, the mean logarithmic deviation falls slightly, Theil's

entropy measure increases slightly (but less than this index   increased in the

United States), and the squared coefficient of variation increases modestly,

but less than the increase observed in the United States.3

     Table I contains two estimates of the squared coefficient of variation

for Australia. The first estimate (and the }D and ENT) was calculated using

a measure of total family income that does not include interest and dividend

income. We excluded this income source because the process by which it was

collected changed dramatically from 1981/82 to 1985/86. Using a decomposition

property of the squared coefficient of variation (discussed below), we also

calculated an inequality measure that included interest and dividend income

(reported in parentheses in the table). In this calculation, we used the

parameters characterizing the distribution of interest and dividend income in

1985/86 for both 1981/82 and 1985/86, thereby allowing the relative importance

of this source to change as it did in the national income accounts of

Australia4. The increase in inequality measured this way is similar to the




for the United States and Canadian surveys, meaningful inequality comparisons
between these two countries at a point in time may be possible. The data used
for these calculations are discussed later in this section, with further
details reported in appendix A.
3The fact that the mean logarithmic deviation did not increase in Canada, but
the entropy and squared coefficient of variation did, reflects the property
that the mean logarithmic deviation is relatively more sensitive to changes at
the lower end of the distribution (and the lowest quintile in Canada
experienced an increase in its total share of income over this period), while
the squared coefficient of variation is more sensitive to changes at the upper
end (where changes were occurring so as to increase inequality in Canada).
4The major effect of the change in collection procedures was to increase (from
0.04 to 0.07) the percentage of family income that was due to interest and
dividend income, and perhaps to increase the measured inequality of interest
and dividend income, in the national income accounts, the share of income
from interest and dividends increased only slightly during this period. As


                                     6
increase observed when excluding interest and dividend income. In the

analysis of the squared coefficient of variation that follows, we will

continue to use this procedure for the Australian data.

       Given that family income is composed of income from several different

sources, a natural question is whether the increases in family income

inequality reported in table 1 can be linked to increases in the inequality of

one or more income sources or to some other underlying change in the

distribution of family income. In particular, we wish to explore whether

observed increases in earnings inequality among husbands (and possibly wives)

can account for all the increases in family income inequality in table 1, or

whether some oher factor might also be partly responsible for the increases.

       Following earlier analyses of the distribution of family income (Gronau

1982; Lehrer and Nerlove 1984; Schirm 1988; smith 1979), we focus on the

squared coefficient of variation as our measure of dispersion. Dividing a

family's income into J different sources, the squared coefficient of variation

-   which is simply the ratio of the variance of income to the square of its
arithmetic mean - can be written as:

                                J   T
 (1)    GV2 —    EsCV      +   25   E s4skCV4CVkPk
                                            -'
                j—I            i—I k—j+1. '


            is the share of total income coming from the jth source, CV   is the
where
        s
 squared coefficient of variation for the jth source,   and     is the

 correlation coefficient between the jth and kth income sources.    Unlike

 logarithmic-based measures of dispersion, the squared coefficient of variation



                                                             measures of this
 the change in procedures should have produced more accurate
 income source, we chose to use the 1985/86 parameters in recalculating the
 squared coefficient of variation.



                                        7
is defined for zero incomes. While there may be zero amounts for many sources

of income, equation (1) still holds as long as the CVs are calculated using

the zeros.5

    Equation (1) provides few general predictions about how overall income

inequality (CV2) can be expected to change given changes in the shares, the

C1s or the correlation coefficients (see Schirm 1988). The only

prediction that does not depend on values of the other parameters is the

following: if the correlation coefficient between two    sources   of income

increases, then CV' will increase.        will also increase when CV increases

provided that all correlation coefficients involving the jth source of income

are positive (this condition is sufficient, but not necessary). The effects

of changes in the shares of the income sources are generally unclear. For

example, if the share of the jth income source increases and the share of the

lcth source falls by the same amount, then the direction of the change in C'?

will depend on the relative sizes of CV and CV, as well as of all other

shares, coefficients of variation, and correlation coefficients.

     While predicting how changes in the income source coefficients of

variation or shares will affect overall inequality is difficult, a direct

estimate of the effect on GV2 of changes in the components of the

decomposition in equation (I) for actual or assumed values of the other

components is possible. For example, suppose we wish to estimate how changes

in the dispersion of husbands' earnings from 1979 to 1987 affected income




5Other decompositions of c'? are also possible, for example, CV2 can be
expressed as an exact function of the means, variances, and covariances of the
J income sources. However, the & decomposition we use has the attractive
property that each of the components of the decomposition are invariant to the
scale in which income is measured (as is CV' itself), while the alternative
decomposition does not possess this property.



                                      8
inequality. We might estimate this impact by first simulating what      CV2 would

have been if the inequality of husbands' earnings changed from its observed

1979 level to its observed 1987 level, but all other parameters in the

decomposition equation remained at their 1979 values.6 We can then compare

this simulated value to the actual 1979 value, interpreting the difference as

the effect of changes in the dispersion of husbands' earnings on total income
              7   Such analyses can be performed for changes in an income source
inequality.

CV2 or changes in a correlation coefficient between income sources; however,

since the income source shares must sum to one, a change in any one share

must be accompanied by a change in at least one other share.

     In the following subsections we analyze the components of changes in

married couple income inequality using the CV2 decomposition outlined above

for a breakdown based on five income sources for the United States, Canada,

and Australia. The income sources are husbands' earnings, wives' earnings,

other earnings, interest and dividend income, and other income (which

primarily includes government transfer payments and pension income).

fl United     States

     Table 2 shows the structure of family income inequality in the United

 States in 1979 and 1987. It does this by reporting income shares and squared

 coefficients of variation for the five income sources, and correlation

 coefficients between these sources, for the United States in 1979 and 1987.




 6This effect can also be estimated using 1987 values of the decomposition
 equation parameters. As the two estimates will not necessarily be equal, we
 calculate and report both sets below.
 7Changes in the distribution of one income source may also affect the
 distribution of other income sources. For example, changes in the inequality
 of husbands' earnings could affect the distribution of wives' earnings or of
 other earnings. By itself, the CV1 decomposition provides a simple mechanism
 to account for changes in income inequality, It does not identify behavioral
 linkages between different income sources.

                                          9
These statistics were calculated using the 1980 and 1988 March Current

Population Surveys, and correspond to reports of annual income in the calendar

yeats preceding each survey.

     Several notable changes in the components of family income inequality in

the United States occurred during this period. The &     for   husbands' earnings

increased, while the &   for wives'   earnings fell. The share of income made

up by husbands' earnings fell by 5 percentage points, with the share made up

by wives' earnings increasing by the same amount. The major change from 1979

to 1987 in the relationships between income sources was the increase in the

correlation coefficient between husbands' and wives' earnings from 0.01 to

0.11.8

     The statistics in table 2 are computed using zero incomes for a

particular income source whena family receives no income from that source.

This fact impliSs that our results for changes in the dispersion of husbands'

and wives' earnings may differ from those derived from a sample that is

limited to individuals with positive earnings (as in Blackburn and Bloom 1987;

Burtless 1990; Karoly 1993). A major difference between the inequality

statistics reported in table 2 and corresponding statistics reported in

earlier research is our finding that the coefficient of variation of wives'

earnings (zeros included) decreased during the 1980s, while earlier research

(using positive incomes only) found that earnings inequality among women

increased. The decline in earnings inequality among our sample of wives can

be entirely attributed to an increase in the percentage of wives with positive




8Cancien, Danziger, and Gottschallc (1993) also discovered an increase in
the correlation coefficient between husbands' and wives' earnings in the
United States during the 1980s, although their findings suggest that the
increase occurred only among white couples.



                                       10
earnings.9 This increase in wives' employment would also be expected to

increase the correlation coefficient between the earnings of all husbands' and

wives' •   but   this change does not account for much of the increase in the

correlation coefficient (for example, the interspousal earnings correlation

coefficient among families in which both the husband and wife have positive

earnings increased from 0.10 to 0.18).

     Table 3 presents summary statistics that relate to our analysis of

changes in the level and structure of family income inequality from 1979 to

1987. As described earlier, these statistics are calculated by changing

selected components in equation (1) from their estimated 1979 value to their

estimated 1987 valuà, while holding all other components fixed at their

observed 1979 values. For example, if all components of the decomposition




9Let n, ci?, and y be the population size, squared coefficient of variation,
and mean income for the complete population, and let n1, GV, and              be the
same numbers for the subset of the population with positive incomes. Using
the additive decomposability property of the squared coefficient of variation
(see Bourguignon 1979), we can write CV2 as:


     Ci? —
                 (n1/n)(y1/y)2CV
                                   +
                                         (n1/n)(1/y2)(y1-y)2 + [(n-nl)/n]

Using the fact that y —                  this expression simplifies to:
                             (n1/n)y1,
     Ci? —
                 (1/p1)CV
                            +
                                (l-pl)/pl
where p1 —           is the percentage of individuals with positive incomes.
             n1/n
Assuming that changes in p1 leave CI4 unchanged (that is, that the
distribution of earnings among wives entering the labor force is the same as
that for wives already in the labor force), it follows that increases in p1
lower cv2. With CV—. 66 in 1979 in the United States, the increase in p1 from
0.61 to 0.69 accounts for all of the fall in the ci?        for   wives' earnings
(CV—. 66 in the United States in 1987 also).




                                            11
stayed constant at their 1979 values except for the squared coefficient of

variation for husbands' earnings (which increased from 0.42 to 0.48), the

overall CV2 would have increased by 0.028, a magnitude equal to 62 percent of

the actual increase in the overall &.     Similarly,    with other parameters held

constant, the increase from .01 to .11 in the correlation coefficient between

husbands' and wives' earnings would have increased the overall      CV2 by 44

percent. The fall in CV1 for wives' earnings accounts for a small decrease in

income inequality (although the magnitude    is   roughly twice as large if 1987

base parameters are used, partly because the share of income from wives'

earnings was larger in 1987 than in 1979).

     The effect of changes in income shares on inequality is positive but

small, especially if 1987 base components are used in the decomposition. Most

of the impact appears to be caused by the increased share of income coming

from interest and dividend income (and the fall in the share from other

earnings), as the size of the effect from shifts in income shares is smaller

if only the changes in the shares of husbands' and wives' earnings are

consideredj° Unfortunately, the magnitude of the income share effects is

quite dependent on the values of the other components of the decomposition, so

any statements about the effects of shifts in shares are tenuous.

Canada     Australia
                                 -




     The data on income inequality among Canadian married couple families are

drawn from the 1980 and the 1988 Survey of Consumer Finances. The top panel

of table 4 reports the components of the CV2 decomposition for Canada in 1979

and 1987, while the top panel of table 5 reports the sources of change




10A rough calculation shows that about half of the increase in the share of
income from wives' earnings is caused by higher employment rates for women.
with the other half caused by an increase in the wife/husband earnings ratio.


                                     12
accounting for the measured increase in CV2. For the most part, the

structure income inequality, and the changes in that structure from 1979 to

198?, are similar in Canada and the United States.     In Canada, the two major

forces leading to increases in faintly income inequality are an increased

dispersion of husbands' earnings and an increased interspousal correlation of

earnings. The fall in the CV2 of wives' earnings — caused completely by

increased employment probabilities1 as in the United States —     offset    these

two forces to some extent. In addition, the change in income shares also

suggests a decline in income inequality in Canada, largely because of the

increased share coming from government transfers. This was not the case in

the United States (See Blackburn and Bloom 1993)

     The Australian statistics were computed using the 1961/82 Income and

Housing Survey and the 1985/86 Income Distribution Survey.      The results are

presented in the lower panels of tables 4 and    5.   The increase in the

 inequality of husbands' earnings is clearly the dominant factor associated

with the increase in overall family income inequality in Australia. The
                                                 husbands' and wives' earnings is
 change in the correlation coefficient between

 much smaller in Australia than in the United States or Canada. and plays a

                                                            shares had a large
 small role in increasing inequality. Changes in income
                                                           because of the increase
 effect in decreasing overall inequality, again largely

 in the importance of other income.

 Other Countries 4 Periods
                                                GV2 decomposition for married
      We also computed the components of the

 couples in the United States in 1991 using data from the March 1992 Current



                                                                   but its
 11The inequality of other income does tend to be relatively high,
                                  husbands' (and wives') earnings leads to
 strong negative correlation with
                                             overall inequality to fall.
 increases in its share that generally cause


                                      13
Population Survey. Selected components are reported in the first row of table

6. The results suggest that the income distribution for married couples

changed very little after 1987, with overall inequality stable between those

years. Although, the correlation between husbands' and wives' earnings did

not change, both the inequality of husbands' earnings and the share of income
                                                          12
made up by wives' earnings increased from 1979 to 1987.

     We also perform the cv2 decomposition for several additional countries

using data sets available as part of (LIS).13 The US income data differ

conceptually from the income data we have been using, as LIS researchers have

made several adjustments to take noncash benefits into account.14 Results for

four countries'withLIS data from the late 1970s to the early 1980s are

presented in table 6. Overall income inequality among married couples

increased in the early l980s in France and the United Kingdom, but not in

Sweden. The Netherlands also did not experience an increase in inequality

from 1983 to 1987, although unlike our other comparisons, the Dutch comparison

is of a recession year (1983> with a nonrecession year (1987). Changes in

husbands' earnings inequality differed considerably across countries, with an

especially large increase for the United Kingdom (even compared to the United

States, Canada, and Australia), and again a decline in the Netherlands. All




12The increase in the inequality of husbands' earnings (perhaps caused by the
recession) appears to have been offset by a continued decline in the
inequality of wives' earnings.
'3For more information about the LIS, see Smeeding, O'Higgins, and Rainwater
(1990).
14The LIS data for the United States, Canada, and Australia are actually drawn
from the same household surveys we use. However, the US data contain only a
randomly sampled fraction of the survey for the United States and Canada. We
also performed our decomposition using the LIS data for the United States for
1979 and 1986. While the actual magnitudes of the decompositions are
different when compared to table 2, the general pattern of the changes over
time are quite similar in the two analyses.


                                    14
the countries experienced an increase in the share of income from wives'

earnings, although this increase was much larger in Canada and the United

States than in the other countries.

     Less evidence supports the universality of increases in the correlation

between husbands' and wives' earnings. This correlation increased in Sweden

and the United Kingdom, both for all couples and for two-earner couples, but

in France (as in Australia), the increase was not observed among two-earner

couples, and in the Netherlands the correlation coefficient actually declined

for all couples. At least a loose correlation appears to exist betweenchanges

in the interspousal correlation of earnings and increases in husbands'

earnings inequ.lity, as some evidence of an increase in both is apparent for

every country except the Netherlands, where both fell.



II. The Relationship between Rusbands' and Wives' Earnings

     The results of the previous section point to an increase in the

correlation between husbands' and wives' earnings during the 1980s as an

important factor associated with increases in family income inequality in

several countries. The purpose of this section is to examine this result more

closely for the United States and Canada, for which we have data on labor

supply of individual family members. In particular, we wish to discover

whether the increased correlation of earnings reflects an increase in the

correlation of husbands' and wives' hourly wages or in the number of hours

worked. Is it a consequence of changes in the process by which men and women

sort themselves into married couple units, so that men with characteristics

that tend to be well rewarded in the labor market are more likely to be

married to women who also possess such characteristics? Or have changes in

the structure of the relationships between individual characteristics and



                                      15
labor market outcomes led to increases in the correlation of husbands' and

wives' earnings?

       in this section we focus on the logarithm rather than on the level of

earnings to facilitate our analyses. Let EH_wRHE represent annual earnings

for husbands. and E_wH annual earnings for wives.            The covariance of log

earnings between husbands and wives can be written:


      (2) COV(ln E511n E) — COV(ln w.ln w) + GOV(ln H,ln H)
                                 + COV(ln   w,ln     H) + COV(ln w,ln H)


While we take note of the changes in the last two terms of equation         (2),   we

focus our attention primarily on changes in the first two terms on the

right-hand side of equation (2), the interspousal covariance of log wages

and of log hours. We analyze changes in these two covariances both

unconditionally md conditionally on a set of regressors that are fairly

standard in the estimation of wage and labor supply equations.
                                                15
        We assume that log wages (Zj) follow:


       (3)   Zj — PX5 +

where        is a vector of observed characteristics,        is a spouse-specific

coefficient vector, and        is an error term. We also assume that hours worked

by individuals with positive hours worked follows:


        (4) ln 15   — 71J1E + •i2z +                  + u1     frs.w



 where the          are parameters and   is an error term. Substituting equation

 (3) into equation (4) yields a reduced-form equation for hours worked:



 15
      Family-specific subscripts are suppressed.


                                         16
    (5) in Hi —                            +              + UI'
                         w11X


     By estimating equations (3) and (5), we can study the extent to which

changes in the correlation of X5 and                             or changes in the interspousal

correlation of residuals in equations (3) and (5) have affected the

correlation of hours and wages between spouses. We also estimate employment

probability equations that, like equation (5), follow the form:


        (6)
                  —                   +               +              ,    J—n,w
                       a1X                     a21X

where         is an indicator of an individual's employment status. Estimates of

these equation allow us to study changes in the correlation of employment

status between spouses.

        Changes over time in the interspousal correlation of wages, hours, or

employment can result from changes in the correlations of the systematic or

the stochastic components of equations (3), (5), and (6). For instance, the

sample interspousal correlation (r) of log wages can be written:

                                                                         5ASA
                                  5ASAzz                                  C  £
                                                                            HW
                         —           AA
                              ____ r(z,z)
                                       H        $1
                                                                     ____             AA + K
                                                                                     r(c.c)
  (7)         r(z,z)              5        5
                                                                 +
                                                                         SzSz
                                      zK    z
                                                t4                        K     II



where                 s is the sample standard deviation of the subscripted variable,

and R is a remainder term)6 From equation (8), the overall correlation

coefficient consists partly of a weighted sum of the correlation between the




'6The remainder consists of weighted correlations between                                and ' and
between         and t.       In   our empirical work, we focus on the correlation between
the predicted values and the correlation between the residuals, because the
correlations embodied in the remainder term do not lend themselves easily to
interpretation.


                                                            17
husbands' and wives' predicted wages and the correlation between their wage

residuals.17 Similar expressions exist for the hours and employment equations.

       One hypothesis of interest to us is that changes in the similarity of

husbands' and wives' labor market characteristics might be the cause of

increases in the correlation of husbands' and wives' earnings. This could be

the result, for instance, of technological changes in household production

that have reduced the incentive for specialization by husbands and wives.

While the periods on which we focus may appear somewhat short, rates of

marital formation and dissolution, as well as simple aging, are sufficient to

suggest the possibility of considerable turnover in the husband-wife pairs

sampled in our'data)-8

       We evaluate empirically how changes in the correlation of observable

characteristics have affected the correlation in earnings by measuring the

extent to whichchanges in the distribution of        and    in equations (3),

(5), and (6) have affected the correlation in the nonrandom components of

wages, hours, and employment, that is r(51) in equation (7). It is also

truethat changes in the structure of the relationships between observable
characteristics and wages or labor supply can affect the various interspousal
correlations (see appendix B))-9 Thus, we will use equation (7) —          applied
separately to employment, hours1 and wages —    to   explore whether the




17The two weights that appear in equation (8) sum to a number less than one.
If the two correlations that make up the remainder term had been included,
the weights on the four correlations would sum to one.
    rough calculation suggests that as much as 50 percent of the married
couples eligible for inclusion in our 1979 samples (for the United States and
Canada) would be either ineligible or dissolved in 1987.
'9As shown in appendix 3, this result holds only in the context of multiple
regression equations. In the case of a simple regression, the correlation
between the predicted values of spouses' labor market outcomes is simply the
interspousal sample correlation of the independent variable.


                                      18
correlation between husbands' and wives' earnings increased during the l980s

because of an increase in the interspousal correlation between measured

factors that determine labor market outcomes, changes in the coefficient

weights for those measured factors, or changes in the interspousal correlation

of the stochastic components of our labor market equations.

Th United          States

     For the U.S. data we define our hours variable as annual hours worked

and our wage rate variable as annual earnings divided by annual hours worked.2°

The top panel of table 7 reports the variances of the logarithms of wages and

hours and the covariance between the log of wages and the log of hours

separately for husbands and wives in 1979 and 1987.21 For husbands both the

dispersion of wages and the dispersion of hours increased in the l9BOs, .zhile

for wives the dispersion of wages increased, but the dispersion of hours fell.

The correlation between hours and wages increased slightly for both husbands

and wives during this period.

      The bottom panel of table 7 reports interspousal correlation coefficients

for earnings-related characteristics and for earnings and their components in

1979 and 1987. As with the correlation between the levels of husbands' and

wives' earnings, the correlation between the logarithms of husbands' and          of




20Because we restrict our wage-equation sample to working individuals who meet
a minimum-level wage restriction (see appendix A, item 10), there are somewhat
fewer observations for wages than for hours.
21These statistics are the components of the decomposition of the variance
of logarithms of annual earnings (E—wH) among individuals with positive
 earttings


              a
               2        —    a
                                 2
                                         + a2toE + 2a(lnw,lnH)
                                  Low

 where   o
                   w,ln B)
                             is      the covariance of log wages and log hours.
             (in




                                                      19
wives' earnings increased during the period. This increase was largely the

result of an increase in the interspousal correlation of log wages, as the

correlation of log hours did not change.22 There was also an increase in the

employment correlation from 1979 to 1987. However, focusing on the

interspousal correlations of earnings-related characteristics, we see no

change in the correlation coefficient for education, and a slight decline in

the correlation coefficient for age.

     Least-squares estimates of reduced-form equations for employment, annual

hours worked, and wages are reported for husbands and wives in table Cl of

appendix C.23 The most notable change front 1979 to 1987 in the coefficient

estimates for the husbands' equations is the increase in the importance of

schooling to wages for both husbands and wives. The age coefficient estimates

also changed between years in most equations, revealing an increased tendency

for older husbands to work less compared to younger husbands, and for younger

husbands and wives to earn relatively lower wages.

     Table 8 reports interspousal correlation coefficients of predicted




22There was also an increase in r(ln w,ln H) from -.08 in 1979 to -.06 in
1981, and in r(ln w,ln H) from 0 to .04.
23
  The independent variables in these equations include the individual's
education, age, region of residence and number of dependents (that is,
nonearners) in the family. In the wage equation, education is assumed to
enter as a spline function (as in Card and Krueger 1992) with a shift in the
slope allowed at eight years of education, while age is entered as a
quadratic. As wages enter the employment and hours equations, these
specifications for age and education (for both spouses) are preserved in the
employment and hours equations for each spouse. Table Cl reports
the coefficient estimates for the husbands' age and education variables in the
husbands' labor-market equations, and the coefficients for the wives' age and
education variables in the wives' equations.
     We also estimated wage and hours equations for wives in which we made
standard selectivity corrections for being employed (see Heccnan 1979). Our
coefficient estimates were virtually unchanged by this modification, and the
estimates of the error covariance between the wage (or hours) equation and the
probit equation were small and insignificant.

                                       20
values and of residuals for the employment, hours, and wage equations in

1979 and 1987. The estimates indicate that the interspousal correlations of
                                               increased from 1979 to 1987. The
predicted hours and wages (and employment)
                                               also increased from 1979 to 1987,
interspousal correlation of wage residuals
                                         declined slightly. Observe that the
but the correlation of hours residuals
                                                 residuals is much more important
increase in the correlation between the wage
                                  interspousal wage correlation than is the
to the overall increase in the
                                                     This result arises because
increase in the correlation of predicted wages.

 the residual correlations receive much greater weight in determining the
                                                          of the fact that the
 overall change in the wage correlation, a consequence

 residual variajices tend to be much larger than the variances of the predicted

 values (see equation ti) This result also explains why the large increase
                                                  hours is not associated with an
 in the interspousal correlation of predicted

 increase in the observed interspousal hours correlation.

      The stability of the interspousal age and education correlations suggests
                                                     value correlations of wages
 that the increase in the interspousal predicted
                                         the coefficients in the wage and hours
 and hours is not caused by changes in
                                         value correlations do not depend simply
 equations. However, as the predicted

  on these two correlations of
                                 characteristics — because of nonlinearities. the

  inclusion of other regressors. and so on — we sought to verify this
                                               value correlations for the 1987
  conclusion by recalculating the predicted
                                              the 1979 wage and labor supply
  sample of married couple families using

  coefficient estimates. The bottom two rows of table 8 present these
                                                                   two-thirds
  alternative correlations. The results indicate that one-third to

  of the increase in the employment and hours predictedvalhle correlations
                                         their 1979 values, but that no change
  remain when coefficients are held at

                                      Hence, the increase in the interspousal wage
  occurs in the wage correlations.


                                         21
correlation appears to be entirely caused by changes in the wage equation

coefficients and by an increase in the residual correlation, and not by the

formation of marital unions that are more homogeneous in terms of wage-related

characteristics. By contrast, the increase in the interspousal   correlation of

hours is caused both by changes in coefficients and changes in the independent

variable relationships, which suggests that part of the increase in the

correlation of hours may be a result of changes in the homogeneity of marital

unions with respect to hours-related characteristics.

Canada and Australia

     Our definitions of employment, hours, and wages are slightly different

for Canada and Australia than for the United States because of the nature of

the available data. For Canada and Australia we use average weekly earnings

for workers who usually work full-tine as our wage variable, and weeks worked

during the year by full-time workers as our labor supply variable. For

purposes of constructing an interspousal education correlation, we imputed a

value for years of education using educational codes available in the data.

     The components of the variance of log earnings and the interspousal

correlations of labor market characteristics and outcomes are reported in

table 9. The variance of log wages for husbands and wives increased in

Canada, but changed very little in Australia, where the increased dispersion

of husbands' earnings (and the decreased dispersion of wives' earnings) is

attributable to changes in the variance of labor supply. The interspousal

correlation of education increased in Australia, but not in Canada, which is a

curious result given that the increase in the correlation of earnings and

wages was larger in both Canada and the United States.

     We repeated our analysis of changes in the hours and wage correlation

between spouses for Canada only, because there was little evidence of an



                                      22
increase in the hours and wage correlations in Australia.24 Table C2

in appendix C reports the coefficient estimates for the 1979 and 1987

employment, weeks, and wage equations. The coefficient estimates for the

husbands' equations demonstrate that differences in husbands' labor supply

were more closely tied to education in 1979 than in 1987; however, unlike in

the United States, wage-schooling relationships remained fairly stable from

1979 to 1987. In contrast to their husbands, wage differences associated with

education widened sharply from 1979 to 1987 for Canadian wives.

     The interspousal correlations of predicted values and residuals for the

three labor market equations are reported in table 10. The entire increase

in the overall'correlation between spouses in employment, and much of the

increase in the correlation in weeks, is a result of increased correlation in

the predicted values. However, the interspousal correlation of predicted

wages actually fell slightly from 1979 to 1987. In this case, the increase in

the interspousal wage correlation is entirely caused by the increase in the

interspousal correlation of the wage equation residuals. Increases in the

predicted value correlations for employment and weeks are mainly because of

changes from 1979 to 1987 in the coefficients for those equations, and not

because of changes in the similarity of spouses' labor market characteristics.



III. Discussion

     Income inequality increased during the 1980s among families headed by a

married couple in several industrial nations. Our results also reveal that

the increase in income inequality among married couple families is closely




      larger size of our Canadian sample also suggests that the wage
correlation decomposition is more reliable for Canada than for Australia.



                                     23
associated with increased earnings inequality among husbands in families

headed by a married couple.

     In the United States, the rise in husbands' earnings inequality is linked

to the widening of their education-earnings differentials and somewhat less

closely to the steepening of their age-earnings profiles. However, these

changes only explain a portion of the increase in husbands' earnings

inequality in the United States.25 Changes in education-related earnings

differentials were much smaller in Canada and Australia during the 1980s, and

so can explain almost none of those countries' increases in husbands' earnings

inequality.

     Although the inequality of husbands' earnings increased in Australia,

Canada, and the United States, our analyses reveal some striking cross-country

differences in the processes generating those increases. For example, among

United States and Canadian husbands, increased earnings inequality is

associated with increases in both the variance of wages and the variance of

labor supply, but among Australian husbands, increased earnings inequality is

associated with an increase in the variance of labor supply, but not in the

variance of wages (which actually declined slightly between the two survey

years).

     This pattern of findings lends itself quite readily to interpretation.

During the 1980s, the United States, Canada, and Australia all experienced a

shift in employment from their high-wage industrial sectors to their low-wage

service sectors. Industry's share of employment decreased by 4 percentage

points in the United States, Canada, and Australia from 1979 to 1987.26 Some




255ee Blackburn (1990) and Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1993).
26The United Kingdom, which appears to exhibit even larger increases in male
earnings inequality and education-earnings differentials than the three


                                     24
investigators have argued that these declines relate at least partly to the

increased flow of world trade and to corresponding adjustments in the world

division of labor.27 Some have also argued that changes are taking place in

the nature of economic activity within these countries, with industrial

production becoming more capital- and technology-intensive, and therefore

more skill-intensive (for example, see Leontief 1982). The decline of

industrial employment, the acceleration of technological change, and the

escalation of average skill requirements in the industrial sector would be

expected to strengthen the relative demand for skilled workers in an economy,

thereby possibly contributing to an increase in earnings inequality.28

     However, even If one accepted the view that common forces were acting to

increase the inequality of male earnings and family income in the United

States, Canada, and Australia in the 1980s, why would the effects of these




countries under study here (see Katz, Loveman, and Blanchflower 1993). also
experienced the largest decline in industry's share of employment from 1979 to
1987 (9 percentage points). Japan, by contrast, exhibited a negligible change
in manufacturing's share of employment and a very small increase in
education-earnings differentials (see Katz and Revenga, 1989).
27Murphy and Welch (1998) discuss these issues further and provide evidence
related to the United States economy. Alternatively, Baumol, Blackman, and
Wolff (1985) argue that a decline in manufacturing's share of employment in an
economy is a consequence of inherently faster productivity
                                                            growth in the
manufacturing sector relative to the service sector.
     Findlay (1993) constructs a general equilibrium model in which increased
openness of trade can lead to a decrease in the relative demand for
less-skilled workers. Ehagwati and Dehejia (1993) argue that recent patterns
in U.S. international trade are not consistent with such a decrease, and so do
not contribute to the increase in earnings inequality. Their empirical
argument is partly based on evidence from changes in the relative prices of
 imported and exported goods.
     the case of the United States, Blackburn (1990) and Juhn, Murphy, and
Pierce (1993) provide evidence that sectoral shifts account for a portion of
increased male earnings inequality between the late 1960s and the mid-1980s.
Kruger (1993) and Mincer (1993) provides evidence that the acceleration of
technological change in the l980s contributed to the increase of
education-earnings differentials in the United States.



                                     25
forces manifest themselves so differently across these countries with respect

to the components of husbands' earnings inequality? One possible explanation

relates to differences in the nature of the labor markets in the three

countries under study. In particular, wage determination in Australia is

fundamentally a centralized and authoritative process, with minimum wage rates

for each occupation determined by state and federal wage tribunals. In

addition. Australian workers are highly unionized: the unionization rate was

58 percent in 1980 and 56 percent in 1987. By comparison, wage determination

is relatively decentralized and unregulated in the United States and Canadian

labor markets. In addition, relative to Australia, the unionization rate was

low in Canada in the 1980s (36 percent in both 1979 and 1987) and even lower

in the United States (25 percent in 1979 and 17 percent in 1987). Minimum

wages also fell sharply in real terms in the United States during the l980s,

diminishing any relevance they may have had to the determination of labor

market outcomes for prime-age men.

     In line with these differences in the nature of each countries' labor

market institutions, our results suggest that market forces play a weaker role

in wage determination in Australia than in the United States or Canada. The

variance of husbands' earnings increased in Australia not because of an

increase in the variance of husbands' tiages, which actually declined slightly,

but because of an increase in the variance of husbands' weeks worked. In

addition, the rising covariance of Australian husbands' wages and weeks worked

suggests that employment declined relatively more for low-wage workers, a

finding that is consistent with the various factors identified above as

potentially leading to increased earnings inequality.29




290ne might   speculate   that these effects for Australia, which are based on


                                        26
     In the United States and Canada, however, the increased inequality of

husbands' earnings is associated with increases in both the variance of

husbands' wages and the variance of their hours, as one would expect to be the

case in relatively decentralized and unregulated labor markets. The fact that

the dispersion of wages appears to have increased more in the United States

than in Canada is consistent with a stronger union presence in Canada, but

also with the fact that education-earnings differentials for men increased in

the United States, but not in Canada.3° This latter difference appears to

reflect a sharp rise in the supply of more educated men in Canada during the

1980s relative to the United States (see Freeman and Needels 1993).

     After the 'increase in husbands' earnings inequality, the increasing

correlation of husbands' and wivest earnings is the next most important

correlate of increased income inequality among married couple families in the

United States and Canada. We also find evidence that this correlation

increased in Sweden and the United Kingdom, but not in Australia, France, and

the Netherlands. Our analyses show that the increased interspousal

correlation of earnings in Canada and the United States is associated with

increased interspousal correlations of wages, hours, and employment

probabilities. Civen the increases that occurred in women's labor market

activity in the United States and Canada during the l980s, one might

reasonably expect these increased interspousal correlations to reflect some




samples of husbands who report that they usually work full-time, would be
even more pronounced among samples of all male workers.
30Comparing the magnitude of the wage inequality increase in the United States
and Canada may be misleading, because different measures of the wage are used
in analyzing the two countries. Blackburn and Bloom (1993). however, show
that the earnings inequality increase is larger in the United States than
in Canada when weekly earnings for full-time workers, are analyzed in both
countries.



                                     27
changes in the matching of spouses with respect to important labor market

characteristics, but we found very   little evidence   to support this view.

Indeed, the data indicate that the interspousal correlation or predicted
                        the United States and Canada because of changes in the
wages changed in both
                        translate individual characteristics into wage outcomes.
way the labor markets
                                        differentials for both husbands and
For example, increased education-wage
                                     be associated with an increase in the
wives in the United States seem to

interspOUsal predicted wage correlation.

     In part because standard sets of regressors explain relatively small

fractions of the total variation in wages and hours,     the dominant factor

associated with increases in the interspousal correlations of wages and hours

 are increases in the correlations between spouses of their wage residuals and

 of their hours residuals. This result closely parallels the findings of

 Blackburn (1990) and Juhn, Murphy. and Pierce (1993),    who note the importance

 of changes in unobservable influences on wages to the rise in wage inequality

 among United States men. Our results confirm the importance of changes in

 unobservable influences in wage and hours equations to the increasing variance

 of husbands' and wives' wages and hours in the United States and Canada. They

 also suggest that these unobservable influences have become more highly

 correlated between spouses over time. If our findings about the stability of

 interspousal correlations of observed labor market characteristics extend to

 unobserved characteristics, our results suggest that changes have occurred in
                                                           into labor market
 the weights that translate unobserved characteristics
                                             associated with certain labor market
 outcomes, for example, that skill prices

 characteristics not controlled for in our analyses tended to increase in the




                                        28
19805.31 However, this conclusion is highly speculative and deserves further

analysis using data that will permit a richer specification of spouses' labor

market characteristics. Additional analysis of income and earnings data for

other countries and time periods is also needed before more definitive

conclusions may be reached about the ways in which   labor market institutions

help condition an economy's wage and employment responses to important

macroeconomic shifts.




3tJuhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1993) use similar logic to interpret increases in
the residual variance of wage equations for U.S. men in the l980s. These
authors conclude that the widening of education-wage differentials is largely
a result of increased prices for unobservable skills.




                                      29
                                References

Baumol, William, Sue Anne Batey Blaclcsan, and Edward Wolff. 1985.
   "Unbalanced Growth Revisited: Asymptotic Stagnancy and New Evidence."
   American Economic Review. 75(4): 806-17.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, and Vivek Dehejia. 1993. "Freer Trade and Wages of the
   Unskilled: Is Marx Striking Again?" Unpublished manuscript. Columbia
   University.

Blackburn, McKinley. 1990. "What Can Explain the Increase in Earnings
   Inequality Among Males?" Industrial Relations. 29(3): 441-56.

Blackburn, McKinley, and David Bloom. 1987. "Earnings and Income Inequality
   in the United States.' Population and Development Review. 13(4): 575-609.

Blackburn, McKinley, and David Bloom. 1993. "The Distribution of Family
   Income: Measuring and Explaining Changes in the l980s for Canada and the
   United States." In David Card and Richard Freeman, eds., Small Differences
   that Matter: Labor Markets and Income Maintenance in Canada and the United
   States. Chicago University of Chicago Press, 233-66.

Blackburn, McKinley, David Bloom, and Richard Freeman. 1990. "The Declining
   Economic Position of Less Skilled American Men." In Gary Burtless, ed., A
   Future of Lousy Jobs? The Changing Structure of U.S. Wages. Washington.
   D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 31-67.

Bound, John, and George Johnson. 1992. "Changes in the Structure of Wages
   During the 1980s: An Evaluation of Alternative Hypotheses." American
   Economic Review. 82(3): 371-92.

Bourguignon, Francois. 1979. "Decomposable Income Inequality Measures."
   Econometrica. 47(4): 901-20.

Burtless, Gary. 1990. "Earnings Inequality over the Business and Demographic
   Cycles." In Gary Burtless, ed., A Future of Lousy Jobs? The Changing
   Structure of U.S. Rages. Washington. D.C.: The Brookings Institution,
   77-116.

Cancian, Maria, Sheldon Danziger, and Peter Gottschalk. 1993. "Working Wives
   and Family Income Inequality among Married Couples." In Sheldon Danziger
   and Peter Gottschalk, eds., Uneven Tides: Rising Inequality in America.
   New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 195-222.

Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1992. "Does School Quality Matter? Returns
   to Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United
   States." Journal of Political Economy. 100(1): 1-40.

Findlay, Ronald. 1993. "Wage Dispersion, International Trade and the Service
   Sector." En Gote Hansson, ed., Trade, Growth and Development: The Role of
   Politics and Institutions. London: Routledge.




                                     30
 Freeman, Richard, and Karen Needels, 1993. "Skill Differentials
                                                                   in Canada in
    an Era of Rising Labor Market Inequalityi' In David Card and Richard
    Freeman, eds., Small Differences that Matter: Labor Markets and Income
    Maintenance in Canada and the United States. Chicago:
                                                           University of
    Chicago Press, 45-68.

 Cronau, Reuben. 1982. "Inequality of Family Income: Do Wives' Earnings
    Matter?" Population and Development Review. 8(Supplement); 119-36.

 Heckman, James. 1979. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error."
    Econometrics. 47: 153-61.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1993. 'Wage Inequality and
   the Rise in Returns to Skill." Journal of Political
   410-42.
                                                       Economy. 101(3):

Karoly, Lynn. 1993. "The Trend in Inequality Among Families,
                                                               Individuals,
   and Workers in the United States: A Twenty-Five Year
                                                         Perspective." In
   Sheldon Danziger and Peter Gottschalk, eds., Uneven Tides: Rising
   Inequality in America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 195-222.

Katz, Lawrence, Gary Loveman, and David Blanchflower. 1993. "A Comparison of
   Changes in the Structure of Wages in Four OECD Countries." NBER
                                                                   Working
   Paper No, 4297.Cambridge, Mass,: NBER.

Katz, Lawrence, and Ana Revenga. 1989. "Changes in the Structure of Wages:
   The United States vs Japan." Journal of the Japanese and International
   Economies, 3: 522-53,

Krueger, Alan B.  "How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence
   from Microdata, 1984-89." Quarterly Journal of Economics. 108(1): 33-60.

Lehrer, Evelyn, and Marc Nerlove. 1984. "A Life-Cycle Analysis of Family
   Income Distribution." Economic Inquiry. 22: 360-74.

Leontief, Wassily. 1982. "Technological Advance, Economic Growth, and the
   Distribution of Income." Population and Development Review 9(3):
   403-10.

Mincer1 Jacob. 1993 "Human Capital, Technology, and the Wage Structure:
   What Do Time Series Show?" In Studies in Human Capital: Collected Essays
   of Jacob Mincer. Brookfield, Vermont: Edward Elgar, 366-405.

Moghadam, Reza. 1990. "Wage Determination: An Assessment of Returns to
   Education, Occupation1 Region and Industry in Great Britain." Discussion
   Paper No. 8, London: Centre for Economic Performance

Murphy, Kevin, and Finis Welch. 1991. "The Role of International Trade in
   Wage Differentials. In Marvin Kosters, ed. Workers and their Wages.
   Washington, D.C.: AEI Press.

Schirm, Allen. 1988. "Marital Sorting, Wives' Labor Supply, and Family
   Income Inequality." Unpublished manuscript.



                                    31
                      Michael O'Higgins, and Lee Rainwater,
                                                           Eds. 1990.
Saeeding, Timothy M.,
   poverty, Inequality and
                           rncome Distribution fri Comparative PerspectivC
                                                                 Institute
                                                                           The
                                   Washington, D.C.: The Urban
   xembourg Income Study (LIS).
   Press.
                                                                Journal of
Smith, James P. 1979. "The Distribution of Family Earnings."
   political Economy. 87(5,pt. 2): 5163-92.




                                       32
                                        Table 1
               Inequality of Total Income Among Married-couple
                                                                           Families,
                                         Selected Yearsa


                                                    Inequality iceasureb

 Country and       Year                       MID          ERr

 United States
    1979                                  .198            .145             .304
    1987                                  .224            .167             .349
 Canada
    1979                                  .167            .125             .256
    1987                                  .163            .135             .285
AustraliaC
   1981/82                                .251            .158         .342 (.459)
   1985/86                                .264            .164         .358 (.483)


  STotal income includes earned and unearned
                                             cash income, excluding capital
gains and one-time, lump-sum payments.

       is the mean logarithmic deviation, EN? is Theil's entropy measure, and
CV2 is the squared coefficient of variation. For incomes
                                                          y, i—1,...n, these
measures are calculated using the following formulas:

             MLD — — S
                       in
                       n i—i
                               lo(y/y)


             EN?   —
                       in
                       —S                —
                                y1iog(y1/y)         and
                       ny i—i

                          n     _2
                   —
                       il'iT0

where   "   —11y/n. All three measures are increasing functions of the degree
of inequality.

  CThe Australian statistics are for income excluding interest and dividends.
The numbers itt parentheses are calculated using the distribution of interest
and dividend income from 1985/86 in the calculations for both years.
                                    Table 2
                                 Coefficient of Variation of Total Income
       Components of the Squared
                                     in the United States, 1979 and 1987
        for Married Couple Families



                                                          Income    Source
                                                                         Interest
                              Husbands'    Wives'          and
                                                             Other   Other
                              Earnings Earnings Earnings Dividends Income
Item              Total

1211                             .68        .17                .06             .04     .05
  Share             1.00                                                              6.64
                                           1.70               7.69           13.93
                     .30         .62


Correlation with:                                     a
  Husbands' earnings
                                     --    (.10)
                                    .01         --
  Wives' earnings
                                    .04      .00
  Other earnins                             -.00                   .04
  interest and dividends            .15
  Other income
                                -   .27     -   .05                .04          .06




12U                                 .63      .22                   .05          .05     .05
  share             1.00                                                              6.57
                                           1.39               9.42           11.46
  C'?                3s             .48

 Correlation with:                                    a
   Husbands' earnings
                                      --    (.18)
                                     .11         --
   Wives' earnings
   Other earnings                    .04        .01
                                                                   .03
   interest and   dividends          .15
                                            -
                                                .02
                                                .09                .05          .09
   Other income
                                 -   .25


                                                          husbands' and wives'
   8This statistic is the correlation coefficient between
                                       amounts for both husbands' and wives'
 earnings among families with positive
 earnings.
                                    Table 3
         Decomposition of Changes in CV2 in the United States, 1979-87


Actual Change — .045

Percent of Change                   1979 Base                1987 Base
Associated with Changes    in:    Parameters                Parameters
  GV2 for husbands                    62 %                      58 %
  CV2 for wives                      -20                        38

  p for husband and wife              44                        51
  Income shares                       31                         7

  Share shift from
                   a
   husband to wife                    13                        -2




      calculating this statistic, the share of income from husbands'
was reduced by the amount of the increase in the share of income from earnings
                                                                       wives'
earnings, while the other income source shares were left unchanged. This
convention preserves the constraint that all income shares sum to unity.
                                     Table 4
            Components of the Squared Coefficient of Variation among
                                          and Australia, Selected Years
          Married Couple Families, Canada


                                                           Income Source

                                                                        Interest
                                gusbands' Wives'   Other     and                       Other
                                                                                       Income
                 Total          Earnings Earnings Earnings Dividends
Item

                                           Canada


1211                               .66         .17              .08          .04          .05
  share             1.00                                                                 2.98
                                   .34       1.76              6.71        10.85
  Cv2                .26

Correlation with:
  Husbands' earnings
                                    --        (.06)
  Wives' earnings                  .02
  Other earnings
                      -
                                  . .00       -.01
                                   .04             .03           .06
  Interest and dividends                                                     .02
                                  -.30        -.09               .07
  Other income


lQfl                                               .22           .07          .04          .08
  share             1.00            .59
                                              1.31             6.84        11.55         2.85
  CV2                .29           .44


 Correlation with:
   Husbands' earnings
                                     --        (.21)
   Wives' earnings                  .16
   Other earnings                   .01        -   .02
                                    .07            .04           .06
   Interest and dividends
                                   - .33       -   .17           .04          .06
   Other income


                                           Australiaa

 1981/82                                                                         .07       .05
                     1.00           .61            .19            .08
   Share                                                                    22.93         3.98
                          .45       .44        1.78             7.86
   GIl2


 Correlation with:
   Husbands' earnings
                                      --           (.21)
   Wives' earnings                   .17
                                    .01             .01.
   Other earnings                                                 .05
   Interest and dividends           .16             .06
                                   -.27            -.17           .01        -   .02
   Other income
                            Table 4 (continued)


                                              Income Source
                                                          Interest
                           Husbands' Wives'   Other     and
Item            Total      Earnings Earnings Earnings Dividends Income
1985 /8 6
  Share           1.00        .58       .21         .07         .07       .07
                   .48        .56     1.66        8.07        22.93      3.39
Correlation with;
  Husbands' earnings           --     (.20)
  Wives' earnings             .19       --
  Other earnings             - .04    - .03
  Interest and dividends      .16      .06         .05
  Other income               - .33    - .19        .02         - .02


  a7 reasons noted in the text, the 1981/82 entries for the CV2 and
correlations involving interest and dividend income are taken from the
calculations using the 1985/86 data.
                                   Table 5
                                CV1, Canada and Australia,      selected Years
    Decomposition of Changes in

                              Canada (Actual Change —   .029)

                                     1979 Base                   1987 Base
Percent of Change
                                    Parameters                  Parameters
Associated with Changes in:

                                       145 %                       124 %
  CV2 for husbands
  CV2 for wives                         45                         -86
                                         83                         97
  p for husband and wife
                                        -17                        -83
  Income shares                                                           .
  Share shift from
                                         48                         14
   husband to wife


                       Australia (Actual Change — .024)

                                    1981/82 Base                1985/86 Base
Percent of Change
Associated with Changes    in:       Parameters                  Parameters


                                        179 %                      159 %
  CV2 for husbands
                                        -17                        -24
  CV2 for wives
                                         16                         17
  p for husband and wife
  Income shares                         -55                         79
  Share shift from
                                                                      7
   husband to wife
                                       Table 6
                Selected Components of the Inequality Decomposition1
                         Various Countries and Time Periods


                                                                 Correlation of
                               Ct'2   for                      Husbands' and Wives'
                                                    Wives'          Earnings
                       Total           Husbands'   Earnings'
Country/Year           Income          Earnings     Share      All     Both Earners

United States
  1991                   .36                .53      .25        .11        .19
France
  1919                   .70            1.09         .16        .13        .29
  1984                   .73            1.33         .18        .16        .29
Netherlands
  1983                   .38                .70      .10        .11        .14
  1987                   .32                .60      .12        .06        .14
Sweden
  1981                   .21                .26      .26        .21        .15
  1987                   .21                .28      .28        .25        .21

United Kingdom
  1979                   .25                .49      .15        .09        .13
  1986                   .39                .93      .16        .18        .20
                                         Table 7
          Variances and Correlations of U.S. Husbands' and
                                                           Wives' Earnings and
                          Other Characteristics 1979 and 1987


 A: Components of variance of log earnings3

                                   Husbands                              Wives

                           Log          Log                   Log        Log
 Year                  Wages        Hours        Cot'.       Wages      Hours        Cot'.


 1979                      .326         .176.    .012         .337      1.061        .046
 1987                      .371         .221     .013         .377        .855       .052



 : Correlation between husbands' and wives' characteristics

 Year           Education         Age           P        log('E)     .log(w)     Jog(H)

1979                 .65          .93           .10        .05         .20         .02
1987                 .65          .91           .15        .11         .28         .02


Notes:

  Coy.        --    Covariance between the log of wages and the log of hours.
  P           --   Employment indicator (equal to one if individual worked
                   during survey year, zero otherwise).
              --
  log(E)           Logarithm  of earnings, for individuals with positive
                   earnings.
              - - Logarithm
  log(w)                      of hourly income1 defined as annual earnings
                   divided by annual hours worked, for individuals with positive
                  hours (individuals with wages below $1 in 1987 dollars were
                   excluded).
  log(N)      -
                - Logarithm of annual hours worked, for individuals with
                  positive hours.

  sage variances and wage-hours covariances
                                             are calculated using that part of
the sample that satisfies our exclusion restrictions for wages, which is
smaller than the corresponding samples of individuals with positive hours.
Education, age, and employment correlations are calculated using the complete
sample.
                                       Table 8
            Interspousal Correlations of Predicted Values and
                                                              Residuals,
                            United States, 1979 and 1987


                            Employment             Weeks
Correlation                                  _____________           Wages
Between                    1979       1981   1979     1987    1979      1987



Predicted valuesa          .80        .84    .10       .24    .57

Residuals              -   .04    -   .04    .02       .01    .14       .17
Predicted values
 (with 1979                .80        .82    .10      .18     .57       .58
 coefficients)


  apredicted value correlations are calculated using the sample of all
married couples. The residual correlations for the hours and wage
equations can only be calculated for dual earner married couples.
                                      Table 9
            Variances and Correlations of Husbands' and Wives' Earnings
                  and Other Characteristics, Canada and Australia



A: Components of variance of log earnings3

                              Husbands                           Wives

                    Log         Log                    Log        Log
Year               Wages       Hours       Coy.       Wages      Flours       Cdv.


Canada
  1979                 .319         .096   -.003       .339       .346       -.004
  1987                 .338         .166    .017       .380       .381        .033

Australia
  1981/2               .254         .080    .005       .227       .469        .01.7
  1985/6               .246         .094    .009       .235       .375        .029


B: Correlation between husbands' and wives' characteristics


Year          EducatloiP Age               P       log(E)     log(w)      log(H)


Canada
  1979           .63          .93          .12       .04        .11         .10
  1987           .62          .93          .20       .12        .22         .15

Australia
  1981/2         .41          .92          .24       .13        .35         .1S
  1985/6         .44          .91          .31       .16        .31         .15



  a
   The wage variable is weekly earnings and the labor-supply variable is
weeks worked over the year. The samples are restricted to full-time
workers (more than 30 hours per week). See notes to table 7 for further
details.


     continuous years of education variable was constructed by using the
available education codes to impute years of education.
                                      Table 10
            Interspousal Correlations of Predicted Values and
                                                              Residuals,
                               Canada, 1979 and 1987


                         Employment              Weeks               Wages
Correlation                                                   _______________
Between                 1979    1987      1979      1987      1979      1987

Predicted values         .74    .86        .65       .84      .62        .58
Residuals              -.02    -.03        .12      .16       .05       .12
Predicted values
 (with 1979             .74     .74       .65       .65       .62       .63
 coefficients)
                                                  AppeMlx A

                            SeLected Features of the Different Data Sets AnaLyzed



                                                    Cotiitry

                      ted
                                           Cr.ada                   AustraLia



1. Wa of           Nereb curreit           Swvey of Consiser         Irca,,e and Noising
   data set(s)     PopuLation              Finaices (SCE)            S.tvey;
                   jrvey (S)                                         iricw'. Distrtjtiai




2. Years           19                      1960                      1981/82;
                   1988                    196$                      1985/86




3. SuipLe silt     Iloisthotd, with        Sw as U.S.               Sase as U.S.
                   information al ott
                   iSIvi&at. residing
                   in hasehotd.



. Arvroxirete      60,000                  40,000                   15,000;
   nter of                                                           5,500
   srpte tnIt.
   irctted in
   cacti survey




5. Definition      Iwo or re               Sn as U.S.               Sc as U.S.
   of the   f4Ly   tndivid.ats rotated
                   by btood or 'mrrtne
                   ad living in th.
                   Lw househoLd;   p1..
                   lndiviôsLs Lfvi,Q
                   aLon. in haaehotds
                   or with other
                   individuals to ijious
                   they •re not related.
                   This definition
                   corresponds closely
                   to the notion of en
                   "ecou'c.It faulty."
                                                       -Cotntry

                    IMited
                    State,                                           Assstretip




 6. inca           Esming, of all            Sn U.S.,                Sai,e as U.S.
    coverage        MIt ly meters;           (though
                   asset incaiw;             Inforation on
                   trafer tricaiie;          direct tax ps.iie,t.
                   MId   persian Inca.       Is available).
                   Capital gainsllosses
                   rct Incti4ed. Alt
                   Inca fIgrea are
                   pre tax.



7. Ref erece       Cateqter year             Saiw as U.S.            July 1981 to
    period for     preceding the                                     m 1962;
    Inca data                                                        JuLy 1965 to
                                                                     Jn   1986.




8. lapited data   Missing dat. are          Similar to U.S.         Slisi tar to U.S.
                   kpjted Ssedon
                  the Incaues of
                  Inca-ropcitlrg
                  u.,n4...ts with
                  (lice ctiaracterl,tfcs.



9. Top-coding     All Inca,. 'alit,.        All Inca.. sanes        MIgh Incas are
   of   Inca      In th. iceo s    are      in the two 5Cr          asked by averaging
   data           top-coded at 50,000       data aets are top-      th    tng other high.-
                  (1979) US dallars.        cods, .t vat,.. that    Inca people In the
                  Atthai the neetnat        v.ry ecross provinces   sast data cUster.
                  top-coda — 99,999         NC over tIn. A
                  (1917) US Sttn In         cantat reaL top-code
                  the 1985 S, a             (eqiat to the Cwodiw,
                  applied the 1980 top-     eqivslent of 50,000
                  coda (in real tern)       (1979) U.S. dollars)
                  to alt of the 1988        was tied to aLl of
                  S Inca,. data we          the 5Cr incair data
                  nlyzed.                   we nlyzed.
                                                  toi.ntry.
                                                                Australia


10. calculation   Arn.jet   earnings      Asnel earnings        Arnsai esrnfngs
   of sege        divided by anal         divided by weeks      divided by weeks
   variable       ban worked, with        worked for fult-      worked for
                  indiviSiste having      ti.e workers Ci...,   Individjat, W.o are
                  • calculated wage       30 or re han per      pririerily ful(-ti.e
                  below SI per hat        week), excISing       workers (i.e., 30
                  (in 1937 U.S.           fro the sLe           or re hats     per
                  thtlan) excltad         indivickals with      week),   excluding
                  frau the surple.        weekLy ages below     Ira the n'pte
                                          140 (1937 U.S.        indiylOal. with
                                          dollars).             weekly wages below
                                                                140 (1967 U.S.
                                                                dollars).



ii. Wder-         Appears to be stable    Similar to U.S.,      leo Intonation.
   rortirg        over time, arid re      except for   asset
   of Inca        severe for    trnfen    ircae, Siid     I.
                  Intuit    and asset     reported sa.Iat
                  Inca. than for earned    ore cletely
                  intone,                 than in the U.S.
                                 Appendix B
      Effect of Changes in Wage Equation Parameters on the Correlation
                      Between Wages across Individuals


     In this appendix, we consider how changes in the parameters of two

wage (or hours) functions can affect the correlation of the two function
outcomes,

     To begin with, we assume that only one variable (for example, years of

schooling) enters the two wage functions, that is,


     w1 —
            —




where the erroi tens are omitted so as to focus on the correlation in

predicted values from the usual wage equations. Then the correlation

between w1 and w2 is:


                                          C(x1,x2)
     p —
                olx     1
                            flu
                             2x   2
                                      —

                                          axx
                                            a
                                             1   2


where C(x1•x2) is the covariance between x1 and x2, °y is short-hand for

the standard deviation of a variable y, and p is the correlation

coefficient between w1 and w2, As p simplifies to the correlation

coefficient between x1 and x2, changes in ft1 and ft will not affect p, but

changes in the correlation between x1 and x2 will.

     This result changes, however, when more than one variable determines

wages. For instance, let the variables               and   enter the wage equations,

that is:


           —

           —
                ]!l
                fi2x2
                        +
                         +
                             ll
                             •12z2
Now, the correlation between w1 and w2 is:

                                                                        +
                    fl1fi2C(x1,x2) +         fl12C(x1,z2) + y12C(z1,x2)
                         2                           2 2 112      2 2                      2 2
               l°x 2fl171C(x1,z1) +                                     2fl2y2C(x2,z2) +
                             1                          1           2                        2



for which,

                                 flfl2C(x1,x2) + fl1-r2C(x1,z2)         4u+
             —                                                      -
                                                                               P:lldltzl)
       Op1         ft1                   C(w1,w2)


so that increases in ft1                 can either increase or decrease p, depending on the

signs and sizes of the relevant parameters. In fact, the above formula

leads to the following conclusion: if fl>O, then Op/Oft1 will be positive

(negative) if the percentage of the covariance between w1 and w2 that is

attributable to terms involving x1 is greater than (less than) the

percentage of the variance of w1 that is attributable to terms involving

             (If                  then the opposite conclusion holds.) An immediate

implication is that, holding other variances and covariances constant, an

increase in the covariance between                          and x2 (and so the correlation

between            and x2) will increase the likelihood that increases in ft1                    (or

ft2)
       will    increase p.




32The portion of the variance of w1 attributable to                            is defined so that
one-half of the covariance terms involving x1 are said to be attributed to
       and the other half attributed to the other variable involved in the
covariance.
                                   Appendix Table Cl
                        OLS Estimates of Labor Market            Equations
                                United States,   1979 and 1987a



    Independent            Employment                    Hours
                                                                                     Wages
    Varlableb            1979       1987         1979         1987           1979      1987

    Husbands

    Education spline:

 Education        8       .008          .003      .028         .009           .054       .037
                         (.002) (.002)           (.004) (.005)               (.004) (.005)
 Education >      8       .004          .005      .009         .014           .061      .074
                         (.001) (.001)           (.001) (.001)               (.001) (.001)
 Age                      .029          .035      .021         .031           .053      .056
                         (.002) (.002)           (.003) (.004)              (.003) (.003)
 Age2/100                -.037      -   .045     -.027        -.042      -    .053     -.055
                         (.002) (.002)           (.003) (.004)              (.003) (.003)
                          .10           .14      .04           .04        .14           .16
N                        31746     26900       29032       24272         28792         24028
ii
                          .065          .071     .169         .212           .282       .311

Wives

Education spline:
Education S       8      -.004     -.004       -.021       -.010         -.015   -.007
                         (.004) (.004)         (.014) (.014)             (.007) (.008)
Education > 8            .018           .022     .030         .036           .071       .091
                         (.001) (.001)         (.004) (.004)             (.002) (.002)
Age                      .039        .034        .050         .065           .024       .043
                        (.002) (.002)          (.008) (.007)            (.003) (.003)
Age2/100                -.057   -.050          -.062      -   .084      -    .026     -.048
                        (.003) (.003)          (.009) (.009)            (.004) (.004)

It2                      .29        .31         .04        .04               .10       .15
N                       31746      26888       19699      18835         19117         18372
                         .165       .143       1.020          .820           .305      .320
                           Appendix Table Cl (continued)

  ama employment equations are Linear probability models for working or
not working over the income year. The hours equations use the logarithm of
annual hours as the dependent variable, and are estimated using the sample
of individuals with positive hours worked. The wage equations use the
logarithm of annual earnings divided by annual hours worked as the
dependent variable.

  bAll regressions include three region dummies and the number of
nonearners in the family as independent variables. The employment and
hours regressions also include the spouse's education and age variables as
independent   variables.
                                   Appendix Table C?
                   OLS    Estimates of Labor-Market Equations,
                                 Canada, 1979 and


                          Employment       :          Hours                 Wages
Independent
VarIablet'           1979         1987     1979          1987    1979          1987

Husbands

High school              .014      .019        .071       .108       .149       .136
                     (.004) (.004)          (.006) (.008)        (.010) (.010)

Some college             .008      .018        .066       .103       .190       .224
                     (.005) (.005)          (.007) (.009)        (.012) (.011)

College graduate         .01.6     .030        .086       .128       .444       .455
                     (.006) (.006)          (.009) (.011)        (.013) (.013)

Age                      .021      .026        .010       .014       .044       .051
                     (.002) (.002)          (.003) (.004)        (.003) (.003)

Age2/100             -.030        -.037     -.014        -.018   -.049   -.054
                     (.002) (.002)          (.003) (.004)        (.004) (.004)

                         .13       .20         .07        .09        .09        .10
N                    20053        22248    18341         19858   18186        19688
                         .041      .053        .090       .152       .290       .304


Wives

High school              .057      .069        .129       .146       .144       .181.
                     (.008) (.007)          (.018) (.016)        (.017) (.016)

Some college             .121      .134        .159       .211       .268       .327
                     (.010) (.008)          (.021) (.018)        (.019) (.016)

College graduate         .173      .173        .217       .275       .512       .693
                     (.015) (.011)          (.030) (.024)        (.025) (.020)

Age                      .039      .041        .057       .043       .022       .050
                     (.003) (.003)          (.008) (.007)        (.005) (.004)

Age2/100             -.059        -.060    -.065         -.043   -.026         -.058
                     (.004) (.003)         (.009) (.008)         (.006) (.006)

K2                    .29          .30         .07        .11        .08        .14
N                    20053       22248         7383      10583       7123     10267
A2                                                                              .327
                         .174      .140        .324       .342       .312
                        Appendix Table C2 (continued)

  8The employment equations are linear probability models for working or
not working over the income year. The weeks equations use the logarithm of
annual weeks as the dependent variable, and are estimated using the sample
of full-time workers who worked for at leeast one week during the year.
The wage equations use the logarithm of annual earnings divided by annual
weeks worked as the dependent variable, and use only full-time workers.

  bAll regressions include four (five in 1987) region dummies and the
number of nonearners in the family as independent variables. The
employment and hours regressions also include the spouse's education and
age variables as independent variables.
