                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MULTIFACTOR MODELS DO NOT
                       EXPLAIN DEVIATIONS FROM THE CAPM




                                    A. Craig MacKinlay




                                  Working Paper No. 4756




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         June 1994


I thank Fischer Black, Kent Daniel, Eugene Fama, Bruce (Jrundy, John Heaton, Ravi
Jagannathan, Shmuel Kandel, Krishna Ramaswamy, Bill Schwert, Jay Shanken. Robert
Whitelaw, and especially Andrew Lo and Robert Stambaugh for useful discussions relating to
this paper. A preliminary draft was completed while I was a summer visitor at the University
of British Columbia in July 1991. Thanks to the UBC finance faculty for constructive
suggestions. An early draft circulated under the title "Distinguishing Among Asset Pricing
Theories.' I am grateful to seminar participants at Indiana University, MIT, NBER Asset
Pricing Conference, Princeton, Rutgers University, Stanford, University of California at
Berkeley, University of Chicago, University of Illinois, University of Rochester, Vanderbilt,
and Wharton for helpful comments. Research support from the Batt&yniarch Fellowship and
the Geewax-Terker Research Fund is gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4756
                                                                                        June 1994

                            MULTIFACTOR MODELS DO NOT
                         EXPLAIN DEVIATIONS FROM THE CAPM

                                          ABSTRACT

       A number of studies have presented evidence rejecting the validity of the Capital Asset

Pricing Model (CAPM), This evidence has spawned research into possible explanatiens. These

explanations can be divided into two main categories - the risk based alternatives and the nozuisk

based alternatives. The risk based category includes multifactor asset pricing models developed

under the assumptions of investor rationality and perfect capital markets. The nonrisk based

category includes biases introduced in the empirical methodology, the existence of market

frictions, or explanations arising from the presence of irrational investors. The distinction

between the two categories is important for asset pricing applications such as estimation of the

cost of capital. This paper proposes to distinguish between the two categories using at ante

analysis. A framework is developed showing that a ante one should expect that CAPM

deviations due to missing risk factors will be very difficult to statistically detect. In contrast,

deviations resulting from nonrisk based sources will be easy to detect. Examination of empirical

results leads to the conclusion that the risk based alternatives is not the whole story for the

CAPM deviations. The implication of this conclusion is that the adoption of empirically

developed multifactor asset pricing models may be premature.



A. Craig MacKinlay
Department of Finance
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
 1 Introduction
One of the important problems of modern financial economics is the quantification of the
tradeoff between risk and expected return. Although common sense suggests that invest-
ments free of risk will generally yield lower returns than more risky investments such as the
stock market, it was only with the development of the Sharpe-Lintner Capita] Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM) that economists were able to say how much lower this would have to be. In
particular, the CAPM shows that the cross-section of expected excess returns of financial
assets must be linearly related to the market betas with an intercept of zero. Because of the
practical importance of this risk/return relation, numerous studies have empirically exam-
ined this implication. Over the past fifteen years, a number of these studies have presented
evidence which contradict the CAPM in that the hypothesis that the intercept of a regression
of excess returns on the excess return of the market is zero is statistically rejected.
    The apparent violations of the CAPM have spawned research into possible explanations.'
For the analysis of this paper the explanations will be divided into two categories — the risk
based alternatives and the nonrisk based alternatives. The risk based category includes
multifactor asset pricing models developed under the assumptions of investor rationality
and perfect capital markets. For this category the source of deviations from the CAPM is
missing risk factors. The nonrisk based category includes biases introduced in the empirical
methodol6gy, the existence of market frictions, or explanations arising from the presence
of irrational investors.2 Examples are data—snooping biases, biases in computing returns,
transaction costs and liquidity effects, and market inefficiencies.
    The finding of empirical tests of the CAPM that the intercepts deviate statistically from
zero has naturally lead to the empirical examination of multifactor asset pricing models
motivated by the Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT) developed by Ross (1976) and the In-
tertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model (ICAPM) developed by Merton (1973). The basic

   'Of course Roll's (1977) critique is relevant here, In a strict sense, most studies reject the mean—variance
efficiency of the CRSP Indexes. In the analysis of this paper, the missing risk factors analysis will apply to
the case where the source of the violations is the misidentification of the market portfolio.
    2Although this category is labelled nonrisk based clearly some of the explanations contain elements of
risk.
   3See Fama (1993) for detailed discussion of these rnultifactor model theories.
approach has been to introduce additional factors in the form of excess returns on traded
portfolios and then re-examine the zero-intercept hypothesis. A recent example of a paper
which includes this approach is Fama and French (1993). They document that the estimates
of the CAPM intercepts deviate from zero for portfolios formed on the basis of book value to
market value of equity ratios as well as for portfolios formed based on market capitalization.4
Upon finding that the intercepts for these portfolios with a three factor model are closer to
zero, they conclude that missing risk factors in the CAPM are the source of the deviations.
They go on to advocate the use of a multifactor model, stating that, with respect to the
use of the Sharpe—Lintner CAPM, their results "should help to break this common habit"
(Fama and French (1993) page 44).
    However, the conclusion that additional risk factors are required may be premature.
There are a number of other explanations which are consistent with the presence of devia-
tions. One explanation attributes the CAPM deviations to data—snooping. This explanation
is presented in Lo and MacKinlay (1990). The argument is that on an ex post basis one will
always be able to find deviations from the CAPM. Such deviations considered in a group will
appear statistically significant. However, under this explanation they are not real but just a
result of grouping assets with common disturbance terms. Since, in financial economics our
empirical analysis is cx post in nature, this problem is difficult to directly control. Further,
in practice, direct adjustments for potential snooping are difficult to implement and, when
implemented, make it very difficult to find real deviations.
    While, in general, it is difficult to quantify and adjust for the effects of data—snooping
biases, there are some related biases which can be examined. One such case pursued by
Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan (1993) is sample selection bias. These authors show that
significant biases can arise in academic research when the analysis is conditioned on the
assets appearing in both the CRSP database and the COMPUSTAT database. Their analysis
suggests that deviations from the CAPM such as those documented by Fama and French
(1993) can be explained by sample selection biases. Breen and Korajczyk (1993) provide
   4faina and French are also cocerned with the observation that the relation between average returns and
market betas is weak. This point is not addressed in this paper but has been addressed in a number of recent
papers. Some examples are Chan and Lakonishok (1992) Kandel and Stambaugh (1993), Kothari, Shanken
and Sloan (1993), and Roll and Ross (1992).


                                                    2
further evidence on selection biases providing support for the Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan
conclusion.
    Other researchers interpret the deviations from the CAPM as indications of the presence
of irrational behavior by market participants. A number of theories have been developed
which are consistent with this line of thought.5 A recent example is the work of Lakon-
ishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1993) where they argue that the deviations arise from investors
following naive strategies including extrapolating past growth rates too far into the future,
assuming a trend in stock prices, overreacting to good or bad news, or liking to invest in firms
with a high level of profitability. With this alternative the possibility of non-zero intercepts
arises not only from missing risk factors but from specific firm characteristics.
    Conrad and Kaul (1993) consider the possibility that biases in computed returns explain
the deviations. They find that the implicit portfolio rebalancing in most analyses biases
measured returns upwards. This leads to overstated returns and consequently CAPM devi-
ations. This problem will be the most severe for tests using frequently rebalanced portfolios
and short observation intervals.
    Finally, market frictions and liquidity effects could induce a non-zero intercept in the
CAPM tests. Since the model is developed in a perfect market, such effects are not accom-
modated. Amihud and Mendleson (1986) present some evidence of returns containing effects
from market frictions and demands for liquidity. Also, Luttmer (1991) provides evidence
on the importance of market frictions in the context of the bounds on the moments of the
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution derived in Hansen and Jagannathan (1991).
   The controversy of whether or not the CAPM deviations are due to missing risk factors
flourishes because empirically it is hard to distinguish between the various arguments. The
difficulty arises because, on an ez post basis, one can always find a set of risk factors that will
make the asset pricing model intercept zero.6 Given this, without specific theory identifying
the risk factors, one will always be able to explain the cross-section of expected returns with
a multifactor asset pricing model. This will be true even if the real explanation lies in one
of the nonrisk based categories.

   5DeBondt and Thaler (1985) is an important early paper responsible for initiating interest in this area.
   6&il (1977) argues this point for the CAPM case.

                                                     3
    Depsite the difficulty in distinguishing between the risk based and nonrisk based cate-
gories, the practical implications of the distinction are important. One application illustrat-
ing the importance is the estimation of the cost of capital to evaluate investment opportu-
nites. If the risk based explanation is correct, then cost of capital calculations using the
CAPM can be badly misspecified. A better approach would be to use a multifactor model
which captures the missing risk factors. On the other hand, if the deviations are a result of
the nonrisk based explanations then disposing of the CAPM in favor of a multifactor model
may lead to serious errors. The cost of capital estimate from a multifactor model can be
very different than the estimate from the CAPM.
   In this paper I discriminate between the risk based and the nonrisk based explanations
using ex ante analysis. The objective is to evaluate the plausability of the argument that
the deviations from the CAPM can be explained by additional risk factors. I argue that
cx ante one should expect that CAPM deviations due to missing risk factors will be very
difficult to statistically detect. Intuitively this is because the deviation in expected return
is also accompanied by increased variance. I formally analyze the issue using mean-variance
efficient set mathematics in conjunction with the zero-intercept F-test presented in Gibbons,
Ross, and Shanken (1989) and MacKinlay (1987). Technically the difficulty exists because
when deviations from the CAPM or other multifactor pricing models are the result of omitted
risk factors, there is an upper limit on the distance between the null distribution of the test
statistic and the alternative distribution. With the nonrisk based alternatives where the
source of the deviations is not missing factors, no such limit exists.
   The paper also draws on a related distinction between the two categories. This distinction
is the difference in the behavior of the maximum Sharpe measure squared as the cross-section
of securities is increased.7 For the risk based alternatives the maximum Sharpe measure
squared is bounded and for the nonrisk based alternatives the maximum Sharpe measure
squared is a less useful construct and can, in principle, be unbounded.
   The results of the paper underscore the important role that economic analysis plays in
distinguishing among different pricing models for the relation between risk and return. In

  7The Sharpe measure is the ratio of the mean excess return to the standard deviation of the excess return



                                                    4
the absence of specific alternative theories, without very long time series of data, one is
limited in what can be said about risk/return relations among financial securities.
   The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 the framework for the analysis is presented.
in section 3 the optimal orthogonal portfolio is defined. This portfolio will play a key role in
the arguments of the paper. Many of the results in the paper can be related to the values of
the squared Sharpe measure for relevant portfolios. In section 4 the relations between the
parameters of the returns and the Sharpe measures are presented. Section 5 develops the
implications relating to the missing risk factors controversy. Theoretically, the framework
used to distinguish between the risk based and nonrisk based explanations assumes a large
number of assets. Section 6 illustrates that the usefulness of the framework does not depend
on this assumption. The paper concludes with section 7.

2 Linear Pricing Models and Mean-Variance Analysis.
We begin by specifying the distributional properties of excess returns for N primary assets
in the economy. Let ; represent the Wxl vector of excess returns for period 1. Assume Zg is
stationary and ergodic with mean p and covàriance matrix V which is full rank. Given these
assumptions for any set of factor portfolios, a linear relation between the excess returns and
the portfolios' excess returns results. The relation can be expressed as:

                                          =                                                  (1)




                                                   =   0                                     (2)




                                                   =                                         (3)




                              = p,    ,
                                                   — p)(Zpt —      =                         (4)




                                               5
                                               Cov[zt, ctl =      0.
                                                                                                              (5)

 B is the N x IC-matrix of factor loadings, Zpj is the K x 1-vector of time-t factor portfolio
 excess returns, and a and c are N x 1-vectors of asset return intercepts and disturbances
 respectively.8
     It is well-known that all of the elements of the vector a will be zero if a linear combination
 of the factor portfolios form the tangency portfolio (i.e. the mean—variance efficient portfolio
 of risky assets given the presence of a riskfree asset). Let z7 be the excess return of the
 (ex ante) tangency portfolio and let x9 be the N x 1 vector of portfolio weights. Here, and
 throughout the paper, let represent a conforming vector of ones. From mean—variance
 analysis:


                                               = (t'V1p)'1V'p.
                                                                                                             (6)


 In the context of our previous discussion, the asset pricing model will be considered well—
specified when the tangency portfolio can be formed from a linear combination of the K-
factor portfolios.
     In the next section a portfolio is constructed which will be useful to characterize the asset
pricing model deviations when factor portfolios are not jointly mean—variance efficient.

3 Optimal Orthogonal Portfolio.
Our interest is in formally developing the relation between the deviations from the asset
pricing model, a, and the residual covariance matrix E when a linear combination of the
factor portfolios do not form the tangency portfolio. To facilitate this I define the optimal
orthogonal portfolio.9 This is the unique portfolio which can be combined with the factor
portfolios to form the tangency portfolio and is orthogonal to the factor portfolios, I next

   8The dependence of a,   B, and Eon the factor portfolios is suppressed for notational convenience.
   9See Roll (1980) for properties of orthogonal porfolios in a general context and see Lehmann (1987, 1988,
1992) for discussions of the role of orthogonal portfolios in asset pricing tests. Also related is the orthogonal
factor employed in MacKinlay (1987), the active portfolio considered by Gibbons, Ross and Shanken (1989)
and the modifying payoff used in Hansen and Jagannathan (1994).



                                                       6
formally define this portfolio.
Definition: optimal orthogonal portfolio.
    Take as given K factor portfolios which cannot be combined to form the tangency port-
folio or the global minimum variance portfolio. A portfolio h will be defined as the optimal
orthogonal portfolio with respect to these K factor portfolios if:

                                    =    XpLa   + Xh(11W)                                 (7)


and


                                         XAVXP =      0                                   (8)


for a (K x 1) vector w where X,, is the (N x K) matrix of asset weights for the factor
portfolios, Xh is the (N x 1) vector of asset weights for the optimal orthogonal portfolio,
and Xq is the (N x 1) vector of asset weights for the tangency portfolio. If one considers a
model without any factor portfolios (K = 0) then the optimal orthogonal portfolio will be the
tangency portfolio.
   The weights of portfolio h can be expressed in terms of the parameters of the one factor
model. For the vector of weights:

                                     =
                                      = (ctt 0)—1E r.                                     (9)


where the t superscript indicates the generalized inverse. The usefulness of this portfolio
comes from the fact that when added to (1) the intercept will vanish and the factor load-
ing matrix B will not be altered. The optimality restriction in (7) leads to the intercept
vanishing, and the orthogonality condition in (8) leads to B being unchanged. Adding in



                                     =   Bz     + uihZht   +   Ut                       (10)




                                                7
                                            E[ug] =   0
                                                                                            (11)



                                         E[ugu/] =                                          (12)



                            E[zh] =    Ph   ,          — Ph)2] =
                                                                                            (13)



                                        Cov[zpt,ug] = 0.                                    (14)



                                       COV[Zht,UtI = 0.                                    (15)

The link results from comparing (1) and (10). Taking the unconditional expectations of both
sides:


                                            a=                                             (16)

and by equating the variance of Ct with the variance of /i&ZM    +   U1:



                                         = I3/9.c +
                                         =        +                                        (17)

The key link between the model deviations and the residual variances and covariances
emerges from (17). The intuition for the link is straightforward. Deviations from the model
must be accompanied by a common component in the residual variance in order to prevent
the formation of a portfolio with a positive deviation and a residual variance which decreases
to 0 as the number of securities in the portfolio grows. In cases where the link is not present
(i.e. the link is undone by 'I'), asymptotic arbitrage opportunities will exist.




                                                8
4 Squared Sharpe Measures.
The squared Sharpe measure is a useful construct for interpreting much of the ensuing
analysis. The Sharpe measure for a given portfolio is calculated by dividing the mean excess
return by the standard deviation of return. It is well-known that the tangency portfolio
q will have the maximum squared Sharpe measure of all portfolios.'0 The squared Sharpe
measure of q, s, is:

                                                 = p'V1p.                                              (18)


Since the K factor portfolios p and the optimal orthogonal portfolio h can be combined to
form the tangency portfolio, it follows that the maximum squared Sharpe measure of these
K+ 1 portfolios will be •s. Since his orthogonal to the portfolios p, one can express s as the
sum of the squared Sharpe measure of the orthogonal portfolio and the squared maximum
Sharpe measure of the factor portfolios,


                                                 = s+ s                                               (19)


where s = 4 and .s; =
    In applications I will be employing subsets of the N assets. Results similar to those
above will hold within a subset of N assets. For the subset analysis when considering the
tangency portfolio (of the subset), the maximum squared Sharpe measure of the assets and
the optimal orthogonal portfolio for the subset, it is necessary to augment the N assets with
the factor portfolios p. Defining   as the (N + K x 1) vector [z 41' with mean p' and
covariance matrix V,, we have for the tangency portfolio of these N + K assets:

                                                =   ,;tç—';.                                          (20)


The subscript s indicates we are using a subset of the assets.

   10See Jobson and Korkie (1982) for a development of this point and a performance measurement applica-
tion. The existence of a maximum Sharpe measure as the number of asssets become large is central to the
arbitrage pricing theory. For further discussion see Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983) and Ingersoll (1984).


                                                     9
      As we shall see, the analysis (with a subset of assets) will involve the quadratic a'E'a
 computed using the parameters for the N assets. Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) and
Lehmann (1988, 1992) provide interpretations of this quadratic term in terms of Sharpe
measures. Assuming E is of full rank,'1 they show:


                                        aE'a, =                         — 4.              (21)


Consistent with (19), for the subset of assets a'Ea will be the squared Sharpe measure of
the subset's optimal orthogonal portfolio it8. Therefore for the a given subset of assets we
have:

                                             2     —           Ic-'—1
                                                                        a8


and

                                           2—                           2
                                          q. — 8h. +
                                                           2




We also note that the squared Sharpe measure of the subset's optimal orthogonal portfolio
is less than or. equal to that of the population optimal orthogonal portfolio. We have:


                                                 sL             4                         (24)


   Next we use the optimal orthogonal portfolio and the Sharpe measures results together
with the model deviation residual variance link to develop implications for distinguishing
among asset pricing models. Hereafter I will suppress the s subscript. No ambiguity will
result, since, in the subsequent analysis, we will be working only with subsets of the assets.

 hhIf S is singular then one must use the generalized inverse.




                                                      10
5 Implications for Risk Based Versus Nonrisk Based Alterna-.
    t ives.

Many asset pricing model tests involve testing the null hypothesis that the model intercept
is zero using tests in the spirit of the zero-intercept F-test.'2 A common conclusion is that
rejection of this hypothesis using one or more factor portfolios is an indication that more
risk factors are required to explain the risk—return relation. This conclusion has lead to the
indusion of additional factors so that the null hypothesis will be accepted. A shortcoming of
this approach is that, after adding factors, when all is said and done there are multiple po-
tential interpretations of why the hypothesis is accepted. One view most recently advocated
by Fama and French (1993) is that we have made genuine progress in terms of identifying
the "right" asset pricing model. An alternative view is that, since the additional factors lack
strong theoretical motivation, we have suceeded in finding a within sample fit through data—
snooping. Certainly supporters of the nonrisk based positions would argue this alternative
view.
   In this section we employ cx ante analysis to attempt to discriminate between the two
interpretations. The analysis integrates the link between the pricing model intercept and
the residual covariance matrix of (17) and the squared Sharpe measures results with the
distribution theory for the zero-intercept F-test. We consider two approaches. The first
approach is a testing approach which compares the null hypothesis test statistic distribution
with the distribution under each of the alternatives. The second approach is estimation
based, drawing on the squared Sharpe measures analysis to develop estimators for the squared
Sharpe measure of the optimal orthgonal portfolio. Before presenting the two approaches
the zero-intercept F-test is summarized.

  "Examples of tests which basically fit into this framework are those in Campbell (1987), Connor and
Korajczyk (1988), Fama and French (1993), Gibbons1 Rs and Shanken (1989), lluberman, Kandel, and
Stambaugh (1987), Lehmann and Modest (1988), and MacKinlay (1987). The arguments in the paper can
also be related to the zero-beta CAPM tests in Gibbons (1982), Shanken (1985), and Stambaiigh (1982).




                                                 11
 5.1 Zero Intercept F-Test.
 To implement the F-test the additional assumption that excess asset returns are jointly
 normal and temporally independently and identically distributed is added. This assumption,
though restrictive, buys us exact finite sample distributional results thereby simplifying the
analysis. However, it is important to note that this assumption is not central to the point;
similar results will hold under much weaker assumptions. Using a Generalized Method of
Moments approach, MacKinlay and Richardson (1991) present a more general test statistic
which has asymptotically a chi-square distribution. Analysis similar to that presented for
the F-test holds for this general statistic.
    We begin with a summary of the zero-intercept F-test of the null hypothesis that the
intercept vector a from (1) is be 0. Let H0 be the null hypothesis and H be the alternative.


                                        H0:          a=   0                              (25)



                                                     a    0.                             (26)

H0 can be tested using the following test statistic:

                          = [(T — N — K)/N][1 + f4fl;'pI1&'E1&.                          (27)

where T is the number of time series observations, N is the number of assets or portfolios of
assets included, and K is the number of factor portfolios. The hat superscripts indicate the
maximum likelihood estimators. Under the null hypothesis, 9 is unconditionally distributed
central F with N degrees of freedom in the numerator and (T — N — K) degrees of freedom
in the denominator.
   We car1 also characterize the distribution of O in general. Conditional on the factor
portfolio returns for the distribution of 01 we have:


                                               FN,T.N_K(A),                             (28)


                                                12
                                   A=     T[1 -f   14O;'ft,y'a'E'a                                  (29)

where A is the noncentrality parameter of the F distribution.'3


5.2 Testing Approach.
In this approach we consider the distribution of 0 under two different alternatives. The
alternatives can be separated by their implications for the maximum value of the squared
Sharpe measure. With the risk based multifactor alternative there will be an upper bound
on the squared Sharpe measure, whereas with the nonrisk based alternatives the maximum
squared Sharpe measure in principle can be unbounded (as the number of assets increases).
    First we consider the distribution of 0, under the alternative hypothesis when deviations
are due to missing factors. Drawing on the results for the squared Sharpe measures, for the
noncentrality parameter of the F distribution we have:


                                    A = T [1 + ;n;1ft)-1 s.                                         (30)


From (24), the third term in (30) is bounded above by 4 and positive. The second term is
bounded between zero and one. Thus we have an upper bound for A,


                                          Ac T$ C Ts.                                               (31)


The second inequality follows from the fact that the tangency portfolio q has the maximum
Sharpe measure of any asset or portfolio.'4
    Given a maximum value for the squared Sharpe measure, the upper bound on the non-
centrality parameter can be important. With this bound, independent of how one arranges
the assets to be included as dependent variables in the pricing model regression and for any

  '31f K = 0 then the term [i+p,Q;',)—' will not appear in (27) and in (29) and 9 will be unconditionally
distributed non-central F.
 14The first half of this bound appears in MaciCinlay (1987) for the case of the Sharpe—Lintner CAPM.
Related results appear in Kandel and Stambaugh (1987) Shanken (1987a), and Hansen and Jagannathan
(1991).



                                                   13
 value of N,'5 there is a limit on the distance between the null distribution and the distribu-
 tion when the alternative is missing factors.'6 All the assets can be mispriced and yet the
 bound will still apply. As a consequence one should be cautious in interpreting rejections of
 the zero-intercept as evidence in favor of a model with more risk factors.
     In contrast, when the alternative one has in mind is that the source of nonzero intercepts
 is nonrisk based such as data snooping, market frictions, or market irrationalities, the notion
 of a maximum squared Sharpe measure is not useful. The squared Sharpe measure (and the
 noncentrality parameter) are in principle unbounded. When comparing alternatives with
 the intercepts of about the same magnitude, in general, we would expect to see larger test
 statistics in this nonrisk based case.
    We can examine the potential informativeness of the above analysis by considering alter-
natives with realistic parameter values. We construct the distribution of the test statistic for
three cases: the null hypothesis, the missing risk factors alternative, and the nonrisk based
alternative. For the risk based alternative, we draw on a framework designed to be similar
to that in Fama and French (1993). For the nonrisk based alternative we use a setup that
is consistent with the analysis of Lo and MacKinlay (1990) and the work of Lakonishok,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1993).
    We study a one factor asset pricing model using a time series of the excess returns for
32 portfolios for the dependent variable. The one factor (independent variable) is the excess
return of the market so that the zero—intercept null hypothesis is the CAPM. The length of
the time series is 342 months. This setup corresponds to that of Fama and French (1993)
Table 9 regression (ii). For the null distribution of the test statistic O we have:


                                           01        F32(O).                                           (32)


    To define the distribution of Oj under the alternatives of interest we need to specify the
parameters necessary to calculate the noncentrality parameter. For the risk based alter-
        practice when using the F-test it will be necessary for N to be less than T — K so that S wilt be of
full rank.
  16See MacKinlay (1987) for a complete analysis of this point.



                                                    14
native, given a value for the Sharpe measure squared of the optimal orthogonal portfolio,
one can consider the distribution corresponding to the upper bound of the corresponding
noncentrality parameter. The Sharpe measure of the optimal orthogonal portfolio can be
calculated using (19) given the Sharpe measures squared of the tangency portfolio and of
the included factor portfolio. My view is that in a perfect capital markets setting ex ante a
reasonable value for the Sharpe measure squared of the tangency portfolio for an observation
interval of one month is 0.031 (or approximately 0.6 for the Sharpe measure on an annualized
basis). This value, for example, corresponds to a portfolio with an annual expected excess
return of 10% and a standard deviation of 16%. If the maximum squared Sharpe measure
of the included factor portfolios is the ez post squared Sharpe meansure of the CRSP value
weighted index, the implied maximum squared Sharpe measure for the optimal orthogonal
porfolio is 0.021. This monthly value of 0.021 would be consistent with a porfoho which has
an annualized mean excess return of 8% and annualized standard deviation of 16%.
   The selection of the above Sharpe measure can be rationalized both theoretically and
empirically. For theoretical justification we can consider the Sharpe measures of equity
returns in the literature examining the the equity risk premium puzzle.17 While the focus
of this research does not concern the Sharpe measure, it can be calculated from the analysis
provided by Cecchetti and Mark (1990) and Kandel and Stambaugh (1991). Both of these
papers are informative for the question at hand since they do not assume any imperfections
in the asset markets. If their models with reasonable parameters imply Sharpe measures
that are higher than the value selected for use in this paper, one would want to reconsider
the selected value. However, one should not completely rely on the measures from these
papers for justification. In the presented models the aggregate equity portfolio generally will
not be mean variance efficient and therefore need not have the highest Sharpe measure of
all equity portfolios.
   Common to the papers is the use of a representative agent framework and a Markov
switching model for the consumption process. The parameters of the consumption process
are chosen to match estimates from the data. Cecchetti and Mark, using the standard

  '7See Mebra and Prescott (1985) for the original discussion of this puzzle.



                                                    15
time-separable constant relative risk aversion utility function, specify range of nines for the
time preference parameter and the risk aversion coefficient. For each pair of values they
generate the implied theoretical unconditional mean and standard deviation of the equity
risk premium from which the Sharpe measures can be calculated. The annua]ized Sharpe
measures range from 0.08 to 0.16, substantially below the value of 0.60 suggested above.
    Kandel and Stambaugh allow for more general preferences. For the representative agent,
a class is used which allows separation of the effects of risk aversion and intertemporal
substitution. The standard time-separable model is a special case with the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution equal to the inverse of the risk aversion coefficient. They set the
monthly rate of time preference at 0.9978 and consider 16 pairs of the risk aversion coefficient
and the intertemporal substitution parameter. The risk aversion coefficient varies from 1/2
to 29 and the intertemporal substitution parameter varies from 1/29 to 2. For 13 of the
sixteen cases the annual Sharpe measure of equity is less than 0.6. The three cases where
the Sharpe measure is greater than 0.6,' seem implausible since they imply the equity risk
premium and the interest rate have almost the same variance. Historically the variance of
the equity risk premium has been substantially higher the cx post variance of the real interest
rate. In aggregate, the results in these papers are consistent with the value specified for the
maximum Sharpe measure squared in the context of frictionless asset markets.
    We can also ask what Sharpe measure is empirically reasonable. To do this, we present
historical Sharpe measures are presented for a number of broad based indices. These mea-
sures, some of which represent portfolios actually held, are reported in Table 1. For each
index two estimates are presented, the cx post measure (based on maximum likelihood esti-
mates) and an unbiased squared Sharpe measure estimate. For the July 1963 through De-
cember 1991 period the squared Sharpe measures are presented for the CRSP value weighted
index, the CRSP small stock (tenth decile) portfolio, and the cx post optimal portfolio of
the two above indices plus the long term government index and the corporate bond index
distributed by CRSP in the SUB! file. The small stock portfolio has a monthly squared
Sharpe measure of 0-013 (or 0.010 using the unbiased estimate) substantially below the im-

  '8These are the cases with high values for both the risk aversion parameter and the intertempora.1 substi-
tution parameter.


                                                    16
plied value for the tangency portfolio. The cx post optimal four index porfolio's measure is
only slightly higher at 0.014.
   Table 1 also contains results for the period from January 1981 through June 1992 results
for theS&P 500 Index, a growth index and a value index.'9 The source of the return statistics
used to calculate the measures is Capaul, Rowley, and Sharpe (1993). These resultE provide
a useful perspective on the maximum magnitudes of Sharpe measures since it is generally
acknowledged that the 1980's is a period of strong stock market performance especially
for value-based investment strategies. Given this characterization, one would expect these
results to provide a high estimate of possible Sharpe measures. We can see that the Sharpe
measures from this period are very much in line with (and lower than) the value used in the
analysis of the risk based alternative. The highest cx post estimate is 0.021 for the value
index. Generally, I interpret the evidence in this table as supporting the measure selected
to calibrate the analysis for the risk based alternative.
   Proceeding using a squared Sharpe measure of 0.021 for the optimal orthogonal portfolio
to calculate .A, for the distribution of 81 we have:


                                         0,        F32,3(7.1).                                       (33)


This distribution will be used to characterize the risk based alternative.
   I specify the distribution for two nonrisk based alternatives by specifying values of a, E,
and i4O;'p, and the calculating from (29). To specify the intercepts I assume the elements
of a are normally distributed with a mean of zero. We consider two values for the standard
deviation, 0,0007 and 0.001. When the standard deviation of the elements of a is 0.001 about
95% of the alphas will lie between -0.002 and +0.002, a annualized spread of about 4.8%. A
standard deviation of 0.0007 for the aiphas would correspond to an annual spread of about
3.4%. These spreads are consistent with spreads that could arise from data-snooping2° and
also plausible and somewhat conservative given the contrarian strategy returns presented in

  '9The growth index contains the S&P 500 stocks with high price to earnings ratios and the value index is
constructed from stocks with low price to earnings ratios.
  '°With data-snooping the distribution of 9, is not exactly a noncentral F (see Lo and MacKinlay (1990)).
however, for the purposes of this paper, the noncentral F will be a good approximation.


                                                   17
Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny. For E we use a sample estimate based on portfolios sorted
by market capitalization for the period 1963 to 1991 inclusive. The effect of             on
will typically be small, so we set it to zero. To get an idea of a reasonable value for the
noncentrality parameter given this alternative, we calculate the expected value of A given
the distributional assumption for the elements of a conditional upon = E. The expected
value of the noncentrality parameter is 39.4 for a standard deviation of 0.0007 and 80.3 for
a standard deviation of 0.001. Using these values for the noncentrality parameter of the
distribution of 01 gives:


                                        01 -. F,(39.4).                                    (34)


when c =      0.0007   and


                                        01 -       F32,9(80.3)                             (35)


when CQ = 0.001.
   A plot of the four distributions from (32), (33), (34), and (35) is in Figure 1. The vertical
bar on the plot represents the value 1.91 which Fama and French calculate for the test
statistic. From this figure notice that the null hypothesis distribution and the risk based
alternative distribution are quite dose together.21 This reflects the impact of the upperbound
on the noncentrality parameter. In contrast the nonrisk based alternatives' distributions are
far to the right of the other two distributions consistent with the noncentrality parameter
being unbounded for these alternatives.
   What do we learn from this plot? I would claim two things. First, if we want to distin-
guish among risk based linear asset pricing models the zero-intercept test is not particularly
useful because the null distribution and the alternative distribution have substantial overlap.
Second, if we want to compare a risk based pricing model with a nonrisk based alternative
in mind the zero-intercept test can be very useful since the distributions of the test statistic

 2tSee MacKinlay (1987) for detailed analysis of this alternative.




                                                   18
for these alternatives has little overlap.22
    This analysis can be related to the Fama and French (1993) finding that a model with
three factors does a good job in explaining the cross section of expected returns. Because
for a given finite cross section under any alternative the inclusion of the optimal orthogonal
porfolio will lead to this result, by itself, this result does not support the risk based category.
Indeed, the Fama and French approach to building the extra factors will tend to create a
portfolio like the optimal orthogonal porfolio independent of the explanation for the CAPM
deviations. Their extra factors essentially assign positive weights to the high positive alpha
stocks and negative weights to the largenegative alpha stocks. This procedure is likely to
lead to a portfolio similar to the optimal orthogonal portfolio. This is because the extreme
alpha assets are likely to have the largest (in magnitude) weights in the optimal orthogonal
portfolio since its weights are proportional to Ea (see (9)). Further, the fact that, in the
Fama and French study when the number of factors is increased to three, the significance of
the test statistic only decreases marginally is also consistent with the argument that missing
risk factors is not the whole story.
    More evidence of the potential importance of nonrisk explanations can be constructed
using weekly data. To see why the analysis of weekly data can be informative, consider the
biases introduced with market frictions such as the bid—ask spread. Blume and Stambaugh
(1983) show that in the presence of the bid—ask bounce, there is an upward bias in the
observed returns. For asset i and time period £ Blume and Stambaugh show the follow-
ing approximation for the relation between expected observed returns and expected virtual
returns.


                                        E(R) =       E(R.) + t9                                        (36)


where the superscript "o" distinguishes the returns observed with bid-ask bounce contami-
nation from the virtual returns. t9 is the bias which is equal to one fourth of the proportional
bid-ask spread squared. The bias will carry over into the intercept of any factor model. Con-

  22Likelihood analysis provides another interpretation of the plot. Specifically, we can compare the values
of the densities for the tour alternatives at 9 = 1,91. Such a comparison leads to the conclusion that the
first nonrisk based alternative is much more likely than the other three.

                                                     19
sider a one factor model where the factor is cx ante the tangency portfolio. In this model the
intercept for all virtual asset returns will be zero. However, the intercepts for the observed
returns and the Sharpe measure squared of the optimal orthogonal portfolio will be nonzero.
If the bias of the observed factor return is zero23 and if the factor return is uncorrelated with
the bid-ask bounce process, then for the intercept of the observed returns we will have

                                                     =    t9                                          (37)


since a of the virtual return will be 0. Then, for the Sharpe measure squared of the optimal
orthogonal portfolio we will have

                                             2   =                                                    (38)


where S° is the residual covariance matrix for the weekly observed returns and t2 is the vector
of biases for the included portfolios.24 When the null hypothesis that the intercepts are zero
is examined using observed returns violations exist solely due to the presence of the bid-ask
spread.
    Bias of the type induced by the bid-ask spread is interesting because its magnitude
does not depend on the length of the observation interval. As a consequence its effect will
statistically be more pronounced with shorter observation intervals when the variance of
the virtual returns is smaller. To examine the potential relevance of the above example,
the F-test statistic is calculated using a sample of weekly returns for 32 portfolios. The
data extends from July 1962 through December 1992 (1591 weeks). NYSE and AMEX
stocks are allocated to the portfolios based on beginning of year market capitalization. Each
portfolio is allocated an equal number of stocks and the porfolios are equal weighted with
rebalancing each week. For these portfolios, using the CRSP value weighted index as the
one factor, the F-test statistic is 2.82. Under the null hypothesis, this statistic has a central

  Thi5 will approximately be the case for a value weighted market index.
  24The bias of a portfolio will be a weighted average of the bias of the member assets if the weights are
independent of the returns process. This will be the case when the portfolio is rebalanced period by period.
This will not be the case if the portfolio is weighted to represent a buy and hold strategy (as is a value
weighted portfolio). In this latter case the bias at the protfolio level will be minimal.

                                                     20
 F distribution with 32 degrees of freedom in the numerator and 1558 degrees of freedom in
 the denominator.25 This statistic can be cast in terms of the alternatives presented in Figure
 1 since the noncentrality paramter of the F distribution will be approximately invariant to
 the observation interval and hence only the degrees of freedom need to be adjusted. Figure
 2 presents the results which correspond to the weekly observation interval. Basically, these
 results reinforce the monthly observation results — the observed statistic is most consistent
 with the nonrisk based category.
     In summary, what can be said about the risk based multifactor alternatives versus the
 nonrisk based arguments for deviations from the Sharpe—Lintner CAPM? The results suggest
 that the risk based missing risk factors argument is not the whole story. From Figures 1 and
 2 we can see that the test statistic is still in the upper tail when we tabulate the distribution
 of O in the presence of missing risk factors. The p-value using this distribution is 0.03 for
 the monthly data and less than 0.001 for weekly data. Hence there is a lack of support for
 the view that missing factors completely explain the deviations.
     On the other hand, given the parametrization considered, there is some support for the
nonrisk based alternative views. The test statistic falls almost in the middle of the nonrisic
based alternative with the lower standard deviation of the elements of alpha. Several of the
nonrisk based alternatives could equally well explain the results. Different nonrisk based
views can give the same noncentrality parameter and test statistic distribution. The results
are consistent with the data snooping alternative of Lo and MacKinlay (1990), with the
related sample selection biases discussed by Kothari, Shanken, and Sloan (1993) and Breen
and Korajczyk (1993) and with the presence of market inefficiencies. The bottom line is that
the analysis suggests that more than missing risk factors is needed to explain the empirical
results.


5.3 Estimation Approach.
In this section we use an estimation approach to make inferences about possible values for
Sharpe measures. An estimator for the squared Sharpe measure of the optimal orthogonal

  25Diagnostics reveal some serial correlation in the residuals of the weekly one factor model. Given this the
null distribution will not be exactly central F.

                                                     21
portfolio for a given subset of assets is presented. Using this estimator and its variance,
 confidence intervals for the squared Sharpe measure can be constructed facilitating judge-
ments on the question of the value implied by the data and reasonable alternatives given this
value. An unbiased estimator of the squared Sharpe measure is presented.26 This estimator
corrects for the bias that is introduced by searching over N assets to find the maximum. For
the estimator we have:

              -
                   —            (T-N-K)              N(T—N--K—2)
                       '(TN—K2)11                        T(T—N—K)



                                                  = [ 2(1 +
                                         •
                                  -2
                            var(shI,L,,IZP )                              IX


           + TEl + fih;h14]_14j2 + (N + 2T[l + ;u;',2]—'4)(T — N — K —
     [(N                                                               2)                             (40
                                  (T—N—K—4)
Conditional on the factor portfolio returns, the estimator of s in (39) is unbiased.


                                         E[iflO;'] =                                                  (41)


Recall that when K = 0 the optimal orthogonal portfolio is the tangency portfolio and hence
4, = s,. The estimator can be applied when K = 0 by setting i'1;' = 0.
    The estimation approach is illustrated using the above estimator for the Fama and French
(1993) portfolios. We consider the case of K =              0   and therefore we are estimating the
maximum squared Sharpe measure from 33 assets — the value-weighted CRSP index, the 25
stock portfolios and 7 bond portfolios. (Recall, with K = 0,          4, = .s,.)   The estimator of
can be readily calculated, but the variance of i cannot since it depends on 4. To calculate
the variance we use a consistent estimator, i, and then asymptotically (as T increases) we

  26'I'his estimator is derived using the fact that 9 is distributed as a non-central F variate. Its moments
follow from the moments of the non-central F distribution. Results for the tangency portfolio (K = 0) are
presented by Jobson and Korkie (1980).



                                                    22
have:


                                        ' N(4,6(i))                                       (42)


Using monthly data from July 1963 through December 1991, the estimate of 4 is 0.092 and
the asymptotic standard error is 0.044. Thus using this data set, for a two-sided centered
90% confidence interval we have (0.020, 0.163) and for a one-sided 90% confidence interval we
have (0.036, cc). It is worth noting the upward bias of the ex post maximum squared Sharpe
measure as an estimator. For the above case the ei' post maximum is 0.209 substantially
higher than the unbiased estimate of 0.092. The bias is particular severe when N is large
(relative to T).
    In terms of an annualized Sharpe measure, the two-sided interval corresponds to a lower
value of 0.49 and an upper value of 1.40, and the one-sided interval corresponds to a lower
value of 0.65. Given that the tangency portfolio and the optimal orthogonal portfolio are the
same, we can use this interval to provide an indication of the magnitude of the maximum
Sharpe measure needed for a set of factor portfolios to explain the cross section of excess
returns of portfolios based on market to book value ratios. Consistent with the CR.SP value
weighted index being unable to explain the returns, its ex post Sharpe measure lies well
outside the intervals with an annualized value of 0.33. In general one can use the confidence
intervals to decide on promising alternatives. For example, if one believes that ex ante Sharpe
measures in the 90% confidence interval are unlikely in a risk based world, then the nonrisk
based alternatives may provide an attractive area for future study.

6 Asymptotic Arbitrage in Finite Economies.
In the absence of the link between the model deviation and the residual variance expressed
in (17) asymptotic arbitrage opportunities can exist. However, the analysis of this paper
is based on the importance of the link in a finite economy. It is this importance that will
be illustrated in this section. We will use a simple comparison of two economies, economy
A where the link is present and economy B where the link is absent. The absence of the
link is the only distinguishing feature of economy B. For each economy the behavior of the

                                             23
maximum Sharpe measure squared as a function of the number of securities is examined.
    For the analysis specification of the mean excess return vector and the covariance matrix
is necessary. We will draw on the previously introduced notation. In addition to the riskfree
asset, assume there exists N risky assets with mean excess return p and nonsingular covari-
ance matrix V, and a risky factor portfolio with mean excess return pp and variance o. The
factor portfolio is not a linear combination of the N assets.2' For both economies A and B:


                                                                                                      (43)



                                    V = fl/I'c +Wo -- Io.                                            (44)

Given the above mean-and covariance matrix and the assumption that the factor portfolio
p is a holdable asset, the maximum Sharpe measure squared for economy I is:

                                      =       s + &(55'c + Jo'a                                      (45)


Analytically inverting (55'c + Ic) and simplifying, (45) can be expressed as:


                               12   = + —j[a'a + (o?+c5'5)
                                          2      1or(a'E)2
                                                                                                     (46)


To complete the specification, the cross-sectional properties of the elements of a and 5 are
required. We assume the elements of a to be cross-sectionally independent and identically
distributed,

                               a1 "-          IJD(O,c)                                               (47)


The specification of the distribution of the elements of 5 conditional on a differentiates

  2TThis criterion can be met by eliminating one of the assets which is included in the factor portfolio if
necessary.




                                                     24
economies A and B. For economy A


                              &Ia — IID(cx1,O)              I=1       ,N,                           (48)


and for economy B


                              &ja         IID(O,c)                                                 (49)

Unconditionally the cross-sectional distribution of S will be the same for both economies,
but for economy A conditional on a, 6 is fixed. This incorporates the deviation - residual
variance link. Because £ is independent of a in economy B, the link is absent.
    Using (46) and the cross-sectional distributional properties of the elements of a and
8, an approximation for the maximum Sharpe measure squared for each economy can be
derived. For both economies jya'a converges to o, and rS6 converges to c. For economy
A (a'8)2 converges to c and for economy B (a6)2 converges to o. Substituting these
limits into (46) gives approximations of the maximum Sharpe measures squared for each
economy.28 Substitution into (46) for economy A gives

                                     2_ 2
                                     SA3p+   Na
                                                                                                   (5)
                                           c2.JV22'    C




and for economy B gives


                               4 = -f NzE1_2::22].                                                 (51)


The importance of the link asymptotically can be confirmed by considering the values of
in (50) and (51) for large N. For economy A and large N

                                              = .4 +       ,                                       (52)


  The accuracy of these approximations for values of N equal to 100 and higher was examined. Simulations
showed that these approximations are very precise.




                                                  25
and for economy B


                                               =   s + N[1.                                              (53)


The maximum Sharpe measure squared is bounded as N increases for economy A and un-
bounded for economy B. Using the correspondence between boundedness of the maximum
Sharpe measure squared and the absence of asymptotic opportunities (see Ingersoll (1984)
Theorem I) there will be asymptotic arbitrage opportunities only in economy B.
   However, our interest here is to examine the importance of the deviation - residual vari-
ance link given a finite number of assets. We do this by considering the value of the maxi-
mum Sharpe measures for various values of N?9 The values of N considered are 100, 500,
1000, and 5000. For completeness we also report the maximum Sharpe measure squared
for N =    cc.Given (50) and (51), to complete the calculations, s, o, a and        must           o
be specified. The parameters are selected so that p and V are realistic for stock returns
measures at a monthy observation interval. The selected parameter values are s = 0.01,
   = 2.66, a, = 0.05. Two values are considered for Ca, 0.001 and 0.002. The results are
reported in Table 2. The difference in the behavior of the maximum squared Sharpe mea-
sures between economies A and B is dramatic. For economy A the boundedness is apparent
as the maximum Sharpe measure squared ranges from 0.023 to 0.030 as N increases from
100 to influity. For economy A the impact of increasing the cross-sectional variation in the
mean return is minimal. Comparing the o =                 0.001   panel to the o = 0.002 reveals few
differences with the exception of differences for the N = 100 case. For economy B it is a
different story. The maximum Sharpe measure squared is very sensitive to both increasing
the number of securities and to increasing the cross-sectional variation in the mean return.
For o =    0.002   the maximum Sharpe measure squared increases from 0.169 to 1.608 as N
increases from 100 to 1000. When c increases from 0.001 to 0.002 the maximum Sharpe
measure squared increases from 0.21 to 0.80 for N equal to 500.
   In addition to the maximum Sharpe measures squared, Table 2 reports the approximate

  29Shanlcen (1992) presents related results for an economy similar to B with 5 restricted to be 0 for N =3000
and N = 3 million. He notes that for N = 3 million '4something close to a 'pure' arb5trage is possible."



                                                     26
probability that the annual excess return of the maximum Sharpe measure squared portfolio
is negative. For this probability calculation, it is assumed that returns are jointly normally
distributed and that the mean excess return of the maximum Sharpe measure squared port-
folio is non-negative. The mean and variance are annualized by multiplying the monthly
values by 12. This probability allows for an economic interpretation of the size of the Sharpe
measure. Since the excess return represents a payoff on a zero investment position, if the
probability of a negative outcome is 0 then there is an arbitrage opportunity. For economy
A this probability is about 28% and stable as N increases. However, for economy B the
probability of a negative annual excess return quickly approaches 0. For example, for the
case of a0 equal to 0.002 and N equal to 500 the probability of a negative outcome is less
than 0.001?0 Since negative outcomes can occur, the excess return distributions cannot be
completely ruled out on economic grounds. However, in aggregate it appears that, given the
above model for economy H, unrealistic investment opportunites can be constructed with a
relatively small number of stocks. This is not the case for economy A. The bottom line is
that is a perfect capital markets environment, the link between the model deviations and
the residual variance is important even with a limited number of securities. Analysis which
does not recognize this link is unlikely to shed light on the potential for omitted risk factors
to explain the deviations.

7 Conclusion.
Empirical work in economics in general and in finance in particular is ex post in nature. Given
this, it is often difficult to discriminate between various explanations for observed phenomena.
A partial solution to this difficulty is to examine the alternatives and make judgements from
an ex ante point of view. The current explanations of asset pricing empirical results are
particularly well suited to ex ante analysis. This paper presents a framework based on the
economics of mean-variance analysis to address and reinterpret prior empirical results.

  30To put these probabilities of negative annual excess return! into perspective, they can be compared to
actual results for the S&P Index and the CBS? small stock index. For the 67 years from 1926 through 1992
the excess return of the S&P index has been negative 37.3% of the years and the excess return of the CBS?
small stock index has been negative 34.3% of the years. These percentages are not particularly sensitive
to the time period considered. Over the 30 year period from 1963 through 1992 the S&? Index has been
negative 36.7% of the time and the small stock index has been negative 30.0% of the time.


                                                   27
   It has been common to look to multifactor asset pricing models as an alternative to
the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM. However, the results in this paper suggest that looking at other
alternatives may be fruitful. The evidence against the CAPM can also be interpreted as
evidence against multifactor alternatives being the complete explanation. It is improbable
that multifactor models on their own will explain the deviations from the CAPM. Generally,
the results suggest that more can be learned by considering the likelihood of various existing
empirical results under differing specific economic models.




                                             28
                                    References

Amihud, Y., and H. Mendleson, 1986, "Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread," Journal of
     Financial Economics 17, 223—250.
Brent, W., and It. Korajczyk, 1993, "On selection biases in book-to-market based tests of
    asset pricing models," Working Paper #167, Northwestern University.
Campbell, J., 1987, "Stock returns and the term structure," Journal of Financial Economics
     18, 373—399.

Capaul, C., Rowley, I. and W. Sharpe, 1993, "International value and growth stock re-
     turns," Financial Analysis Journal January—February, 27—36.
Cecchetti, S., and N. Mark, 1990, "Evaluating empirical tests of asset pricing models,"
     American Economic Review 80, 48—51.
Chamberlain, C. and M. Rothschild, 1983, "Arbitrage, factor structure, and mean—variance
   analysis on large asset markets," Econometrica 51, 1281—1304.
Chan, Louis K. C. and J. Lakonishok, 1993, "Are reports of beta's death premature?"
     Journal of Portfolio Management 19, 51—62.
Connor, C]. and R. Korajczyk, 1988, "Risk and return in an equilibrium APT: Application
   of a new test methodology," Journal of Financial Economics 21, 255—290.
Conrad, .1., and G. Kaul, 1993, "Long-term market overreaction or biases in computed
     returns?" Journal of Finance 48, 39—63.
DeBondt, W., and R. Thaler, 1985, "Does the stock market overreact?" Journal of Finance
     40, 793—805.

Fama, E., 1993, "Multifactor portfolio efficiency and multifactor asset pricing models,"
   CRSP Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Fama, E. and K. French, 1993, "Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,"
   Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3—56.
Gibbons, M. It., 1982, "Multivariate tests of financial models: A new approach," Journal
     of Financial Economics 10, 3—27.
Gibbons, M., Ross, S. and 3. Shanken, 1989, "A test of the efficiency of a given portfolio,"
    Econometrica 57, 1121—1152.
Hansen, L., and It. Jagannathan, 1991, "Implications of security market data for models of
   dynamic economies," Journal of Political Economy 99, 225—262,
Hansen, L., and R. Jagannathan, 1994, "Assessing specification errors in stochastic discount
   factor models," working paper, University of Minnesota.
Huberman, G. Kandel, S. and It. Stambaugh, 1987, "Mimicking portfolios and exact arbi-
   trage pricing," Journal of Finance 42, 1—10.
Ingersoll, J., 1984, "Some results in the theory of arbitrage pricing," Journal of Finance
    39, 1021—1039.

                                           29
Jobson, D., and R. Korkie, 1980, "Estimation for Markowitz efficient portfolios," Journal
     of the American Statistical Association 75, 544—554.
Jobson, D., and R. Korkie, 1982, "Potential performance and tests of portfolio efficiency,"
    Journal of Financial Economics 10, 433—466.
Kandel, S. and R. Stambaugh, 1987, "On correlations and inferences about mean-variance
   efficiency," Journal of Financial Economics 18, 61—90.
Kandel, S. and R. Stambaugh, 1990, "A mean-variance framework for tests of asset pricing
   models," Review of Financial Studies 2, 125—156.
Kandel, S. and R. Stambaugh, 1991, "Asset returns and intertemporal preferences," Journal
     of Monetary Economics 27, 39—71.
Kandel, S. and R. Stambaugh, 1994, "Portfolio inefficiency and the cross-section of mean
   returns," Rodney White Center for Financial Research Paper, Wharton School, Uni-
   versity of Pennsylvania.
Kothari, 5., 3. Shanken, and R. Sloan, 1993, "Another look at the cross-section of expected
    returns," manuscript, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and It. Vishny, 1993, "Contrarian investment, extrapolation,
   and risk," unpublished working paper, University of Illinois, University of Chicago,
   and Harvard University.
Lehmann, B., 1987, "Orthogonal frontiers and alternative mean variance efficiency tests,"
     Journal of Finance 42, 601—619.
Lehmann, B., 1989, "Mean-variance efficiency tests in large cross-sections," working paper,
   Columbia University and National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lehmann, B., 1992, "Empirical testin& of asset pricing models," in The New Palyrave
   Dictionary of Money and Finance, Peter Newman, Murray Milgate, and John Eatwell
     eds., Stockton Press (New York), 749—759.
Lehmann, B. N. and D. Modest, 1988, "The empirical foundations of the arbitrage pricing
   theory," Journal of Financial Economics 21, 213—254.
Lo, A. and A. C. MacKinlay, 1990, "Data-snooping biases in tests of financial asset pricing
    models," Review of Financial Studies 3, 431—467.
Luttmer, E., 1991, "Asset pricing in economies with frictions," working paper, University
    of Chicago, November.
MacKinlay, A. C., 1987, "On multivariate tests of the CAPM," Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics 18, 341—372.
MacKinlay, A. C., and M. Richardson, 1991, "Using generalized methods of moments to
    test mean-variance efficiency," Journal of Finance 46, 511—527.
Merton, R., 1973, "An intertemporal capital asset pricing model," Econometrica 41, 867—
    887.
Roll, R., 1977, "A critique of the asset pricing theory's tests: Part 1," Journal of Financial
    Economics 4, 129—176.


                                            30
Roll, R., 1980, "Orthogonal portfolios," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 15,
     1005—1023.

Roll, R., and S. Ross, 1994, "On the cross-sectional relation between expected returns and
    betas," Journal of Finance 49, 101—122.
Ross, S., 1976, "The arbitrage theory of capital asset pridng," Journal of Economic Theory
    13, 341—360.

Shanken, J., 1985, "Multivariate tests of the zero-beta CAPM," Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics 14, 327—348.

Shanken, J., 1987a, "Multivariate proxies and asset pricing relations: living with the Roll
    critique," Journal of Financial Economics 18, 91—110.
Shanken, J., 1992, "The current state of the arbitrage pricing theory," Journalof Finance
    47, 1569—1574.

Stambaugh, R. F., 1982, "On the exclusion of assets from tests of the two parameter model,"
    Journal of Financial Economics 10, 235—268.




                                          31
                                          Table 1

Historical Sharpe measures for selected stock indices. i is the monthly expost Sharpe
measure squared and âh(ann) is the positive square root of this measure annualized. . is
an unbiased estimate of the monthly Sharpe measure squared and h(ann) is the positive
square root of this measure annualized. The portfolio of four indices is the portfolio with the
maximum expost Sharpe measure squared. The four indices are CRSP value-weighted index,
CRSP small stock decile, CRSP longtenn government bond index and CRSP corporate bond
index. The bond indices are from the CRSP SBBI file. All indices are based on total return.




  Time Period                 Index                   à      ih(ann)       4       sh(arzn)

   6307 - 9112          CRSP VW Index              0.0091      0.33      0.0061      0.27
   6307 - 9112         Small Stock Decile          0.0142      0.40      0.0100      0.35
   6307- 9112        Portfolio of four Indices     0.0145      0.41      0.0021      0.16
   8101 - 9206           SSCP 500 Index            0.0161      0.44      0.0085      0.32
   8101 - 9206     S&P-BARRA Value Index           0.0208      0.50      0.0130      0.40
   8101 - 9206    S&P-BARRA Growth Index           0.0108      0.36      0.0033      0.20




                                                                                        05.94
                                          Table 2

A comparison of the maximum Sharpe measure squared for two economies denoted A and
B. The excess return covariance matrix for the two economies is identical and the.cross-
sectional dispersion in mean excess returns is identical. The economies differ in that economy
A displays stronger dependence between the mean excess returns and the covariance matrix of
excess returns. The mean and covariance matrix parameters for the economies are calibrated
to correspond roughly to monthly returns — see the text for details. N is the number of
securities, s is the maximum Sharpe measure squared for economy I, I = A, B, and p(z, <
0) is the approximate probability for economy I that the annual return of the maximum
Sharpe measure squared portfolio will be less than the risk free return assuming that monthly
returns are jointly normally distributed and that the mean excess return is positive. Ca is
the cross-sectional standard deviation of the component of the mean return that is explained
by a second factor in economy A and that is not explained by a common factor in economy
B.



                         N         4      p(z.4<0)      4      p(z8<0)
                   ci = 0.001
                         100      0.023    0.298      0.050      0.220
                         500      0.028    0.280      0.210      0.056
                        1000      0.029    0.277      0.410      0.013
                        5000      0.030    0.275      2.010        **
                         cc       0.030    0.274        cc         **

                   a0   = 0.002
                         100      0.028    0.282      0.169      0.077
                         500      0.030    0.276      0.808        **
                        1000      0.030    0.275      1.608        a
                        5000      0.030    0.274      8.008        **
                                  0.030    0.274        cc         **



   ** Less than 0.001.




                                                                                       05.94
                                           Figure 1

  Distributions for the CAPM zero-intercept test statistic for four alternatives. Alternative I
  is the CAPM (null hypothesis). Alternative 2 is the risk based alternative (deviations from
  the CAPM are from missing risk factors). Alternatives 3 and 4 are the nonrisk based alter-
  native (deviations from the CAPM are unrelated to risk). The distributions are
  F,309(7.l), F32(39.4), and F32,309(SO.3) for alternatives 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively. The
  degrees of freedom 'are set to correspond to monthly observations from July 1963 to Decem-
  ber 1992 (342 observations). Using 25 stock portfolios and 7 bond portfolios, and the CRSP
  value-weighted index as proxy for the market portfolio the test statistic is 1.91.



    0
   -o

   0
   (-U

   6

—  --
>c 0
   0

   (N

   0

   00
                   1             2             .3             4             5             6
                                               Figure 2

      Distributions for the CAPM zero-intercept test statistic for four alternatives. Alternative I
      is the CAPM (null hypothesis). Alternative 2 is the risk based alternative (deviations from
      the CAPM are from missing risk factors). Alternatives 3 and 4 are the nonrisk based alter-
      native (deviations from the CAPM are unrelated to risk). The distributions are
      F,1558(71), F15(39.4), and F321558(8O.3) for alternatives 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively. The
      degrees of freedom are set to correspond to weekly observations from July 1963 to December
      1992 (1591 observations). Using 32 stock portfolios and the CRSP value-weighted index as
      a proxy for the market portfolio the test statistic is 2.82.



       03

       0

       (0
       P
       0

—Th
 >c

      0

      (N
      P
      0

      00
      00              1             2             3             4             5             6
                                                   x
