                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HOW AMERICA GRADUATED FROM
                           HIGH SCHOOL: 1910 TO 1960




                                     Claudia Goldin




                                 Working Paper No. 4762



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1994


This research has been supported by The Brookings Institution and the National Science
Foundation. It is part of a larger project on education and the wage structure.The Maldnz of
Educated Americans (working title). Maya Federman and Judith Li were the research
assistants on the project in Cambridge, MA. Linda Tuch is the research assistant on the
project in Washington, D.C. Robert Whaples supplied various city-level data for 1920. I
thank them all. Zadia Feliciano kindly helped with the 1940 PUMS extract, and I am vezy
grateful to her. Helpful comments and suggestions were offered by Robert Margo. Stefanie
                                                                        the ESP-WIP Seminar
Schmidt, and participants of the All-UC Conference (November 1993).
at The Brookings Institution, the Macro-History Seminar at Rutgers  University, the Applied
Microeconomics Workshop at Columbia University, and the Greater      D.C.  Area Economic
History Seminar. An Appendix to this paper, describing the methods used in the state-level
data collection, is available as an NBER-DAE Working Paper. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in the Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4762
                                                                                 June 1994

                          HOW AMERICA GRADUATED FROM
                            HIGH SCHOOL: 1910 TO 1960

                                         ABSTRACF

      Human capital accumulation and technological change were to the twentieth century what
physical capital accumulation was to the nineteenth century -- the engine of growth. The
accumulation of human capital accounts for almost 60% of all capital formationand 28% of the

per capita growth residual from 1929 to 1982. Advances in secondary schooling account for
about 70% of the increase in total educational attainment from 1930 to 1970 for men 40 to

years old. High school, not college, was responsible for the enormous increase in the human
capital stock during much of this century. In this paper I answer when and where high schools
advanced in the 1910 to 1960 period.
       The most rapid expansion in the non-South regions occurred in the brief period from 1920

to 1935. The 1920s provided the initial burst in high school attendance, but the Great Depression
added significantly to high school enrollment and graduation rates. Attendance rates were highest
in states, regions. and cities with the least reliance on manufacturing and in areas where
agricultural income per worker was high. Schooling was particularly low where certain industries
that hired youths were dominant and where the foreign born had enteredin large numbers before
the immigration restriction of the l920s. More education enabled states to converge to a higher
level of per capita income between 1929 and 1947, and states rich in agricultural resources, yet

poor in manufacturing, exported educated workers in later decades.



 Claudia Goldin
 Department of Economics
 Harvard University
 Cambridge. MA 02138
 and NBER
       This study concerns the diffusion of the American highschool in the twentieth century and

briefly touches on its contributions to economic growth and to changes In the wage structure. It

was high school, not college and the university, that was responsible for the largest increase in

educational attainment during the twentieth century. And because educational advances were an

important spur to economic growth, it is high school that must be studied.

        An oft-cited statistic demonstrating the importance of human capitalto American economic

growth comes from the familiar decompositionof the growth residual. From 1929 to 1982 national

income per worker grew at a rate of 1.48% average annually. Conventional factors (labor hours!

capital) can account for only 5°/o of this growth, leaving a residual of 95%. Of that residual.

according to Edward Denison, 28% can be explained by increases in formal education (Denison

1985, p. 113). The role of formal schooling in economic growth is virtually the same for most other

subperiods of this century for which the calculation has been made, including the 1929 to 1948

period which is of particular relevance here.

         Although one can quibble with many of the details of the Denison calculation, a

fundamental conclusion is likely to be unaffected. Human capital accumulation and technological
                                                        capital accumulation was to the nineteenth
change were to the twentieth century what physical

 century .- they were engines of growth. In fact, during the 1929 to 1962 period human capital

 formation accounted for almost 60% of all capital formation. The increased human capital stock

 advanced per capita growth in the twentieth century by more than any other single measurable

 factor. Because much of the residual must owe to advances in knowledge, the role of human

 capital formation in the economic growth of this century must be extremely large. According to

 standard estimates, which probably understate the growth of education over time, mean schooling

 of the male labor force increased from 7.72 years in 1920 to 10.86 years In 1970 or by 41%. The
                                                       from high school increased from 23% in 1940
 percentage of the male labor force that graduated
                                                               to which I will offer amendments.'
  to 55% in 1970, again according to conventional estimates


       The mean schooling figures are from Smith and Ward (1984). The high school graduation
  figures are from the census, beginning with 1940.

                                                 —1—
          Lass well-known than the statistics just cited is that advances in secondary schooling

  account for about 70% of the increase in total educational attainment from 1930 to 1970 of men

  40 to 44 years old.2 Holding the fraction going to college (13+ years) at the level at the older

  cohort but allowing high school graduation and attendance to rise to that achieved by the younger

 cohort increases mean years of schooling by 2.7 years (see Table 1). Schooling increased by 3.9

 years between these cohorts. Therefore 70% of the gap in schooling was due to increases in high

 school attendance and graduation. Increased high school attendance, not that of college nor

 elementary schooL was responsible for the enormous increase in the human capital stock during

 much ol this century.3 Increased high school attendance and graduation provide the single most

 important explanation for increased per capita income during this century.'

          The spread of high schools is depicted in Figure 1, which graphs total secondary school

 enrollment as a percentage of 14 to 17 year olds and graduates from public and private high

 schools as a fraction of 17 year olds.5 The high school enrollment rate rose from 10% to 90% and

 the graduation rate increased from 5% to 65% during 1910 to 1960. This paper explores when,

 where, and, to some degree, why high school attendance, enrollment, and graduation rates

 advanced. Disaggregating the total U.S. figures by region reveals that the most rapid expansion

 in the non-South was in the 1920 to 1935 period. The years of the 1920s and 19305 are,

 therefore, the main focus. Public and private graduation rates more than doubled in the East North


    2 The figure would be 85% if all of the increased education in the primary grades needed to
advance students to the secondary grades was included. It would be reduced to 59% by
subtracting the 0.412 years, on average, of education needed to advance those In the grades 5
through 7 to 8th grade.

     It should also be noted that only 0.412 years of the increase was due to the increase in 8th
grade graduation. College attendance and graduation Increase years by 1.60.

     'Of course if the returns to college are considerably greater than those forsecondary school,
its role in augmenting income would be far greater than its influence on the stock of human capital.

    $ It should be noted that the numbers underlying Figure 1 use contemporaneous data from the
Bureau of Education (later the Department of Education) and amendments to these data,
particularly for the pre-1925 period, for which no complete documentation is readily available. I
have managed to duplicate the aggregate data In my construction of the state numbers (see
Goldin 1 994c.).

                                                -2-
Central and quadrupled in the Middle Atlantic from 1920 to 1935. Both enrollment and graduation

rates reached such high levels in the 1930s that they increased only gradually, when at all, until

the early 1 960$. The national data in Figure 1 are, then, seriously misleading. Only the South

increased its secondary schooling rates to any considerable degree from the 1940s to the 1960s.

        Secondary schooling was facilitated in most states by a rich agricultural sector and was

hindered by high manufacturing wages and a large manufacturing sector. Until the 1 930s,

attendance rates were highest in states and cities with the least reliance on manufacturing. Levels

were particularly low where industries that traditionally relied on juvenile labor dominated and

where the foreign born entered in large numbers before immigration restriction. The high school

graduation rate in Idaho, for example, exceeded 35% in 1924 but was Just 20% in New Jersey.

By 1928 45% were graduating in Idaho but only 25% in New Jersey. One might have expected

youths in Idaho to have benefited less from a high school education than those in New Jersey, and

one might have expected the provision of high school education to have been more costly in Idaho.

The opportunity cost of schooling -- high in New Jersey and low in Idaho -- seems to have been

the overwhelming factor. The Great Depression produced vastly higher secondary schooling rates

in virtually all of the Northeast. and educational advance may be the one beneficial by-product of

its devastating unemployment.

        If one travelled west, in the 1 920s, along just about any latitude one would have

encountered successively higher rates of secondary schooling. The Far West had among the

highest, followed by the mountain states, then the plains states, next those of the Midwest,and at

the bottom of the non-southern states was the Middle Atlantic region. Although an egalitarian urge,

spreading with the frontier, appears to have operated, there were other factors thatenabled higher

schooling in the West. The existence of prosperous agriculture, and thus taxable property,

facilitated education, whereas the presence of manufacturing impeded it. These twofactors

operated as classic income and substitution effects in their impacts on schooling. There was also

the ever-present desire of youths in rural areas to migrate to the city. That they actuallydid, and

 in large numbers, may have been a major consequence of the spread of high schools.

                                                 -3-
        The cross-section analysis, just alluded to, can reveal differences across regions, cities,

and states. But as long as all Americans were similarly affected the analysis will miss why the high

school expanded everywhere during the 1920 to 1935 period. Although the subject is left for other

portions of this project. I will speculate on the reasons. Publicly-provided goods are lumpy. As the

demand for secondary schooling increased, each district eventually passed a threshold level,

established a high school, and decreased the costs of attendance to youths. Thus the sheer

availability of public high schools, given the latent demand, increased enrollments substantially.

        The demand for secondary schooling increased because of both push and pull factors,

Large earnings differences between white-collar and blue-collar jobs developed in the late

nineteenth and early twentieth centuries with the growth of offices, business bureaucracies, and

retail establishments, all of which increased the demand for greater knowledge and literacy.6 At

the same time, the relative demand for juvenile labor in manufacturing seems to have decreased

in response to the influx of foreign-born adults and increased mechanization and capital intensity

in manufacturing. High schools and the educational bureaucracy responded to the new demand

for education. The curriculum changed substantially from 1910 to 1930, and the provision of

vocational, industrial, and manual courses made secondary schooling more attractive to youths

particularly in urban areas. In rural America, the consolidation of school districts and the adoption

of the school bus brought the high school to sparsely sewed areas. The high school movement

coincided with an increase in the effectiveness of compulsory education and child labor laws. But

empirical tests of the coercion hypothesis cast doubt on it. Laws were almost always strengthened

in states with already high enrollment and attendance rates.



Form and Function of Secondary Schools

        The high school did not always take the form it does today. Rather, the modem form

evolved in the 1910 to 1930 period. It emerged so rapidly that the high school of 1930 bears a


    6 See (3oldin (1 994b) on the premium to high school education, and Goldin and Margo (1992)
for data on the white-collar/blue-collar premium in the 1 920s.

                                                -4-
far greater resemblance to that of 1990 than it does to that of 1900. Not until 1902 was there a

standard format established and prescñbed for high schools, requiring fifteen units for graduation.'

But the model high school took time to diffuse throughout America, and during that time the

function of the high school was to change substantially.

        Diffusion was hastened by the consolidation of school districts, a process that swept the

nation's cities but proceeded more slowly in rural areas, and by the greater density of population

in cities. By the 1 930s most of America's high school youths were in schools I would characterize

as modern. Yet more than half of all public secondary schools in 1934 were one-room affairs that

could not possibly have offered a wide range of courses.

        Even after high schools began their extraoi'dinary growth in the early twentieth century, a

large percentage of youths who completed high school immediately continued in college or in

another institution of higher learning (e.g., nursing, library, and teaching schools). A primary

reason to attend high school around 1900 was to gain entry to college and most high schools

offered the classical (or scientific-Latin) curriculum, demanded by colleges for admission. The

classical curriculum generally required Latin and Greek, as well as German. often French, English,

history, mathematics, and some science courses. In the 1910s about 50% of all public high school

graduates went to college or another institution of higher learning without delay (or had intents to),

and 55% of male public high school graduates did or intended to (see Table 2). By 1923 the

percentage had slipped to 44%, and by 1933 only 25% were immediately continuing their studies

(or had intents to continue). The proportion of all Ameflcan youths entering college had not

decreased. It had expanded. Rather, the proportion of all youths attending high school had

increased substantially and fewer of the new entrants treated high school as a prelude to college.

Thus the fraction continuing after graduation declined with the rise in high school enrollments. Only




    'unit was four to live periods of 45 minutes per week during a 35-week semester (see Krug
 1964, p. 153).

                                                  -5-
 in the 1970s did the fraction continuing reach the level attained before 1920.8

         The flood of students who entered high school around 1910 to 1940 sought an education

that would lead directly to employment, not college. The economy had begun producing white-

collar jobs that demanded formal education in excess of that provided by the common school but

considerably less than that furnished by college?

         Then, as now, commissions were formed to study the effects of secondary schools on

American competitiveness. One of these, the Douglas Commission headed by Carroll Wright, the

former U.S. Commissioner of Labor Statistics, concluded -- in 1906 -- that the current school

system was not meeting the needs of industry. European countries, in stark contrast, had

extensive industrial and manual training programs. By implication, then, the United States would

lose out in world markets unless something were done about training youths for manufacturing jobs

(Massachusetts Commission on Industrial and Technical Education 1906). Many looked to the

apprenticeship system in Germany, in which students combined academic subjects and industrial

training. Oddly enough, many in the United States today — some ninety years later -- are eyeing

a descendant of that system. The German system of continuation schools -- schools for working

youths -- was put in place in many states in the 1 920s as a requirement of all who left school

before the mandatory age and for some who left after but had not met established educational

standards.

         Increased demand for a high school education by students not bound for college led to a

questioning of the classical and scientific-Latin curricula. If high schools were to prepare students

for life, rather than for college, the curriculum would have to change from that required by college.

The English curriculum was the most popular successor to the classical; it dropped the Greek

requirement and gave students more choice in foreign languages. In 1900 51% of all high school


    8 Smith and Ward (1984, p. 39), using data from the census on educational attainment, show
that the actual percent of males who continued to college does not reach that achieved by the
1686-90 birth cohort until the cohort born 1946-50.

    'It has also been claimed that credentializalion - or what economists would term signalling
-- began to evolve in this period and that a high school diploma was the first credential of that type.

                                                 -6-
students wore enrolled in Latin and 56% were taking algebra. By 1934 only 16% were taking Latin

and 17% were taking algebra. But the debate over curriculum was not settled with the introduction

of an alternative to the classical track allowing students to be trained for life rather than college.

        The new issue regarding curriculum was whether high school should train students for

employment by offering them instruction in a host of practical arts.           Vocational (including

commercial), technical or manual, and industrial courses were rapidly incorporated into most high

school curricula. By 1934 10% of all high school students were enrolled in bookkeeping, 17% in

typing, and 9% in shorthand. The industrial track, however, was quicicly abandoned, a casualty

of a lack of cooperation between firms and unions and a suspicion that tax dollars were supporting

particular firms and industries, The idea has been recently revived, and the barriers to its adoption

are the same now as in the 1920s. Vocational and manual courses are still part of the curriculum,

very much as they were at their inception. In many ways, little has changed since the modern high

school took shape in the 1920s and 1930s.

        The junior high school emerged in the 1920s as a response to the high drop-out rate of

youths between 14 and 16 years old and the problem of educating a heterogeneous mass of

students in one school.10 The junior high school was intended to provide academic, vocational,

and technical courses to students having no intention of completing the, full twelve years. Even

today, shop and commercial courses are part of the junior high school curriculum, a curious

remnant of an age when youths left school at 14 years old and educators wanted to front-load the

vocational track. Junior highs were one part of a complex tracking system that provided a work-

oriented curriculum to some, many of whom received a junior high diploma as their terminal

degree, and a college preparatory or academic curriculum to the others, who would continue with

high school. By 1934 29% of all high schools were of the reorganize& type, either offering three-

year programs or having an adjunct junior high school and offering a six-year program.

         Most American youths, in the 1910 to 1920 period, left school before the eighth or ninth


   '° The first junior high schools were established in two college towns — Berkeley, CA and
Columbus, OH -- both in 1909 (Smith 1932, p. 80).

                                                   -7-
grades. In 1910 just under 30% of all 14-year olds in the non-South were enrolled in 9th grade,

although in 1920 about 50% were. The drop-out rate before 8th or 9th grade was substantial,

albeit declining.   Those who continued after 9th grade suffered some attrition, although

considerably less. The high school graduation rate of those who entered the 9th grade in 1919

was 54% in public schools (61% in private schools). By 1929 it was 66% for the group entering

9th grade and the retention rate for the public schools exceeded that of the private schools.

Therefore, students who continued to high school from the 8th grade had remarkably high retention

rates during the period considered.'1

        In 1690 fully 32% of those enrolled in grades 9 through 12 were in private schools. By

1900 the figure had decreased to 18%, and it declined further to 11% by 1910 reaching 9% by

1920. Although it dipped to a low ol 6°/n in the 1 930s, it has since risen back to the 9% mark. It

was the initial influx of the masses into public high schools that reduced the fraction of youths in

private schools, although it may have been the building of public schools that accomplished both.

For the period under study, therefore, the fraction in pdvate schools was somewhere between 6%

and 10°/c.

        Secondary school buildings were constructed at an extremely rapid rate from 1890 to the

onset of the Great Depression, and the actual building of schools may account for a large traction

of the increase in enrollments. An increase in enrollments can be met by some combination of

increasing (1) the number of schools, (2) the number of teachers per school, and (3) the number

of students per teacher. During the 1920s more than 80°/a of the increase in urban secondary

school enrollments was absorbed through the building of new schools. Pupils per teacher actually

declined somewhat and teachers per school increased, absorbing the remaining enrollments.

During the Great Depression when enrollments soared in the industrial North and Midwest,

localities were strapped for educational funds. The building of new schools took up only 42% of

the increase in enrollments from 1933 to 1937, whereas crowding in existing schools accounted


      The figures are for the entire United States and come from various Biennial Surveys of
Education.

                                                -8-
for the rest.'2 Of additional interest but not direcdy addressed here, is that secondary schooling

was expensive schooling. How America graduated from school is also a study in public finance,

particularly with the onset of the Great Depression.

         High schools in the 1910 to 1940 period were forced to respond to several changes in

American society. Enrollments soared, particularly among those who had no intention of continuing

their studies beyond secondary school, and many of the new pupils were the children of the foreign

born whose Americanization was a stated goal of the high schools of the period.



Educational Statistics

         The national figures on high school enrollment and graduation rates in Figure 1 hide

important time-series changes. The South had meager high school enrollment and graduation

rates early in the century but converged on the rest of the country after 1940. An illusion is thereby

created that there was a more gradual and continuous advance in schooling rates from 1910 to

1960 when, in fact, most non-southern regions show a burst of growth from 1920 to 1935 and then

exhibit little change until the late 1 950s.

         The schooling data come from several sources, each revealing different parts of the

process of change. There is one main source -- the annual and biennial surveys of the Bureau

of Education (later the Department of Education) from around 1900 to the 1950s. These data

come from the thousands of schools surveyed and have been supplemented to obtainestimates

of public and private enrollments (by grade and sex) and die number of high school graduates by

state and region. The public and private secondary school numbers are adjusted using data from

the several states and the private school data are adjusted further using Catholic school dataand

 information on preparatory students at colleges and universities (see GoidIn 1994c). These are

 the first secondary schooling data I am aware of to be produced at the state level.


     12These calculations use a city-level data set for 230 non-southem cities for 1923,1927, 1933,
 and 1937. The increase In total enrollments (E) is by definition: E • S (T/S) (E/i), where S-
                                                                                      where * —
 number of schools and T — number of teachers. Thus E' • S + (1/5)' + (EjT)' ,
 dlog(*)fdt.

                                                  -9.
         The published federal population censuses prior to 1940 contain information on school

 attendance by age and nativity for states and cities. These data supplement those from the

 Bureau of Education to investigate the reasons for differences, particularly across cities. The 1940

and subsequent censuses contain information on highest grade completed (and often attended).

These have been used by a large number of researchers to calculate completed grades for

cohorts. They are, however, enormously at variance with the data from the Bureau of Education

for the older cohorts. I will have something to say on this important topic, although much must be

left for another paper.

        Two data sets are used here: (1) a state and regional series on enrollment and graduation

rates (annually, with some breaks, to 1920 and then biennially) from 1910 to 1960, together with

state-level data on income and industrial structure, among other variables; and (2) a cross-section,

time-series data set for 230 cities containing attendance rates from the 1910, 1920, and 1930

federal population censuses; various schooling data for 1923, 1927, 1933, and 1937 from the

Biennial Surveys of Education; and additional information from the manufacturing censuses, the

financial statistics of cities, and the population censuses. The state data are for the entire United

States; the city data include 230 cities in the non-South (with populations over 20,000 in 1920).



When and Where Did America Graduate from HiQh School?

        Graduation Data

        A key indicator of the spread of high schools is the total and public high school graduation

rates, constructed here from contemporaneous data on the numbers of youths graduating

expressed as a fraction of all 17-year olds. Both public and total (public and private) rates are

graphed in Figure 2 for four non-South regions (New England, Middle Atlantic, East North Central,

and Pacific) from 1910 to 1958, although the discussion will include reference to all regions.

       All non-South regions have public and private graduation rates that begin at or below 10%

in 1910. Each rises to 50% or more by the mid-1930s. By 1935 the median 17-year old was a

high school graduate, although just 15 years earlier the median 17-year old had only a 20%

                                               -10-
probability of having a high school diploma. The increase in graduation rates from 1920 to 1935

was extremely rapid, especially so in the industrial areas of the Northeast and Midwest.

        Graduation rates, in all regions, were substantially lowered immediately prior to, and during,

American involvement in World War II, although the GI Bill later increased high school rates to

abnormally high levels.13 Even when private schools are added to the total, graduation rates in

the 1950s are no higher than those of the late 1930s." In most non-South regions, high school

graduation rates did not increase or increased only slightly duringthe twenty years alter 1938. The

extraordinarily rapid increase in high school graduation rates in the 1930s is probably the reason.

        The reduction in graduation during World War II occurred in all regions but was large in

New England and the Pacific states. The decrease was not due primarily to the military recruitment

of high school boys. Rather, high school youths moved into civilian jobs as wages rose,particularly

at the lower end ol the wage distribution. World War I had asimilar impact, although it is not very

noticeable in Figure 2. Female youths left high school during the World War II in almost equal

proportion to male youths in New England, but somewhat less than male youths in other regions.

such as the Middle Atlantic and the East North Central (graphed in Figure 4). In all regions girls

were attracted by the same factors that enticed boys to leave high school -- the increase in the

 relative wage of unskilled labor - although to a lesser degree.

         The three western regions -- West North Central, Mountain, and Pacific -- had slightly

 greater increases in graduation rates than did the regions of the East for the entire period from

 1910 to 1940, but the increase was more continuous. Rather than gettingoff to a slow start and

 then having a large spurt in high school growth from 1920 to 1940, as did the most eastern

 regions, the three in the West grew more rapidly during the pre-Depression period.

         The reliance on private schools differed across the regions. New England had the highest


     13The reason they are increased above normal is because the denominatorhere is the number
 ol 17-year olds and all returning GIs would have been older than 17.

     "Private school graduation data are available after 1934 tor only a few years in the 1940s and
  19505. Some given In FIgure 2 for the 1950s have been constructed from Catholic school data
  (see Gold in I 994c) which are not readily available for the late I 930s.

                                                   —11-
fraction of high school students enrolled and graduating from private schools. The Mountain states

had a very large fraction in the 1910 to 1920 period, although it later declined with the increase in

publicly provided education. The proportion graduating from private schools declined in all regions

over time, especially during the Great Depression. In New England during the 1910s and 1920s

about 200/a of all high school graduates came from public schools, although by 1933 16% did. In

the Middle Atlantic region the figure declined from 20% to 10% across the same period. In most

other regions the percentage generally began above 10% and declined to about 5°/a by the 1930s.

        The three regions of the South are distinguished from all others in the considerably lower

initial secondary schooling levels and their virtually continuous increase to the end data in 1958

(see Figure 3 which compares the South with the East North Central).'5 There is a discernible

increase during the Depression in two of the regions, but the timing is different from that in other

regions of the country. The high school revolution did not take place in the South during the 1920s

and 1930s. Rather it was drawn out over a much longer period of time.

        In all years and all regions, although only two (the Middle Atlantic and the East North

Central) are shown in Figure 4, the graduation rate for female youths was higher than that for male

youths. It was considerably higher in New England, the West North Central, and the Mountain

states, somewhat less so in the other three regions. That differences by sex existed in all states

suggest that the return to high school education was greater for female than for male youths. A

high school education for young women meant entree to jobs in the clerical sector, whereas its

absence meant a low-wage manufacturing job as an operative. At a time when physical strength

still mattered substantially and jobs with on-the-job training in various crafts were strictly limited to

male youths, schooling for females had higher returns than for males. It should be realized,

however, that the internal rate of return would have been reduced for girls compared with boys

because of their low life-time labor force participation rate (see 001dm 1990).




   ' Public high school graduation rates are used because they exist for more years than the
public and private rates, and the four regions depicted had only a small fraction of the total
attending private school for the entire period.

                                                  -12-
        Contemporaneous and Retrospective Graduation Data

        In ccynpahng educational attainment by cohort across censuses, many researchers have

noticed that cohorts gain schooling over time even if they did not go back to school. Individuals,

quite simply inflate, that is lie about, their educational attainment. This inflation is larger during

periods of substantial gains in schooling. Some have also commented that the retrospective data

from the census are at variance with the contemporaneous data from the Commissioner of

Education for the period I am considering (Denison 1985; Folger and Nam 1967). It should be

apparent from Figure 2 that the 1920 to 1940 period was one of enormous increase in educational

attainment. If there ever were a census when subsequent cohorts would have been tempted to

lie about their educational attainment, 1940 would have been it.

         The 1940 census was the first to request information on educational attainment and

census takers may have been insufficiently trained to elicit accurate responses. Some older

Americans had been educated in non-graded schools and many others, particularly in rural areas,

attended school for considerably more years than grades. Although the question in the census

was framed in terms of grades and not years, it is apparent that there was eitherfabrication or

misunderstanding of the question.

         These differences are apparent in Figure 5, for which the Middle Atlantic and the East

North Central regions are used as examples. Each graph contains estimates of the graduation rate

of males in the years before 1938 as reported in the 1940 population census. The graduation rate

is computed as the fraction of males, at some age and born in the region who stated they

graduated from high school. They are assumed to have graduated when they were eighteen, but

the results will be unaffected if they graduated at seventeen or nineteen or some other age.

         There are three lines in each graph. The top two are from the 1940 census. One gives

 the graduation rate for males born in the given region and the other (the line directly beneath it)

 is a lower-bound estimate for the graduation rate of males educated in the region. The difference

 between the two lines concerns liow the foieign born are treated. If one assumesthat the foreign

 born did not continue their formal education once they entered the United States, the upper line

                                                  -13-
is correct If 1 instead, one assumes that all the foreign born in a region were educated there, the

lower line is correct. The true line is probably closer to the top one. The third line comes from the

contemporaneous Bureau of Education data, which have just been discussed.

        The state and regional data I have produced were computed to give an accurate picture

of the historical b-ends in secondary schooling and to be consistent with the aggregate data

produced by the Bureau of Education in the 1920s and 1930s. If the data err, they do so on the

high side because I have accepted the enrollment and graduation data coming from the states,

which are higher than those from the schools.

        Because the 1940 census was the first to collect information on educational attainment and

is frequentiy used to produce such estimates for older cohorts, the wide differences between the

contemporaneous data and those from the 1940 census bear closer scrutiny. My tentative

conclusion is that the graduation rate data from the 1940 census for cohorts that were 18 years

old in the 1910 to 1920 period are off by a substantial amount, possibly by a factor of 1.5 or 2.

The implications of this finding for the Denison calculation with which I began and for estimates of

the returns to education for the older cohorts must await further research.



        Enrollment Rates

        Another measure of high school participation and attainment is the enrollment rate.'6

Figure 6 contains total and public secondary school enrollment data on four regions -- New

England, Middle Atlantic, East North Central, and Pacific. Enrollment rates are computed by

dividing by the number of youths 14 to 17 years old. The graphs show similar trends to those on

graduation rates.

        New England, the Middle Atlantic, and the East North Central had enrollment rates that

grew slowly but steadily to the Great Depression when they increased greatly. They levelled off

in the 1930s, dropped during World War II. soared with the 01 Bill, came back to normal in the


    16 Enrollments are generally given as 'first day. although each state could have used its own
definition, such as enrollments throughout the year.

                                                -14-
early 1950s, and increased in the late 1 950s. There were ups and downs from the mid-i 9305 to

the late 19505. But the truly surprising finding is that the aggregate enrollment rate was not much

higher in 1958 than it was in 1938 and in the Middle Atlantic region it was lower.

        The Pacific region, and the others of the western United States, had somewhat different

enrollment histories. The increase was greater and more continuous during 1910 to 1930.

Enrollment rates by 1930 were so high that the Depression, whatever its impact on the area, had

lithe effect on the high school enrollment rate. In 1930 about 60% of 14 to 17 year olds in the

Pacific region were enrolled in high schools, whereas 60% in the East North Central were and just

50% in the Middle Atlantic were.

        Figure 7 superimposes enrollment rates for four of the regions on one graph. Differences

in the levels before the Great Depression and the catch-up during the 1 930s are now more

apparent. New England and the Pacific states began with the highest enrollments, but the three

states of the Far West rapidly advanced, pulling way ahead of the rest. The East North Central

began to increase rapidly in the 191 Os and nearly overtook New England just prior to the

Depression. All non-South regions had enrollment rates that greatly exceededthat of the Middle

Atlantic. In the 1930s the very laggard three states of the Middle Atlantic rapidly increased

enrollmen and by the mid-1930s the three northeastern and midwestern regions had converged.

The Far West, however, was still in front.



         In sum, all non-South regions had large increases during the 1910 to 1940 period, although

 those of the more industrial North initially lagged behind. Most northern states experienced an

 expansion in secondary schooling during the Great Depression that was far greater than that

 experienced by other regions. Growth was so rapid in all non-South regions that rates of

 enrollment and even graduation in the 1930s remained in place for more than twenty years.

 Finally, girls, just about everywhere, graduated at far greater rates than did boys. The next

 sections confront these (acts with economic, demographic, and school district information to

 understand what fostered these changes and differences.

                                                 -15-
Accountine for Differences in Secondary Schooling across States and Cities

         Variation across the states and in a sample of 230 cities shows the impact manufacturing

had in reducing the level of high school education, and thus why the Depression released so many

youths to attend school. The state data reveal that higher incomes, particularly those in the

agricultural sector, operated differently from higher manufacturing wages. The city data, being

more abundant, can show the impact ol the percentage foreign born, wealth, and type of

manufacturing. Even affercontrolling for a large number of variables, region, while reduced in

explanatory power, is still important. The western states, it appears, were the most egalitarian,

whereas northern states were the least, among the non-southern states.



        States

        The factors that determine schooling at any level concern both the individual and the

schooling jurisdiction, which during this time was almost solely the school disbict. For the

individual, these are generally summarized in the expected returns from schooling. Returns should

already incorporate the costs of education, most importantly opportunity and transportation costs,

which in many of these areas were prohibitive. Parental resources will also determine schooling

decisions, to the extent that the capital market is imperfect, which it presumably was for these

youths. Finally, the financial resources of the school disuict will determine its ability to tax and to

borrow, necessary       fund and build schools, Just two variables at the state level appear of

overwhelming importance in our ability to explain secondary schooling differences before the Great

Depression.

        Figure 8 contains two graphs. The uppermost is the log of agricultural service income per

worker (in 1920) graphed against the graduation rate in 1930.17 All 48 states are included; the

hollow dots are the fourteen states of the North (New England, Middle Atlantic, and East North

Central regions). For the states of the non-North, agricultural income per capita appears to be a




      Agricultural income per worker is not available for 1930,

                                                -16-
powerful variable in determining secondary schooling. As it increases, so does the graduation rate.

But the relationship does not appear to hold for the states at the North.

         Consider instead the bottom portion of Figure 8 which graphs the log of the manufacturing

wage in 1929 against the graduation rate. Here the hollow dots are for the nan-North and the

northern states are given as abbreviations. For all states there is a somewhat positive relationship

between wages and education. But for the North (particularly excluding Rhode Island) the

relationship is negative.

         These relationships are better summarized in Table 3 in which all states are included and

in which there is an interaction between the percentage of the work force in manufacturing and the

manufacturing wage. Note that the distinction in Figure 8 was North versus non-North, but that

was only for convenience. Table 3 uses the continuous variable, percentage of the work force in

manufacturing instead. Also included in Table 3 are various demographic characteristics of the

states populations: percentages foreign born, urban, and nonwhite.

         I am implicitly making two defensible assumptions in the estimation in Table 3. One is that

manufacturing wages in general are unaffected by the labor supply decisions of youths. Youths

were a very small percentage of this labor market, so the assumption appearsreasonable. The

second is that the wage of educated workers (say, that of office workers) did not vary across

states. Evidence from the 230 cities I have assembled shows that even though manufacturing

wages did vary significandy across regions, the wages for more educated workers (clerical workers)

did not.'° Given the two assumptions, the regression in Table 3 traces out the demand curvefor

schooling as a function of the opportunity cost of school (the manufacturing wage) holdingthe tax

base (agricultural income) and other factors constant.

          Both the manufacturing wage and agricultural income per capita have positive coefficients,

as does the percentage of the work force in manufacturing. But the interaction term between the



     '      data are available for 1910, 1915, and 1920, which is a somewhat anomalous year. The
 ratio of the highest to lowest mean clerical earnings acsoss regions was 2.6%, in 1915, but was
 39% for production workers.

                                                 -17-
two manufacturing variables (percentage and wage) reveals precisely what Figure 8 showed.

When the percentage in manufacturing is somewhere above the median (when it is greater than

0.3 18). the relationship between the graduation rate and the wage is negative. Similarly, when the

wage exceeds the median (when it is greater than $1212), the relationship between the graduation

rate and the percentage of the labor force in manufacturing is also negative.

         I interpret the findings in the following manner. Agricultural income per capita is the single

best measure of the tax base for most of the states in this period (total per capita income is less

strongly related to education than income from agriculture).19 Thus, as agricultural income per

capita increased, the value of land presumably did and a greater amount of wealth was available

for districts to tax. But as the proportion of the work force in manufacturing increased and as the

wages of manufacturing workers did, the opportunity cost of schooling was greater. Thus when

the manufacturing sector was large enough, an increase in its wage served as a potent drag on

the education of youths.

        The two variables -- agricultural income per capita and the manufacturing wage -- produce

a result, when the manufacturing sector was sufficiently large, akin to that from classic income and

substitution effects. But because agriculture was a declining sector, it will be seen that states rich

in agriculture, yet weak in manufacturing, schooled their youth to become educated migrants.



        Cities

        The cross-section, time-series city-level data set is considerably larger than the state-level

data set and many of the most promising explanatory variables (per capita wealth, the occupational

and industrial distributions, school quality variables) are available by city. The data set I am using

contains 230 non-southern cities, all of which had populations in excess of 20,000 in 1920. The

education variable is the proportion of 16 and 17-year olds who attended school during the census




    " Data on taxable property at the state level also exists, although it may not include all property
that was taxed at the local level. In several cases states did not tax property, and these states do
not have an estimated value of property, just an assessed value.

                                                 -18-
year.2° This measure is somewhat different from the secondary school enrollment and graduation

rates just discussed for the states. The two variables are highly correlated.

       As can be seen In Table 4, there was substantial variation in the attendance rates of 16

and 17 year olds both within and across regions. Attendance rates generally increased, and the

variation among cities within a region decreased, as one moved West Levels increased with time

across all regions, although percentage point differences by region widened. The variation within

all regions decreased over time, as can be seen from the coefficient of variation.

        Regional differences among school attendance for urban teenagers are similar U) those

found for the regions as a whole, although some differences exist. In both data sets the Middle

Atianlic and New England regions lagged in 1920 and 1930, whereas the regions of the West had

far higher levels. But the cities of New England have far lower educational rates than the region

as a whole. New England was an ôducationally diverse region in the 1920s with some high

education states (Massachusetts) and some very low ones (Rhode Island).

        The city-level data set contains extensive information. In each year there is population

data, yielding the fraction of the city's population that was foreign born and population density

(populatiorilarea in acres). The occupational or industrial mix of the work force are also available.

In 1920 the data are only for the manufacturing labor force and give the fraction in manufacturing

and, among those, the proportions who were in craft, operative, laborer, and managerial positions.

There are also variables for the distribution of manufacturing employment by industry. For 1930

the occupational distribution comes from the population census and is more encompassing. For

both 1920 and 1930 the Financial Statistics of Cities gives the estimated value of taxable property.


     20The census question inquired whether the Individual attended any school during iii peflod
of the previous census year. Thus, if an Individual had attended night school for even one day,
the answer was supposed to be in the affirmative. I also have Commissioner of Education data
giving the numbers of pupils in different types of secondary schools (e.g.. Junior highs, vocational
schools, regular four-year high schools). The data are much in agreement with the census
information but differ in important ways that make them less useful. The unit of analysis tor the
Bureau of Education data Is the school district Youths from the smaller cities could have gone to
school in a neighboring district, and since some districts had no high schools, they probably did.
The Bureau of Education data also do not include students living in a city who went to private
school.

                                                -19-
Finally, there are school quality variables from the Biennial Reports of the Commissioner of

Education which yield teacher salaries, the density of secondary schools, the number ol pupils per

teacher, and the number of teachers per school. The school quality variables caine from a data

set that includes 1923, 1927, 1933, and 1937. Only school density is used hereY

        Differences by region in school attendance can be due to factors colTelated with the region,

such as percentage foreign born, the percentage of the work force in manufacturing, per capita

wealth, and population density. Table 5, ccl. (1), includes these factors and shows that in 1920

the foreign born as a percentage of the population and employment in the manufacturing sector

both lowered school attendance whereas wealth increased it. The population density of the city

(people per acre) has a negative impact on attendance, a likely consequence of the greater poverty

of denser areas. Regional differences are thereby reduced, but remain. The Middle Atlantic still

tails, but New England's less than outstanding educational performance is greatly explained.

        Of particular interest are the findings in column (2), which adds the percentage of all

manufacturing workers in different occupational groups (laborer, semiskilled operative, craft, and

manager), industry percentages, and school density. An increase in the percentage of all

manufacturing workers who were operatives, given the percentage of the population employed in

manufacturing, decreases schooling more than an increase in the percentage who were laborers.

Where production jobs were unavailable, particularly semiskilled operative positions, schooling was

more likely to flourish. Operative positions, it seems, were the encouragement to leave school.

Type of industry also mattered. Not surprisingly, the greater the fraction of manufacturing workers

in textiles and clothing, the lower was school attendance. Part of the relationship between

schooling and manufacturing came from the migration of families less willing to educate their

children to areas with high demand for youths. But a large part of the drag of industry on

schooling must have come from the pull of employment opportunities.


   21 Most of the school quality variables are jointly determine with the attendance variable and
should not be included in the estimation.

      See the evidence on this point in Parsons and Goldin (1989).

                                               -20-
        Important changes occurred between 1920 and 1930. Attendance rates for the states of

the Middle Atlantic and New England were greatly surpassed by those of the Far West and East

North Central regions. The percentage foreign born in 1930 no longer reduced attendance rates,

as can be seen in columns (3) and (4) of Table 5. European immigration restriction meant that the

foreign-born had resided in the United States for more years in 1930 than in 1920 and apparently

learned to take greater advantage 01 the pubbc school system. Another possibility is that schools

were built during the 1 920s in cities with many foreign born who were previously constrained by

the absence of schools. The proportion of the population in manufacturing employment had an

equivalently strong effect in reducing school attendance in 1930 as in 1920.

        Also of interest is that the coefficients on the regional dummies for the northeast increase

from 1920 to 1930. Holding the other factors constant, the states of New England and the Middle

Atlantic had school attendance rates for 16 and 17 years olds that were between 22 and 26

percentage points lower than were those of the Far West. and they were about 12 percentage

points lower than those of the midwest. Because the school attendance rates (from the census)

for 16 and 17 year olds in the northeast in 1930 were about 5S% (see Table 4), these corrected

differences are extremely large?



        Converoence in Schoolina across Cities, 1920 to 1930

        Convergence equations have been estimated (see Table 6) to understand why change

occurred during the 1 920s. The difference in the log of the attendance rate between 1920 and

1930 is regressed on the attendance rate in 1920. Column (1) contains only regional dummies and

shows that 0.46 of the gap was dosed every decade. The cities of New England and the Middle

Atlantic converged on the lowest level and those of the East North Central and the Pacific

converged on the highest level. Column (2) adds the percentage foreign born in 1920. the fraction




      The addition of the various factors does not narrow the difference across regions in 1930,
although it does in 1920. Therefore, the raw differences in Table 4 are approximately those that
are revealed in columns (3) and (4) of Table 5.

                                               -21-
 in manufacturing employments in 1920, and the distribution of manufacturing workers in 1920. All

increase the level of attendance on which the city was converging.

        Although the (log) attendance rate in 1920 is included in the equation, the percentage

foreign born in 1920 has an independent effect Cities with low attendance rates in 1920 but high

fractions foreign born had larger catch-up than cities with low fractions foreign born but with

equivalently low attendance rates. The children of the foreign born, as was also seen In Table 5

had assimilated during the 1 920s in terms of the educational attainment measure used.

        A similar story can be told with regard to the composition of the manufacturing work force.

The percentage ol the population in manufacturing in 1920 does not have a separate impact, but

the composition of the manufacturing work force does. Although the demand for operative workers

in 1920 reduced school attendance, some of the decrease was reversed by 1930. The reversal,

though, is not evident in the states of New England and the Middle AtJantic.

        Prior to the Depression, then, me urban and industrial areas of the northeast were left

behind in the high school revolution. Various states in the East North Central, however, became

educational leaders. Ohio, Michigan, and Wisconsin pioneered in progressive curriculum, schools,

and laws.     Several independent variables (e.g.. percentage foreign born, percentage in

manufacturing, per capita wealth) greatly reduce the differences among regions in 1920, but by

1930 they have less of an effect. Local governments and individuals may have become set in their

ways regarding educational decisions, and thus it took the Great Depression to catapult much of

the North into the high school revolution.



Education and Economic Growth across States

        I motivated this paper with the notion that secondary schooling was responsible (or a large

fraction of economic growth in America during this century. The calculation treated the increase

in income as resulting from the greater earnings ol educated persons. But schooling can also have

positive external effects in a state or city, arid a large literature has concerned the impact ol

education in some base year on the rate of growth of income or population in a geographic area

                                              -22-
(see. e.g., Glaeser 1994; Glaeseretal. 1994).

        There was strong convergence in per capita income across states during the period from

the 1920s to the 1950s (see also Barro and Sala-l-Martin 1991). And, as shown in Table 8, part

A, states with greater levels of secondary schooling in the 1929 to 1947 period converged to higher

levels of income. Education, by itself, did not have a positive effect on income growth because of

the strength of income convergence. It was precisely the laggards In both the educational and

development processes that grew most rapidly. But given convergence in income, education

mattered for the level.24

        States with high levels of education also endowed their citizens with the means to move

to better places. But the relationship between education and migration is quadratic. People fled

the states with low levels of income and education at the same time they moved out of rich

agricultural states that had high levels of schooling but lithe manufacturing activity.

        Thus the relationship between education and migration is complicated by that between

income and education -- that is the impact on schooling from high agricultural income versus that

from high manufacturing wages. Those states with moderate to high agricultural income per capita

but small urban and manufacturing sectors --e.g.. Kansas, Nebraska, Nevada — exported educated

workers to the rest of America. And states with poor agricultural and manufacturing sectors --e.g.1

much of the South -- exported their populations, who were relatively poorly educated. But states

in the middle — e.g., California, Ohio, Wisconsin -- were the net receivers and thus the relationship

is quadratic, as revealed in Table 8, part B.



Why America Graduated from HiQh School

        This exploration of where and when secondary schooling increased hints to why change

occurred. Although the issue is the subject of another part of this project (see Goldin 1994b), die




    24Balfanz (1993) contains results that suggest greater secondary schooling caused increases
in value added per worker at the state level, although the current model may have a specification
problem.

                                                 -23-
argument and some of the evidence can be summarized as follows. At the inception of the high

school movement around 1890 to 1915, the earnings of the educated, relative to the less-well

educated, were substantial. Male clerical (office) workers in manufacturing, for example, in the

Northeast and Midwest earned 1.5 times what production workers did in 1910 and 1915. The

ratios were even higher for female clerical workers relative to female production wodcers.a Male

clerical and supervisory workers as a group earned about 2 times what production workers did

around 1890 to 1915. Very few Americans had secondary schooling in 1890 and most youths

across the county could not easily and cheaply obtain it. The large returns to high school must

have been an important factor in the expansion of secondary schools across the nation in the

subsequent decades. But the relationship between the demand for educated workers and the

expansion of high schools is a complicated one. Because the ratios just presented are for all

workers, not just juveniles, opportunity costs could have remained high even in areas having

apparentiy large returns to education. Decisions regarding schooling depended critically on the

generosity of parents and the foresightedness of youths.

        Because most of the return to high school education came from switching sectors — from

manufacturing to service-sector jobs -- many youths whose entire lives were spent in the shadow

of the factory might not have been able to comprehend the benefits of secondary schooling.

School propaganda, about which so much has been written, may have been beneficial advertising

informing the sons and daughters of blue-collar workers that education was a benefit to them too

(see Tyack 1974).

        Even though the ratio of the earnings of educated workers to manufacturing operatives

remained high through the 191 Os, the real impetus to educational change was probably the decline




     The data on both clerical (office), supervisory, and production workers in manufacturing come
from the U.S. census of manufactures for 1890, 1910. and 1915. Wage data are not given
separately for males and females in 1910 and 1915, and they have been estimated using
regression analysis on the city-level sample. Clerical workers cannot be separated from
supervisory and managerial employees in 1890, although comparisons can be made between 1890
and 1910 (or 1915) by combining two categories of while-collar workers in 1910 (or 1915). See
Goldin 1 994b.

                                              -24-
in the demand tor juveniles in manufacturing. The demand for juvenile workers began to decrease

in the early 1 900s particularly in industries that mechanized and substituted adultforeign-born labor

plus capital for craft workers plus juveniles (see, e.g., Osterman 1980).

        The declining manufacturing demand for juveniles is explored in Table 7, which gives the

percentage of all employed males youths who were manufacturing workers in nine industrial and

large cities. In all cities the percentage of employed youths working in manufacturing declined from

1900 to 1910 absolutely and relative to that for adults (columns 6 and 7)? The evidence

suggests that the high school movement was given a stimulus by the decreased demand for

juveniles in their most significant employment sector apart from agriculture.21 That stimulus was

greatly increased during the Great Depression.

        If much of the impetus to educational change at the secondary level was due to the large

returns to education, the enormous increase in high school attendance and graduation in the

decades after 1910 should have lowered the educational premium. There is evidence that the

premium decreased around the mid-1910s and early 1920s (see Goldin 1994b). But the timing

is somewhat odd since the decrease in the premium is somewhat in advance of the largest

increase in education. The premium, it appears, then remained stable -- yet still high -- until the

1940s. One possibility is that increased demand for educated workers managed to outstrip

increased supply even from 1920 to 1940, similar to what is suspected regarding the recent

increase in the relative earnings of college-educated workers.

        Greater school accessibility, better school quality, and more relevant curriculum must also

have increased the enrollment of youths. Teens in many rural areas, and even some cities, during

the first several decades of this century had no high schools in their district nor in any neighboring

district. The simple provision of schools and school bus transportation increased enrollments by




       The figures for 1920 show a sharp increase, but reflect, I believe, heightened labor demand
for less-skilled manufacturing workers during World War I.

      The question, then, is whether rural areas within a state had a much lower rate of increase
in high school attendance.

                                                 -25-
decreasing the costs of attending schools.

        Curriculum changes instituted in the 1920s added vocational, manual, and commercial

classes to the menu of junior and senior high school courses. These courses were established

to make school relevant, keep youths in school, and create better workers. The impact of the

changed curriculum can be proxied in the city data set by the density of vocational high schools

in a district! The cross-section regression in Table 5, column (4), reveals that a greater density

of vocational schools increased the attendance rate given the overall density of high schools,

including vocational schools. That is, exchanging a vocational high school for a regular high

school, holding other factors constant, would increase attendance rates, but the impact is small.

        The role of legal compulsion has not yet been discussed. Both compulsory schooling and

child labor laws were significantiy strengthened in the 1920s. Before the 1920s such laws

contained a number of exemptions and may not have been enforced as zealously as they were

after. Thus, legal change has been viewed as providing a large impetus to change. But careful

investigation has thus far revealed that legislation lagged rather than led. States that had large

increases in educational attainment were those that later increased the age of compulsory

education or eliminated various exemptions. Although the jury is still out on the issue, evidence

is mounting that legal change was not the spur it appears to be (see Goldin 1994a).



Concluding Remarks

        The period 1910 to 1940 witnessed the second great transformation of American schooling

-- the rise or the high school. The first transformation involved the spread of the common school

in the nineteenth century and the third was the rise of college education in the post-World War II

period. Neither was as spectacular in its increase as was the rise of the public high school. In

1938, the median eighteen-year-old male in the East North Central region, for example, was a high

school graduate, but he had stood only a 15% chance of having his diploma in 1920.


    a I have not yet found data at the city level that reveal the number of schools offering the non-
traditional courses.

                                                 26-
        Virtually the entire gain in educational attainment in the 1900 to 1970 period came from

advances at the high school, not college, level. High school enrollment and graduation rates in the

north and west rose rapidly between 1920 and 1935. Rates achieved by the mid-1930s were

maintained for the next fifteen to twenty years before increasing again to today's levels.

        At the state level, higher agricultural income per capita had a strong positive effect on

schooling at the secpndary level, a likely result of a strong tax base. But manufacturing labor

demand, mainly the availability of operative positions in certain industries, was a significant drag

on the education of youths, and the Great Depression provided an ironic fillip to schooling through

its elimination of many jobs, particularly those for young men. Although the presence of the foreign

born in cities depressed attendance in 1920, it had no effect by 1930. Manufacturing demand

decreased schooling in both 1920 and 1930 and had a long-lasting impact in both the New

England and Middle Atiantic regions.

        The rapid increase in high school enrollments and graduation rates was, apparenUy, the

response of a latent demand to the building of public schools in both urban and rural districts and

to a decrease in transport costs. The returns to education in 1890 were high, although the rewards

came mainly from intersectoral shifts from manufacturing to office work. School propaganda

campaigns cannot be ruled out as an influence, but they probably operated more like informative,

rather than deceptive, advertising. The demand for juveniles in manufacturing declined

substantially just prior to the rapid increase in high schools. But it is also the case that the demand

for white-collar workers rose, particularly in the female-dominated office work positions.

        The subject that motivated this paper was the role of education in economic growth. States

that pulled ahead of the pack in secondary schooling were most often rich agricultural states and

those with high per capita income but moderate manufacturing activity. Such states converged on

higher levels of income, and they often endowed their youths with the necessary education to

migrate out of agriculture and thus out of the state.




                                                 -27-
                                          REFERENCES


Balfanz, Robert. 1993. 'Mass Schooling and Manufacturing Productivity In the United States: 1880-
   1950.' Paper presented at the Social Science History Association meetings, November 1993.

Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-l-Maitin. 1991. 'Convergence across States and Regions?
   Brookings Papers on Economic ActMtv, vol.1. WashIngton, D.C.: The Brookings InstitutIon, pp.
   107-182.

Denison, Edward F. 1985. Trends In American Economic Growth, i929-1982. Washington, D.C.:
  The Bróoklngs Institution.

Folger, John K. and Charles B. Nam. 1967. Education of the American Population. A 1960 Census
   Monograph. Washington, D.C.: US GPO.

Glaeser, Edward L 1993. 'CitIes, Information, and EconomIc Growth.' Paper written for a
   Housing and Urban Development Conference. December.

Glaeser, Edward L, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrel Shlelfer. 1993. 'EconomIc Growth In a
  Cross-Section of Cities.' Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper Number
   1645. July.

001dm, Claudia. 1994a, in progress. 'Compulsory Schooling Laws during the Second
   Transformation of American Education.'

Goldin, Claudia 1994b, in progress. 'The Wage Structure and the High School Movement: 1890
  to 1940.'

Goidin, Claudia I 994c. 'Appendix to How America Graduated from High School: The
  Constructjon of State-Level Education Data,' National Bureau of Economic Research-
   Development of the American Economy Working Paper, forthcoming.

Goldin, Claudia, and Robert A. Marga 1992. 'The Great Compression: The Wage Structure In the
  United States at Mid-Century,' Quartertv Journal of Economics 107 (February): 1-34.

Kuanets, Simon. Ann Ratner Miller, and Richard A. Eastetlin, 1960. PopulatIon Redistribution and
   Economic Growth.: United States, 1870-1950. VoL II.         Analyses of Economic Change.
   Philadelphia, PA: The American Philosophical Society.

Krug, Edward A. 1964. The Shaping of the American High School: 1880-1920. Madison, WI:
  University of Wisconsin Press.

Lee, Everett S., Ann Rather Miller. Carol P. Brainerd, and Richard A. Easterlin. 1957. Population
   Redistribution and Economic Growth: United States. 1870-1950. Vol. I. Methodolociicai
  Considerations and Reference Tables. Philadelphia, PA. The American I'hilosophlcal Society.

Massachusetts Commission on Industrial and Technical Education. 1906. Report of the
  Commission of Industrial and Technical Education. New York: Teachers College, Columbia
  University.

Massachusetts Department of Education. 1928. Annual Report of the Department of Education.
  Boston, Massachusetts.

                                               -28-
Osterman, Paul. 1980. Getting Stailed: The Youth Labor Market. Cambridge, MA: The Mif Press.

Parsons, Donald, and Claudia Goldin. 1989. 'Parentai Altruism and Self interest: Child Labor
   among Late-Nineteenth Century American Families,1 EconomIc Inoulrv 27 (October): 637-59.

Smith, James P., and Michael P. Ward. 1984. Women's Waaes and Work in the Twentieth Century.
  Santa Monica, CA: The Rand Corporation.

Smith, William A 1932. Secondary Education In the United States. New York: MacMillan Co.

Tyack, David. 1974. The One Best System. Cambridge, MA Harvard University Press.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States. Washington, D.C.: US
   GPO.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic AnalysIs. 1984. State Personal Income by
  State: Estimates for 1929-1982. WashIngton, D.C.: US GPO.

United States Department of the Interior, Office of Education, various years. Biennial Survey of
  Education (years). Washington, D.C.: US GPO.

United States Office of Education. various years. Rerort of the Commissioner of Education ffor the
  yearl. Washington, D.C.: US GPO.

U.S. Department of Education. 1993. 120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Portrait.
  Washington, D.C.: US GPO.




                                                -29-
       Public and Private Secondary School Rates
   1


0.9
0.8
0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

  0
      1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970



Fiqure 1: Secondary School Enrollment and Graduation Rates: Entire United States

Notes: Enrollment figures are divided by die number of 14 toll year aids; graduation figures are divided
by the number of 17 year olds. Total includes both males and females in public and private schools.
Sources: U.S. Departnent of Education, 120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Portrait
Washington, D.C.: US GPO (1993).
                                                                                  0.7-


                                                                                  0.6 -

      t     Public ard
                                                                                  0.5-

                                                        /
                                                        'I
                                                                                  0.4-

                                              ;-blcgradua1'on tale
                                                                                  0.3-




                                                                                          /ubic
 2                                                                                0.2-

                                                                                  0.1-




  90              c2O              93            1940          1950       1960                  1920      1930         1910       1950   I 960

                                   New England                                                            Middle Allantic




0-5—'
          bIiC and
                                                                     i_
                                                Public ;tacui!ior' rate
                                                                          --


          pr:vaIe ;ralia1Cfl ele        /)-
0.4




02l-

                                                                                      0
                                                                                       1910     1920      1930             1940   1950   1960
     1910         1920         1930               190           1950      1960

                             East    North Central                                                               Pacific



  Fiqure 2: Total and Public High School Graduation Rates bc Four Regions

 Notes: Males and females are combined. The number of graduates is divided by the approximate number
 of 17-year olds in the state. Interpolations are made between census years. See Appendix (or details on
 the construction of the underlying education data.
 Sources:
 Commissioner of           Education, Regort of the Commissioner                 of   Education (various years); Commissioner of
  Education,       Biennial  Survey of Education (various years).
        — South Atlantic        —-- East South Central — West South Central — East North Central

        0.6

        0.5

        0.4

        0.3

        0.2

        0.1


          0
           1910             1920             1930             1940              1950             1960




Fiqure 3: Public Hiqh School Graduation Rates for the South and the East No1Th Central

Notes: Males and lemales are combined. The number of graduates is dMded by the approximate number
of 17-year olds in the state. Interpolations are made between census years. See Appendix for details on
the construction of the underlying education data.
Sources:
Commissioner of Education, Report of the Commissioner of Education (various years); Commissioner of
Education, Biennial Survey of Education (various years).
                    0,7


                    0.6


                    0.5


                    0.4


                    0.3


                    0.2


                    0.1


                      0
                       1910        1920        1930        1940        1950        1960
                                               Middle Atlantic


                     0.7

                     0.6

                     0.5

                     0.4


                    0.3

                    0.2

                    0.1


                      0
                          1910     1920        1930        1940        1950        1960
                                             East North Central


Fiqure 4: PubUc Hkjh School Graduation Rates by Sex: Middle Atlantic and East Nodh Conual ReQions

Notes: Graduates are divided by the number of 17-year aids in the state. Interpolabons are made between
census years. See Appendix for details on the construction of the underlying education data.
Sources:
Commissioner of Education1 Report of the Commissioner of Education (various years); Commissioner of
Education, Biennial Survey of Education (various years).
                    0.6


                    0.5


                    0.4


                    0.3                      940. ma. gad. a;.


                    0.2


                    0.1


                      0-—
                      1899            1909                1919       1929           1939

                                                  Middle Atlantic




                          1899        1909                1919       1929           1939

                                                East North Central


Figure 5: Educational Attainment Data from the Bureau of Education and the 1940 Population Census:
Middle Atlantic and East North Central Regions

Notes:
1940, male grad. rate: proportion of men born in the given region who reported graduating from high school
in the 1940 population census. The year given is (1940 - age + 18).
1940, male (with foreign born): same as 1940, males, but includes the foreign born in their region of
residence in 1940.
Grad. rate, male: number ol male graduates from public and private high schools in the region divided by
me nunber of 17 year oids from Commissioner of Education data.
Sources:
Commissioner of Education, Report of the Commissioner of Education (various years); Commissioner of
Education, Biennial Survey of Education (various years). 1940 RUMS, 11100 sample.
1-                                                             1




fl10        1920     1930      19.40    1950      ¶960          1910     1920     1930         ¶940   ¶950   ¶960
                      New England                                                 Middle Allanhic




                                                                                           Pa




¶510        1920     ¶930      1940     1950      1960          1910     ¶920     ¶930         1940   ¶950   ¶960
                   East North ContraJ                                                Paciiic




       Fcure 6: Total and Public Secondpry School Enrollment Rates in Four Realoas

       Sowtes:
       Commissioner of Education, Repoqt of the Commissioner of EducaUon (various years); Convrgssioner of
       Education. Biennial Survey of Education (various years).
       Notes: Males arid females am b1ned. Ensollment Is dMded by the approxbnata number of 14 b 17
       year aids fri the state. Intarpoladone are made between census yea't See Appendix br details on flw
       Consbtictjon of the underlying educa6on data.
             —a— New England        — Middle Atlantic       —— East North Central — Pacific
       1

    0.9

    0.8
    0.7

    0.6

    0.5
    0.4

    0.3

    0.2

    0.1
       1910             1920             1930              1940             1950            1960




Fiqure 7: Total Secondary School Enrollment Rates lor Four Reqions

Sources:
Commissioner of Education, Repoit of the Commissioner of Education (various years); Commissioner of
Education, Biennial Survey of Education (various years).
Notes: Males and females are combined. Enrollment is divided by the approximate number of 14 tID 17-
year olds in the state. Interpolations are made between census years. There are no private school data
Icr 1940 to 1946. See Appendix for details on the construction of the underlying education data.

Notes: The line at 1930 is intended to mark the possible impact of the Great Depression.
                           0.6



                           0.5
                     0
                     C,
                     a,
                      60.4
                      5
                     a:
                     C
                      0


                     jO.3
                           0.2



                           0.1
                                 5.9         6.3                 6.7             7.1                                7.5
                                                   Log (Agr. Income/Capita), 1920

               0.6


                                                                                           0
               °'5T                                                      0
                                                                                 0                              0
                                                                                     IN             0
                                                                                               0
                                                                                               C           0

          (5
         cc                                                                                        IL
          C
          0
          O.3                                                                                           'Ill.
                                                                             0
         •0
          '5
         o                               000                     o0 p'                    NJ       NY

               0.2
                                  o

                                  0
               0.1
                     4,1               4.3       4.5          4.7         4.9                             5.1
                                             Log (Manulacturing wage), 1929



Fiqure 8: Agricultural Income, Manufacturir Wages and Graduation Rates in 1930 by State


Sources:
Graduation rates: Commissioner of Education, Report of the Commissioner of Education (various
years); Commissioner of Education, Biennial Survey of Education (various years).
Agricultural income, 1920: Kuznets, eta!. (1960), table A 4.3.
Manufacturing wages per worker, 1929: Lee, et al. (1957), table M-5.
Notes: The regression line in part A is estimated over all non-northern states. That in part B is
estimated over only the northern states, except Rhode Island.
                                               Table 1
                  Computing the Impact ci High School on Educational Attainment
                                          for 3 Cohorts

                                R g-ii             12 >12
Males
Cohort born in yew                    % in Grade Interval

1946-50                         6.6     12.5      45.6   35.3
  (40-44 yrS. ill 1 990)
1926-30                        17.4     21.2      42.3   19.1
  (40-44yrs.   in 1970)
1886-90                        72.5     10.7       8.3      8.6
  (40-44 yrs. in 1930)

                                Approx. Mean Years in Interval       Computed
                                                                       Mean
1946-50                         7.7     11.5      12.0   15.3         12.82
  (40-44 yrs. in 1990)
1926-30                         7.2     10,5      12.0   15.2         11.46
  (40-44 yrS. in 1970)
1886-90                         5.8      9.8      12.0   15.2           7.56
  (40-44 yrs. in 1 930)

Counterlactual:
                                                                         Mean      Mean Without
                                                                                    Increase to
                                                                                    8th Grade
111886-90 cohort had high school attainment of 1926-30 cohort            10.27          9.86
If 1886-90 cohort had high school attainment of 1946-50 cohort           11.36         10.47

Source: Percent completing grades br cohorts born 1926-30 and 1946-50 from Smith and Ward
(1984); approximate mean years in interval computed from distributions In Smith and Ward to be
consistent with the actual means and with data from the 1940 census. Computed means differ
from actual means in Smith and Ward by about 2%. Percent complebng grades and mean years
in interval for the cohort born 1886-90 from 1940 PUMS (entire sample). Smith and Ward's
percentile distribution br the 1886-90 cohort has too low a percentage 8th grade and too high
a percentage with 12 years of schooling compared with the 1940 census. Smith and Ward
average various census and CPS data, and thus their numbers for the early cohort reveal even
more 'creep' than in the 1940 census.

Notes: The figure ol 10.12 years for the 1886-90 cohort, for example, is computed by using the %
9-11th grade from the 1926-30 cohort, and that for % 12th grade (61.4%). The %> 12th grade
is held at its 1886-90 cohort level (8.6%) and the means for the 8th grade and> l2tfl grade are
also held at their 1886.90 levels. That is. the only factors that change are those having to do with
high school attendance and graduation -- the percentages In the 9-11 and 12 groups and mean
years for the 9-11 group. Increasing those in the 9-12 grades, of course, necessitates decreasing
the group in S 8 grade. Because 31.3% of the 1886-90 cohort had already. completed the 8th
grade, the increase in elementary grades that this entails increases years of schooling by only
0.4 12. Because those who completed grades 5-8 are moved up to high school, a mean for 58
grades of just 2.3 years. The corTesponding figure for the 1946-50 calculabon is 07 years. The
increase for the 1946-50 counterlactual among those in the elementary grades is 0.684 years.
These years are subtracted in the calculation of the countertactual mean without the increase in
years to the 6th grade.
                                              Table 2
                  High School Graduates Continuing to College and Other Institutions



                           0/ Continuing, among High School Graduate?
                           1901    1910 1914 1923 1933 1937
to college only

   total, public           31% 34%         350/0     31% 21% 24%
   males, public           40      45      45        37      23     26
   total, public &
   private                 33      35      35        32      23b    n.a.

to college &
other institutions'

   total, public           na.     49°/o   50% 44% 25% 29%
   males, public           na.     55      55        46     25      30
   total, public &
   private                 na,     49      50        45     25b     na.



• Percentage continuing is reported by the Commissioner of Education fran, the reports of school
principals. It is the percentage who intended to continue, probably in the immediate future. Some
did not eventually do so, whereas a far larger group went back to school at a later date having
never indicated an intent to continue their education.
  Private school graduaUon numbers are for 1932.
  Other institutions probably include normal, nursing, and library schools.



Notes: These figures probably do not include students in the preparatory departments of colleges
and universities and in normal schools.            Their inclusion would increase the continuation
percentages for earlier years.

Sources: Commissioner of Education, ReDort of the Commissioner of Education (various years);
Commissioner of Education, Biennial Survey of Education (various years).
                                            Table 3
                        Explaining Graduation Rates across States, 1930



Dependent variable: Total Graduation Rate in 1930 (mean — 0.322)


                                                    Coefficient      t-statistic        Mean

Q/ of labor force in manufacturing, 1930                1.757            2.41            0.255

Manufacturing wage, 1929/1000                           0.396            2.35         1190.8

% in manufacturing manufacturing wage                  -0.0145          -2.41           31.0

Agricultural income per agr. worker, 1920/1000          0.116           2.09           942.5

% foreign born, 1930                                   -0.141           -0.772           0.141

% urban, 1930                                           0.0450          0.404            0.460

% nonwhite, 1930                                       -0.376           -2.57            0087

Constant                                               -0.215           -1.13


corrected R' - 0.55
Number of observations - 48


Sources:
Graduation rate. 1930: Commissioner at Education, Canmissioner of Education, Biennial Survey
of Education. See text.
% of labor force in manufacturing, 1930: U.S. Population Census, 1930.
Manufacturing wages, 1929: Kuznets, et al. (1960), table A 3.5, p. 129.
Agricultural income, 1920: agricultural service income per worker from Kuznets, et S. (1960), table
A 4.3, p. 167.
% foreign born, % urban, % nonwhite: Historical Statistics (1975), series A195-206.
                                           Table 4
             Means and Coefficients of Variation of School Attendance by Region
                                 for Cities, 1920 and 1930


                                     Srhrxil Alterylarre nf ifi nnd 17 Year Olds

                                     Mean                  Coefficient of Variation

Region (# cthes)              1920            1930            1920             1930

New England (48              0378            0.539           0.323            0.222
Middle Atlantic (64)         0.334           0.546           0.282            0.213
East North Central (73)      0.405           0.675           0.263            0.171
West North Central (21)      0.452           0.640           0.173            0.120
Mountain (6)                 0.585           0,722           0.163            0.137
Pacific (18)                 0.574           0.847           0.113            0.085




Sources:
U.S. Federal Populaon Censuses, 1920 and 1930.
                                                      Table 5
                     Explaining Variation in School Attendance Across Cities, 1920 and 1930

Dependent variable; School attendance rate ol 16 and 17 year olds
                                    (1)             (2)                            (3)           (4)
                                   1920           1920                            1930          1930
Regional     Dummies
  New England                     -0.090          -0.097                         -0.242         -0.268
                                  (3.60)          (3.91)                         (7.87)        (9.04)
  Middle Atlantic                 -0.157          -0.147                         -0.232        .0.229
                                  (6.64)          (6.59)                         (7.93)        (8.29)
  East North Central              -0.120          -0.119                         -0.110        -0.094
                                  (5.30)          (5.56)                         (3.82)        (3.32)
  West North Central              -0.123          -0.119                         -0.192        -0.198
                                  (4.61)          (5.12)                         (5.68)        (6.30)
  Mountain                        -0.012          -0.010                         -0.091        -0.075
                                  (0.31)          (0.29)                         (1.78)        (1.70)
  Pacific (omitted)

Population Variables
 /o foreign born                  -0.155          -0.038                          0.027         0.252
                                  (3.30)          (0.83)                         (0.39)        (2.39)
 population density               -0.144          -0.281                         -0.234        -0.533
    + 100                         (2.05)          (3.45)                         (2.68)        (4.75)

Schooland City Variables
 property value + 10,000           0.401          0.178                           0.382          0.324
                                  (4.00)         (1.90)                          (3.51)         (2.89)
 school density                                  74.8                                          97.7
                                                 (2.43)                                        (2.92)
 vocational school                                                                            197.7
       density                                                                                 (222)

Labor Force Variables
 0/0 manulacturing                -0.490         -0.161 % manufacturing          -0.519         0.314
                                  (6.53)         (2.32)                          (5.00)        (2.65)
 0/ laborers, in mtg.                            -0.769 % transportation                        0.540
                                                 (5.08)                                        (3.25)
 0/ operatives, in mfg.                          -0.836 % trades                                1.34
                                                 (5.48)                                        (4.17)
 °/c   craft, in rnfg.                           -0.636 % white collar                          0.989
                                                 (4.22)                                        (4.35)
 % managers, in mfg. (omitted)                             % lower skilled
 among production workers (1920)                           (omitted)
   % in textiles                                 -0.206
                                                 (3.42)
       % in clothing                             -0.490
                                                 (3.26)
       % in chemical                             -1.08
                                                 (2.59)
       % in clay, glass                          -0.255
                                                 (1.36)
       % in metal                                -0.084
                                                 (1.56)
Constant                         0.593            1.25                              0.811            0.199
                               (192)             (9.03)                           (22.2)            (1.81)

Adjusted A2                      0.55             0,67                              0.51            0.58

Number of observations        218              215                               211              215



Notes: In all cases 0/0 is entered as a fraction. t-statislics are in parentheses. Ordinary least uares
estimation used.

% foreign born — % foreign born of males 20 years.
population density - total population in either 1920 or 1930/area of city for closest date available.
property value — estimated value of taxable property in the city.
school density — adjusted number of all high schools in 1923 or 1 933/area of city for closest date available.
The number of schools is weighted by the fraction of secondary students in them (e.g., junior high schools
receive less than a 1/3 weight, regular and senior high schools receive a weight of 1).
vocational school density - number of vocational schools/area of city.
% manufactunng — for columns (1) and (3), (number of production workers in manufacturing)/(tot&
population of city); for column (2), (number of workers in the manufacturing sector)/(total population of the
city); for column (4), (number of male workers in manufacturing sector)/(total number of male workers in
city).

Sources: City•level data set from the U.S. federal population and manufacturing censuses, Financial
Statistics of Cities, and the Biennial Report of the Commissioner of Education.
                                                   Table 6
                              Explaining the Change in Urban School Attendance,
                                    Convergence Equabons: 1920 to 1930


Dependent variable: Log(attendance rate of 16 and 17 year olds in 1930/same in 1920)

                                                 (1)            (2)                (3)


L.(attendance rate in 1920)                     -0.463         -0.394          -0.410
                                               (15.39)        (10.79)         (11.27)
Region Dummies

   New England                                  -0.227         -0.269             -0.187
                                                (6.26)         (7.01)             (3.79)
   Middle Atlantic                              -0.154         -0.127             -0.042
                                                (4.20)         (3.47)             (0.87)
   East North Central                           -0.034          0.007             -0.032
                                                (1.00)         (0.21)             (0.88)
  West Nocth Central                            -0.151         -0.097             -0.107
                                                (3.81)         (2.45)             (215)
   Mountain                                     -0.172         -0.170             -0.151
                                                (3.01)         (3.17)             (2.85)
   Pacific (omitted region)

Population density ÷ 100 in 1920                                                  -0.197
                                                                                  (1.98)
  Foreign born in 1920                                          0.472              0.474
                                                               (4.32)             (4.29)
% manufacturing workers in 1920                                 0.011              0.456
                                                               (0.09)             (2.86)
0/0 manufacturing workers New England                                             -0.607
                                                                                  (2.98)
% manufacturing workers x Middle Atlantic                                         -0.570
                                                                                  (2.83)
Among manufacturing workers in 1920
  % factory laborers (omitted)

   % semiskilled operatives                                     0.344              0.375
                                                               (3.15)             (3.48)
   % craft workers                                              0.273              0.313
                                                               (2.58)             (2,98)
   % managers supervisors                                       0.077              0.227
                                                               (0.35)             (1.05)

Constant                                          0.132        -0.134             -0.216
                                                 (3.98)        (1.52)             (2.47)

Adjusted R2                                      0.59           0.62               0.64

Number of observations                         229            222             222

Sources: City-level data set from the U.S. federal population and manufacturing censuses.
Notes: % foreign born - % foreign born of total population.
                                                               Table 7
                       Juvenile Workers in Manufacturing and Mechanical Trades for Selected Cities. 1900 and 1910



                   Fraction of all Employed Males in Manufacturing and Mechanical Trades

                          10-15 years             14-15 yrs.              All Ages
                     1900           1910           1910            1900              1910
                      (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)         (6)           (7)
City                                                                                            (1)1(4)       (2)1(5)
Boston                0.26         0.18            0.19           0.34               0.30        0.76          0.60
Buffalo               0.45         0.22            0.24           0.40               0.37        1.13          0.59
Chkago                0.36         0.23            0.23           0.37               0.39        0.97          0.66
Cincinnati            0.51         0.28            0.30           0.44               0.35        1.16          0.80
Cleveland             0.51         0.22            0.25           0.46               0.38        1.11          0.58
New York              0.33         020             0.20           0.38               0.37        0.87          0.54
Philadelphia          0.50          0.31           0.31           0.46               0.40        1.09          0.78
Pittsburgh            0.41          0.22           0.23           0.40               0.40        1.03          0.55
St. Louis             0.49          0.32           0.33           0.39               0.35        1.26          0.91




Source: 1900, 1910 federal population census.
                                               Table 8
           Role of Secondary Schooling in Income Convergence and Migration across States


A. Income Convergence

Dependent variable: Log(income per capita 1947/income per capita 1929)

                                  Coefficient     t-statistic

Log(inoome per capita 1929)          -0.505        -11.93

Graduation rate, 1930                 0.488          3.54

Constant                              3.80          15.14

Corrected A2 — 0.76
Number of observations — 49


B. Migration

Dependent variable: Net migration between 1930 and 1 940/Average population between 1920 and 1930

Graduation rate in 1930               1.36           267

Graduation rate in 1930 squared      -1.82           -2.34

Constant                             -0.208          -2.74

Corrected R2 0.15
Number of observations - 49


Sources:
Income per capita, 1947, 1929: state personal income from U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of
Economic Analysis (1984), table 2.
Graduabon rate: Commissioner of Education, Biennial Survey of Education. See text.
Net migration and average population: Lee, et at (1957), table P-i.
