                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             INTERSTATE CIGARETtE
                          BOOTLEGGING: EXTENT, REVENUE
                             LOSSES, AND EFFECI'S OF
                             FEDERAL INTERVENTION




                                     Jerry G. Thursby
                                     Marie C. Thursby




                                 Working Paper No. 4763




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1994



This paper is part of NEER's research program in International Trade and InvestmenL Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4763
                                                                                 June 1994

                              INTERSTATE CIGAREITE
                           BOOTLEGGING: EXTENT, REVENUE
                              LOSSES, AND EFFECTS OF
                              FEDERAL INTERVENTION


                                         ABSTRACT


       In this paper, we develop and estimate a model of commercial smuggling in which some,

but not all, finns smuggle a portion of the cigarettes they seu. The model is used to examine

the effects on interstate cigarette smuggling of the Contraband Cigarette Act and a change in the

federal excise tax. We fmd thai both policies have unintentional effects. While the Contraband

Cigarette Act was imposed to reduce interstate smuggling, we find it had the opposite effect. In

contrast, an increase in the federal tax is not intended to affect smuggling, but we fmd it

increases the portion of cigarette sales that is commercially smuggled.




Jeny 0. Thursby                                                   Marie C. Thursby
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
Krannert Building                                                 Krannert Building
Purdue University                                                 Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906                                          West Lafayette, IN 47906
                                                                  and NBER
I. Introduction

         Within the last year. substantial increases in cigarette taxes have been either proposed or

legislated at both the federal and state levels. The Clinton administration called for a 75 cenL per pack

increase in the federal tax, and a Congressional subcommittee recently proposed an increase of $1.01 per

pack. çvera1 states have already legislated increased cigarette taxes. Whether these increases are

intended to reduce smoking or raise revenue, their success will depend on the extent to which firms and

consumers respond by increasing their tax evasion efforts. It is not surprising, then, to find concerns in

the popular press over increased cigarette smuggling.'

         Not since the late 1970s has there been such concern over cigarette smuggling. In the early to

mid seventies, interstate cigarette smuggling was serious enough that several states appealed to the

federal government for assistance and the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (ACIR,

1977) recommended federal legislation prohibiting the interstate transportation of contraband cigarettes.

In response. Congress passed the Contraband Cigarette Act (CCA) of 1978 which prohibited single

shipments. sale, or purchase of more than 60.000 cigarettes not bearing the tax indicia of the state in

which they are found. It is commonly believed that smuggling declined significantly after this and that

the decline was due to the federal intervention:

         The Commission concludes that the incidence of cigarette smuggling has declined significantly
         since 1977. due in large part. to the passage of the Federal Cigarette Contraband Act in 1978.
         (ACIR 1985, p. 4).
Thus. until the recent movement to increase taxes. cigarette smuggling had ceased to be a major policy

issue.

         With existing models, however, it is difficult to assess the impact on interstate smuggling of

either the CCA or the proposed federal tax increase. In this paper. we develop and estimate a model of

commercial smuggling which allows us to examine both policy issues. Estimation of commercial

smuggling is important for the analysis of both policies, and it is a major difference between our study

tFor example, see The Wall Street low-nat, March 30 ("Tax cut spins Canada cigarette sales") and April 5, 1994
('Canada's Taxing Pols Outwitted by Underground Economy") and The Chicago Tribune. March 31. 1994 "Fewer
smokers or more bootleggers?". Groups expressing concern range from health advocates and government officials
to the Tobacco Institute, which has an incentive to discourage legislators from increasing taxes.
                                                      1




and others.   The bulk of the literature on smuggling focuses on casual smuggling by consumers who

cross state borders to take advantage of lower taxes in border states.2 It is unlikely that the CCA could

have affected this type of smuggling because it pertained to single loads in excess of 300 packs. This

most likely omits even the most avid smoker among consumers who smuggle. It is also unlikely that a

changejn the federal tax would affect consumer smuggling across state lines. An increase in the federal

tax might. affect consumer smuggling across national borders, but that is not our primary interest. Our

interest is interstate smuggling by firms. and any impact of the federal tax in our analysis occurs through

its effect on firm costs (and, therefore, equilibrium industry behavior)

        In Section [1 we deveLop a theoretical model in which firms smuggle itt order to evade excise

taxes in a high (ax state. Firms choose the quantity of cigarettes to sell in a given state and the portion of

sales on which to pay the state tax, takIng as given the behavior of rival firms, the manufacwrer's price.

and enforcement parameters. The equilibrium we examine is one in which some firms pay lax on all

sales while others smuggle a portion of their sales in order to evade the state tax. The portion of tax-

paid sales in the state is a function of the state tax, the cost associated with acquiring and camouflaging

smuggled cigarettes, expected penalties in the event of failure, as well as market parameters.

        hi Section III we derive an empirically estimable version of this function. In addition to the fac-

tors mentioned above, the estimation procedure involves estimating consumer demand. This allows us to

account for the types of smuggling done by consumers, namely casual smuggling across stale borders arid

smuggling from military bases and Indian reservations. The model is estimated using annual data from

1972-1990. This period contains both the enactment of the CCA in 1978 and an increase in the federal

excise tax in 1983, enabling us to examine effects of both policies. Sections IV-VI report those results.

as well as revenue losses associated with commercial smuggling.

        Contrary to the ACIR conclusion, we find Federal entry into contraband cigarette enforcement

had the opposite of the intended effect. According to our estimates, commercial smuggling increased

slightly in 1979 and fell in the early eighties, but it would have decreased in all years and the decrease

2See, for example. Balcagi and Levin (1986), Baltagi and (Joel (1987), Hamilton (1982),.Warner (1982), and
Manchester (1973) The ACIR (1985) study discusses commercial smuggling, but it does not distinguish between
commercial and casual smuggling in its estimation.
                                                        3



would have been even greater if the act had not been passed. While this may seem surprising, we argue

in Section IV that it can be explained in terms of a combination of factors related to the reaction of

enforcement agencies to passage of the law.3 Section V shows the results are robust to alternative non-

constant elasticity variants of the model. Section VI reports the other somewhat surprising result, that art

increase in the federal excise tax increases the portion of cigarettes smuggled. To understand the result,

recall that our model includes finns who smuggle a fraction of their sales and firms whose sales are

entirely legal. An increase in the federal tax increases costs for both types of firms, leading to a reduction

in their equilibrium sales. As shown in Section VI, an increase in the federal tax will be associated with

an   increase in the portion of cigarettes smuggled for a sufficient reduction in sales by nonsmuggling

firms. Section VII concludcs.

          As noted earlier, the literature on cigarette smuggling tends to focus on casual smuggling by

consumers. In contrast, the literature on smuggling in international trade is primarily devoted to models of

smuggling by firms. The model closest to ours is Thursby. Jensen, and Thursby's (TJT. 1991) model of

camouflaging, in which sonic. but not all, firms in a market pay tariffs on a portion of their imports in

order to camouflage smuggled imports. Although the focus of their theoretical work is imports, they

present empirical evidence on the relevance of the model to interstate cigarette smuggling in the United

States. We differ from TJT in two respects. In the theoretical analysis, we make assumptions on the tax

structure and eriforcenient that are more appropriate to the cigarette case. In addition, we derive an

empirically estimable smuggling function that allows for estimation of the extent of smuggling.



IL A Theoretical Model of Commercial Smuggling

          In this section. we present a model of cigarette distribution in which some. but not all, firms

smuggle in order to evade state excise taxes. We adopt 'firs assumptions on market structure and the

form of smuggling. but we differ in the treatment of taxes and penalties for tax evasion. Finns who

smuggle are able to evade taxes on only a portion of their sales because tax-paid sales are necessary to

3Warner (1982) noies that any decline in smuggling in the early eighties could have been due to the reduction in
real tax differences that occurred with increasing rates of inflation. However, as with the ACIR (1985) study,
Warner does not estimate the extent of commercial smuggling.
                                                          4



 camouflage &nuggled cigarettes. The market is quasi-competitive in that a finite number of firms compete
 as Coumot rivals, but as the number of firms increases, output and price approach the competitive

 outcome. Each firm makes its decisions taking as given its rivals' behavior, the manufacturer's price. tax

 structure, and government enforcement. K is in modeling the last two parameters that we deviate from

TJT. Their theoretical analysis focuses on smuggling when firms face ad valorem taxes and the only

penalty for smuggling is confiscation. These assumptions are inappropriate for our case since cigarette

taxes are per unit and penalties include fines andlor imprisonment in addition to confiscation.4

         Consider the decision problem of the ith cigarette distributor who purchases cigarettes either

front the manufacturer or from an out-of-state wholesaler for sale in state s. The state government levies

an excise tax ofT5 per unit sold. If the firm pays the tax on all units sold, its profits are



(1)      [P(Q) —w —ci —Tç—T5]q



where P(Q) is inverse demand facing firm i. Q is the quantity of cigarettes sold by all finns in s, w is the

manufacturer's price, I is the federal tax, c is cost associated with transportation and/or retailing, and q
is the quantity sold by firm i.

         Alternatively, the firm may try to avoid paying the tax on (1 —))q of its sales and report sales of

liqi, where y c 1 is the portion of sales on which it pays the state tax. In reality, this can occur in a
variety of ways, but a common one is for a firm to purchase (I —yj)q cigarettes from a wholesaler in a

low tax state,j, paying T per unit plus a premium to the wholesaler not to affix tax indicia to the ciga-

rettes (ACIR, l985), The smuggling firm then affixes counterfeit indicia for tax payment in S.




4Dara front the ACIR (1985) suggest that state penalties are relatively low. Fines appear more prevalent than
prison sentences, and stare fines appear lower than those for a federal conviction. Our results for 1979-1984 show
that the value of confiscations was less than one-tenth of one percent of estimated values for the amount
smuggled..
5Athough some cigarettes are hijacked. we do not model hijacking. Tax administrators we interviewed indicated
that they receive manufacturers' accounts of cigarettes sold to distributors, making it difficult to smuggle
cigarettes purchased from the manufacturer. The mechanism we model is harder to detect, and enforcement
evidence suggests it is a common method.
                                                          5




Enforcement efforts make this a risky activity. We incorporate this aspect of smuggling by introducing a

parameter, e. to denote the level of enforcemenL and we express p. the probability firm i success fi.illy

smuggles a unit, as a function of e. Iris also natural to assume this probability is a function of the

portion of its sales the firm attempts to smuggle. We assume pQ, e) is increasing and concave in •yj and
decreasing, and concave in e. in addition, p(, e) E (0. 1] for all yj. p(O, e) = 0 for all e. and

p(l. e) = p(t 0) = I. As noted earlier. finns caught smuggling are subject to fines, imprisonment, and

confiscation of cigarettes. We assume expectations are rational, so that (I — p(.)) is the true fraction of

finn i's sales that are detected and confiscated. Thus, expected profit for a firm who tries to evade taxes in

s are given by


(2)       Cit1   (P(Q) —T5flq1 +     (p(, e)P(Q) —Ti— E1ft1 — )qi       —
                                                                            [w+   c + TJq
where E = ea + F[ 1 — p(. e)J represents per unit excess smuggling cost The first term in E repre-

sents costs incurred by the firm whether or not it is successful in smuggling. The parameter a is in-

cluded to differentiate firms by their ability and cost of smuggling. One could think of ai representing

the premium paid to a wholesaler in a low tax stare. If the finn's management has established ties with

the wholcsaler,6 it may pay a lower premium than others. Managers may also differ in their ability and

for experience in camouflaging. The second component of E represents fines (or an imputed cost asso-

ciated with imprisonment) and is incurred only if the firm's smuggling efforts are unsuccessful. F is a

constant per unit, so that the expected fine is decreasing and concave in Yi

          Notice that (1) and (2) are equivalent when yj = I. In addition, our specification of (1) and (2)

implies that firms sell a homogeneous product. Even though cigarettes are differentiated, this specifica-

tion can be justified since firms carry many of the same brands. We abstract from issues related to prod-

uct differentiation prim arily because our data are for all cigarettes, which precludes any such analysis.

Aggregate data also preclude our distinguishing between wholesale and retail sates, hence our model will




6   It is reported in ACIR (1985) that some smuggling firms have purchased wholesale firms in low tax states so as
to lower their smuggling costs.
                                                           6



 abstract from whether the firm operates at the wholesale and/or retail levels. It should also be noted that

 (2) implies any confiscated cigarettes are resold by the government.

          Each firm is assumed to choose q and yj so as to maximize expected profit given by (2). Under

 the assumption of Coumot behavior, the first order conditions for an interior solution to the firm's pub-

1cm are:

(3)       &Crq/dq     = [P(Q) + '(Q)qJftj + (1 —)p(Ti• e)J

                                              —Lw +   c i- Tf+ 'flh + (I —tlCIj + Ei)] = 0

(4)       &Clti/?Ti     P(Q)[l +(l —)3p/&—p(.e)I +[T + E +(l —Ti)FJp/J— T5 =0
Equation (3) implies the firm should expand sales in state s until expected marginal revenue equals mar-

ginal cost, aiul given any nonnegative qj, equation (4) determines the optimal value of y. which we de- -

note by yj r f(q; e. 1's, I. F. at) where q = Iq q1. Under our assumptions, af1/aq = afaq3 c 0. for
all i, j = 1,... n5, ?f/ae> 0. af1/aT5 cO. af/aT > 0, dfj/OF > 0, and &fi/da > 0 whenever I > Ti > 0.

The equality of own and cross effects of sales foUows from the fact that rival sales affect the fraction of

legal sales only through the inverse demand term. P(Q). in (4). Under our assumption that the govern-
ment resells confiscated goods at the market price. Q is simply the sum of all sales in state s (legal or

not).7

         Firm i will smuggle some, but not all, of its sales in state s (1 > yj > 0) whenever



(5)       [P(OJ+Ffll +dp(0. e)/&-flJ>T5—T1—ea >0


This is because d ti/&Ti simplifies to T + ea— T5 when y = I. Tj + ea1 represents the expected mar-

ginal cost from switching a unit of sales from legal to illegal. When this is less than the marginal benefit

from the switch. 'F, it is opt.im al for the firm to attempt to smuggle some of its sales. At the other ex-
treme ( = 0). [P(OJ + F)[ 1 + dp(0. e)/dyj +
                                                  Ij + ea represents the firm's excess cost and expected loss
71I confiscated cigarettes are rEsold, ?(Q) represents inverse demand. but if ihey are destroyed. the firm's inverse
demand is a function of its rival's smuggling behavior and the probability of success. See TTF, p. 794 for a
discussion of how alternative assumptions on confiscation would affect the own and cross effects of sales.
                                                          7



(mm tines and confiscation. If this exceeds the marginal benefit, T5, the finn will pay taxes in state s on

some portion of its sales.

         To define the market equilibrhun. it is useful to restate the finn's problem as maximizing cx

pected profit subject to = 4(q). where expected profit is given by


(6)      fl = [P(Q) —T5]4(q)q +        fp(ti(°J e)P(OJ —'5— E](l — f(q))q       —
                                                                                    [w+ c   + T1Jq1.


The finn's sales are then determined by

(7)      [P(OJ + P'(OJq]f(q) + (I      —
                                           f(q))p(f(q). e)J
                                              = [w + c1 + Tf+ f(Q)Ts + (1 —1(q))(T +
where 4(u) is defined by (4). For interior solutions to (4), the fact that 3f/3q cO implies that expected

marginal and average cost are declining in qj. Thus, as in TJT, we assume fl1 is concave in q so that a

unique maximum exists. The market equilibrium is a Nash equilibrium vector of sales. (q1* q*)
such that fl1(q*) U(q. qj*) for all q1e [0. K] where K is a real number such that P(Q) = 0 forQ K>

Oaridforalli=I          N.

         Now suppose there are two types of finns, differentiated only by the excess smuggling cost pa-

rameter, a. Type 1 firms have a1, which is low enough that (5) holds, and type 2 finns have a2 which is

high enough that (5) does not hold. The payoff function for type I finns is (6) evaluated at = 4(q)

(0, 1) and the payoff function for type 2 finns is (6) evaluated at 4(q) E 1. Because finns are identical

except fora. we can express the equilibrium level of sales in states as Qi = Nlql*            + N2q2*. where
N1 and N, are the number or type I and 2 firms, respectively. Each type I finn will pay l' on a frac-
tion, y' = f(Q). of its sales,8 and q1* q* •j*, and Q' are implicitly defined by


(8) (P(Q) + P'(0Jq1][ .y + (1 — Yi)P( 'Yi) e)]

                                    =[w+c+Tf+'y1T5+(l—y1)(TJ+E1)],and

8We can express y1 in this way because of the equality of the own and cross effect of sales and the fact that type
two flrms are identical.
                                                        8




(9) (P(OJ+F(OJq2J           W+c+Tf+T5.


         In the next section, we develop an empirically estimable version of yU, but first it is useful to

note comparative static properties of the theoretical model. Since 7i =f(Q*; e, T. T. F, a1) where Q
=   q1* ÷ N2q2*. the comparative static results may differ in sign, as well as magnitude from those
on -fl stated earlier. For example, a change in T5 affects y' directly (see equation 4). but it will also
affectyj * Lhiough its effects on q 1 * and q* The direct effect is negative, but the sales effects are

ambiguous, so that we cannot sign the effect of a change in the T5 on the equilibrium fraction of state

tax-paid sales. An increase in T3 or any of the excess smuggling cost parameters (e, a1. or F) wiJl

increase sales of non-smuggling firms and the fraction of smugglers legal sales, but will decrease the

total sales of smugglers. Increases in the federal tax. manufacture?s price or transport cost act somewhat

differently because they affect per unit cost of legal and illegal sales, while the tax in state j or the en-

(orcement parameters only affcct the cost of smuggled cigarettes. In general. we cannot sign the effect of

an increase in the federal tax or manufacturers price, but in the special case of linear demand, either has

the intuitively expected effect of reducing both sales of non-smugglers and total sales of smuggling
finns.                                                                                  -




IlL An Empirical Model of Commercial Smuggling
         In this Section we develop an empirically estimable ftmction for tax paid sales in a state as a frac-

lion of total sales (legal and illegal) in the state. Although this function is similar 1071*. it takes into ac-

count issues of estimation and data availability not considered in our theoretical analysis. In Section A

we derive an estimating equation that allows us to account for the fact that market data reflect smuggling

by consumers as well as the commercial smuggling of interest to us. We also explain the variables used

to reflect taxes and enforcement parameters. Section B is devoted to a discussion of data and the estima-

tion procedure.
                                                          9



A. Estimating Equation

            We address three types of cigarette smuggling.9 First, "casual" smuggling is done by consumers

in high tax states who cross state lines to purchase cigarettes in low tax states. The second type is the

sale of tax free cigarettes on American Indian reservations and military installations to non-Indians and

non-military personnel. This smuggling, like the first, is thought to be primarily smuggling by con-
su.rners.

            Organized or commercial smuggling by firms is the third type, and the one targeted by the CCA.

This type of smuggling often involves firms purchasing tax-paid cigarettes in low tax states and is the

type modeled in Section II. Note that with this type of smuggling, cigarettes are legal in the state where

they are purchased because the low tax state's excise tax is paid. However, the wholesaler in the low tax

state is paid not to affix the local tax indica. The primary sources for such cigarettes are the tobacco

producing (and lowest tax) states North Carolina and, to a lesser extent. Kentucky and Virginia. Table 1

presents the per capita tax paid cigarette sales is these three out-smuggling states as well as the U.S. aver-

age for selected years. Smuggling is not thought to have been a problem in 1965 when the largest differ-

ence in taxes (excluding local taxes) with other states was $.46 (in 1990 prices) and few states had differ-

ences larger than S.30. Per capita sales in KY and VAtO for 1965 are similar to the U.S. average. By

1970 many states had tax differences close to $.40 and per capita tax paid cigarette sales in the three out-

smuggling states had risen well above the U.S. average. The primary reason for this rise is thought to be

the increasing tax differentials.

            We start with a standard cigarette demand function which treats cigarettes in neighboring states

as a substitute for "local" cigarettes, arid which accounts for the presence of non-tax paid sales on military

bases and Indian reservations. Our initial demand equation is




   Mail-order sales of cigarettes are an additional source. Such smuggling is thought to be of minor importance
(ACW 1977; Maltz. Edelhurtz. and Chamberlain (1976) report mail-order smuggling to be on the decline) since
mail fraud statutes apply 10 the activity and because of the difficulty in smuggling large quantities of cigarettes
while, at the same time, avoiding detection by postal authorities.
LU
   Data on NC are unavailable as only data on tax paid sales are gathered and NC did not tax cigarettes in 1965.
                                                        10



(10)    InQst 8s + l3ilP1'5t + liiLNC + 3t + 4ln(AVRP5tiRP5t) + I35InCAN5t
                + MLLITARYSX1I1TA;L + ftjINDIAN5XthTAX5 + tig1t1Qst j +
                    +     + IslnQst.i +£st


The subscripts t= 1     lands = I         N refer to the year and state. respectively, of the observation.

Variables are defined as follows:

                Q       = per capita cigarette demand.

                RF        retail price.
                iNC       state per capita income.
                        = time trend

                CAN = ratio of avenge tax in adjacent Canadian provinces to tax in state s if

                state s is adjacent to any Canadian provinces, otherwise CAN=l -

                MILITARY = percent military in state s.
                INDIAN = percent American Indian in state s.

                TAX       state cigarette excise tax.
                AVRP = the average retail price of cigarettes in adjacent stares,

                £       = random error assumed to be distributed 14(0, a.             -


The parameters 5 allow for a different constant term for each state. A fixed effects model is estimated in

order to adjust for any demographic differences across states that might lead to different cigarette de

mand; we assume that demographic changes over our sample period were unimportant with respect to

cigarette demand. We allow for heteroscedasticity by assuming a different disturbance variance for each

state. Below we relax the constant elasticity assumption with respect to price and income.

        A time trend is included to account for (apparent) declines in cigarette smoking due to advertised

adverse health effects; the sign of its coefficient. Il3 is expected to be negative. AVRP5t and CAN5t are

measures of the incentive for consumer to cross borders to purchase cigarettes. States with cigarette

prices generally lower than that of their neighbors will observe higher demand (ceterisparibus) for ciga-

relies due to out-smuggling of cigarettes by consumers from neighboring states; the opposite occurs irt
                                                      II


states with prices generally higher than their neighbors.1' We do not have available information. on av-

erage retail prices in Canada hence we use tax rates. AVRP (CAN) are introduced In ratio with RP (local

state tax rate) simply for ease of presentation: by doing so we can interpret Pi as the price elasticity of

demand net of any cross -bordering smuggling by consumers.12 Canada and neighboring states enter

separately because of the added difficulty in crossing the US/Canadian border. Data on Mexico arc un-

available, and, in addition, we can find no mention of smuggling across the USfMexican border as a

problem.

        MILITARY5tXInTAX5t arid INDIAN5tXIflTAX5t are included since sales of cigarettes on Indian

reservaLions and military bases are free of state taxes. and military bases and indian reservations have

often been mentioned as a source for smuggled cigarettes. Tight control of sales on military bases (e.g..

sates only to military personnel or dependents and Limits on the number of canons sold to a consumer)

would suggest that any smuggling off military bases would be casual. It is not clear whether smuggling

off Indian reservations is done solely or primarily by consumers. We assume that casual smuggling is

the primary form of this smuggling)3 Large indian and/or military populations should lead to decreased

demand for cigarettes sold through tax paid outlets, but total demand will be higher since cigarette prices

are tower ott bases and reservations and this may spill over into tax paid cigarette sales (our observed

quantity). In addition, it is well known that cigarette smoking is more prevalent among the military than

among civilians. For these reasons we are unable to hypothesize signs on 136 and 13j.




 11 We also considered the ratio of taxes in neighboring states as well as retail prices in neighbonng states

because smuggling by consumers is confined primarily to what might be loosely temied weconomicN regions
where factor costs are similar. In the area where a casual smuggler operates one could argue Iliac price
differentials are due primarily to tax differences. That is. a price difference that leads to casual snuggling is a
difference due primarily to lax differences rather than to price differences stemming from, say, differing labor
costs. Results using the two measures are very similar so we only repon the results based on prices (which is the
measure typically used by other researchers).
12
    Only the standard error of the estimate of {3 is affected by using ratios.
    This assumption should have little, if any, effect on our estimates of the extent ot' organized smuggling since
our measure of the incentive for organized smuggling is the difference in a states excise tax with the excise tax in
North Carolina which remained at two cents throughout our sample period. if we were to introduce separately the
incentive for firms to smuggle off Indian reservations we would use the local state tax rate which is almost
perfectly collinear with the tax difference with North Carolina.
                                                       12



         Data available on cigarette sales are art "tax-paid" or "legal" sates: we only observe the portion

of the ith states cigarette demand for which the ith state's taxes are paid In the absence of commercial

smuggling we would observe Q (which. of course. reflects the demand or supply of cigarettes from

neighboring states). In the presence of commercial smuggling we observe the portion of sales that are

legal. Define y, 0 <y 1, to be the fraction of demand in the sth state in year t which is not supplied

or "bootlegged" into the state by commercial smugglers. In equilibrium Yst equals tax-paid sales as a

fraction of total sales in the stateJ4 That is, we observe 4t =     iQt rather than Q51 (or Yst)' where L is
the per capita quantity of legal sales in state a in year t. Substituting the accounting identity Q a t-st +

S5 into the above, where S5 is the level of commercial smuggling in state s at time t, we solve for the
level of organized smuggling activity as



(11)             S5 L5t(l Yst)'Yst'


Yst is unobserved, but it is estimable, its theoretical analog is a function of the level of enforcement as

well as the tax differential with the low-tax states. The functional form chosen is

                 Yst = expI Ô1TAXD1F5t + 5,TAXD1F + 53ENFORCE51

                                  + ö4RPsixTAXDWst + w5txTAXDIF5)
where

        TAXDIF = the difference in the tax rate in state s and the tax in the low tax

                 state where purchases are made by organized smugglers.
        ENFORCE = the level of enforcement (representing E1 in the theoretical model),

and w5 is a random error assumed to be distributed N(0, a,).

        Enforcement level is unobserved, but it is a function of a set of observable variables. We con-

sider this below, though we note for now the reasonable assumption that ENFORCE is equal to zero if



                                                                                                           *
  In the event that all firms smuggle a portion of their sales, '1st =7j*, Otherwise, yst = lvi *N 1 q l       +
N2q2 J/[N1ql +N2q2].
                                                       13



TAXDIF = 0. A quadratic in TAXDIF is used to account for possible nonlinearity in the effects of tax

differences,

        We choose an exponential form for Yst as well as interact the random error and RP with TAXDTF

because this implies, as it should,    =   1 (that is. no commercial smuggling) if the lax difference with the

low tax state. and hence the incentive to smuggle (and to enforce against smuggling), is zero. Recall that

in the theoretical model Ti * is a function of the equilibrium aggregate sales in the state        Note, how-

ever. in equation (4) the effect is shown to be through the inverse demand equation. Hence we use RP5

in place of Q5. Our analysis does not imply a sign on the coefficient of RP. Also recall that the direct

effect of an increase in TAXDIF on 71 * is negative, but that an increase in TAXDIF also changes total

sales of smugglers and non-smugglers, These latter effects can outweigh the direct effect so that the net

effect is positive. It is nonetheless our expectation that increases in TAXDIF reduce Tst (t <0).

        Our measure of the tax differential, TAXDIF5t, is the difference between the tax rate in the sth

state at time t and the tax in North Carolina at time t. As noted above, many of the cigarettes smuggled

by firms are "legal" at the point of origin: that is, smuggling firms pay the state excise tax in North

Carolina, Kentucky, or Virginia. The nominal taxes in these three states were unchanged during (he pe-

dod of our observations at 2, 3, and 2.5 cents. respectively. Since North Carolina is considered to be the

primary source of smuggled cigarettes we measure the incentive for firms to smuggle using the difference

in the local state excise (axes and the excise tax in North Carolina. Results change very little if we use

the slate excise tax rate rather than the tax differential given a constant nominal North Carolina tax rate.

        In the theoretical model the effect of enforcement is unambiguous. so that we expect ö3 > 0. As

the level of enforcement rises the proportion of legal sales to quantity demanded. 1st. should increase.

However, enforcement is itself a function of the Lax differential: an increase in the tax differential in-

creases the incentive for states to engage in enforcement activities since the returns to enforcement activ-

ity are potentially greater. There is little direct evidence available on the level of anti-smuggling enforce-

ment Other than the tax differential, our evidence includes the date of passage of the Contraband

Cigarette Act, the fact that some states were members of joint enforcement operations, some qualitative

information on the severity of penalties for smuggling, and the rebate offered to wholesalers for each le-
                                                        14




gal sale.15 The joint enforcement groups were the Interstate Revenue Research Center (IRRC). with

member states MI, MN. IN. IL, OH. FL. and MS. and the Eastern Seaboard Interstate Cigarette Tax En-

forcement Group (ESICTEG). with member states CN. DE. MD, MA. NJ. NY. and PA. The information

on the severity of smuggling penalties is from ACIR (1977) where states are categorized as having light,

moderate, or severe criminal penalties for smuggling. The states in the latter two categories are CA. CIt

MI. NE. NY. Old, and Th. Benjamin (1992) aregues that the payment of a discount or rebate to

wholesalers for each legal sale is a form of enforcement Ostensibly. the discount is to cover the cost of

affixing the tax indica. but it is widely agreed that the rate is substantially in excess of the cost of stamp-

ing the cigarettes and is therefore a disincentive for smuggling.

         We account for the level of enforcement using the function

(12)             ENFORCESt = x1TAXDIF5t + cx2TAXDlF + tx3MEMB5XTAXDIF5t

                                   + ci4FELONY5XTAXDIF51 + ct5DISC5tXTAXDJF5t
                                   + CCAt + v5tXTAXDIF5t

where

        MEMB = 1 if the state is a member of 1RRC orESICFEG, 0 otherwise.16

        FELONY = 1 it the state imposes a moderate or severe penalty for cigarette

                 smuggling. 0 otherwise.                                                   -


        DISC      the discount rate paid to cigarette wholesalers.
                                                                 .3
        v is a random error assumed to be distributed N(0. a;).

and CCAt captures the effects of the Contraband Cigarette Act in one of two ways:

        CCAt = CoD79_90t>CTAXDIF5t + a7D79_901xTAXDIFjwhere D79_90 = 1 if the year

                 is a year after 1978 (i.e.. a year in which the Contraband Cigarette Act was in

                 effect), 0 otherwise, or



15 Pan of the reason it is hard to measure accurately enforcement activities by state is that enforcement is
undertaken by both state law enforcement and tax agencies. The relative importance of these agencies in
enforcement activities varies from state to state (ACIR. 1977). See also the discussion in MaUi., Edeihurta, and
Chamberlain (1976, especially pages 23-24).
16
   We experimented with separate dummies for membership in IRRC and ES1CEG but results were poot
                                                       15




        CCA1 =        CZJ+SDJtXTAXDIF51
                                            where      = 1 if the year is the Jth year in which the
                 Contraband Cigarette Act was in effect. 0 otherwise. That is.          = 1 if the year

                 is 1979. 0 otherwise, D2t = 1 if the year is 1980, 0 otherwise, etc.

The first specification of the period in which the Contraband Cigarette Act was in effect imposes a quad-

ratic structure on the time effects of the Act, while the second specification allows the effect to "freely"

vary over the twelve year period. We shall refer to the first (second) model as the CCA-1 (CCA-2)

model. If correct, the first specification is more efficient than the second; however, evidence presented in

ACW (1985) and given in private discussion to the authors suggests that enforcement activity varied

substantially during the SO's. We shall return to this below.

        In (12) interaction with TAXDIF is used so that the level of enforcement is zero if there is no in.

ccntive for firms to smuggle (TAXDIF = 0). It is expected that membership in IRRC or ESICTEG will

increase the level of enforcement (a3> 0) and that more severe penalties for smuggling will also have a

positive effect on enforcement (c4 > 0). The effect of the passage of the Contraband Cigarette Act is

generally considered to be an increase in thelevel of enforcement.

        The above implies

(13)                = exp( (81+83czi)TAXDlF5 + (ö2+83cc2)TAXDW

                         + ö3a3MEMBXTAXDlF5t + 53Q4FELONY5XTAXDIF5t

                         + S3U5DISC5tXTAXD1F51 ÷ S3CCAt +

                         + wstxTAXDIFst + &3v5txTAXDIF5t I

                           exp(Zst4   + u5tXTAXDIF5t)



where ust = wst + ö3vst is distributed N(0, a) and o =          -+- öa. Substituting Qt = ktnt and

Qst-i = '—st-ltYst-l into (10) and taking logs gives


(14)             htL5 =        + XstP +   P8thIstt +        - 38Zt4Q + vst
                               +       + I8uItst1 + (Zst 81st1$ +
                                                       16




where            st = st ÷ U51XTAXDIF5t — 13sust.iXTAXDIFstz.


Note the non-linear restrictions among the cccl ficienis of (14). An estImate of from estimation 01(14),

used in (13) and (11), provides estimates of the extent of commercial smuggling in each state.

         Before proceeding to estimation, severaL points need to be made. FUst, the coefficients of(12).

the enforcement equation, are not identified since they are each multiplied by 53. the coefficient of en-

forcement in the equation fory. which is presumed positive. Second. the coefficient of TAXDWSL the

sum of a (presumed) positive, unidentified coefficient (si)' and the product of two positive, unidentified

coefficients (53 and at), hence TAXDIF5t's coefficient cannot be signed a priori. Likewise. the coeffi-

cient of TAXDIF5 is a combination of unidentified coefficients and cannot be signed. Finally, the vail-

ances a,,, and 0v are not identified.



B. Data and Method of Estimation

        We estimate (14) using annual data from 1972 - 1990 for 39 states plus the District of Columbia.

Our data exclude observations on states with local government excise taxes (AL, IL MO, Ni. NY, and

TN) since the information needed to calculate art effective In nit is unavailable (see also lIT). HI and

AK are excluded since smuggling of cigarettes for these states may be of a distinctly different character-

istic given the necessity of ocean travel or travel through Canada when hauling cbntraband cigarettes.

Observations on NC. KY, arid VA are exduded since they reportedly sources of commercially smuggled

cigarettes. The data are a total of 760 observations (T=19 and N=4CD. In Table 2 are the mean values of

per capita in paid cigarette sales, price, and state tax levels (both in 1990 prices) for the 40 states in our

sample for each of the 19 years.

        It is well known that the usual fixed effects (within) estimator (that is, ordinary least squares. In-

strumental variables, generalized least squares. etc., estimators ot(14) after diffeztncing the data from its

"time" means to remove individual effects 5) is inconsistent for fixed T (number of time periods) when

the regressors are not all strictly exogenous. Strict exogenelty fails here because of the presence of the

lagged dependent variable on the right hand side of (14). Hence the preferred approach Is to estimate
                                                      17




(14) after quasi-differencing the data to remove individual effects (see Holtz-Eakln. Newey, and Rosen

(L983) and Wooldridge(1991)). This view presumes large N and small (and fixed)T. In the present

context. N is fixed (and fairly small) while I is not (at least conceptually) fixed though It Is small. Hence

any appeal to consistericyfor eli/icr estimator must reside on the notion that I can potentially increase

without limit; thus neither the usual estimator orestimation afterquasidiffeziencing would appear to

dominate. We stick with the usual fixed effects estimator.

              and Q! (and hence L51) are simultaneously decennined so we use Instrumental variables. In
addition, we allow the possibility that 1st and ENFORCE51 are stochastic by including the disturbances

w5 and 'st- lf 1st and/or ENFORCE5t are indeed stochastic this implies that the disturbances In (14) are

the sum of a heteroscedastic disturbance, Eg. and a heteroscedastic MA(l) process, u51XTAXDIF5t

    Psttst. 1XTAXDIF5t..(. The implied disturbance variance and first oaicr autocovariance in (14) are
—




(15)
                      ')
                  E(vjj) =     a             2
                                   ÷ (TAXDIF51 *
                                                  2      ')       '
                                                 I3TAXDIFjj..1)o
and
                                                 I
(15)              E(v5t V5t.l) = 4I8aTAXDIFjj1.



All other elements of the covariance matrix are zero. Since the errors are correlated through time Lj

and RP5i are not independent of the disturbance. To obtain consistent estimates of the parameters of

(14) requires, in addition to an instrument for RP5t, instruments for L.5tj and 11stj. However, if          =0

the problem with the endogeneity of L1 and RP51.j disappears.

          We begin estimation by testing for the presence of heteroscedasticity in (1) the UsEdue to hetero-

scedasticity in the fraction of legal sales equation (13), and in (ii) the demand equation (10). We use a

likelihood ratio test comparing the alternative model


                  A        2          2
(17)              Vst=05+ Wlta+e5t


against the null model
                                                          18




(18)              v=a +e51

where W51 =
                           '   A             2                 A                          A
               crxw; + I38TAXDIF5.i))7 and the vst are the residuals and ig Is the estimate of
from instrumental variables estimation of (14) using instrumenis for RP51. RPst .             nd Lst 1'
         We test for heteroscedasticity using both definitions of CCA1 (models CCA- 1 and CCA-2). and

we estimate (14) both imposing and not imposing the non-linear restrictions among the coefficients. This

gives a total of four tests. As instruments for both retail price and lagged legal sales we use their pre-

dictS value from regressions on the other right hand side variables in (14) as well as lagged income and

two period lags of income and TAXDW: the current, one-period lagged. and two-period lagged state

cigarette tax rate: the current, one-period lagged. and two-period lagged manufacturer's price to wholesal-

ers plus the federal excise tax rate: a dummy variable equal to one for the years when the federal excise

tax was 5.16 and 0 for those years when it was 5.08: and an index of the wage rates of grocery store

workers as well as the one and two-period lags of the index. The results of the four tests is a rejection of

the null model (18) at any reasonable significance level: the largest p-value is 0.0001.

         We then tested model (17) venus a model without fixed effects (that Is, model (17) venus the
            A)      2           1
null model vjj = a      + W5a + est), again using a likelihood ratio test. The null model is again rejected
(the largest p-value is .00007) implying heteroscedasticity in the demand equation (10). FinaUy. we
                                  A')    ')
tested (17) venus the null model vu =       + est (that is. fixed effects only). We use Lagrange muttiplier

(LM) tests which are simply the tests for significance of the coefficient of W in (17). 18 The results are

mixed. The p-values for Model CCA- t are both larger than 0.32 while the p-values for CCA-2 are 0.062

and 0.161. Since results are mixed, we estimate the model without the restriction



t7This lest Is similar to the Lagrange multiplier tests suggested by Breusch and Pagan (1979) and While (1980).
See also the discussion in Godfrey (1988, pp. 188-190) and references therein regarding application of

 '
heteroscedasticity tests in models with endogenous regressors.
    Note that the null value (a2 0) lies on the boundary of the parameter space: however, in this case. the LM
statistic is still valid in large samples (Breusch arid Pagan 1979).
19 We
         also obtained estimates after imposing the restriction that the variance of ust is zero. Not surprisingly, it
makes almost no difference in the results for Model CCA-l.
                                                       19




        The estimation method is generalized non-linear 2SLS (see. e.g.. Ainenilya, 1985, pp. 240-24!).



IV. The Level of Smuggling and Enforcement Results
A. Parwnerer Estimates

        Estimates of model (14), after imposing the non-linear restrictions among the coefficients, are

found in Table 3. The naming of wad ables is done in an obvious shorthand. Only CAN is Insignificant

in both models. Of the remaining coefficients, only INDIAN has a sign that is counter to our intuition.

Price and income elasticity magnitudes are appealing given the addictive nature of smoking. They tend

to be tower than estimates reported elsewhere. Lcwiu and Coate (1982) and Wasserman. ci. a!. (1990)

review a number of prior studies and report that estimated price elasticities are in the range -.23 to -1.30.

        Turning to the variables associated with lst' we first consider the null hypothesis that all coeffi-
cients of the variables in   are jointly zero; that Is. we test whether = I Vs and I. The p-values for
each of the tests are very close to zero, hence we reject the hypothesis that all are Jointly equal to zero.

The coefficients of TAXDIF and TAXSQ are jointly significantly different from zero at standard signifi-

cance levels for CCA- I and are jointly significantly different from zero at the 11% level 1t CCA-2. Re-

call, however, that their coefficients are combinations of unidentifiable parameters and thelrslgns are In-

determinant, hence, significance or a lack of significance is a moot point. MEMB,FELONY, DISC and

RI' are significant only in Model CCA-2. In that model, the coefficient on membership in anti-smug-

gling organizations has. as expected. a positive effect on the proportion of legal sales, but the coefficients

of FELONY and DISC have signs counter to our expectations.

        Recall the quote given earlier attributing reductions in smuggling In the early 80's to passage of

the Contraband Cigareue Act. Our estimates imply the contrary. Holding other factors constant, passage
of the act Is assoc ated with a fall in the proportion of legal sales. Smuggling activity did appear to fall

during the early SO's (see below), but not in response to passage of the Act. In Model CCA- 1. the coeffi-

cient of the linear term (CCAxTAX) associated with the years 1979-92 Is different from zero at standard

significance levels, and the coefficient associated with the quadratic term Is close to being significant at

the 10% level (they are also jointly different from zero with a p-value very close to zero). The linear co-
                                                     20



efficient Is negative and the quadratic coefficient is positive. The overall effect on the proportion of legal

sales is negative: evaluated at mean regressor values for the period 1979-1990 (the non-zero values for

the CCA term) the quadratic form is negative. Using a different dummy variable (interacted with

TAXDIF) for each year the Act is in effect (CCA-2) shows a negative effect on y for all years except for

1985 (for which the effect is positive but insignificant). For all other years except 1986-87. the estimated

coefficients are significant at the 10% leveL A joint test of whether all the coefficients of these variables

are zero has a p-value close to zero.

        What could account for this apparent, and counter-Intuitive, effect of the passage of the Contra-

band Cigarette Act? if we accept the reasonable position that an increase in enforcement Increases the

proportion of legal sales, then we are left with the result that passage of the Act lowered enforcement.

Several hypotheses are possible. but consider the following points. First, broadly speaking, enforcement

activities arc undertaken by two groups: law enforcement agencies and tax administrators. Testimony

before the ACIR clearly indicated the Importance of both groups for effective enforcement. The federal

agency responsible for implementation of the Act, the Bureau of Alcohol. Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF).

cannot supply the second type of enforcement since it is a law enforcement agency. Its personnel are not

tax auditors, and they are allowed to examine records of suspected smugglers only by court order.

Second. the ACIR (1985) expressed concerns ".. that some states are using federal actions to justify

reducing their rote in enforcing cigarette tax laws." The ACIR concluded that state enforcement efforts

were reduced after the CCA because both the presence of the federal government in enforcement and the

perception that smuggling was lower reduced the returns to state enforcement efforts. Think beginning

in 1980, the federal government began attempts to reduce or etiminate funds appropriated for enforce-

ment of the Contraband Cigarette Act (see ACIR, 1985). We vere told by state tax administrators that

the ATF currently does not allocate any efforts to*ard enforcement. The smuggling problem is believed

to have disappeared and the states have been told that the AW will reinstate enforcement efforts if the

states feel smuggling has agate become a problem. Finally, these administrators claim that. by and large,
cigarette smuggling Is not delectable unless an agency Is actively looking for smuggling -
                                                      21



        Based on the above we hypothesize the following as an explanation of the adverse effect of

passage of the Contraband Cigarette Act. Many states reduced enforcement activity because of the pres-

ence of federal enforcement activities. The ATF, being only a law enforcement agency, and not an

agency of tax auditors, is less effective per dollar spent on enforcement than are the states which have

both law enforcement and tax auditing capabilities. Beginning before passage of the Act, smuggling

activity had been declining and continued to dedine after a jump in 1979 (we turn to this below) leaving

the impression that the ATF was indeed quite effective. With the Impression that smuggling was

disappearing, the states did not search for smugglers, and hence were not in a position to determine the

adverse effects of the AcL



B. Level of Smuggling and Revenue Effects

        Estimates of the parameters of the      function permit estimation of the level of commercial

smuggling. Estimates are presented in Table 4 under two scenarios. In the first we estimate commercial

smuggling implied by Models CCA-l and CCA-2 (the "With CCA" columns of Table 4). We then it-
estimate smuggling assuming that the Contraband Cigazene Act was never passed. In the latter experi'

ment we set to zero all variables associated with the Act for aD years rather than just the years prior to

1979 (the "Without CCA" columns of Table 4); that is, CCA1 = 0 V t, The columns titled "%Smug" In

Table 4 give the average values of the percent of total sales (IOOx(l -1st)) commercIally smuggled Into

the 40 states in our sample for each of the 19 years. Presented also are the estimated standard errors for

these averages (columns "SE"). The standard errors are based upon the standard errors for the estimated

 parameters. Asymptotic statistical theoiy suggests normality of the estimated ys. Also presented art

the average per capita packs of cigarettes smuggled in the 40 stases (columns Smug). For sonic states

and time periods the value of i' is greater than one implying no smuggling. The columns "%Smug" are

based on the estimated value of y regardless of whether or not it is above or below one: this allows for a

correct estimated variance. However, the columns "Smug" are calculated by setting to one any value oty

in excess of one. This change is relevant for Model CCA-2 for which about 20% of the estimated ys are

greaterthan one.
                                                      22




         Smuggling activity was generally declining from 1972until 1979 when it takes a jump before

 continuing its downward trend before turning up in the late 80's. In the absence of the Contraband Ciga-

 rent Act there would not have been a jump in 1979. Model CCA-l (Model CCA-2) implies that smug-

 gling was higher in 1979 by about two (one) packs of cigarettes per capita due to changes following pas-

sage of the Act. Note in Model CCA-2 that estimates of the percent smuggled are not significantly dif-

ferent from zero in years 1985 and 1986.

         In Table 5 are presented revenues as well as revenue losses for the 19 years in our sample. Here

again we set to one any value of yin excess of one. "Revenue Received" is the total revenue received by'

the states in our sample. "Revenue Lost" is the amount that would have been received in the absence of

organized smuggling. "Ratio" is the ratio of Revenue Lost to the sum of Revenue Lost and Revenue Re-

ceived. We also compute the values in the absence of the Contraband Cigarette AcL The Implied

aggregate revenue losses for the period 1979 - 1990 due to reduced enforcement after passage of the Act

is 5828 million and $1,103 million for Models CCA-l and CCA-2.

         Are the smuggling numbers reported in Tables 4 and 5 reasonable? In the 1985 ACIR report it is

claimed that cigarette tax evasion had declined 45% between 1975 and 1985. Our estimates of the de-

cline in smuggling based on Models CCA-1 and CCA-2 (using columns Smug) are 28% and 49.%, re-

spectively. The number reported by the ACifi includes all foams of smuggling for all stales while ours is

an estimate of the decline in organized smuggling for the 40 states in our sample. On the revenue side,

the 1977 ACIR report claims a loss in 1976 of 5900 million (using in 1990 dollars) in tax revenues from

all forms of cigarette smuggling. Their figure includes gains to those states that attract consumers from

neighboring states. Our estimate of the loss from organized smuggling is 5635 million and $278 million

for Models CCA- I and CCA-2. respectively. If all contiguous states except KY, NC, and VA are in-

cluded, our estimates of the losses are $865 million and 5313 million for Models CCA-l and CCA-2. re-

spectively. These last figures, of course, do not include losses on local cigarette taxes.
                                                       23




V. Nonconstant Elasticity Models

         Wasserman, a. at, report evidence suggesting non-constant price and income elasticities of de-

mand for cigarettes. Their regressions use not only income and the log of puce, but also those variables

interacted with a time trend.2° We alter our empirical models by introducing the interaction of the time

trend with the logs of price and income. We refer to these new models as CCA-lt and CCA-2t. The

regression results are in Table 6. Wasserman, ci. at. found that the estimated income elasticity of de-

mand went from positive and significantly different from zero in 1970 to negative and Insignificant in

1988. They further report that consumers became more sensitive to prtce as time passed. Both Models

CCA-lt and CCA-2t imply a falling income elasticity of demand. However, the evidence in the two

models concerning the price elasticity of demand is contradictory. Table 7 gives the elasticity by year

and model along with the standard error (or the elasticity (columns "SE"). In every case the puce and in-

come elasticities of demand are significantly different for zero at commonly used significance levels.

        Note that the coefficients of TREND in both CCA-lt and CCA-2t are positive (though only mar-

ginally significant in CCA- it). This implies that, holding constant other factors that influence cigarette

consumption and allowing for nonconstant price and income elasticities, cigarette consumption has been

increasing over time. This effect is counter to commonly held beliefs about changing cigarette habits.

        Tables 8 and 9 report the smuggling and revenue effects of smuggling for the models with

trending elasticities. The evidence on smuggling and us revenue effects are very similar to that observed

with the earlier models. In particular. there is a jump in smuggling associated with the passage of the

Contraband Cigarette Act.



VI. Federal Excise Taxes and Smuggling

        It has been proposed by the Clinton administration (and others) that the federal excise tax on

cigarettes be raised from the current 24 cents per pack to anywhere from 50cents to $2. The purpose is

not only to raise federal revenues but also to discourage cigarette smoking.



20Note, however, that Laughunn and Lyon (1971) report no such interaction effects.
                                                      24



        What effect might these proposed increases have on commercial smuggling? In the development

of the theoretical model we showed that the federal tax affects sm.uggling only indirectly through its

effects on equilibrium sales. With the exception of linear demand, an increase in the federal tax has an

ambiguous effect on the level of organized smuggling. In our empirical model this tax is embedded

(enters) in the retail price term which appears both in the demand equation (10) and the legal sales

equation (12). An increase in the excise tax. all else equal. will increase price, hence an analysis of

changes in smuggling pre and post 1983. the only year in our sample in which the federal excise tax was

changed. might shed light on the effects of federal taxes on organized smuggling. Unfortunately, we are

unable. with the model as expressed above, to separate changes in retail price due to, say, shifts in labor

costs, from changes due to excise tax changes. To remedy this we rn-estimate (14) after introducing the

federal excise tax directly into they function (12). This allows us to measure the effect on the level of

legal sales of a change in excise tax. holding constant retail price. The fact that we now introduce the

excise tax as well as retail price does not imply misspecification in the models estimated earlier. This

follows from the fact that the excise taxes were included in our earlier models, albeit indirectly. Note

that we cannot simply enter the excise tax as one regressor and the difference between the retail price and

the excise tax since, in general. only a portion of the tax will appear in the price term.

        Models CCA- 1. CCA-2. CCA- It. and CCA-2t were reestimated after introducing the level of the

federal excise tax into the y function. In every case the coefficient of the federal excise tax was negative

and significant implying decreases in the proportion of legal sales with increases in the federal excise tax.

While federal tax collections might well rise, state collections will fall. The implied elasticities ofywith

respect to the federal excise tax ranged from -.031 to -.076. We continue to find that passage of the

Contraband Cigarette Act is associated with an increase in smuggling.

        Although our estimate of 1t differs somewhat from its theoretical analog, the theory is useful for

understanding why y might decrease with an increase in the federal tax. Recall that y5 =(71 *Nlql* +

N2qzuJ4Nlql* + N2q2*J. Since the sign of aqj*/aTf is ambiguous. any empirical result is consistent
with the theory. However, if demand is linear or not too convex, &q MTfc 0 for i = 1.2. This is the

intuitively expected result since an increase in the federal tax increases per unit cost of both smuggled
                                                      25



and legal units sold. In this case. 1st will decrease for N fixed, if the response of a legal trader is greater

than that of a smuggler. Although it is not included in our theoretical model, an increase in the federal
tax may induce firms to exit, in which case lst is more likely to decrease if N2 decreases more than N1.



VU. Concluding Remarks

        In this paper we develop a theoretical and empirical model that permits estimation of the level of

organized smuggling of cigarettes out of the low-tax and cigarette producing states NC, KY. and VA.

The level of smuggling, as well as the generally decreasing trend in that level, accords well with evidence

presented in the 1977 and 1985 ACIR reports. We find two important policy results. First, passage of

the federal Contraband Cigarette Act did not deter smuggling, as has been claimed. Those who have

claimed success for the Act interpreted the general decline in cigarette smuggling from levels in the 70's

to much lower levels in the 80's as evidence of its success. We find, however, that the decline was not

due to passage of the Act, Rather, it followed from generally decreasing real levels of state tax differen-

tials. In every model we estimate we find an increase in smuggling following passage of the Act; this

increase is then followed by a continuation of the downward trend in cigaretLe smuggling.
        Second, we find that increases in the federal excise tax are associated with a greater proportion of

smuggled cigarettes. Proposed increases in the excise tax may well operate, as hoped. to raise federaL tax

revenues and lower the level of cigarette smoking, but it will also serve to increase the proportion of

smuggled cigarettes and thereby reduce state revenues. This result has not been anticipated by

government officials or previous studies of smuggling. Officials are clearly aware that changes in the

federal tax could affect consumers smuggling across the Canadian and Mexican borders, but our results

come from examining commerica] smuggling. Since previous studies have tended to focus on smuggling

by consumers, the effects we find have been unnoticed.
                                              26




                     Table   1: Per Capita Tax Paid Sales in the U.S.
                                 and Out-Smuggling States



         Year                    Ky           NC         VA Mean U.S.
         1965                    129          NA         123            127
         1970                    156          172        124            118
         1975                   223           226        153            13
         1978                   225           206        156            134
        1980                    215           188        149            133
        1985                     182          156        135            122
        1990                     183          134        119            104




Data are from The Tobacco Institute (1990).
                          27




       Table 2: Per Capita Tax Paid Sales,
         Avenge Price, and Avenge Tax



Year     Per Capita Tax        Price         Tax
           Paid Sales

1972          128.4            1.261         0.313
1973          129.8            1.225         0.301
1974          132.0            1.179         0.275
1975          133.1            1.166         0.261
1976          135.8            1.132         0.251
1977          135.2            1.185         0.243
1978          134.8            1.146         0.226
1979          132.8            1.084         0.207
1980          133.0            1.005         0.184
1981          133.4            1.011         0.172
1982          131.2            1.108         0.175
1983          126.0            1.226         0.186
1984          120.4            1.241         0.181
1985          118.7            1.274         0.189
1986          116.0            1.336         0.196
1987          113.2            1.395         0.212
1988          109.1            1.464         0.208
1989          104.8            1.532         0.219
1990           99.9            1335          0118
                                             28



                       Table 3: Models CCA-1 and CCA-2

                           CCA-1                        CCA-2

                    Coef         c-Ratio          Cod         c-Ratio

Demand Parameters

taRP                 -0.0700      -4.3806          -0.2581      -7.6610
InJNC                 0.0687       3.9518           0.1089       5.1118
TREND                -0.0048     -13.2096          -0.005 1     -7 .2775
ln(AVRP/RP)           0.0296       1.0286          0.1492        3.6590
InLAGSALES            0.8434      36.2553          0.4597       123385
CAN                   0.0044       0.63 13        -0.0101       -1.1596
INDIAN                0.0069        4.3364         0.0149        7.4890
MILTARY              -0.0068       -1.6361        -0.0104       -2.1939

Fnction Legal Sales Parameters

TAXDIF              -0:4625      -3.1696          -0.2730       -1.5156
TAXSQ               -0.3510      -1.5649          -0.4030       -1.5064
MEMB                -0.0104      -0.1375           0.3717        9.4536
FELONY              -0.0608      -0.8762          -0.2894       -7.3663
DISC                 0.0097       1.0566          -0.0294       -5.2880
RP                   0.1502       1.3450           0.2962        1.6768
CCAxTAX             -0.1470      -2.5795
CCAXTAXSQ            0.3189       1.6162
079                                               -0.0533     -2.6597
080                                               -0.0951     -1.7242
081                                               -0.205 1    -3.0574
D82                                               -0.1843      -3.1820
083                                               -0.1379     -2.4843
D84                                               -0.1572     -2.5983
085                                                0.0266       0.4478
086                                               -0.0268     -0.4069
087                                               -0.0511     -0,6886
088                                               -0.1617     -1.9621
089                                               -0.2890     -3.0039
D90                                               -0.4272     -4.0809

R-Square            0.9240                        0.8880
                                         29



                          Table 4: Smuggling Estimates

                      With CCA                     Without CCA
Year      %Smug           SE     Smug         %Smug       Sc   Smug

Model CCA-1
1972        9.18        0.337    14.50          9.18   0.337    14.50
1973          9.36      0326     14.89          9.36   0.326    14.89
1974          8.70      0.316    13.91          830    0.3 16   13.91
1975          8.04      0303     12.59          8.04   0.303    12.59
1976          7.81      0.300    12.26          7.81   0.300    12.26
1977          7.60      0.284    11.90          7.60   0.284    11.90
1978          7.23      0.273    11.44          723    0273     11.44
1979          8.03      0.257    12.37          6.62   0256     10.25
J980          7.49      0.242    11.47          6.09    0.239    9.34
1981          7.02      0.230    10.64          5.64    0.225    8.56
1982          6.85      0.225    10.16          5.47    0.220    8.12
1983          6.85      0.228     9.82          5.48    0.220    7.85
1984          6.91      0.236     9.13          5.52    0.226   7.26
1985          6.81      0.236     8.90          5.41   .0.226    7.05
1986          7.05      0.247     8.81          5.65    0.238    6.99
1987          7.03      0.251     8.50          5.64   0243      6.73
1988          7.34      0.265     8.50          5.94   0258      6.81
1989          7.23      0,274     8.68          5.82   0.266     6.97
1990          7.26      0284      8.50          5.89   0.279     6.93
Model CCA-2
1972          4.02      0.427     6.73          4.02   0.427     6:73
1973          4.08      0,403     6.72          4.08   0.403    6.72
1974          4.20      0.371     6.65          4.20   0.371    6.65
1975          3.90      0.354     6.12          3.90   0354      6.12
1976          3.49      0.356     5.76          3.49   0.356     5.76
1977          3.07      0.342     5.21          3.07   0.342     5.21
1978          2.19      0243      4.27          2.19   0.343    4.27
1979          3.11      0,297     4.86          2.06   0.311    3.84
1980          3.68      0288      5.29          2.00   0.285    3.60
1981          5.04      0269      6.72          1.74   0.267    3.18
1982          4.48      0.244     5.81          1.53   0.267    2.81
1983          3.10      0.243     4.12          0.80   0.291    2.01
1984           2.91     0.253     3.66          0.17   0.323     1,44
1985          -0.38     0.267     1.05          0.09   0.327     1.36
1986 .        0.46      0.261     1.59         -0.04   0.355     1.27
1987          0.69      0.274     1.65         -0.28   0.372     1.07
1988          2.56      0.273     2.98         -0.66   0.410     0.84
1989          4.71      0.280     5.38         -0.99   0.438     1.11
1990          7.29      0.279     8.15         -1.23   0.477     1.11
                                  30


                       Table 5: Revenue Effects

                         With CCA              Without CCA
          Revenue    Revenue                Revenue
Year      Received      Lost    Ratio          Lost      Ratio
Model CCA-1
1972      7081630    966922     0.120        966922      0.120
1973      7005291    963137     0.121        963137     0.121
1974      6547196    808564     0.110        808564     0.110
1975      6053877    670962     0.100        670962     0.100
1976      5980019    635098     0.096        635098     0.096
1977      5677877    580740     0.093        580740     0.093
1978      5583805    542258     0.089        542258     0.089
1979      5019042    525778     0.095        442171     0.081
1980      4560397    439758     0.088        362689     0.0'74
1981      4216295    376256     0.082        305711     0.068
1982      4094050    352614     0.079        284306     0.065
1983      4113346    360596     0.081        291654     0.066
1984      3960401    338867     0.079        272930     0.064
1985      3889966r   327394     0.078        262954     0.063
1986      3954004    336542     0.078        270732     0.064
1987      3882539    328943     0.078        264513     0.064
1988      3943635    352056     0.082        287163     0.068
1989      4034206    369842     0.084        301186     0.069
1990      4030457    396845     0.090        331052     0.076
Model CCA-2
1972      7081630    426830     0.057        426830      0.057
1973      7005291    411377     0.055        411377      0.055
1974      6547196    366940     0.053        366940      0.053
1975      6053877    310686     0.049        310686      0.049
1976      5980019    278362     0.044        278362      0.044
1977      5677877    236602     0.040        236602      0.040
1978      5583805    183821     0.032        183821      0.032
1979      5019042    190060     0.036        149788      0.029
1980      4560397    187928     0.040        127674      0.027
1981      4216295    220937     0.050        103201      0.024
1982      4094050    189336     0.044         90015      0.022
1983      4113346    141909     0.033         66514      0.016
1984      3960401    124663     0.031         46388      0.012
1985      3889966     33976     0.009         44377      0.011
1986      3954004     56479     0.014         44826      0.011
1987      3882539     58689     0.015         37321      0.010
1988      3943635    117038     0.029         30947      0.008
1989      4034206    229693     0.054         46906      0.011
1990      4030457    403837     0.091         63805      0.016
                                            31



                       Table 6: ModeLs CCA-lt and CCA-21


                      Coef         t-raUo            Cod        t-raüo

Demand Pawneters

1nRP                 -0.0523      -1.7300          -0.3442    -6.4845
t*InRP               -0.0043      -2.0064           0.0126     3. 1521
InINC                 0.1665      5. 1201           0.2882     8.3356
t*1nINC              -0.0040      -2.7050          -0.0128    -8.1539
TREND                 0.0057       1.5856           0.0246     6.3777
ln(AVRP/RP)           0.0837       2.5287           0.1862     5.0073
InLAGSALES            0.7788      25.5725           03416     15.1428
CAN                   0.0005       0.0718          -0.0214    -2.5170
INDIAN                0.0092       5.2346           0.0169     7.85 14
MILITARY             -0.0057      -1.3215          -0.0050    -1.1377

Fraction Legal Sates Parameters

TAXDIF               -0.5523      -3.5632          -0.6003    -3.2178
TAXSQ                -0.5838      -2.6004           0.1012     0.3576
MEMB                 -0.0242      -0.3341           0.1461     3.2422
FELONY               -0.1054      -1.5920          -0.3062    -7 .5554
DSCNT                 0.0094       1.0731          -0.0012    -0.2129
PP                    0-3069       2.5495           0.3 195    1.8057
CCA'TAX              -0.1595      -2.7625
CCA*TAXSQ             0.3736       1.8635
079                                                -0.0613    -3.0713
080                                                -0.038 8   -0.58 85
D81                                                -0.0952    -1.2559
D82                                                -0.0816    -1.2809
083                                                -0.0630    -1.0268
D84                                                -0.0983    -1.4510
085                                                 0.1399     2.1081
086                                                 0.0249     0.3332 -
087                                                 0.0136     0.1514
088                                                -0.0977    -0.9525
089                                                -01551     -1.9680
090                                                -0.4490    -3.0 127

P-Square                 0.9235                      0.9122
                                         32




   Table 7: Price and Income Elasticity Estimates: Models CCA-1t and CCA-2t

   Year        Price EIas.     (SE)             Income       (SE)
                                                SaL
Model CCA-lt
1972            -0.0566       (0.0287)          0.1625     (0.0313)
1973            -0.0609       (0.0272)          0.1585     (0+0301)
1974            -0.0652       (0.0257)          0.1545      (0.0289)
1975            -0.0695      (0.0244)           0.1505     (0.0277)
1976            -0.0738      (0.0232)           0.1465     (0.0266)
1977            -0.0781      (0.0222)           0.1425     (0.0255)
1978           -0.0824       (0.0213)           0.1385     (0.0244)
1979            -0.0867      (0.0206)           0.1345     (0.0234)
1980           -0.0910       (0.0200)           0.1305     (0.0224)
1981           -0.0953       (0.0197)           0.1265     (0,0215)
1982           -0.0996       (0.0197)           0.1225     (0.0207)
1983           -0.1039       (0.0198)           0.1185     (0.0199)
1984           -0.1082       (0.0202)           0.1145     (0.0292)
1985           -0.1125       (0.0208)           0.1105     (0.0187)
1986           -0.1168       (0.0215)           0.1065     (0.0182)
1987           -0.1211       (0.0225)           0. 1025    (0.0178)
1988           -0.1254       (0.0236)           0.0985     (0.0175)
1989           -0.1297       (0.0248)           0.0945     (0.0174)
1990           -0.1340       (0.0262)           0.0905     (0.0174)
Model CCA-2t
1972           -0.3316       (0.0499)           0.2754     (0.0333)
1973           -0.3190       (0.0469)           0.2626     (0.0320)
1974           -0.3064       (0.0440)           0.2498     (0.0307)
1975           -0.2938       (0.0412)           0.2370     (0.0295)
1976           -0.2812       (0.0388)           0.2242     (0.0283)
1977           -0.2686       (0.0366)           0.2114     (0.0271)
197€           -0.2560       (0.0347)           0.1986     (0.0260)
1979           -0.2434       (0.0332)           0.1858     (0.0250)
1980           -0.2308       (0.0322)           0.1730     (0.0239)
1981           -0.2182       (0.0316)           0.1602     (0.0230)
1982           -0.2056       (0.0315)           0.1474     (0.0221)
1983           -0.1930       (0.0319)           0.1346     (0.0213)
1984           -0.1804       (0.0328)           0.1218     (0.0206)
1985           -0.1678       (0.034 1)          0.1090     (0.0200)
1986           -0.1552       (0.0359)           0,0962     (0.0195)
1987           -0.1426       (0.0380)           0.0834     (0.0191)
1988           -0.1300       (0.0403)           0,0706     (0,0188)
1989           -0.1174       (0.0430)           0.0578     (0.0187)
1990           -0.1048       (0.0458)           0.0450     (0.0187)
                                          33


                            Table 8: Smuggling Estimates

                    With CCA                           Without CCA
    Year      %Smug      SE       Smug         %Smug         Se      Smug

    Model CCA-lr
    1972           8.41   0.357   13.72         8.41      0357       13.72
    1973           8.82   0.342   14.48         8.82      0.342      14.48
    1974           8.39   0.327   13.80         8.39      0.327      13.80
    1975           7.72   0.312   12.40         7.72      0.312      12.40
    1976           7.39   0.309   11.89         7.39      0.309      11.89
    1977           7.28   0.293   11.71         7.28      0293       11.71
    1978           6.74   0.282   10.91         6.74      0.282      10.91
    1979           7.72   0.262   12.06         629       0.262      9.96
    1980           7.34   0.246   11.44         5.91      0.244      9.30
    1981           6.94   0.234   10.70         5.52      0230       8.58
    1982           6.66   0,230   10.04         5.24      0.225      7.95
    1983           6.37   0.234    9.24         4.95      0.227      7.24
    1984           6.15   0.244    8.24         4.71      0235       6.35
    1985           5.98   0.245    7.94         4.54      0235       6.07
    1986           6.06   0.257    7.66         4.63      0.250      5.83
    1987           5.92   0.263    7.26         4.49      0.255      5.49
    1988           6.04   0.278    7.11         4.62      0.273      5.43
    1989           5.75   0.289    7.14         4.32      0.283      5.45
    1990           5.58   0.302    6.73         4.19      0298       5.21
    Model CCA-it
    1972           4.01   0.430    6.69         4.01      0.430       6.69
    1973           4.61   0.400    7.24         4.61      0.400       7.24
    1974           5.13   0.362    7.74         5.13      0.362 -     7.74
    1975           5.04   0.343    7.52         5.04      0.343       7.52
    1976           4.75   0.344    7.20         4.75      0.344       7.20
    1977           4.87   0.327    7.38         4.87      0.327       7.38
    1978           4.41   0.325    6.66         4.41      0.325       6.66
    1979           5.66   0.282    8.42         4.48      0.295       6.61
    1980           5.20   0.290    7.76         4.53      0270        6.73
    1981           5.89   0.268    8.77         4.39      0.253       6.47
    1982           5.42   0.237    7.88         4.15      0253        5.98
    1983           4.67   0.240    6.48         3.65      0272        5.03
    1984           4.87   0.256    6.28         3.20      0.301       4.12
    1985           0.65   0.280    1.66         3.06      0.305       3.91
    1986           2.42   0.276    3.16         2.88      0.332       3.60
    1987           2.41   0.313    3.03         2.66      0.348       3.26
    1988           4.31   0334     4.87         2.41      0.384       3.01
•
    1989           7.03   0.382    8.77         2.15      0.410       3.31
    1990       10.51      0.415   13.17          1.87     0.447       3.05
                                 34



                       TaMe 9: Revenue Effects

                         With CCA             Without CCA
          Revenue    Revenue               Revenue
Year      Received      Lost    Ratio         Los;      Ratio
Model CCA- it
1972      7081630    917964     0.115       917964     0.115
1973      7005291    941067     0.118       941067     0.118
1974      6547196    205636     0.110       805636     0.110
1975      6053877    663137     0.099       663137     0.099
1976      5980019    617870     0.094       617870     0.094
1977      5677877    573191     0.092       573191     0.092
1978      5583805    519409     0.085       519409     0.085
1979      5019042    512187     0.093       431218     0.079
1980      4560397    438493     0.088       361714     0.073
1981      4216295    377832     0.082       306428     0.068
1982      4094050    347499     0.078       278201     0.064
1983      4113346    339216     0.076       269970     0.062
1984      3960401    305554     0.072       239610     0.057
1985      3889966    291054     0.070       226665     0.055
1986      3954004    291740     0.069       226428     0.054
1987      3882539    279180     0.067       215462     0.053
1988      3943635    291589     0,069       228448     0.055
1989      4034206    302374     0.070       235502     0.055
1990      4030457    314988     0.072       252761     0.059
Model CCA-2t
1972      7081630    368813     0.050       368813      0.050
1973      7005291    399407     0.054       399407      0.054
1974      6547196    393214     0.057       393214      0.057
1975      6053877    355623     0.055       355623      0.055
1976      5980019    325091     0.052       325091      0.052
1977      5677877    318540     0.053       318540     0.053
1978      5583805    273812     0.047       273812     0.047
1979      5019042    328730     0.061       251334      0.048
1980      4560397    275287     0.057       235632      0.049
1981      4216295    292309     0.065       210173      0.047
1982      4094050    257812     0.059       191381      0.045
1983      4113346    225672     0.052       172141      0.040
1984      3960401    219571     0.053       139236      0.034
1985      3889966     50634     0.013       130674      0.033
1986      3954004    108155     0.027       124554      0.031
1987      3882539    102754     0.026       111247     0.028
1988      3943635    183526     0.044       109087     0.027
1989      4034206    366099     0.083       135674      0.033
1990      4030457    626096     0.134       153005      0.037
                                              35



                                           REFERENCES

Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations. "Cigarette Bootlegging: A State and Federal
Responsibility" (Washington. DC: May 1977).

         'Cigarette Tax Evasion: A Second Look" (Washington. DC: March 1985).

Amemiya, Tazeshi, Advanced Econometrics (Harvard University Press: 1985).

Baltagi, Bath H. and Rajeev K. (Joel, "Quasi-Experimental Price Elasticities of Cigarette Demand and
the Bootlegging Effect," American Journal ofAgricultural Economics 69 (1987), 750-54.

Baltagi. Bach H. and Dan Levin, "Estimating Dynamic Demand for Cigarettes Using Panel Data: The
Effects of Bootlegging. Taxation and Advertising Reconsidered," Review of Economics and Statistics 87
(1986), 148-55.

Benjamin. Daniel. 'Taxation by Competing Governments." manuscript. Clemson University (May 1992).

Breusch. T.S. and AR. Pagan. "A Simple Test for Heteroscedasticity and Random Coefficient
Variation," Econometrica 47 (1979) 1287-94.

Godfrey, L.G.. Misspec:fication Tests in Econometrics: The Lagrange Multiplier Principle and Other
Approaches (Cambridge University Press: 1988).

Hamilton, James L.. "The Demand for Cigarettes: Advertising, the Health Scare, and the Cigarette
Advertising Ban,' The Review of Economics and Statistics 54(1979), 401-411.

Holtz-Eakin, D., W.K. Newey, and H.S. Rosen, "Estimating Vector Autoregressionswith Panel Data,
Econometrica 56 (1988). 1371-1395.

Laughhunn, D.J. and H.L. Lyon. 'The Feasibility of Tax Induced Price Increases as a Deterrent to
Cigarette Consumption." Journal of Business Administration 3 (1971). 27-35.

Lewitt. E.M. and D. Coate, "The Potential for Using Excise Taxes to Reduce Smoking." Journal of
Health Economics I (1982). 121-45.

Manchester. P.B., An Econometric Analysis of State Cigarette Taxes, Prices, and Demand, with
Estimates of Tax-Induced Interstate Bootlegging, University of Minnesota (1973).

Matz, Michael, Herbert Edelhertz, and Harvey Chamberlain, "Combating Cigarette Smuggling,"
Organized Crime Desk, Law Enforcement Assistance Administration. U.S. Department of Justice
(January 1976).

The Tobacco Insitute, The Tax Burden on Tabacco, Vol. 25 (Washington, D.C.; 1990).

Thwsby, Marie, Richard Jensen. and Jerry Thursby. "Smuggling, Camouflaging. and Market Structure."
The Quarterly Journal of Economics (August 1991). 789-814.
                                              36


Warner. Kenneth E, "Cigarette Excise Taxation and Interstate Smuggling: An Assessment of Recent
Activity." National Tax Journal, 35 (1982), 483-89.

Wasserman, Jeffrey. Willard Cl. MannIng, Joseph P. Newhouse. and John D. Winkier, "The Effects of
Excise Taxes and Regulations on Cigarette Smoking," Jonrnal of Health Economics 10(1991). 43-64.

White, HaJbert. "A Hetcroscedastic-Consistent Covariance Matrix and a Direct Test for
Heteroscedasuic ity," Econometrica, 48 (1980), 421 -48.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey, "Multiplicative Panel Data Models Without the Strict Exogeneity Assumption,"
manuscripL Michigan Slate University (December 1990).
