                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MASS LAYOFFS AND UNEMPLOYMENT




                                      Andrew Caplin
                                        John Leahy




                                 Working Paper No. 4766




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        June 1994




We would like to thank Boyan Jovanovic, Dale Mortensen, Doug Staiger, and Joseph Tracy
for helpful comments, and the National Science Foundation for fmancial support. This paper
is part of NBER's research program in Economic fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                     NEER. Working Paper #4766
                                                                                     June 1994


                             MASS LAYOFFS AND UNEMPLOYMENT


                                             ABSTRACT


       Mass layoffs give rise to groups of unemployed workers who possess similar
characteristics   and   therefore may learn from one another's experience searching for a new job.

Two factors lead them to be too selective in the job offers that they accept. The first is an

information externality: searchers fail to take into account the value of their experience to others.

The second is an incentive to free ride: each worker would like others to experiment and reveal

information concerning productive jobs. Together these forces imply that in equilibrium the

natural rate of unemp'oyment is too high.



Andrew Caplin                                                        John Leahy
Department of Economics                                              Department of Economics
International Affairs Building                                       Littauer Center
Columbia University                                                  Harvard University
420 West 118th Street                                                CanibridgeMA 02138
New York, NY 10027                                                   and NBER
and NBER
                                     MASS LAYOFFS                                  1

                                1. INTRODUCTION

     Following the seminal work of Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1968), much anal-
ysis of the natural rate of unemployment has focused on the relationship between
allocative shocks and job search. Allocative shocks shift the demand for labor
across products and locations and create an incentive for workers to move from
one job to another. Frictional unemployment arises because it takes time and
effort for the workers who relocate to find appropriate new jobs. There are by
now many models concerning the connection between the allocative shocks, the
search process, and the level and efficiency of the natural rate of unemployment,
including Lucas and Prescott (1974), Hall (1979), Diamond (1981), and Mortensen
(1982).
     A common feature of these classical models of search unemployment is that
laid-off workers simply take draws from a known distribution of wages in the
economy. We believe that this trivializes the adjustment problem that unemployed
workers face. The question facing these workers is often not whether to accept a
given wage offer, but where even to begin looking for employment. What sectors
are hiring? In what jobs will the workers be productive? 'Where are these jobs
located?
    Given the uncertainty that surrounds their adjustment decision, workers have
an incentive to use all of the information at their disposal. In addition to their
own search experience, they are likely to find the experience of others informative,
especially the experience of other unemployed workers with similar characteristics
who face similar adjustment decisions. In this paper, we analyze the incentives
that confront a group of searchers who simultaneously find themselves unemployed
due to a mass layoff. We examine the how the possibility of learning from others
affects search behavior and the equilibrium rate of unemployment-
    Labor market research suggests that learning from the example of other work-
ers may help the unemployed overcome many of the difficulties inherent in ad-
justment. Somewhere between one half and two thirds of all jobs are obtained
through connections with friends and relatives, and one prominent explanation
for the prevalence of such informal channels is informational: a worker and a firm
can learn about the quality of their match from the matches of others.' Rees (1966)
writes:

    See Montgomery (1991) for a brief overview of this literature.
2                               CAPLIN AND LEAKY

    Employee referrals—the most important informal channel—usually pro-
    vide good screening for employers who are satisfied with their present
    workforce. Present employees tend to refer people like themselves. .The
    informal sources also have important benefits to the applicant. He can
    obtain much more information from a friend who does the kind of work
    in which he is interested than from an ad in the paper or a counselor at
     an employment agency.
Wanous (1992), in a study of recruitment methods, adds that:
    Newcomers from an inside source are a better "match" to the orga-
    nization because they had the opportunity to drop out from further
    consideration... . [Recruits from outside sources] will have substantial
     amounts of misinformation.
Finally, in a recent empirical study, Staiger (1990) concludes that his "evidence
suggests that a personal contact may provide information that helps an individual
find a good match."
    There are times, however, when unemployed workers are likely to possess few
useful connections and hence little information about their matches with firms.
For example, if the shock that lead to the workers' unemployment was common to
the sector or the region in which they were employed, then it is very likely that the
workers will need to find new employment in unfamiliar locations or unfamiliar
fields, and that many of the channels through which they normally would have
obtained jobs will have been destroyed.
     At such times there is another feature of labor markets that interacts with
the fact that workers can learn from the experience of others: a large proportion
of job losses result from mass layoffs. Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) report that
plant closings account for 25% of job destruction, whereas plants in which the
workforce contracts by less than 20% account for less than 25% of job destruction.
The fact that workers are laid off in groups means that an unemployed worker
has a natural peer group of fellow unemployed workers with similar skills and
characteristics. Given that the members of this group face a major adjustment
problem and are similar in many ways, there is the possibility that they may
learn from one another's search. Has any other member of the group found a job?
Where and in what sector? Have they succeeded at the job or is it a bad match?
As these questions indicate, the process of the group gradually rebuilding its stock
of information is riddled with informational spillovers. We focus on the way in
                                  MASS LAYOFFS                                      3


which these informational spillovers affect worker reallocation and the natural rate
of unemployment.
    In this paper we develop a simple model of the natural rate of unemploy-
ment in which interactions among searchers are central. The basic microeconomic
mechanism that we describe is one in which a group of workers are laid off and
begin to search for new jobs. They learn about their suitability for different types
of employment not only through their own search but also by watching the success
or failure on the job of other workers with similar characteristics. It is the ability
to learn from others that differentiates our model from previous models of search
unemployment.
    We show that this learning channel produces a natural rate of unemploymcnt
that is suboptimally high. The source of the inefficiency is the presence of an
information externality and a free rider problem. Searchers have no incentive to
take into account the value to others of the information revealed by their own
search activity, but rather have an incentive to sit back and wait for others to
reveal information through their search. Both of these effects lead searchers to be
too selective in equilibrium. By waiting for others to reveal information, searchers
fail to accept jobs that would provide valuable information to others.
      While our emphasis on information externalities is new, we are not the first
to develop models in which the natural rate of unemployment is inefficient. Tobin
(1972) argued that congestion externalities would lead to a suboptimally high nat-
ural rate, a perspective that has recently been applied to Eastern European uneni-
ployment by Gavin (1992). Mortensen (1982) argued that meetings between work-
ers and firms are a situation of bilateral monopoly; workers who reject matches
fail to take into consideration the firm's rents and hence reject matches too often,
implying again that the natural rate is too high. Diamond (1982) and Howitt
(1988), ozi the other hand, show that thick market externalities may imply that
the natural rate of unemployment is too low. Search is efficient in the model of
Lucas and Prescott (1974).
     Our approach also complements the existing literature on connections and exit-
ployntent. Formal models of this mechanism analyze why workers would choose
to use connections to find employment (Holzer (1988)] or why workers with con-
nections might earn higher wages than those who lack connections [Montgomery
(1991), Mortensen and Vishwanath (1992), and Staiger (1990)]. To these we add
the possibility that shocks to a sector or a region might leave unemployed workers
4                               CAPLIN AND LEAHY

with few connections to employed workers, and that group interactions may lead
to suboptimal search in the presence of connections among unemployed workers.
    In formal terms, the model that we develop is most closely related to our
model of information spillovers and search in real estate markets [Caplin and
Leahy (1993a)]. Other related models of information spillovers include the work
of Banerjee (1992), Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992), Caplin and Leahy
(1993b, 1993c, 1993d), Chamley and Gale (1992), and Rob (1991). Caplin and
Leahy (1993b) and Atkeson and Kehoe (1992) present models in which sectoral
reallocation destroys informational capital and reduces output; these models differ
from the model contained in this paper in that Caplin and Leahy do not model
search, and Atkeson and Kehoe do not model group learning.
     The layout of the paper is as follows. Section 2 motivates our model of search
with information spillovers and lays out the main assumptions. The solution to
the model is presented in Section 3. Section 4 contains many of the main results
including a discussion of the information externality and the free rider problem,
a proof of the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium, and a demonstration that
the natural rate is inefficient. Section 5 discusses various extensions to the model.
Section 6 concludes.

    2. A MODEL OF SEARCH WITH INFORMATION SPILLOVERS

     We consider an economy with a continuum of different worker types indexed
by i E 10,1] and a continuum of distinct industries indexed by j E [0,1]. There
are N workers of each type i and a continuum of firms of each type j. Each firm
has a single job opening.
     As in Jovanovic (1979), the fundamental allocative problem for the economy
is to match workers to firms in which they are productive. We assume that there
are two components to a worker's productivity, an idiosyncratic component 4' that
is specific to the match between a particular worker and finn, and a common
component     that influences the productivity of all workers of type i in industry
j. The marginal product of the worker is 4'Ai,.
    The driving force in the model is Aj,. Fluctuations in this parameter will
necessitate labor reallocation, and the fact that the parameter is common across
workers of type i will form the basis for learning during the adjustment process.
We assume that AU follows a Markov process taking either the value zero which
                                    MASS LAYOFFS                                          5

 makes a worker completely unproductive in the industry or one which corresponds
 to high productivity. The transition probabilities between these two states are as
 follows: given that A,j is equal to one in period t, the probability that it is equal
 to zero in period t + 1 is .s, and given that A,, is equal to zero in period t, the
 probability that it is equal to one in period t + 1 is equal to v. We assume that
 these transitions are independent across industry and worker types.
      The assumptions on A,1 have two implications. First, because transitions are
 independent across worker types, type i workers can learn nothing about their pro-
 ductivity in an industry from observing the productivity of workers of other types.
 Second, when Aj becomes zero, all type i workers in industry j become unproduc-
 tive and simultaneously begin to search elsewhere. This last property corresponds
 to the notion of mass layoffs in which many similar workers simultaneously find
 themselves unemployed.
     We now describe the process of search when the entire group of N type i
workers simultaneously find themselves unemployed. We assume that workers
are risk neutral and that they choose their search strategies to maximize the
expected present value of wages using discount rate fi. Wages are assumed equal
to the marginal productivity of workers, Ø. Initially the only information that
workers possess is their prior information concerning the distribution of job offers
across the economy. The distribution of      is determined by the Markov process.
We assume that each idiosyncratic component is an independent draw from a
uniform distribution on 10,1].
     In the first period of unemployment, each worker visits a single firm with
a vacant job and receives an imperfect signal of their productivity on that job.
The worker then must decide whether to accept or reject the job based on this
signal and on the worker's prior beliefs. If they reject, they remain unemployed
and receive nothing. If they accept they pay a cost c and receive their marginal
product         They remain in the job so long as        equals one. The cost and
irreversibility of job acceptance mean that accepting a job is an expensive and
risky option. This will provide an incentive for workers to wait for others to reveal
information about an industry through their search.
     In the second period of unemployment, each worker who rejected a job gets
to pick a new firm to search in. The key assumption is that they also have an
opportunity to learn from the success or failure of others' search in the first period,
and to use this information to guide their search activity. In order for observation
6                                CAPLIN AND LEAHY

of others' job acceptance to be valuable, it must be that it improves understanding
of the common factor A,,. In general this would be a complicated signal extraction
problem. We make two assumptions that simplify learning without altering the
basic incentives affecting search. First, once one worker of type i accepts a job,
not only does this worker observe the common factor but so do all workers of
type i. Second, the private signal that workers receive upon approaching a firm
is simply the idiosyncratic component of productivity , so that workers learn
nothing about AIj prior to acceptance.
      This learning mechanism implies that if no other worker accepted a job in the
first period, then the group learns nothing and will continue their blind process
of search in the second period. If, on the other hand, anyone accepted a job in
the first period, all workers learn their productivity in that industry. If workers of
type i learn that they are productive in industry j, they will have an incentive to
search there, whereas if they learn that they are unproductive they will have an
incentive to search somewhere else. In all subsequent periods search proceeds as
in the second. In general, workers' search policies depend on whether or not the
workers know that the industry in which they are searching is productive.
     Note that the model as constructed is agnostic as to exactly how information
passes among workers. One possible scenario is that workers observe the wage paid
to employed individuals, and if this wage is positive they infer that the common
factor is one. Another possibility is that workers observe whether the individual
stays on the job or returns to the pool of searchers and infer from this the value
of Aj. Finally, workers might learn that an industry is a good one directly by
communicating with employed workers of their type.
      We place one additional restriction on the search process: we assume that all
workers of type i search for employment in the same industry j. This restriction
does not affect the way in which the information externality affects the search pro-
cess or the optimality of search, but it greatly simplifies the aggregation because it
prevents the group of N type i workers from splitting when two or more searchers
find employment in separate industries. It therefore ensures that all type i workers
are laid off simultaneously when the industry in which they are employed becomes
unproductive. Relaxing this assumption complicates the analysis, and also gives
rise to interesting additional phenomenon concerning an individual worker's deci-
sion whether or not to experiment by searching in other industries. We discuss
the implications of relaxing this assumption in Section 5.
                                  MASS LAYOFFS                                      7

     At the economy-wide level, the picture that emerges is one of many groups
of workers searching for employment in a variety of markets. Members of each
group sample firms in the same market. Jf one of them chooses to take a job,
then all learn their productivity in that market. If this productivity is high they
will choose to search further in this market. If it is low they will choose to search
elsewhere. At the same time that the unemployed are searching for employment,
the employed are losing their productive jobs at a rate s.
     In this setting we look for a symmetric Nash equilibrium in search strategies
and a steady-state level of unemployment. The model is structured so that workers
are in one of three states. They are either employed or, if unemployed, they either
know of a good industry or are completely uninformed. Employed workers make
no strategic decisions. They remain on the job until they become unproductive. A
strategy for an unemployed worker consists of rules describing which jobs to accept
in each of the two states of unemployment. The structure of the model is simple
enough that in the next section we show that both rules are of the reservation
variety. Therefore the Nash equilibrium has two parameters and that describe
                                                                   ,
the reservation acceptance levels. Once we have solved for and we can use the
steady state distribution of workers between employment and the two unemployed
states to complete the characterization of equilibrium and the natural rate.

     DEFINITION: An equilibrium consists of search cutoff rules for the unin-
formed searcher and 4, for the informed searcher such that it is optima) for each
uninformed worker to accept jobs if and only if 4, > 4, and each informed worker
to accept jobs if and only if 4, > 4, provided others are pursuing this strategy.
     We need to place one restriction on the parameters in order for the model
to be interesting. For any search to take place, we need that the ex ante present
discounted value of a job with the highest idiosyncratic match component be
greater than the cost of accepting employment. As we shall see below the expected
value of wages earned on a job for which 4, is equal to one is ($)(      ...Ø. We
need this to be greater than c.
     Overall the data of model are N, s, v, c, and (3. The first measures the size
of layoffs; the second and third concern the amount of sectoral reallocation; the
fourth is the cost of experimentation; and the last is the discount rate. In the next
sections we show that given these data there is a unique equilibrium and describe
how changes in the parameters effect the equilibrium rate of unemployment.
8                                CAPLIN AND LEAHY

                    3. THE SOLUTION TO THE MODEL

     We begin by analyzing the optimal search policy of a collection of N workers
of the same type. We then imbed this search strategy into an aggregateframework.

A. Optimal Search
     The search behavior of workers will depend on whether or not previous search
has revealed markets with high )Ljj. We must therefore consider searching workers
in two states: an uninformed state in which the worker must search for a productive
market, and an informed state in which the worker limits search to markets which
are known to have Ajj equal to one.
    Let V() denote the value the optimal search strategy for an uninformed
worker who currently possesses an idiosyncratic match component . The worker
has two choices: accept the job or ignore the current offer and wait for the next
period. V() is simply the maximum of these two choices,
                                 V() = max{A,W},
where A is the expected value of accepting the job and W is the expected value
of waiting.
    The value of accepting is:
                        A=   crpe4 +   apsf3Vt + (1 — p)$Vt   —


where   a=   17(1  fl(1 — .s)), p = v/(s + v), and Vt denotes the unconditional
                    —

expectation of V(). To understand this equation note that if a worker accepts a
job, the worker pays c and observes the common component Aq. The probability
that the common component is high is equal to the steady state proportion of
industries with Ajj equal to one. Given the transition probabilities .s and v, it
follows that this probability is equal to p. If the common component is high then
the worker receives the wage so long as the job survives. Good matches expire
with probability .s so that the present value of wages is Ø. When a match expires
all workers of type i become unemployed and uninformed. Hence when a match
expires the worker receives the expected value of being in the uninformed state. If
a worker discovers that the common component is low upon accepting a job, then
again the worker remains uninformed and receives V.
     The value of waiting, W, will depend on the actions of others. If one worker
of type i discovers a job of type j in which .X,, is one, then all workers of type i will
                                        MASS LAYOFFS                                         9

benefit from the information. If, on the other hand, no agent of type i finds a good
match, all agents of type i will remain uninformed.2 Let it denote the probability
that a worker becomes informed through others' search. The value of waiting is
then,
                                   W = fl[irjt + (1— ir)VC]
where J is the expected value of an optimal search strategy in the informed state.
     Since the value of waiting is independent of the particular realization of 4',
whereas the value of accepting is strictly increasing in 4', the optimal policy is to
set a reservation level of 4' and to accept a job whenever 4' exceeds this level. The
reservation level equates the value of accepting and waiting. A little algebra
yields
(3.1)                   —   c   = j9irfl + [(1 — it) —(1— p) — cxpsJf3V.

     We can now use to calculate the expected value of an optimal search policy
in the uninformed state. If the draw of 4' is above the worker accepts the job,
otherwise the worker waits. Hence
             I                       r1
        = / V(çbb)dçb = / Wdcb+ / [apçb+aps/3Vt -1-(1 —p)Vt —c]d4'.
           J            Jo
Eliminating W and solving for Vt,

(39)                 11=             -                -
                                1—(1—4')(ap.s+1—p)fl—4'(1—ir)f3
    We can also use to calculate the probability that a worker who waits will
become informed through others search,
                                     = p(1 — s)(1 — N-1)
Here we have used the fact that in a symmetric Nash equilibrium each agent is
following strategy 4' so that the probability that at least one other agent.accepts
a job is I — N—1• This job is productive with probability p and survives with
probability 1 —

  2 Note that it makes no difference whether all workers reject jobs or a single worker accepts
and discovers that the industry is bad. In either case all the workers end up In the uninformed
state.
  ' Note that we have made use of the fact that all agents are searching in the same market
so that all accepted jobs are either productive or unproductive.
10                              CAPLIN AND LEAHY

    The search decision in the informed state is quite similar. The worker chooses
between accepting a job and further search,
              J() = max{a# + asflVt — c, (1— .s)/JJt + .s/3Ve).
Here the fact that the worker is informed implies that the probability that the
match is productive is equal to one, and the value of waiting depends on the
probability that the match will expire. Again the optimal strategy is to accept only
matches that exceed some minimal threshold at which the worker is indifferent
between accepting and waiting,
(3.3)                4+    crs$VC — c = (1   —
                                                 s)fift + s/9Vt.
Finally, with , we can calculate Jt:

             Jt= Jo/ (a+asfiVt—c)d+ I (a+asfiVt—c)4
(3.4)                              J3
                 = (1 +2)+asfiVe —c.
     Equations (3.1) through (3.4) form a system of four equations in the four
unknowns ,    , V,   and P. The solution to these equations defines the equi-
librium search strategies. We now imbed this search behavior into the aggregate
framework.

B. Aggregation
     The steady-state unemployment rate is determined from four parameters:
the separation rate .s, the steady state probability that a match is productive p,
                                                 .
and two reservation match parameters . and As usual the way to solve for the
natural rate is to equate flows between states. Figure 1 illustrate the flows between
employment and the two states of unemployment. Let E denote the fraction of
the labor force that is currently employed, and let I and U denote the fractions
of the labor force that are informed and uninformed respectively.
     The first relation between E, I and U is the adding up constraint. As pro-
portions they must sum to one,
(3.5)                             E+I+U=1.
    The second relation between E, I and U comes from equating flows into and
out of the uninformed state,
(3.6)                       s(E + I) = p(l — s)(i — N)u
                                  MASS LAYOFFS                                    11


                                           stptrtIion




                                            Ie.rning        -
                Uninformed                                      Informed



                                     job    •cccptcncc / .cceptence


              sePtittlon
                                      Employed




                                      Figure 1
Flows into the uninformed state are the result of separations. Since each period a
fraction s of all matches between industries and types become unproductive, these
flows are s(E + I). The right hand side of equation (3.6) is the flow out of the
uninformed state. If any one of a group of N workers of a given type i finds a
good match, then the entire group leaves the uninformed state. The probability of
this occurring is p(1 — N) and (1 — s) is the probability that this match survives
one period.
     Finally, equating the flows into and out of employment gives us a third rela-
tionship between E, I, and U,
(3.7)                (1 — .s)(1 — q)I +   p(l — s)(1    —
                                                            )U = sE.
The right side of equation (3.7) gives the exit rate from employment. The left side
of the equation gives the entry rate which is equal to the probability of aiccepting
a match from each of the two unemployment states multiplied by the probability
that the match is high and the survival rate for productive matches.
    We can solve equations (3.5)-( 3.7) for the employment rate

(as)             E=          p(l—s){l——(l—s)(1 _")]
                           (s+(l-s)(l-$))(s+p(l-s)(l -i))
12                               CAPLIN AND LEAIIY

     This completes the solution to the model.

                                 4. ANALYSIS

A. The Free Rider Problem and the Information Externality
     Several features of the model are immediately apparent from the equations.
According to equation (3.1), all else equal is increasing in r, the probability that
the worker becomes informed through others search. The possibility that search
by others will reveal information concerning the location of productive markets
therefore increases the value of waiting and causes the uninformed worker to be
more selective. Each agent therefore has an incentive to delay matching in order
to free ride off the information revealed by others. In many models, most notably
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), the incentive to free ride leads to non-existence
of equilibrium. In contrast, in Section 4B we show that there always exists an
equilibrium to this model and that this equilibrium is unique.
     Another feature of the model may be seen from the definition of in increases
in   reduce it. Therefore if one worker of type i becomes more selective, the
probability that all other workers of type i will become informed falls. Since
an individual searcher ignores this effect in choosing the cutoff , there is an
informational externality in the model; agents ignore the value to others of the
information revealed through their matches. The presence of this externality will
cause Nash equilibrium to be inefficient. We return to welfare issues and analyze
the social planner's problem in Section 4C below.
     While we speak of the free rider problem and the information externality as
separate forces, they are really reflections of the same phenomenon. If there were
rio information externality, that is if the action of one agent did not affect to
payoffs of others, then there would be no incentive to free ride. Similarly, if agents
could not wait to take advantage of the information revealed by others, then the
fact that actions reveal information would be of no importance.

B. Existence and Uniqueness
     Proposition 1 demonstrates both the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium.

     PROPOSITION 1: There exists a unique solution to equations (3.1)-(3.4) with
, E(0,l).
                                         MASS LAYOFFS                                                13



                       Vt


                                                               Eqn (3.1)




                                                                     (3.2)




                                            Figure 2
       PROOF: See Appendix.
      The proof of the proposition is contained in the appendix. The main argument
 is presented in Figure 2. First we show that Vt in equation (3.2) is a quasiconcave
 function of and that v is equal to zero when is equal to one. Next we show
 that 1" in equation (3.1) is an increasing function of and that E (0,1) when
 Vt is equal to zero. Finally, we show that the Vt that solve equation (3.1) for
 a given lie below the ye that satisfy a social planners first order
                                                                     condition, so
 that the intersection between (3.1) and (3.2) is unique and occurs to the right of
 the maximum in (3.2).

 C. The Socially Optimal Search Strategy
      In Nash equilibrium each agent chooses an optimal strategy given the strate-
gies chosen by others. We compare this equilibrium to that of a social planner
who chooses all agent's strategies simultaneously so as to maximize their collective
utility. To make this comparison as clean as possible we restrict our social planner
to symmetric strategies. In the present situation in which all agents are identical,
this planner's problem takes the form of maximizing the utility of any one agcnt
subject to the constraint that all agents follow symmetric strategies.

     The reason that equilibrium exists in spite of the presence of the free rider
                                                                                   problem is that
reservation wage strategies are natural mixed strategies, where the mixing is done through the
draw of the idiosyncratic parameter . This contrasts with the pure strategies that underlie the
famous non-existence result of Grossman and Stiglitz.
14                              CAPLIN AND LEAIIY

     The equations that characterize the social planner's problem are not that
different from those that characterize the Nash equilibrium. Equations (3.3) and
(3.4) continue to hold, as the determination of the cutoff in the informed state
conditional on W is efficient. The change is that the social planner chooses a
cutoff in the uninformed state       to maximize Vt in equation (3.2) taking into
account that ir is a function of 9r.
     Proposition 2 states that ' <. This can be seen from Figure 2 that shows
that the intersection that determines lies to the right of the maximum value of
Vt
    PROPOSITION 2: A social planner who maximizes the collective utility of
workers would choose a cutoff in the uninformed state that is lower thazi the Nash
equilibrium cutoff, ' C
     PROOF: See Appendix.
     The gap between       and is the result of the information externality and
the free rider problem. These cause searchers to be too cautious. Searchers pass
up matches that may bring valuable information and they wait for information to
be delivered by the actions of others.
     Note that the social planner will also choose a lower value for . This is
not due to any externality in the informed state, but rather to the fact that job
separations link valuations in the two states. For this reason increases in ye tend
to reduce .j. as can be seen from equation (3.3).
     Algebraic manipulation of equation (3.8) shows that OE/O and OE/$ are
negative when    and 4 are in the interval [0, 11. Therefore the   fact that both
and 0 are inefficiently high in Nash equilibrium implies that the natural rate of
unemployment is inefficiently high as well.

D. The Comparative Statics of N
     Possibly the most interesting comparative static parameter in the model is
the size of a cohort N. Differentiating equation (3.1), (3.2) with respect to N
and solving for d/dN we see that increases in N raise the cutoff for acceptance
in the uninformed state
                                    (Jeyt).
                dN         ______________ —
                          P 1—apsfl—(I—p)fi
                                              a 7€ —T4re\&w
                                                     '
                                                            —
                                   MASS LAYOFFS                                          15


The inequality follows from the fact that Or/OqS c 0, Oir/ON > 0, and P > V
The intuition underlying this result is that increases in N increase the probability
that someone else will investigate the market. This in turn increases the value
of waiting and the incentive to free ride. Hence 4 rises and each worker becomes
more selective. It is easy to see from equation (3.2) that Vt rises with 4 so that
workers are also better off the larger their cohort.
     How does the social planners cutoff 4' vary with N? There are two effects.
First, as N rises, the value of finding a good match increases as there are more
workers who will benefit from becoming informed. This effect implies that 4'
should fall as N rises. Second, as N rises duplication of search costs becomes an
issue. The social planner wants to avoid too many searchers incurring the cost c
when the industry is unproductive. This effect implies that 4 should rise as N
rises. Simulations of the model indicate thW the derivative of 4' with respect to
N is ambiguous due to these two conflicting effects.
    Another variable that has an ambiguous derivative with respect to N is the
duration of unemployment. Let Dir denote the expected duration in the unin-
formed state, and D, the expected duration in the informed state, then
                    Du = (1 — p(1 — ))[1 + ,rD1 + (1— 7r)Du].
The expected duration of unemployment in the uninformed state is simply the
probability that the agent remains unemployed in the current period plus the
expected duration given that the agent remains unemployed. The latter depends
on whether or not the agent becomes informed. Solving for Du,

                           Du
                                   "     p(l — )X'- + irDj)
                                   1—(1—p(l—4)X1—ir)
     The direct effect of an increase in N is to increase r and to reduce Du; an
increase in it reduces the duration of unemployment by increasing the probability
that the worker will enter the informed state where jobs may be accepted more
quickly. An increase in N however has two other effects that work in the other
direction. An increase in N increases which reduces the probability of finding
a job on one's own. An increase in N also increases Vt which increases 4 and
therefore increases the duration of unemployment in the informed state. This

      J is greater than Vt because better information makes agents better off. A formal proof
of this fact is contained in Lemma I in the appendix.
 16                               CAPLIN AND LEAHY

 indicates that the derivative of Du with respect to N is ambiguous. Simulations
 of the model showed that this was in fact the case.
     Generally the longer are spells, the higher will be the natural rate of unem-
ployment. So it is not surprising that just as in duration analysis, the derivative of
E with respect to N is ambiguous. Given , an increase in N increases the prob-
ability that workers will become informed, and since the probability of becoming
employed from the informed state is greater than from the uninformed state, this
has the effect of increasing the employment rate. The increase in N, however, also
leads to increases in and that reduce the flow out of unemployment.

 E. Limit Behavior
      As N rises to infinity, one of two situations may occur. If limpq....., C     1,
then NI approaches zero and ir approaches p(1—s). It is very possible, however,
that with ir = p(1   —
                         the incentive to free ride is so strong that it is optimal for
                         .s)
a worker to set equal to one. If this is the case, then as N approaches infinity,
workers become so selective that approaches one and                 approaches some
limit between zero and one. Thus even as the number of searchers becomes very
large, it is not necessarily the case that information about productivity gets out
quickly. As N rises there are more workers searching, but each becomes more
selective.

                     5. DISCUSSION AND EXTENSIONS

     In this section we discuss several issues raised by the model, as well as how
the model might be extended in the light of these issues. We organize the dis-
cussion around a series of questions: What is the nature of the group interaction
among searchers? When is group search likely to be important? What happens
if searchers may recall prior offers? What are the incentives to experiment by
searching n other industries? We take up these questions in turn.

A. The Nature of the Interaction among Searchcr3
      As it is modelled, the information externality and the free rider problem affect
the cutoff for accepting a job. It is clear that there are many other margins upon
which these forces might operate. For example, the results would have been similar
if the crucial decision that a searcher had to make was how much effort to expend
                                     MASS LAYOFFS                                            17

in finding a job. In deciding how hard to search, a worker might not take account
of the benefits search provides others. The worker would also have an incentive
to relax and allow others to expend effort on search. Similarly the margin might
involve the decision to move to a new location or to develop new skills. Each of
these decisions involve potential information spillovers, and therefore the potential
for insufficient search.
     There is one potential interaction that appears to introduce an incentive for
excessive search. Suppose that there were only M jobs in each industry, and that
M is less than the number of workers of type N. The fact that there are fewer
jobs than searchers appears to create an incentive to be the first one to accept a
job in an industry, since then one is assured of a productive job, whereas followers
may be left out.6 This argument, however, ignores the fact that unless the number
of productive industries is also limited, the ability to search elsewhere places a
floor on the value of being unemployed. The fact that someone else accepts a job
appears more likely to help via the information channel than to hurt by making
jobs scarce. The fact that someone else accepts a job cannot be harmful, unless
the total number of jobs for a specific type of worker is limited.

B. When is Group Search Important?
    Group search is likely to be important when two conditions are met. First, it is
necessary that there be a group of unemployed workers with similar characteristics
who can learn from one another's search. As discussed in the introduction this
is likely to be the case when there are mass layoffs. Workers from the same
firm are likely to share many of the same skills, as well as social and economic
characteristics. The second condition is that workers lack perfect channels of
information concerning the location of productive jobs, so that they value the
information that they might obtain from others' search.
     It is clear that shocks will differ in how well they meet these conditions. For
example, large, permanent shocks are more likely to lead to plant closings and mass
layoffs than are smaller, more temporary shocks. Shocks to a sector or a region are
more likely to destroy information channels than are shocks that are idiosyncratic
to the firm. Workers who are laid off from a struggling firm in a thriving industry

  6 In general, this sort of behavior need not lead to a lower unemployment rate. See Jovanovic
(1987).
18                               CAPLIN AND LEAHY

or region may have friends in other firms in the industry or region through which
they can obtain jobs. In such cases, learning from other unemployed workers may
prove to be less important. Workers laid off during a regional or sectoral downturn
are more likely to benefit from informational spillovers. All in all, it would appear
that the importance of informational externalities would be proportional to the
severity of the adjustment problem that the worker faces.
     We can easily amend the model to include both industry and firm specific
shocks. We only have to note that separation need not necessarily send a worker
into the uninformed state. If the separation is due to a firm shock the worker
enters the informed state instead. The worker loses a job, but not the knowledge
that the industry is productive.
     Suppose that industry shocks occur with probability s, and firm shocks occur
with probability 3. Then defining & = 1/(1 — /3(1 — s — Sf), equations (3.1) and
(3.3) are amended as follows

(3.1') &p + &sp/3Vt + &51p$Jt + (1 —              —c= f3Je — (1 — ir)/3Vt
(3.3')    a  + S$Vt + &31fiJt + (1 — p)$Vt        —c=
                                                      (1— $ )f3Jt — s1fiVt.
Equations (3.2) and (3.4) are unaffected, if is equal to p(1 — s)(1   —


    It is straight forward to show that if we hold s + sj fixed, increases in s-
raise both and 3, and hence the natural rate of unemployment. It is therefore
possible that fluctuations in the natural rate could arise from fluctuations in the
relative importance of industry and firm specific shocks.
   The clean separation between shocks to industries and shocks to firms is
somewhat misleading. It makes it appear that if workers retain any connections
to other employed workers then they do not need to learn from others' search and
that they only learn from others search if all connections to employed workers
are destroyed. This is really a consequence of our simplifying assumptions on the
learning process. In general, workers face a complex signal extraction problem.
Some of the information that they receive prior to employment reflects factors
common to all workers and some of the information that they receive subsequent
to employment is idiosyncratic. In addition, the characteristics that workers share
with other workers are not one dimensional; workers share some characteristics
with some workers and other characteristics with other workers. All of this means
that there is really a continuum of shocks, each of which leads to situations in which
group search is more or less important. Each shock places a group of workers out
                                 MASS LAYOFFS                                     19

of work. Their ability to learn from each other will depend on how similar they
are. Some of these workers may be well connected to workers in other industries
and may find new jobs quite easily. Others workers will lack connections and will
therefore find the information revealed through group search of some value.

C. Search with Recall
     One feature of the model is that we do not allow workers to recall past job
offers. In many search models this is an innocuous assumption, since offers that
were rejected in the past will be rejected again in the present. In the current
setting, however, the possibility that uninformed workers may become informed
means that allowing recall may make a difference.
     There are two possibilities depending on whether or not 4' > in the equi-
librium without recall. If 4, C 4,, then allowing recall makes no difference, since
recalled offers will always fall below the reservation acceptance level. The logic
is the standard one: the reservation match equates the value of accepting any
current offer and waiting, it does not matter how many current offers there are.
     If, however, c 0 then some offers that would be rejected in the uninformed
state would be acceptable in the informed state. If we allow recall, these offers may
be accepted as soon as it is discovered that the market is good. The possession
of these offers therefore increases the value of becoming informed and hence the
value of waiting in the uninformed state. Allowing recall in these cases will tend
to increase the incentive to free ride and raise . With recall uninformed searchers
become more selective.
    The effect of recall on the natural rate appears to be ambiguous. On the one
hand, allowing recall reduces the exit rate from the uninformed state. It may,
however, increase the exit rate from the informed state since some offers will be
recalled immediately when searchers become informed. Although fewer groups of
searchers will be informed, those that are informed will find employment more
quickly.

D. Ezperimerdation
     Possibly the most severe restriction placed upon the model was the require-
ment that all workers of a given type search in the same market. We now discuss
the implications of relaxing this assumption.
 20                                  CAPLIN AND LEAHY

      The first thing to note is that workers have an incentive to search in separate
industries. Consider a worker who accepts a job in an industry in which the
common match parameter is low. If that worker is searching in the same industry
as all other workers then there is no way that the worker can benefit from the search
behavior of others; the worker knows that because they are in the same industry
any jobs that they accept will also have low productivity, If, however, the worker
is searching elsewhere, then it is possible that the worker will become informed
even though the industry in which the worker is searching is unproductive.
     The immediate implication of the fact that workers search in different indus-
tries is that it makes aggregation difficult. It multiplies the number of possible
states in which a group of N workers might find themselves. It is possible that
several workers may find jobs in separate industries at the same time, and work-
ers' welfare will depend on how many different industries are known to have good
matches at any given time. Workers who know of only one good industry become
uninformed upon separation, whereas workers who know of several may search in
one of the surviving industries.
     In spite of this apparent complexity, there are several qualitative points con-
cerning the nature of this equilibrium that may be addressed verbally.7 First, while
allowing search in separate industries makes aggregation problematic, it is clear
that the basic economic forces, namely the information externality and the in-
centive to free ride, are not altered in any essential way by this generalization.
When agent's search in separate industries, the probability of becoming informed
becomes,8
                              = 1 — [1 —(1 —           —

As before it' is decreasing in . Agents still take into account the fact that they
may learn from others, and this causes them to be too selective in the jobs that
they take. The natural rate remains suboptimally high.
     Second, several new phenomenon arise when we allow search in separate in-
dustries. Even if all workers search in separate industries in the uninformed state,
there is still too little experimentation in the informed state. Once a worker learns

      See Caplin and Leahy (1993e) for a more formal treatment of the issues raised in this
discussion.

    The probability that a single agent accepts a job is 1 — . The probability that this job is
productive is p. And the probability that it survives is 1 —s. So the probability that no other
agent is in a productive job in the next period is [1 — (1 — )p(1 —
                                  MASS LAYOFFS                                      21

of a good industry, the worker has no incentive to continue searching elsewhere.
There is, however, a social benefit to discovering other productive industries so
that when workers lose their jobs they know where to search in order to find pro-
ductive ones. A social planner may want to dedicate a small subset of workers of
a given type to the task of searching for new markets in which the common match
component is high.
     Finally, even though uninformed workers have an incentive to search in sep-
arate industries, it is still the case that the private incentive to diversify is not
as strong as the social incentive. To see this suppose that industries differed in
their ez ante probability of having a good match. This amendment creates an
incentive to search in the best industry that counteracts the incentive to search
away from the crowd. There exists some differential in the probabilities between
the most promising industry and the next most promising industry such that if
all workers were searching in the most promising industry, each worker would be
indifferent between continuing to search there and searching elsewhere. In this
case there is no private incentive to diversify search, but there is still a social in-
centive. Whereas a worker that chooses to search in another market neither gains
nor loses, all other workers gain. If the most promising market turns out to be
unproductive, these workers will need to look elsewhere for employment and will
benefit from knowing the locations of other productive industries. Therefore once
again there may be too little experimentation in equilibrium.

                                6. CONCLUSION

     We have constructed a model of job search in which unemployed workers
learn from the experience of other unemployed workers. We have shown that
this interaction among searchers leads both to an information externality and an
incentive to free ride, and that these imply that the natural rate of unemployment
is suboptimally high. The model suggests that policies designed to encourage
experimentation and improve the information possessed by the unemployed may
improve welfare.
22                                 CAPLIN AND LEAHY

                                   7. APPENDIX

We need one preliminary result in order to prove Propositions 1 and 2.

     LEMMA 1:     Given any ir E (O,p(l — s)), and any pair Jt and Vt that solve
equations (3.1) through (3.4), J Vt.
   PROOF: Let £ be the set of bounded, continuous functions F : [0,1] —.
[O,1/(l — /)1 with the sup norm. We now define a mapping T: Si x Si -# a x Cl.
For (f(),g() E Cl x Cl, we get T(f,g), the components of which we will denote
TI and Tg, as follows:
         Tf() = max{a$ + (apsfl + 1—p)ft — c,/9gt —(1— ir)flft}
          Tg() = max{a + (asp + 1_ p)ft — c,(1 — s)gt — s$ft}
Here ir .cp(l — s) is exogenous, and ft and ge denote the expectation off and g
respectively.
    Standard dynamic programming arguments (see Stokey and Lucas (1989))
show that the mapping described above is a contraction. Hence by the contraction
mapping theorem, it has a unique fixed point. it is easy to see that this fixed point
is (V(), J(Ø)).
     We now define a sequence (V(#), J8()). Let (1"o, Jo) = (0,0). Let (Vs, J) =
T(V_1,J...1). Now, since p 1, it follows that J1() V1() for all 0.                  Also,
since r c 1 — s and since a + asflV,1 > /3V,_I over the range of 4, that it
matters, J1(0) V_1(4,) implies J(4,) V(4,).
    Finally, since by standard dynamic programming arguments (Va, .1,,) con-
verges to (V, J), it follows that J(4,) V(4,). Therefore Jt Vt This completes
the prool                                                             Q.E.D.
One proof establishes Propositions 1 and 2.

     PROPOSITION 1: There exists a unique solution to equations (3.1)-(3.4) with
, e(0,1).
   PROPOSITION 2: A social planner who maximizes the collective utility of
workers would choose a cutoff in the uninformed state that is lower than the Nash
equilibrium cutoff.

      In the lemma we keep if exogenous. This allows us to apply the lemma to both the Nash
equilibrium and the social planner's problem by substituting the appropriate value of w.
                                   MASS LAYOFFS                                      23

     PROOF: For existence we need to show that there exists a.        and a in [0, 1]
satisfying equations (3.1) through (3.4). The determination of . is exactly as in
the standard, single-agent search model, so existence hinges on the existence of a
' E [0,1) that satisfies equations (3.1) and (3.2) (where ir and Jt in these equations
represent the appropriate functions of Vt and ). The strategy of the proof is to
show that Figure 2 correctly illustrates the relationship between equations (3.1)
and ( 3.2).
     Consider equation ( 3.2) first. It gives the value of being uninformed given
that everyone follows the same policy (throughout this proof we will use to
denote an arbitrary policy and reserve # for the Nash equilibrium):

(71)
                        1—(1—)(aps/9+(1-.p)/9)--$—ir)f3
Note that when equals one, ir equals zero, so that Vt equals zero.
   We now show that equation (7.1) describes Vt as a quasiconcave function of
.   Differentiating with respect to :
        dvt
        dçb
(7.2)     irJt — ap + c — (apsfi + (1 — p)fl —(1 — r)$)Vt + $(J —          Vt)
                 1 —(1 — )(as$p + (1 — p)$) — #(l — ir)$ —

Because   (1) = 1 implies ir = Vt = 0; (2) ap > c by assumption; and (3)
dir/dcb < 0; it follows that dVt/dqS is negative when equals one.
    Consider now the first order condition dVt/dc6 = 0. Setting dV/dçb =         0   in
equation (7.2) and rearranging terms:
              &p_c+[1_p+aps]$Vt=
                     p(1 — s)(i   - N)$Jt + (1- p(l — s)N?_l)flVt.
Define * p(l — .s)(1 — N4/"'). Equation (7.3) can be rewritten as
(7.4)           cxp — c+   [1 —   p+ aps]flVc = frfiJt +(1 — fl9Vt.
It follows immediately that the set of Vt and that satisfy the first order condition
(7.4) have two properties. First, when Vt is zero, e (0, 1). Second, the Vt that
satisfy (7.4) are strictly increasing in 4' so long as Jt > Vt.
     We now show that these two properties together imply that Vt in (7,1) has a
single maximum and is therefore quasiconcave. This is done in four steps. First,
 24                                    CAPLIN AND LEAHY

note that Vt and satisfy both equations (7.1) and (7.4) if and only if dVt/dc8 = 0
in equation ( 7.1). Second, note that there exists a pair Vt and e (0,1) that
satisfies equations (7.1) and (7.4). This follows from the following three facts:
that Vt in (7.1) is zero and decreasing in when equals one; that Vt in (7.4) is
zero when C (0,1) and increasing in 4) so long as P > Vt; and that dVt/dcb = 0
in equation (7.1) implies that Vt and satisfy both equations)° Third, note that
there can be only one pair Vt and that satisfy both equations. This follows from
the following logic. Note from equations (3.3) and (3.4) that 0 < djt/dVt < 1.
Hence there exists a V such that for Vt < p if and only if Vt C Now since
V in equation (7.4) ismonotonic in for Vt <V, and since dVt/d# in (7.1) is
zero whenever V' and 4) satisfy both equations, there can only be one solution for
which Vt c V. Hence, if there are two solutions, then one must have Vt > Je
But this is not possible, since if it were a solution then ir E (O,p(1 — .s)) and by
Lemma 1 Vt .c P. So there is only one solution, which implies that Vt in (7.1)
has either a single maximum or a single minimum. Fourth, this solution must
maximize Vt in (7.1). This follows again from the fact that Vt in (7.1) is zero
and decreasing in when equals one, whereas Vt in (7.4) is zero when 4' C (0, 1)
and increasing in 4) so long as P > Vt. Hence Vt in (7.1) has a single maximum;
this shows that Vt in (7.1) is a quasiconcave function of 4'.
     We now turn to equation (3.1). The Nash equilibrium Vt and must satisfy
both equation (7.1) and the first order condition (3.1)
(3.1)           cxpçb —     c = ir$Jt + [(1— ir) —(1 —p)— crpsj$Vt.
Note that when vt equals zero, the that satisfies (3.1) is in (0, 1). Note also
that the Vt that satisfy (3.1) for a given 3.1 are monotonically increasing in 4)
for Vt C P. Finally, note that since ir c *, the Vt that solves (3.1) for a given
4' is less than the Vt that satisfies (7.4). Together these facts imply that there
exists a Vt and a 4) E (0,1) that satisfy both (3.1) and (3.2). This proves that
equilibrium exists and completes the proof of Proposition 1.
     A second consequence of this last set of facts is that ( 3.1) intersects (7.1)
at a 4) which is greater than the that maximizes Vt in (7.1). Since the social
planner chooses the 4) that maximizes Vt, we have both that the Nash equilibrium
is suboptimal and that the Nash equilibrium cut off is greater than the social
planner's cutoff 4) This completes the proof of Proposition 2.            Q.E.D.
 '° Note W in (7.1)   is   bounded so it is not possible for both curves to asymptote to infinity
without crossing.
                                    MASS LAYOFFS                                 25

                               8.   REFERENCES


ATEESON, ANDREW, AND PATRICK KEHOE (1992): "Industry Evolution and Transition:
  The Role of Informational Capital," mimeo, Univ. of Chicago.
BANERJEE, ABRIJIT (1992): "A Simple Model of Herd Behavior," Quarterly Journal of
   Economies 107, 797-818.
BIKHCHANDANI, SUSHIL, DAVID HIRSCHLEIFER, AND Ivo WELCH (1992): "A Theory of
   Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades," Journal of
   Political Economy 100, 992-1026.
CAPLIN, ANDREW, AND JOHN LEAHY (1993a): "Miracle on Sixth Avenue: Information
   Externalities and Search," mimeo, Columbia Univ..
CAPLIN, ANDREW, AND JOHN LEAKY (1993b): "Sectoral Shocks, Learning, and Aggre-
   gate Fluctuations," Review of Economic Studies 60, 777-794.
CAPLIN, ANDREW, AND JOHN LEAKY (1993c): "Business as Usual, Market Crashes, and
    Wisdom after the Fact," American Economic Review, forthcoming..
CAPLIN, ANDREW, AND JOHN LEAKY (1993d): "The Economics of Adjustment, " in
   Rod Cross, ed., The Naturvi Rate of Unemployment Twenty Years On, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
CAPLIN, ANDREW, AND JOHN LEAKY (1993e): "Imitation, mimeo, Columbia Univ..
CHAMLEY, CHRISTOPHE, AND DOUGLAS GALE (1992): "Information Revelation and
   Strategic Delay in a Model of Investment," Econometrica, forthcoming.
DAVIS, STEVEN, AND JOHN HALTIWANGER (1992): "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job
   Destruction, and Employment," Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 819-864.
DIAMOND, PETER (1981): "Mobility Costs, Frictional Unemployment, and Efficiency,"
   Journal of Political Economy 89, 798-812.
FRIEDMAN, MILTON (1968): "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review
    56, 1-17.
GRoSSMAN, SANFORD, AND JOSEPH STIGLITZ (1980): "On the Impossibility oflnforma-
    tionally Efficient Markets," American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
HALL, ROBERT (1979): "A Theory of the Natural Unemployment Rate and the Duration
    of Employment," Journal of Monetary Economics 5, 159-169.
H0IzER, HARRY (1988): "Seach Method Use by Unemployed Youth," Journal of Labor
    Economics 6, 1-20.
HoWin, PETER (1988): "Business Cycles with Costly Search and Recruiting," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 103, 147-166.
JOVANOVIC, BOYAN (1979): "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," Journal of
    Political Economy 87, 972-990.
J0VANOVIC, BOYAN (1987): "Work, Rest, and Search: Unemployment, Turnover, and
    the Cycle," Journal of Labor Economics 5, 131-148-
LUCAS, ROBERT, AND EDWARD PRESCOTT (1974): "Equilibrium Search and Unemploy-
   ment," Journal of Economic Theory 7, 188-209-
MONTGOMERY, JAMES (1991): "Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward
   an Economic Analysis," American Economic Review 81, 1408-1418.
MORTENSEN, DALE (1982): "The Matching Process as a Non-Cooperative Bargaining
   Game, " in J. McCall, ed., The Economics of Information and Uncertainty, Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press.
MORTENSEN, DALE, AND TARA VISHWANATH (1992): "Personal Contacts and Earnings:
   It is Who You Know!," Labour Economics, forthcoming.                     -
PHELPS, EDMUND (1968): "Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium,"
   Journal of Political Economy 76, -
26                               CAPLIN AND LEAHY

REES,  ALKEItT (1966): "Information Networks in Labor Markets," American Economic
    Review 56, 559-566.
Ron, RAFAEL (July 1991): "Learning and Capacity Expansion under Demand Uncer-
    tainty," Review of Economic Studies 58, 655-675.
STAIGER, Douc (1990): "The Effect of Connections on the Wages and Mobility of Young
    Workers, " rnimeo, M.I.T..
T0BIN, JAMES (1972): "Inflation and Unemployment," American Economic Review 60,
     148.
WANOIJS, JohN (1992): Organizational Entry. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
