                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           AGGLOMERATION BENEFITS AND
                          LOCATION CHOICE: EVIDENCE FROM
                             JAPAt4ESE MANtJFACI'URJNO
                         INVESTMENT IN ThE UNiTED STATES




                                       Keith Head
                                        John Ries
                                     Deborah Swenson




                                  Working Paper No. 4767




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1994



This paper is part of NBER'sreseaich program in International Trade and Investment Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Reseaich.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4767
                                                                                     June 1994


                            AGGLOMERATION BENEFITS AND
                          LOCATION CHOICE: EVIDENCE FROM
                              JAPANESE MANUFACTURING
                          INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES


                                          ABSTRACT


       Recent theories of economic geography suggest that fums in the same industry may be

drawn to the same locations because proximity generates positive externalities or "agglomeration

effects." Under this view, chance events and government inducements can have a lasting

influence on the geographical pauern of manufacturing. However, most evidence on the causes

and magnitude of industry localization has been based on stories, rather than statistics. This

paper examines the location choices of 751 Japanese manufacturing plants built in the U.S. since

1980. Conditional logit estimates support the hypothesis that industry-level agglomeration
benefits play an important role in location decisions.



Keith Head                                                        John Ries
Faculty of Commerce                                               Faculty of Commerce
University of British Columbia                                    University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall                                                    2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2                                             Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
CANADA                                                            CANADA



Deborah Swenson
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
I INTRODUCTION
Firms in the same industry tend to cluster in particular regions. White this observation is

not novel, it has become the basis for a number of recent formal models. Economists have

proposed agglomeration effects in the form of both pecuniary and technological externalities

to explain industry localization. However, empirical work in this area has yet to establish

the pervasiveness of externalities based on geographical proximity. Furthermore, we have little

idea of the distances over which such effects operate. The recent influx of hundreds of new

manufacturing plants from Japan into the U.S. provides a unique opportunity to study the

location decision, It also raises the new issue of whether agglomeration effects, to the extent

that they exist, operate on a nationality-specific basis.

   Empirical information on these issues is partictiarly important for the design of policies

aimed at attracting manufacturing investment. For instance, if agglomeration is at least partly

nationality-specific, a locality with a sparse U.S. manufacturing base might find it easier to

develop its manufacturing sector by attracting foreign affiliates than by attracting U.S. invest-

ment. Moreover, the existence of agglomeration externalities that spill across official borders

will alter the payoffs of local goveninients competing for investment.

   This paper estimates a location choice model using data on Japanese investors who estab-

lished new manufacturing plants in the United States. We find that the Japanese ventures do

not simply mimic the geographical pattern of U.S. establishments in their industry. Instead,

initial investments by Japanese firms spur subsequent investors in the same 'industry or indus-

trial group to select the same states. We argue that this pattern of location choice supports an

agglomeration-externalities theory of industry localization rather than a theory based on inter-

state differences in endowments of natural resources, labour, and infrastructure. Moreover, we

find that the geographic extent of manufacturing agglomeration does not end at state borders;


                                                 1
the attractivcness of a state increases with the level of industrial activity in neighbouring states.

      Theoretical analysis has developed various explanations for manufacturing agglomeration.

The early work of Marshall (1920) provides three compelling reasons for spatially concentrated

industries: Localization provides a pooled market for workers with specialized skills, facilitates

the development of specialized inputs and services, and enables firms to benefit from technolog-

ical spillovers. Recent papers by David and Rosenbloozn (1990) and Krugman (1991a, 1991b)

have constructed formal models to analyze and extend these concepts.

      There have been few empirical studies of agglomeration effects. H       non (1986) examines

data for the United States and Brazil and finds strong evidence that industry localization raises

factor productivity. Glaeser et al (1992) do not find a positive relationship between industry

concentration and city employment growth. Instead, they attribute city growth to Industry

diversity and competition. They posit that the lack of dynamic agglomeration effects may arise

because their sample consists of mature industries.

      Previous studies of the investment location decision generally use a measure of aggregate

manufacturing activity as an explanatory variable. Recent studies of this type include Wheeler

and Mody (1992), Woodward (1992), Coughlin et al (1991), and Schmenner et al (1987). They

find that firms are drawn to regions with heavy manufacturing activity. The few studies of

industry-level location choice have focused on a limited set of industries. Carlton's (1983)

study of domestic finns and Luger and Shetty's (1985) study of foreign firms find evidence of

industry-level effects in three specific industries. Smith and Florida (1992) study the invest-

ments of Japanese auto-related parts suppliers and show that they tend to locate near Japanese

assembly plants and prefer areas with greater aggregate manufacturing activity. Past studies do

not      quately distinguish between endowment and industry-level agglomeration effects. Man-

ufacturing activity is likely to be correlated with a number of unmeasured factors favourable to


                                                 2
 specific locations: thus, the coefficient measuring the attractive power of manufacturing activity

 partly captures the effect of unobserved endowments.

    This study contributes to understanding industry agglomeration in a number ways. We ex-

plicitly account for state-specific effects (including overall manufacturing activity) by employing

state-specific constants. This should capture a number of sources of unobserved variation be-

tween states. Our study comprises investments in 225 different 4-digit manufacturing industries.

For each investment, the geographical pattern of U.S. establishments in its industry serves as

a control for industry-specific location factors. We argue that Japanese deviations from this

pattern suggest agglomeration effects. in addition we examine whether znemben of Japanese

industrial groups—known as *eiretsu—tend to cluster geographically. Since these affiliations

often involve the subcontracting of components and other less tangible ties, a tendency for their

members to cluster would offer additional evidence of agglomeration. Finally, we allow the

attractiveness of a state to depend on its own industry clusters as well as those in bordering

states.

   The organization of the paper is as follows. Section II presents several theoretical accounts

of agglomeration externalities and the alternative theory that we refer to as endowment-driven

localization. Section III describes our research design, the main hypothesis we test and al-

ternative hypotheses we consider. Section IV discusses the data set and the construction of

agglomeration measures. Presentation of econometric results follows in Section V. This section

employs a simulation to assess the strength of the estimated agglomeration effects. We conclude

with a summary of the major results and a discussion of their potential policy implications.




                                                3
  II THEORIES OF LOCALIZATION

  Localization, the geographic concentration of particular industries, could arise through a variety

  of mechanisms. The general category we are interested in, agglomeration effects, includes all

  economies that are an increasing function of the number of nearby firms. The cumulative loca-

  tion choices that constitute the process of agglomeration allow accidents of history to influence

  the long-run geographical pattern of industry. Local expansion of a sector sows the seeds for

 further expansion by increasing the supply of the factor that made the location attractive in the

 first place, rather than simply bidding up the price of a given stock. Theoretical attempts to

 formalize agglomeration effects have focused on three mechanisms that would yield such positive

 feedback loops: inter-fit-ni technological spillovers, specialized labor, and intermediate inputs.

     The vague and general concept of technological spiflovers is probably the most frequently

 invoked source of agglomeration effects. tTscfui technical information seems to flow between

 entrepreneurs designers, and engineers in a variety of industries. A large part of the spillovers

 between foreign-owited fijins may include the flow of experience-based knowledge on how to

operate efficiently in a given state) Physical proximity may enhance knowledge flows by mA-

ing casual communication less costly. Since technological spillovers axe usually impossible to

measure, we know little about the geographical extent of these spillovers, the degree to which

they operate within industries versus between industries, and the extent to which they flow

between firms of different national origins. While the prosperity of the high-tecbnolo cluster

in Silicon Valley and the high-fashion cluster in Milan may arise from local knowledge spiUoven,

less ephemeral stories involving specialized labour and parts may play equally important roles.

    As indicated by Marshalj localized industry creates a pooled market for workers with. ape-

    Example, of such information would iuclude experience. with meeting local government regulations, adopting
to the local climate and labout- force, sad low-cost transportation options.



                                                        4
cialized skills. This ant-acts workers for two reasons. First, as argued by David and Rosenbloom

(1990), if the fortunes of individual firms are not perfectly correlated, the spatial concentration

of industry is advantageous to laid-off workers who will be able to find new jobs with other firms.

Hence, an increased number of firms reduces the likelihood that a worker will suffer a long bout

of unemployment. This reduced risk will ultimately benefit the firms as well by increasing the

supply of specialized labour and reducing the risk premium embodied in the wage. Rotemberg

and Saloner (1990) propose what could be seen as a complementary effect. Workers in a given

location will be more inclined to invest in industry-specific human capital if they feel confident

of their ability to appropriate the benefits. A monopsony situation might allow the employer to

capture the benefits instead. Thus, by mitigating the hold-up problem, agglomeration generates

the development of more industry-specific skills.

   Krugman (1991b) argues that the combination of scale economies and moderate transporta-

tion costs will encourage the users and suppliers of intennediate inputs to cluster near each

other. Such agglomerations reduce total transportation costs and generate large enough lev-

els of demand to warrant efforts to produce highly specialized components. This will attract

assemblers which in turn encourages new arrivals and additional specialization.

   The "just-in-time" inventory system employed by many Japanese manufacturers raises the

total cost of transporting parts because it requires flexible and punctual deliveries. Due to the

importance this system places on reliability and trust, it may also encourage specialization in

the form of long-term relationships. These arguments suggest that agglomeration effects will

exert a particularly strong influence on Japanese manufacturers as they attempt to transplant

their production systems to North America.

   While recent theoretical work has concentrated on agglomeration models of industry local-

ization, a simple alternative hypothesis, endowment-driven localization, draws on traditional


                                                 5
trade theory. The latter theory argues that industries will concentrate in regions with favor-

able factor endowments. For instance, sawmills might congregate in a particular state to take

advantage of its abundant supply of high quality timber. A broad view of factor-endowments

would include man-made inputs whose supply is not affected by the output of any particular

Jndustr'.
   in both   theories of localization, firms in the same industry cluster geographically; however,

only in the presence of agglomeration externalities does the clustering add to the attractive-

ness of the location. For instance the existence of an immobile and exogenously supplied input

would tend to attract investment from industries that use that input intensively. However, as

firms congregate, the location becomes less attractive since competition among users bids up

the price of the input. A corresponding phenomena could occur on the demand side if exoge-

nous forces had promoted the concentration of downstream demand for a particular industry.

These considerations suggest an important difference between the theories: agglomeration ben-

efits could result in two states with identical endowments receiving very different shares of the

investment in any particular industry. This study will estimate the magnitude of industry-level

agglomeration effects and assess their importance in location decisions.



III Research Design
We model the location decision of Japanese manufacturing plants as a conditional logit prob-

lem where the dependent variable is the state chosen by each investor. Following the method

employed in earlier studies such as Carlton (1983) and Bartili (1985), we exploit McFadden's

(1974) result that logit choice probabilities may be derived from individual maximization de-

cisions if unobserved heterogeneity takes the appropriate form. We assume that each investor

chooses the state that would yield the highest profit. Profits depend on the availability of inputs

                                                 6
 that enter in the firms production function which include agglomeration effects stemming from

 nearby economic activity of similar firms. Idiosyncratic shocks, denoted c11, also affect profits

but they are not observed by the econometrician. As derived in the appendix, the profitability

of state a for investor j may be represented as



                            8,   + cxrglnA7,5 + crj in A], +aehiA +€,,,                                      (1)


where 8, captures the attractiveness of state a to the "average' (or representative) investor

and 45, A],, and A% are agglomeration variables measured as counts of U.S., Japanese, and

Group (keiretsu) establishments. Each measure varies across investors, j, since investors differ

by industry, Leiretsu membership, and time of entry. The state effect reflects infrastructure, the

prices of variable inputs such as labour, raw materials, and energy as well as any other state

characteristic important to the averageJapanese investor.

   McFadden (1074) demonstrated that if, and only if,            'j, is distributed as a Type I Extreme
Value independent random variable the probability that state a will yield investor j the highest

profit.s among all the states in choice set $ is given by the logit expression,


                                             exp(8, + LEA a, In A,)
                                 PrOs) =                                                                     (2)
                                           Eap(9g+EInA1)'
where 4 = {US, J, G}. Maximum likelihood            techniques   use these probabilities to estimate the

state-specific constants and agglomeration coefficients.

   Our use of state effects contrasts with the approach taken by previous studies of location

decisions in manufacturing in which the authors explicitly included state cha]racteristi audi

as wages, unionization rates, energy prices, and access to a major port.2 The problem with

  'Friedman ct at (1992) isa recent example. It provides a tabular snmmazy of result. fran, previou, work.


                                                     7
 that approach sterns fioni the near impossibility of selecting and correctly measuring all of

 the relevant infrastructure and input pt-ice information that affect location decisions. Omitted

 sources of attractiveness would almost certainly induce a correlation between the error term and

 the agglomeration variables. State effects can include influences on the location decision that

 sic particularly difficult to measure, ranging from the strength of the work ethic in a particular

state to the quality of its golf courses.

    While 9 captures the attractiveness of state s to the average investor, unobserved charac-

teristics of choosers can still make some states closer substitutes in the eyes of certain investors.

Suppose that the parametet-s of the production function vary across industries but are constant

for investments in the same 4-digit industry, in this case, firms in industries with high factor

intensities will choose states with abundant endowments of those factors. For priced inputs, low

prices will indicate abundance. This suggests that industry-level agglomeration variables wiU be

correlated with the unobserved factor conditions pertaining to that industry that constitute the

error term in our model. With a large enough data set, featuring multiple investments in each

industry, this problem could be resolved by including state-industry-specific constants. How-

ever, since our sample of 751 investments includes plants in over 200 different 4-digit industries,

this strategy is not feasible.

   The use of a sample of new foreign investors—the Japanese influx during the 1980e—provides

an alternative strate' for separating agglomeration and endowment effects. The geographical

distribution of U.S. establishments in a particular industry should incorporate all the relevant

information on the abundance of endowments used intensively in that industry. Significant draw-

ing power of prior Japanese investment, after controlling for the U.S. pattern, should provide
an indication of agglomeration effects.

   The empirical investigation distinguishes between alternative explanations for Japanese inca-


                                                S
tion patterns that deviate from those of U.S. firms in the same industry. In addition to Japanese-

specific agglomeration effects, there are two primary explanations for distinctive Japanese pat-

texts. The first is that Japancse firms cluster in the same states regardless of industry for

fundamental reasons, i.e. Japanese investors might choose a state because they want to be

on the Pacific coast, or in a low-unionization state or near major population centers. These

effects would be captured by the state-specific constants. A second possibility is that Japanese

investors concentrate by industry due to systematic forms of heterogeneity that make particu-

lar locations intrinsically attractive for certain types of Japanese investment. For instance, if

a subset of investors, such as auto firms, rely disproportionately on intermediate inputs, they

would exhibit preference for states with superior transportation facilities. We attempt to weed

out such potential sources of uncontrolled-for inter-industry variation by testing the robustness

of our formulation to deletions of particular regions from the choice set and industries from the

investor set.



IV DATA
The data employed in this paper come from a survey of Japanese manufacturing investments

in the United States conducted by the Japan Economic Institute. For each plant in the sample

we know the year it began operations, the identity of the parent firm or firma, and the products

it manufactures. Since most policy discussion focuses on efforts to attract new (also known sa

"greenfield") investments, we excluded acquisitions from the sample.3

    Our estimation includes investments that began operations alter 1979. The previous in-

vestments are used to form the Japanese agglomeration levels as of the beginning of i980. The

   'The location modelfor new investment probably differs in important ways frot the model for acquisitions.
Since acquisitions involve changes in ownership rather than the creation of new atablasliments. they have am-
biguous effects on our agglomeration measure,. Furthermore, while new ventura may locate wherever they want,
acquirors an limited to the current locations of potential targets.

                                                      9
smaller estimation window rcduces potential variation in relative infrastructure levels and factor

prices. Also, since the character of Japanese direct investment may have changed over time, this

reduces unobserved heterogeneity. Finally, the use of the later data allows for a closer match

with our U.S. data which was drawn from the 1982 and 1987 censuses. The post-1979 sample

dontains over 80% of Japanese manufacturing investments in the United States.

   Figure 1 depicts the geographical pattern of all greenfleld Japanese investment. Below each

value for Japanese investment we give the percentage of U.S. establishments in that state in

1982. Since the U.S. sample is constructed from the same set of 4-digit industries as the Japanese

sample, we would expect the upper and lower numbers to match very closely if there were no

special influences on the location of Japanese investment.

   A number of states received no Japanese investment at all. The data in Figure 1 reveals

that those states—namely Delaware. Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, North and South Dakota,

Rhode Island and Wyoming—are quite unpopular with U.S. manufacturers as well. Conditional

logit requires that all choices be selected at least once. Consequently we removed those states

from the choice set. We further reduced the choice set by removing states (Hawaii, Louisiana,

Maine, Minnesota, New Hampshire, Utah, Vermont and West Virginia) which received fewer

than 3 investments after 1979. This reduces the number of estimated parameters by 8 while

reducing the sample by only 9 observations. Given the independence from irrelevant alternatives

assumption built into the logit specification, the reduction in the choice set should not affect

the other parameter estimates.

   We estimate the effects of four types of agglomeration variable on the location choice. In

each case agglomeration is measured as a count of establishments the year before the venture be-

gan operations. We selected establishr    t counts, rather than production or employment levels,


                                                10
 Figure 1: The Geographical Distribution of Japanese and U.S. Manufacturing Establishmeuts

                                                                                                     0.I
                                                                                                     0.4
                     7,5
                                                                                               0.I
                                           0.0
               2.1                         0. 7
               72

                                                                                                               87

                       07                                                                                     0.0
          Is.','                                                                                              0.I
           l5.0\


           -
                           \     oi/
                                 0.8              0.0
                                                  02
                                       /
                                              ________I




                               0_I




  : Figure. exprcsbed as percentages o( the Japan total of 900 greenfield investments sad the U.S. total 1982 stock
tf 229292 n.aaufactuñag establishments. (iS. figures based on 1982 Census of Msaufscturiag Data for .11 4-digit
SIC industries that received some grecufield iap.uiese investment.


because that allowed us to construct equivalent measures of Japanese and U.S. agglomeration.4

    The following list defines the four types of agglomeration effects investigated in this study.


U.S. activity; A.5 Number of establishments in same4-digit SIC. Investments that began op-

      erations between 1980 and                         1984   (inclusive) are matched to 1982 Census of Manufacturing

      counts. Later investments are matched to the 1987 Census.

   'Data confidentiality in the U.S. Census of Manufacturing results in establishments bang the only variale
which is available for every state in every 4-digit SIC industry. there is a slight difference between the Japanese
and U.S. establishment counts. The (1.5. data put. each establishment in one industry. We have data on multi-
product Japanese plants which does not indicate the primary SIC of the plant. It see. reasonabl, that a urn
producing two products would care about the activity in both industries in each state. Renc., we count each
product line as a separate plant for calculating the relennt agglomeration variables. Nate, however, that we
model multi-product plants as siugle choosers in the estimation.




                                                                       11
Japan-based activity Af,      Number of plants operating in same 4-digit SIC in the year before

      investmeut j began operations. Source: Japan Economic Institute 1990 Updated Survey.

Industrial Group member activity A5 Number of establishments in same manufacturer-
      led keiretsu. Group affiliations were compiled using Kigyo Keiretsu Sornn, a publication

      of Toyo Keizai.

Border-State Activity: EtEo() A' where i = US, JIG. B(s) is the set of states with borders
      on state s.


   The two industt-y-level agglomeration variables (AUS and A") make use of the standard

industrial classification tables. We employ the relatively detailed 4-digit level of disaggregation.

These "industries" frequently lump disparate activities together but they may also separate
closely related industries. We have found several cases where the use of standard classifications

causes an understatement of Japancse industrial concentration. For instance, Japanese firms

made 41 investments in industry 3089, 'plastic parts, not elsewhere classified" However, 22 of

those plants produced plastic parts for automobiles. Of the remaining 19 plants, 32% selected

Georgia compared to 2% of all U.S. establishments in industry 3089. Machine tools provides a

case where insufficient aggregation hides the extent of agglomeration. Five of thirteen Japanese

makers of machine tools for metal cutting (SIC 3541), two of six makers of cutting tools (SIC

3545), and four of five makers of the numerical controls used for machine tools (SIC 3625) chose

illinois. While Illinois is relatively strong in each industry, it accounts for little more than 10%

of the U.S. establishments in these industries.

   The last two sources of agglomeration effects, industrial groups and activities in border-

states require some additional explanation. With respect to A6, we consider only industrial or

vertical" groups; i.e. those headed by large manufacturing companies whose members consist


                                                  12
largely of component suppliers. Vertical linkages are likely to be strong in these groups which

may motivate them to locate close to each other in order to access supplies and facilitate infor-

mation exchange. We exclude bank-centered or "horizontal' groups which are largely defined

by financial linkages and tend to behave more like diversified conglomerates. Since state borden

are rather arbitrary boundaries for the extent of agglomeration effects, we created border-state

variants of AUS, A, and A0 by summing the number of firms in adjacent states. These vari-

ables allow for the possibility that, for example, Indiana is attractive to widget manufacturera

not only because of the widget producers there but also because of widget producers in illinois.

Ohio, Michigan and Kentucky.



V RESULTS
Table 1 presents the agglomeration coefficients generated by maximum likelihood estimation of

equation (2). The estimation included state-specific constants which we omitted from the results

table- Column (1) provides the benchmark model estimates where we test whether Japanese

ventures emulate their American counterparts. This specification desdibes location choice when

country-of-origin effects are absent or the case where the number of U.S. firms acts as a proxy

for industry-specific endowment effects. The estimated coefficient reveals that Japanese firms

locate in regions where there are a relatively large number of U.S. establishments in the same

industry, If the error term is an independently drawn disturbance, the coefficient on in AUS

measures   the impact of agglomeration on location choice. However, the endowment 'theory of

localization (described in Section II) suggests that the error term, ej. in equation (I), will be

correlated with AUS, in which case the coefficient on In AU$ will reflect endowment effects in

addition to agglomeration economies,

   Columns (2) and (3) reveal a "follow-the-leader" pattern of Japanese investment that is

                                                13
            Table 1: Agglomeration Effects on Location Choice

                               Dependent Variable: Location Choice
                           (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)

inA5                     0.600        0.505          0.502      0.490        0.476
                        (0.060)      (0.060)        (0.060)    (0.060)      (0.061)

in EEB(S) AV5            0286         0.218          0.216      0.233        0.243
                        (0071)       (0.070)        (0.070)    (0.070)      (0.071)

in .4                                 0.667          0.503      0.591         0.592
                                     (0.092)        (0.094)    (0.095)       (0.095)

lnEjEa(J) Af                          0.449          0.405      0.362        0.363
                                     (0.093)        (0.094)    (0.096)      (0.096)

In A                                                 0.768      0.749        0.749
                                                    (0.131)    (0.131)      (0.131)

hi EeEB(.) A?                                        0.342      0.301        0.301
                                                    (0.140)    (0.143)      (0.143)

USGROWTH                                                                     0.110
                                                                            (0.085)

Log-Likelihood  -2173.39            -2127.13        -2108.82   -2065.22    -2064.38
No. of Choosers   751.                 751.           751        751           751
No. of Choices     34                   34            34          34           34
Note: Conditional logit regression. estimated by "4'iiS likelihood. Standard e
     ron in parentheses. Alternative specific constants were cployed in each a-
        tisnation. Columns (4) and (5) were estimated with .ta*&sped*c time trends
        a. well. A. correspond. to a stock of firm, operating in states it the be-
        ginning of the year when the relevant ventures began operations. It includes
        that venture. The superscripts /. US. sad C refer to Japanese plants in the
        ventures 4-digit SIC, US establishments in the 4-digit SIC, and plants at least
         50% owned by member, of the parent company's industry poup. .9(s) is the
        set of states that border state a. Hence, the summation is the aggregate stock
        in adjacent states.




                                               14
difficult to interpret as anything other than agglomeration effects. The location of Japanese

investments is significantly influenced by the locations of previous Japanese investments in the

same industry and/or keiretsu. The larger             coefficients on the Japanese agglomeration vari-

ables suggest that the attractive effect of prior Japanese investment exceeds that of prior U.S.

investment.5 The large significant coefficient on In A' corroborates our hypothesis that supply

relationships between Japanese firms and technological spillovers are stronger between members

of the same industrial keiretsu.

    Adding the Japanese industry and group counts significantly improves the explanatory power

of the regression equation. The likelihood ratio test overwhelmingly rejects the hypothesis that

the four Japan-specific variables (within-state and border-state at' and A°) have no explanatory

power.6 Moreover, including these variables detracts little from the significance of the U.S.

variables. The following reasons cause us to believe that the estimated coefficients reflect more

than simple correlation between location decisions and unobserved state industry endowments.

To begin, we would expect the coefficients on the U.S. variables to capture this correlation.

If the same unobservables were responsible for the estimated effect on Japanese counts, they

would not result in the significant new information demonstrated by the !ik.i;hood ratio test.

Moreover, we would expect the Japanese variables to share the measured effect of the U.S.

variable in column (1) which they clearly do not.

    We added the industrial group variable, A0, in column (3) to determine whether vertical

linkages might provide an additional impetus to Japanese firms' location decision beyond the

draw of previous investments in the same industry. For example, a firm that produces plastic

auto parts might be attracted to a state that has considerable auto production even if there were

   'A likelihood ratio test of the hypothesis that the U.S. sad Japanese effects (within-state and horde-state)
are equal reject. at the 0.04 confidence level.
   'The test statistic is 129 and the critical value for significance at the 0.005 level is 15.



                                                      15
 no concentration of plastic parts producers in that state. We also hypothesized that member

 firms might locate near each other to i-cap the benefits of shared infonnation. Column (3)

 estimates show that group member activity provides a strong attractive force for investment

 decisions.

     We   tested analogous agglomeration measures which indicated border-state industry activity

 by U.S. firms, Japanese firms, and kciretsiz members in addition to the within-state agglom-

eration variables. The statistical significance of all three border-state variables indicate that

agglomeration externalities cross state boundaries, although, as one might expect, the mag-

nitude of the effect declines. While anecdotal accounts suggest that agglomeration benefits

operate over small geographic areas such as cities, our results suggest that they extend over

greater distances. A group of states becomes collectively more attractive through the activity of

each of its members, creating an industrial "cluster" that could extend for hundreds of miles.7

    One potential problem for interpreting the effect of A"' is that the Japanese ventures, for the

most part, started more recently than the American ones. Because most Japanese investments

occurred later, it is possible that relative levels of infrastructure or factor prices changed from

those prevailing at the time U.S. firms made their location decisions. The apparent Japanese

agglomeration might then arise solely as a response to the new conditions faced by the Japanese

firms when they made their investments.8

    We allow for changes in the relative attractiveness of states by adding state-specific time

trends.9 This makes the model robust to trends affecting the relative attractiveness of a state in

the eyes of the average investor. Column (4) displays estimates of the agglomeration elasticities

  'However, border-.tsite activity is not always dist.at, as it may involve odes like St. Louis that .tn4dle state
borders.
   'Relocation costs might generate tbe inertia implied by U.S. firm.' decisioc, to raia in locations where
environmental factors have become unfavorable. however, agglomeration effects could be at work — well.
   'The appendix contains a derivation of these time trends slowing what forms of change they can sceomodate.




                                                       16
when these state time trends are included. While a likelihood ratio test reveals that inclusion of

the time trends adds significant explanatory power (p-value.005) to
                                                                    the specification, they do

not affect the magnitude or the significance of the coefficients on the agglomeration variables.

Therefore, alihough relative state attractiveness changed over the 1980s, the measured Japanese

igglomeration effects do more than reflect trends in the attractiveness of individual states.

    To the extent that there are industry-specific effects, we need to provide acontrol for changes

that make a state more attractive during the sample period for certain industries but not
others. We employ a variable cailcd USGROWTH which is the growth rate iii the number

of establishments in each industry-state between the 1982 and 1987 census.t° The inclusion of

USGROWTH should sharply diminish the significance of the Japanese agglomeration if the

latter variables simply reflect recent changes in industry-specific endowment effects. As shown in

column (5), USGRQWTH does not have a significant effect on locationchoice and its presence

has a negligible effect on the coefficients of the agglomeration variables.


 V-A Interpretation of Coefficients

 Interpreting the magnitude of the coefficient estimates is not straightforward in the logit model.

 The ratios of the coefficients correspond to the ratios of parameters in the underlying production

 function. Thus, in column (3), the elasticity of output with respect to border-state agglomera-

 tion ranges between 43% and 67% of the elasticity with respect to within-state agglomeration.

 The question remains whether the within-state agglomeration effects0.5O, 0.60, and 0.77—are

 "large" numbers. One way to assess their magnitude is to express them as average probability

                                                                                  j
 elasticities. The elasticity of the probability of a particular investor choosing state i with

   1Deinitiontof isduimnea changed in 1987. To ma3e the 1982 and 1987 sales coapetibk, we atated composite
                                                                               SIC 2656 or 265? nader the 1987
 industry definitions. For instance. 1977 SKi 2651 sad 2654 became Stbcr the sum of 2651 sad 2654 for 1982
 classification system. For this case, we created a composite industry that is
 sad the .u of 2656 sad 2057 for 1987. USGROII'TH measures the powth rateof that composite iadnstry.


                                                      17
respect to agglomeration variable .4 can be calculated by differentiating equation (2).


                                  =   OPr(js) A'           -
                                                         = a(l —
                                                                 PrQs)).
                                       Ok     Pr(js)


Summing over all choosers (j) and choices (s) we obtain the relationship between average prob-

ability elasticities and the coefficient estimate, 6,.


                                       =E=
                                          j=I 3=1

Since S, the number of choices. equals 34 in the estimations, elasticities can be obtained by

multiplying the estimated coefficient by 0.97. The average probability elasticities indicate that

for the average state increasing its stock of establishments in some industry by 10% would

increase its likeLihood of being chosen by a subsequent investor in that industry by 5% to 6%.

Adding the very first Japanese plant in an industry raises the attractiveness of that state to

other firms in the industry by 50%.

   Thus far, we have shown that the coefficients we interpret as agglomeration effects are

very signficant statistically and that agglomeration appears to increase the attractiveness of

a location by a respectable percentage. However, we have not answered the question which

should be of great concern to policy makers: If financial incentives succeed in attracting an

initial investment, will that set in motion cumulative effects that will be strong enough to

have a substantial impact on the location choices of subsequent investments? To address this

question, we used the estimated coefficients to simulate the consequences of state actions that

attract investments.

   Our simulation considers an hypothetical "representative" industry that initially has no

Japanese investment and a 1000 U.S. establishments distributed acres states in proportions


                                                    18
equal to those of the     aggregate   U.S. manufacturing sector (as portrayed in Figure 1). The
simulation entails the sequential entry of 30 Japanese plants. Each one chooses a location based

on   state characteristics (including location decisions of previous investments) and a Type I

Extreme Value independent random shock. This gives rise to a baseline allocation of investments

across states. We compare this baseline to an alternative scenario in which the simulation assigns

the first plant to a predetermined state and allows the following 29 investments to choose states

in response to the exact same pattern of disturbance terms. This allows us to measure the long

run impact for each state of attracting the first investment. We repeat the experiment 100 times

and compute the average outcome.


             Figure 2: The Long Run Payoff From Attracting an Initial Investment

          3r




                                              U                     IN      u
                                              Ml                                U
                                                                                KY

°                       S
                           UI WA




         1
                                           Baseline Allocation (N=30)

•: The Xc. shows the average sumber (scion 100 separate eimuIatioa run.) of invutaeat. that each state
attacta. The V-usia shows the average increase in inveatments attracted the fiat iavestment vat assigned to
the state in questios.



     Figure 2 depicts the distribution of the 30 Japanese investments both in the presence and


                                                    19
absence of state policies securing initial investments. The horizontal axis measures the number

of investments in each state in the "baseline" case where the Japanese plants locate based on

the state characteristics and a random error term. The vertical axis shows the gross investment

yield of actions that ensure the first investor locates in a particular state. The gross yield

includes the first investment plus any changes in subsequent location decisions resulting from

assigning this investment to the state in question)t The figure indicates that states with

manufacturing concentrations or estimated "desirable" state-specific effects such as Georgia,

Ohio, and California attract the most investment, an average of about three investments each.

Moreover, these states also receive the the highest gross yields. While the simulation reveals

that state policies that attract initial investments usually lead to further investment in that

state, subsequent investment related to agglomeration is fairly limited. Across the 34 states

we consider, the gross yield on policies ensuring that the first of 30 Japanese investors locate

a particular state is only 1.4 investments. For "attractive" states, the payoff is higher—2.57 for

Georgia and 2.25 (or California. Over the 100 trials, these states occasionally gained as many as

8 or 10 investments. On the other hand for "unattractive" states, attracting the initial investor

yielded little beyond that particular investment.


V-B Robustness Issues

Conditional logit estimation relies on the assumption of identical independent error terms in

equation (1). If these assumptions are not met in the data, a violation of the independence of ir-

relevant alternatives (hA) property will lead to biased estimates)2 The inclusion of alternative-

  "In some trials, the gnu yield for a particular .tate was tao or evn negative. There were trial, where the
initial investment located in the state in question in the baseline esse so the nerd.. yielded no net change. In
other trials relocating the first investment alter, ensuing contests for investment such that the state's competition
for certain investments is made stronger and the state no longer attracts the investments that it did in the baseline

  "The HA property, which is necessary for unbiased conditional logit estimation. implies that the relative
probability of choosing two alternatives (states) does not depend on the availability or charactaistics of other


                                                        20
specific constant terms (state dummy variables) removes some forms of bias that might arise.

Train (1984. p. 18-25) shows that adding alternative-specific constant terms—state effects in

this study—allows for the use of a conditional logit specification in the presence of some forms

of hA violation. Specifically, our model is valid as long as investors have uniform perceptions of

the substitutability between states. However, unobserved characteristics of the choosers aught

make some choices closer substitutes in the eyes of certain investors than other choices. Such

unobserved heterogeneity will lead to a violation of ILk.'3 Consequently, the coefficient estimates

will depend critically on the sample of choosers and choices. To investigate whether our results

are robust, we reestimate the model using a variety of sub-samples, where each sub-sample

is chosen to remove a potential violation of the independence assumption. We find that the

coefficients on the parameters of primary interest remain remarkably stable.

   We selected four groups of states to remove from the sample: the Pacific, the Rust Belt, the

Sun Belt, and the South. In each of these regions, states might have certain characteristics in

common that could lead to violations of the hA assumption. Pacific states (Alaska, Washington,

Oregon, and California) have lower transportation costs to Japan. Rust Belt states (Illinois,

Indiana. Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania. New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Mas-

sachusetts, and Maryland) tend to have relatively high unionization rates and have a declining

share of the nation's population. Sun Belt states (California, Arizona, Nevada, Texas, and

Florida), on the other hand, have experienced rapid population growth over the last decade.

Southern states (Georgia, South Carolina, Mississippi, and Alabama) have low unionization

rates and have enjoyed rapid growth of manufacturing. The Ilk problem does not arise from

alternatives. For instance, in a choice between three states—A, B. sad C—Pr(A)/Pr(B) is independent of the
chazactenstic. of state C. Suppose, however, that in reality investors aniformly view states C sad B a. dose
substitutes, while they regard A as substantially inferior to either. An unobserved improvement in C would
increase Pr(A)/Pr(B).
   "Conditional proôit models show for correlated error term.. However, they are coaputatiocally Sensible with
such a large set of choices.


                                                     21
the regional differences by themselves. If low uniouization raised the attractiveness of Southern

states to all Japanese investors, this effect would show up in the state-specific constants. In-

stead. the concei-n is that a subset of the investors have strong opposition (or attraction) to some

characteristic conuzion to a group of states. Since we generally cannot observe such sentiments,

they will generate correlated error terms.


                       Table 2: Independence from Irrelevant Alternatives?

                                         Dependent Variable: Location Choice
                       No Pacific     No Rust  No Sun No South j No Auto                  No F/W

   lnA'5                  0,466        0.383       0.469        0.595        0.508         0.455
                         (0.069)      (0.070)     (0.066)      (0.066)      (0.068)       (0.062)

   In E1E8(. 45           0.306        0.164       0.383        0.179        0.218         0.227
                         (0.097)      (0.081)     (0.093)      (0.072)      (0.077)       (0.073)

   in 4                   0.640        0.722       0.717        0.549        0.752         0.513
                         (0.111)      (0.120)     (0.110)      (0.103)      (0.119)       (0.097)

     Et€8(.) 4            0.248        0.438       0.310        0.440        0.340         0.407
                         (0.105)      (0.123)     (0.108)      (0.101)      (0.123)       (0.094)

  lnA                     0.893        0.567       0.941        0.822        0.172         0.771
                         (0.134)      (0.199)     (0.138)      (0.141)      (0.266)       (0.130)

  in Eefl(j) A?           0.145        0.525       0.232        0.419       0.604          0.339
                         (0.155)      (0.189)     (0.160)      (0.152)      (0.237)       (0.140)

  Log-Likelihood        -1668.59     -1121.45    -1631.21     4733.95      4490.59       -2052.79
  No. of Chooser,         609          462         612          654          518            729
  No. of Choices           30           23          29           30           34             33
   Note: Coaditson4 logit regression. estimated by maaiw,.m lik.lihood. St.adnd cr0.. is psienthes...
         Coefficieiii. for alteru.tive-.pecific constaat. tie not r.port.d. Danition. of BBS nzaLJ caa
         be found in the note below Figure 1. No P.ci$c ezcludei AK, CA, OR, sad WA. "No Bait'
         exclude. CT, IL, IN. MA, MD. Ml. OH. PA. NJ, NY, WI. "No Sun' ocludes AZ, CA, FL., NV,
         TX. 'No South' excludes AL, GA, MS. SC. Fisb/Wood' rda. to SIC. 2091. 2092, 2421, 2426
          sad 2436.



  The results of estimating the model with the restricted sample. an shown in columns (1)-(4)



                                                  22
in Table 2. The statistical significance and approximate magnitude of U.S. and Japanese within-

state industry-activity effects holds up well over four entirely different choice sets, although

there is some variation in the estimates of the border-state effects. In particular, the within-

state agglomeration measures retain the same levels of statistical significance across the four

'samples.'4 An alternative approach is to retain the full choice set while eliminating groups of

similar investors. Columns (5) and (6) portray estimates after the elimination of ventures for

which there are reasons to expect correlated error terms that will lead to violations of the hA

assumption: auto-related plants and plants involved in fish or timber processing.

   Smith and Florida (1092) show that the location of large Japanese automobile assembly

plants figured prominently in the location decisions of the over 200 subsequent investments by

auto parts companies. While these clusters might indeed be partly attributable to Japanese

agglomeration externalities, they also could be a source of correlated errors among states with

assembly plants. Column (5) shows the results of estimated the model after eliminating auto-

related investments.15 Again, the results are generally robust to restriction of the sample. The

within-state group variable does, however, become insignificant, suggesting that the estimated

keiretsu effect arises primarily from activity in the auto industry.

    The last restricted sample eliminates two industries that draw heavily on local natural

resources. Japanese firms processing canned and frozen fish are heavily concentrated in Alaska

whereas the corresponding U.S. industry was dispersed among various coastal states. Similarly,

the concentration of Japanese lumber firms in Washington deviates from the U.S. industry

pattern. We speculated that these Japanese ventures might be oriented towards exporting their

 "This approach to the hA problem was inspired by formal tat proposed is E"" and McFadden (1964).
We did not cositnict the test statistics because our use of .lternative-spedfic eoastaats asses the samba of
parameters to vary aaoss specifications Also, since their tests are only valid under the maintained assumption of
ILk is, the restricted choice set, we felt that it would be more instructive to view the reduced-sample timatioas
as informal tests of robustness.
  "Auto parts investments span over forty 4-digit SIC codes. However, the product descriptions provided by the
Jopan Economic !nstitule generally make it clear which plains serve the auto iaduastsy.

                                                       23
 products back to Japan. This unobserved intention could lead to correlated errors terms amor.

 states chosen by finns in these industries. Column (6) shows the result of eliminating ventures in

 canned and frozen fish and lumber industries from the sample. While the estimated coefficients

 on the within-state U.S. and Japanese counts fail somewhat, all the effects remain positive and

significant.'6

    The coefficient estimates presented in Table 2 demonstrate that our primary results continue

to hold, regardless of the imposed sample restrictions. Both U.S. and Japanese within-state

manufacturing activity attract Japanese investment in the same industry,                     the most part,

border activity also appears to be an attracting force. The group activity results, however,

appear less robust to changes in the sample. In particular, they seem to disappear altogether

with the removal of the auto-related investments. This finding could reflect the limitation of

using group affiliation to represent vertical linkages for groups other than those headed by

automobile producers. While firms in auto groups almost certainly produce related products,

other group affiliations might be among firms who produce completely different products. For

example, in the case of electronics, many group companies were created as spinoffs into new

product lines and they have few actual business dealings with other group members.'7 The

insignificance of group agglomeration in the non-auto sample also indicates that group companies

may not need to locate foreign affiliates close to each other in order to facilitate information

exchange.

  "The fact that 9 out of 12 Japanese wood-products manufacturers chose Washington or North Carolina is
hard to reconcile with • resource-driven stoi' given that Oregon and Virginia, which have large count, of U.S.
establishments, received no Japanese investment. However, we wanted to make sure that this hib1y concentrated
industsy was not driving our result..
  See Gerlach (1993). A case in point is Fanuc which produce. numerically controlled machine tool, which
differ substantially (rota the product. of other members of the P\ijitsu soup.




                                                      24
VI CONCLUSIONS

The geographical distribution of Japanese investments in the 1980's demonstrates the impor-

tance of agglomeration economies in location decisions. Our estimates suggest that a state

which experiences a 10 percent increase in any of our agglomeration measures increases its

probability of future selection by 5 to 7 percent. This finding emerges even when we control for

state effects, state time trends, and industry-level stocks and flows of U.S. investment. Japanese

investors prefer to site their plants in areas where they find concentrations of previous Japanese

investments in the same industry and, for auto-related firms, the previous investments made by

keirctsu affiliates. These results do not arise through deliberate selection of industries thought to

exhibit agglomeration effects. Instead, they figure prominently in a sample including a diverse

set of industries. Even the exclusion of heavily localized industries such as autos and sawmills

does not alter the basic findings. In addition, we confirm the hypothesis that state borders do

not define the relevant economic boundaries for agglomeration effects; border-state activity has

up to two-thirds of the attractive power of in-state activity.

   Since Japan-specific agglomeration appears to exert a strong influenàe on location decisions,

it suggests that neither natural resources nor specialized labour drive location choice by them-

selves. This is because those factors should be captured in the pattern of U.& establishment

agglomeration. Hence, the finding of strong attraction between Japanese firms points towards

the importance of explanations involving intermediate inputs and pure technological spillovcn.

   In 1985 Kentucky offered an incentive package in excess of $300 million to attract a Toyota

manufacturing plant. While states do not extend such massive packages frequently, substantial

efforts to lure manufacturing investments are common. The question arises whether the results

in this paper provide a rationale for policies of this kind. Agglomeration effects imply that

any benefits received from attracting a single investment will be magnified by an increased

                                                 25
probability of attracting subsequent similar investments. However, simulation results indicate

that this subsequent investment may be small or negligible, especially for states that Japanese

investors perceived as relatively unattractive. Furthermore, the winners in bidding wars between

state governments may find that the price paid in terms of subsidies and added infrastructure

may offset any gain derived from attracting a foreign manufacturer.



A Appendix: The Conditional Logit Model of Location Choice

This appendix derives the profit function expressed in equation (1) and discusses the restric-

tiveness of the assumptions that underlie the empirical work.

    The following three sets of variables enter the production function.


   • Agglomeration Effects: A1, Economic activity in an area that generates positive exter-

      nalities for nearby firms engaged in similar activities.


   • Infrastructure Measures: i, Inputs available in fired supply to all firms located in the

      state, e.g. highway miles. port capacity, climate, research universities.

   • Priced Variable Inputs: ic, Input whose levels are chosen to minimize costs given the

     prices that prevail in each state, e.g. skilled and unskilled labor, raw materials, energy.

   By assuming that the investor has a production function of the Cobb-Douglas form (where

the inputs are defined in the body of the paper), we obtain a final apecification that is linear in

the parameters and where coefficient estimates can be interpreted as probability elasticities.



                         q = A'   .
                                      AOKKJf1 . . .jfs'i" .x7j' exp(s).                        (3)


   The last term, p, captures state- and investment-specific heterogeneity in total factorpro-


                                                26
ductivity.

    Define p as the output price, w as the price of variable input X1, and let     E   1 —


If inputs are set to minimize cost, and output is set to equate marginal cost with the output

price and p > 0, the profit function is



                      it   = (A" - - - AfJ'3' j$L.t .w;1Mpexp(,)).,                            (4)


where C is a complicated function of the y parameters.

    Taking natural logs and multiplying by p we obtain


                                  K            I,           M
                 pint = +EaAi+Efl,InI—E',jlnwe+lnp+p.                                          (5)
                                              i=I

   This equation specifies profits according to a form amenable to conditional logit estimation

as the profit associated with locating plant j in state a is a (unction of the characteristics of

the state. The finn chooses state a if the profits for locating there exceed those associated with

alternative locations. We drop ln from the profitability equation since adding a constant to

the profits in each location does not affect the comparison of profits and consequently will not

affect choice probabilities.

   Assume that infrastructure measures, I, and input prices. w, vary aaoss states (choices are

indexed by a) but not across investments( Choosers are indexed by j). In that case, infrastructure

variables and input prices can be combined into a single indicator of the attractiveness of state

a to the "average" (or representative) investor which will be denoted as


                                  L            N
                                                                                               (6)
                                  i1          lal



                                                27
where the upper bar" variables—-li, 5, p, and i—are the average of the N Japanese investments.

    Now, profitability for investment j in state s depends on a state effect, the agglomeration

activity related to j, and an error term.


                                                 K
                                pInrj1=9,+ajlnA1+c,,
                                         •=1
                                                                                              (7)


The error term is defined as follows:


                  1.                    M
                        —$,)lnhi. —           — 'fi) law1. + (Inp,. — lap.) + (ps. — P.)      (8)
                 1=1                    1=1



This error term measures deviations from the average Japanese investor's input elasticities,

output price, and total factor productivity in each state. The divergences from the average

input elasticities ale weighted by the corresponding factor price or infrastructure level in that
state. if this error term is distributed as a Type I Extreme Value independent random variable,

the parameters in equation (1) can be estimated using conditional logit.

    We have assumed Cobb-Douglas production functions and a Type I Extreme Value error

term, we believe our results will hold up under more general conditions. With respect to the

production function, the Cobb-Douglas form is convenient because it yields a multiplicative

profit function. However, our specification would remain appropriate in other forms as long as

the profit function can be expressed as


                                    =


where yQ and /4) are functions of the input prices, infrastructure and agglomeration variables:

W, I, and A. In that case, the state effect, 8, in equation (2) will be an estimate of lng(W,,I.)



                                                28
 and E1 ° In A)1 will correspond to a first-order logarithmic approximation of an arbitrary
 continuous function 4(A23).

     With respect to the error term, McFadden (1974) has demonstrated that the extreme value

 distribution, F(c,3) = exp[— exp(—c14J, is the only one that will yield the logit form. However,

 Hausman and Wise (1978) found that the conditional probit, assuming an independent normal

 distribution, produces very similar results to the conditional logit)8 Since the normal distribu-

 tion is known to be a good approximation for a number of continuous distributions, this finding

 suggests the computational gains provided by the conditional logit formulation probably do not

 cause a major loss in robustness as long as the independence assunption is not violated.

     The state-specific time trends arc derived in the following manner. Denote the initial (1979)

 value of infrastructure variable or factor price i in state s as            or w. Assume that in-
frastructure and wages grew (or declined) at constant rates, v and q, during the invest-
ment period (1980-1992). Then, for investment j that occurs in year t, !J,              =
     = w6, exp(qt,). Under these assumptions, equation (7) becomes


                                                          K
                              p In   r. = .o + a9,t1 + E a In A, + ,


where   A9, sf1 31v + Eti 7i'i.



REFERENCES

 B*arix,   TIMOTHY 3., 1985, "Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates
      of the Effects of Unionization, Taxes and Other Characteristics of States," Journal of

  "The intuition behind the Hausinan and Wise result ii that the diffaencc betnes two Type I Extreme Value
error term. has the logistic distribution which resembles the standard normal.


                                                   29
    Business U Economic Statistics,3, No. 1, 14—22.

CARLTON, DENNIS W.,      1983 "The Location and Employment Choices of New Firma: An
    Econometric Model With Discrete and Continuous Endogenous Variables," Review of Eco-
    nomics arid Statistics 65, 440—449.

COUGHLIN, CLETIS, JOSEPH V.      TERn. AND VACHIRA AR.ROMDEE, 1991, "State Character-
    istics and the Location of Foreign Direct Investment Within the United States," Review
    of Economics and Statistics, 675—683.

DAVID, PAUL A. AND JOSHUA L. ROSENBLOOM, 1990"           Marshallian Factor Market External-
    ities and the Dynamics of Industrial Location," Journal of Urban Economics 28, 349—370.

FRIEDMAN,   Joszrn. DANIEL A. GERLOWSICI, AND JONATHAN SILDERMAN. 1992, "What
    Attracts Foreign Multinational Corporations? Evidence from Branch Plant Location in
    the United States." Journal of Regional Science Vol. 32 No. 4, 403—418.
GERLACH, MICHAEL L.,     1993, Economic Organization and Innovation in Japan," Forthcom-
    ing in Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.
GLAESER, EDWARD AND HEm KALLAL. JosE SCHEINICMAN AND ANDREI SCHLEIFER 1992,
    "Growth in Cities," Journal of Political Economy 100, no. 6, 1126—1152.
HENDERSON, J. VERNON, 1986,      "Efficiency of Resource Usage and City Size," Journal of
    Urban Economics 19, 47—70.

HAUSMAN, JERRY AND DAVID WISE, 1978,          "A Conditional Probit model for Qualitative
    Choice: Discrete Decisions Recognizing Interdependence and Heterogeneous Preferences."
    Econometrica 46, No. 2, 403—426.
HAUSMAN, JERRY AND DANIEL MCFADDEN, 1984, "Specification          Tests for the Multinomial
    Logit Model," Econometnca 52, No. 5, 1219—1240.
KRUGMAN,      PAUL ft., 1991a, " Increasing Returns and Economic Geography," Jountoi af
    Political Economy 99, 483—499.

KRUGMAN, PAUL ft., 199Th, Geography and 7?vzde, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

LUGER, MICHAEL I. AND SUDHIR SHErrY, 1985, "Determinants of Foreign Plant Start-up.
   in the United States: Lessons for Policymakers in the Southeast", Vanderbilt School of
    Thjnsnational Law 18, 223—245.

MARSHALL, ALFRED, 1920, Principles of Economics, 8th    ed., London: MacMillan.
MCFADDEN, DANIEL, 1974, "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behaviour,"
   in ZAREMBKA, P., ed., Frontiers in Econometrics, New York: Academic Press, 105-142.

ROTEMBERG, J. AND G. SALONER, 1990, "Competition and         Human Capital Accumulation:
    A Theory of Interregional Specialization and 'flade," NBER Working Paper #3228.

SCHMENNER, ROGER W., JOEL C. HUDER, AND RANDALL L. Cooic, 1987, "Geographic Dif-
    ferences and the Location of New Manufacturing Facilities," Journal of Utica Economics
    21, 83—104.


                                            30
SMITH. DONALD AND RICHARD FLoRIDA, 1992, "Agglomeration and Industry Location: An
    Econometric Analysis of Japanese-Affiliated Manufactwing Establishments in Automotive-
    Related Industries," H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management (Carnegie
    Mellon University) Working Paper.

TRAIN, KENNETH, 1985, Qualitative Choice Analysis: Theory, Econometrics, and an Appli-
    cation to Automobile Demand, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
WHEELER, DAVID AND ASHOKA MODY, 1992, "International Investment Location Decisions:
    The Case of U.S. Firms," Journal of International Economics 33, 57—76.
WOODWARD, DOUCLAS P., 1992, "Locational Detenninants of Japanese Manufacturing Stan-
    ups in the United States", Southern Economic Jouna January, 690—708.




                                         31
