NBER WORKING PAPELSERIES

ON THE TIMING AND EFFICIENCY
OF CREATIVE DESTRUCI'ION

Ricardo J. Caballero
Mohamad L. Hammour

Working Paper No. 4768

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
June 1994

We are grateful to David Gross for excellent research assistance, and to Daron Acemoglu,
Olivier Blanchard, Peter Diamond, Thomas Piketty, Julio Rotemberg and workshop
Paris I, Western Ontario and the
participants at DELTA, Iowa, Northwestern. Pennsylvania,
Caballero thanks the National Science
NBER EFCC meetings for helpful comments.. Ricardo
and Alfred P. Sloan foundations for their fmancial support. Part of this paper was written
while Mohamad Hammour was visiting at DELTA. This paper is part of NBER's research
authors and not
program in Economic fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4768
June 1994

ON THE TIMING AND EFFICIENCY
OF CREATIVE DES11tUCTION

ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the timing, pace and efficiency of the on-going job reallocation that
results from product and process innovation. There are strong reasons why an efficient economy

ought to concentrate both job creation and destruction during cyclical downturns, when the

opportunity cost of reallocation is lowest. Malfunctioning Labor markets can disrupt this
synchronized pattern and decouple creation and destruction. Moreover, irrespective of whether
workers are too strong or too weak, labor market inefficiencies generally lead to technological
"sclerosis," characterized by excessively slow renovation. Government incentives to pmduction

may alleviate high unemployment in this economy, but at the cost of exacerbating sclerosis.
Creation incentives, on the contrary, increase the pace of reallocation. We show how an optimal
combination of both types of policies can restore economic efficiency.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics
Room E52-252g
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

Mohamoud L. Hammour
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027

1 Introduction
When technology, in its broadest sense, is embodied in capital, skills, and the organization

of work, technical progress puts the economy in a state of incessant restructuring. Jts
productive structure must constantly adapt to innovations in products, techniques, modes

of organization, and to the evolving competitiveness of world markets. Production units

that embody new techniques must continually be Ciustbe
destroyed.

This process of growth through Schumpeterian "creative destruction" results in an
ongoing reallocation of factors of production from contracting production sitesto expanding ones.1 This idea finds strong support in recent studies of productivity growth using
plant-level LRD data. Baily, Hulten and Campbell (1992) and Barteisman and Dhrymes

(1991) decompose improvements in aggregate productivity into a component due to

source reallocation from relatively inefficient to relatively efficient plants, and another

due to improvements in technology purely at the plant level.2 Both studies find that
'See Schumpeter (1942). Cox and Aim (1993) provide numerous illustrations of creative destruction at
work in the US economy.
3A related question, that focuses on physical as opposed to human or organizational capital, is how
much of output growth ii associated with capital-embodied technological progress. Using post-war US
data, Hultea (1992) estimates that 20% of residual manufacturing output growth is capital-embodied,
while Greenwood, Herkowits and Krusell (1992) reach a figure of 60% for the growth of aggregate output
per hour. The difference between the results is mainly due to whether gross-output or value-added data
are used to measure the share of equipment in income, and whether output should be adjusted for quality
change.

The much earlier study by Salter (1960) of the distribution of productivity across plants should also be
mentioned. It provides rich microeconomic evidence from the U.K. and U.S. supporting the heterogeneous
microeconomic structure and renovation process implied by the embodied nature of technical progress.
Some examples of this evidence glve a flavor of the study. in his table 1, for example, Salter describes the
'best and average practice" labor productivity in the U.S. blast-furnace industry: In 1911 the best-practice
plants produced 0.313 tons of pig-iron per man-hour, against an average across plants of 0.140. By 1926,
these numbers had increased to 0.573 and 0.296, respectively.

Many other examples of substantial heterogeneity in productivity within an industry can be found in
table 8. In the U.S. beet sugar industry, e.g., man-hours per unit of output (in tons) ranged form 2.81 l.a
0.88 in 1935. Moreover, plant age is strongly related to productivity in this industry. Table 9 shows that.
average man-hour per ton was 2.08 for plants constructed during 1890-99, 1.74 for 1900-09 plants, 1.42 for
1910-19 plants, and 1.26 for 1920-29 plants.
More direct evidence on the embodiment issue is found in table 11. It reports for several U.S. industries
the increase in productivity between 1939 and 1948 for plants that implemented large changes in equipment.

2

a major part of technical progress is associated with factor reallocation. Compounded
over the period 1972-1987 for a sample of 22 industries, the results in Baily et al. (1992)

indicate that aggregate growth is made up of 6.7 percentage points due to reallocation
and 3.5 points due to plant-level technical progress.3

(

Thus, ongoing creative destruction often entails distressing job losses, and can there-

fore result in a political response to protect those jobs. If job reallocation is an inescapable

requisite of the progress in standards of living, policies that are overly protective of existing jobs may hinder the pace of renovation and lead to technological LLsclerosis. But

laissez-faire may be equally deficient. The massive job destruction that takes place in
a recession, for example, may be the sign of chronically malfunctioning markets, rather
than an aspect of the healthy recycling of jobs.
This paper aims at improving our understanding of the characteristics of an efficiently

functioning creative destruction process, of the way market inefficiencies can disrupt

this process, and of appropriate policy responses to such disruptions. We show how
malfunctioning labor and goods markets can disrupt the timing and volatility of creative
destruction over the cycle, and hamper the pace of renovation in the economy. We analyze

the effect of government incentives to production and creation decisions, and show how
an optimal combination of both types of policies can restore full efficiency.

Section 2 presents our basic model. Our economy experiences ongoing exogenous
technical progress. Its productive structure embodies the best techniques available at the

time of creation, and must continually be restructured to incorporate new innovations.

Both the labor and goods markets function inefficiently. The labor market is deprived
of the benefits of a Walrasian auctioneer, and is characterized instead by decentralized

bargaining between workers and firms. Inefficiency in the goods market is introduced
through a distortion in the profitability of firms, which can either be interpreted literally
methods and plant layout, versus those that did not. The rormer increased their productivity by an average
of 17 percent during the period, while the latter increased productivity by less than I percent on average.
3Results for AII industries except 3573," table I, p. 207.

3

as the result of distortionary taxation or more loosely as capturing the effect of "aggregate

demand" on profitability. To study the cyclical timing of creative destruction, we subject

the economy to exogenous fluctuations in profit margins, which may either be "real" —
due to fluctuations in the price of intermediate inputs — or due to fluctuations in the

above-mentioned aggregate-demand distortion.

Section 3 focuses on cyclical aspects of creative destruction. We contrast the cyclical response of an efficient economy with an inefficient economy in terms of observable
characteristics of timing and volatility of creation, destruction and unemployment. In

our efficient economy, the sole role of unemployment is to facilitate labor reallocation.
An efficiently restructuring economy will concentrate reallocation in recessions, when the

opportunity cost of unemployment is lowest. Thus both job destruction and creation
rise in a recession to increase labor reallocation. We show that market inefficiencies can

disi-upt this tightly synchronized pattern and decouple creation and destruction.
Section 4 turns to the effect of labor market inefficiencies on the pace of the creative de-

struction process. Under what conditions will the restructuring of the productive system
be excessively sluggish, and result in technological "sclerosis"? When will restructuring
be, on the contrary, wastefully rapid, and result in what one might call technological "hy-

perkinesis"? Surprisingly, we find that, irrespective of whether workers are excessively
weak or strong, labor market inefficiencies in either direction always lead to sclerosis.

Finally, section 5 analyzes policy. In the absence of an institutional cure for labormarket failures, we look at the effect of government incentives to production and creation

decisions. Expanding the economy through production incentives can reduce unemploy-

ment, but at the cost of exacerbating sclerosis. Could the latter effect more than offset
the welfare benefits of the former, rendering desirable — as the pre-Keynesian "liquida-

tionist" view has it — a contraction that "cleanses" the productive structure? We argue
against this possibility, and show that, as long as more unemployment is undesirable, cre-

ating a contraction cannot be beneficial on the whole. An expansion driven by creation
subsidies, on the other hand, has the opposite effect of alleviating sclerosis as it acceler-

4

ates the pace of reallocation. A small dose of creation subsidies can thus be beneficial,

but a large dose can lead to excessively rapid restructuring of the type documented by
Young (1992) in the case of Singapore. We show that it is through an optimal dynamic
combination of both types of policies that the economy can recover its full efficiency.
Relation to the Literature. Our paper relates to several strands of research in the liter-

ature. A rich body of research developed in the 1960s that analyzes steady-state creative

destruction in a vintage model of embodied technological progress (see, e.g., .Tohansen
1959, Solow 1960, Phelps 1963, Sheshinski 1967). More recent analyses of creative destruction in an endogenous-growth vein can be found in Aghion and Howitt (1992a) and

Grossman and Helpman (1991). Our paper addresses the question of efficiency of the

--

creative destruction process, and analyzes how market failures can disrupt the pace of

--fl-

reallocation and lead to distorted unemployment rates. In this last respect, it is related

to the work of Cox (1993) and Cohen and Saint-Paul (1994), who analyze structural factors by which embodied technological progress leads to "technological unemployment,"

and to Aghion and Howitt (1992b), who study the effect of different rates of technical
progress on steady-state unemployment.

An important dimension of our analysis concerns out-of-steady-state business cycle
issues. Mortensen and Pissarides (1993) and Mortensen (1993) use a search unemployment framework to interpret the evidence on gross job flows over the cycle uncovered by

Davis and Haltiwanger (1990,1992) and Blanchard and Diamond (1990). Although their
focus on search costs in firm-worker bargaining leads to useful insights, we argue below

that shifting the emphasis to specific investment costs along the lines of Caballero and
Hainmour (1994) is a more promising avenue in providing a satisfactory interpretation
of the facts.
Our work also raises an important warning for the literature on the role of allocative

vs. aggregate disturbances in driving employment fluctuations (Lilien 1982, Abraham
and Katz 1986, Blanchard and Diamond 1989, Davis and Haltiwanger 1994). Contrary

to the standard identifying assumption in the literature, aggregate shocks in our model
5

have a reallocation effect and can therefore not be considered independent of reallocation
shocks.4 Moreover, the economy's response to aggregate shocks can look like the response

used to identify allocative shocks in the literature. Depending on bargaining parameters
in the economy, creation and destruction can be either positively or negatively correlated

and the Beveridge curve can be upward or downward sloping.
Our efficiency analysis of creative destruction over the cycle revisits the literature on
reorganizations (Davis and Haltiwanger 1990, Hall 1990, Cooper and Haltiwanger 1992,
Aghion and Saint-Paul 1991, Gnu and Hammour 1991, Saint-Paul 1993) and shakeouts
(Caballero and Hammour 1994, Stiglitz 1993, BresnAhan and RaIl 1991 and 1992) during

recessions. We attempt to relate questions on the efficiency of reorganization over the
cycle to observable characteristics of the data, and ask whether a recession that cleanses
the productive structure can be beneficial on the whole.

The analysis of government policy in the literature is often neglected. An exception
is Hopenhayn and R.ogerson (1991), who quantify the negative welfare-effects of policy

in a steady-state competitive industry subject to ongoing job turnover. Our paper also
tries to develop a substantive analysis of policy in a context where, because of market
failures, policy can play a positive as well as a negative role.

2 A Renovating Economy
Our first step is to present the model we will be using to analyze creative destruction
throughout the paper. We first describe the basic structure of our model economy. The
next two subsections characterize, in turn, the efficient centrally planned outcome and
the decentralized bargaining equilibrium. The last subsection asks under what conditions
the decentralized economy is efficient.
4A similar point is made by Abraham and Katz (1986) concerning Lilien's finding that employment
growth dispersion acro sectors tends to be high when unemployment is high. They argue that this can
be due aggregate demand rather than reallocation shocks, if we consider the different income-elasticities of
demand and different growth rates across sectors.
6

2.1 The Economy
'jWctivc Siructu The economy trades in two goods: a produced good whose aggregate output at time t is Q(t), and a non-produced good in fixed supply V. Its productive
structure is made up of many "production units" that combine in fixed proportions a unit

of capital, a unit of labor, and a unit of the non-produced good as an intermediate input.
Exogenous technical progress is embodied in production units and drives the continuous
process of their creation and destruction. Abstracting away from "learning curve" effects,

we assume that a production unit embodies the leading technology at the time t when

it was created and produces A(t) units of output, where the leading technology grows
exogenously at rate 7> O.

Each production unit corresponds to a "job." The creation rate of new production
units corresponds to the gross hiring rate in the economy, and is denoted by 11(t). Production units in operation fail exogenously at rate 6, and are scrapped beyond a certain
endogenously determined age. Both events free up a unit of labor.

If we denote by a(i) the age of the oldest unit in operation, it is clear from the above

that aggregate employment E(t) and output Q(t) are determined by the distribution of
production units aged between 0 and a(t):
(1)

(2)

E(t) =

Q() =

H(t — a)C6" da.

A(t — a)H(t — a)C da.

Creation Costs; Creating a production unit is costly. It requires acquiring and ixstàJling-capital, searching for a worker, training him and organizing his job. In many
respects, this fact plays a determining role in our economy. In the absence of creation
5jovar,ovie and Lath (1989) study an industry's long-run equilibrium in the presence of both vintage
learning-by-doing effects. It would be straightforward to endogenize the growth rate 7' but, to keep
the paper focused, we decided not to exploit this dimension.
and

7

costs, technology would be updated instantaneously and the distribution of production
units would be degenerate. Moreover, the bargaining problem between workers and firms

depends on the magnitude of those costs, their timing and the extent to which they are
"sunk." Finally, as we will see, the structure of creation costs is crucial for the responsive-

ness of creation, destruction and unemployment to aggregate shocks, and for the degree
of real wage rigidity.

The total cost, in terms of the produced good, of creating H(i) production units at t is
proportional to the leading productivity A(t), and can be thought of in terms of foregone

output. Because the distinction is important for the firm-worker bargaining problem,
C(H, U) is split into two components, investment 1(H) and search costs S(H, U)H:

--

(C(H,U)A(i)—(1(H) + S(H, U)H]

Investment includes capital investment and installation as well as training and orga-

nizational costs. 1(H) is increasing and (weakly) convex in H. Convexity captures the

idea that it may be expensive to create fast, either at the aggregate or the individual
level, and provides a motive for "smoothing" creation.6

S(H, U) is the flow search cost required to expect one hire per unit time, and is
(weakly) increasing in aggregate hires H and decreasing in aggregate unemployment
U. It can be derived from a constant vacancy-posting cost and a matching function

H = H(U, V), H1, liv >0, where V denotes aggregate vacancies.'
Throughout the paper, we will be using the following functional form for creation
6Convexity at the aggiegate level may be derived from a concave production (unction for capital. it
may also be derived from linear individual adjustment costs but a non-degenerate distribution of potential
entrants (e.g. heterogeneous observable skills), as in Diamond (1994). Convexity at the individual level
may be derived from convex installation and training costs, assuming a fixed number of symmetric firms.
'Let a> 0 denote the unit flow cost of posting a vacancy. if we invert the matching function and write
it as V = V(H,U), then the unit flow cost of hiring a worker is S(H,U) = rV(H,tJ)/JJ. The property

5 > 0 requires that the matching function be less than unit-elastic with respect to V, which is a much
weaker requirement than constant returns; the property Srj c 0 only requires that the matching function
be increasing

in U.
S

costs:

1(H) = c0H + c1H2,
3)

S(H,U)=e2(#), co,c1,c20,

0q<1.

The quadratic specification for 1(H) yields a simple linear form for the marginal investment cost. The search cost specification can be derived from the constant returns
Cobb-Douglas matching function H =

eUv'-.

For notational simplicity, we henceforth

denote the creation cost and its components by C(t), 1(i) and 5(t).
Consumer-Workers. We close the model by introducing consumer-workers in the
simplest way possible. There are a continuum of infinitely-lived individuals indexed by
i

[0,1], each endowed with one unit of labor and shares over production units and the

stock of non-producedgoods. Individual i's intertemporal utility at time t is given by

JIQ:'(s) + p(s)A(s)Mf (s)]e'' ds.
Utility is linear in both Q(s) and Mf(s), i's consumption at s of the produced and nonproduced goods.8 Linearity greatly simplifies the consumer's side of the model, since it
implies risk neutrality and gives a constant interest rate equal to the subjective discount

rate r.

We

assume r > to guarantee finite utility. p(s) is the marginal utility of the

non-produced good, normalized by the leading technology A(s) (due, e.g., to technical
progress in the utilization of the non-produced good). Using the produced good as a
numeraire, p(s) also represents the price (normalized by A(s)) of the non-produced good.

Cyclical fluctuations in the price of intermediate inputs are introduced by assuming that

p(t) is sri exogenous function of time.
A few aggregate relationships will be useful. The two goods market equilibrium
conditions are:

'It

would have been very simple to add a linear term lo account for a positive value of leisure. In the
equihbnum conditions below, the marginal value of leisure would have entered in exactly the same way as
the price of the intermediate input. We chose to drop this term for simplicity.

9

Q(t) = Q4(t) + C(t)A(t),

(4)
(5)

where Q'

f1Qf di, M4 fM'di, and, by fixed proportions, E(t) is equal to the

demand for intermediate inputs. Finally, aggregate unemployment is given by

U(t) I — E(t).

(6)

2.2 The Central Planner Problem
We start by asking how a central planner would manage our economy, and derive the
corresponding efficiency conditions. This analysis will help us characterize the efficient

path of creative destruction, and will provide us with a benchmark for assessing the
efficiency of the decentralized outcome.
Since utility is linear, the central planner always maximizes aggregate utility, whatever

his distributional concerns may be. His problem is

(Htt)) J [Qd(j) + p(t)A(t)Ai'(t)I

dt,

subject to (1), (2), (4)-(6), and the constraints a(t),H(i),U(i) 0, for all i, taking as
given the path {p(t)}r>o and the history {H(t)}<0 that determines the initial distribution

of jobs.9 In this problem, the planner is assumed unable to improve the efficiency of
matching in the labor market and takes the matching function and cost parameters as
given.

The first order conditions with respect to a(t) and H(t), respectively, are
(7)

—

a(t)) —

+ uIE(t)J A(i) = 0,

9The constraint U(t) I need not be imposed explicitly because it is guaranteed by 11(t) ? 0.
10

EE(t)A(t) = 1+0

(8)

[A(t) — A(s — a(s))]

e'0 is,

where
w_EQ) = —C,(i) +p(t),

(9)

M(i) 0 with" = "if U() >0,

and
(10)

E(i) = C(i).

The marginal cost variables u9t) and ZE(t) play an important role in the comparison of the centrally planned with the decentralized outcome (the superscript E stands
for "Efficient"). They designate, respectively, the "shadow" wage of a worker and the
marginal creation cost ofajob, nonnalized by A(t). Equation (7) is an exit condition that
requires the quasi-rents from a job to be zero at the time of destruction: A(t —a(t)) is the

output of a production unit that has reached the exit age (t) and k) + ui(t)] A(t) is
its operating cost, equal to the cost of the unit of intermediate input and of labor used.
Equation (8) is an entry condition that equates the marginal creation cost EE(t)A(t) of
a job created at t to the expected present value of quasi-rents over its planned lifetime
T(t) (A(t) being the job's output and, by (7), A(s — a(s)) its operating cost at s).
The shadow wage t(t) is equal to the reduction —Cu(t) in total search costs that
would result were the worker to remain unemployed, plus the constraint multiplier ,i(t).

If the constraint U(t) 0 is not binding, the multiplier is zero and the "shadow" wage
is —Cu(1); if it is binding, the shadow wage is higher, equal to the value needed in (7) to
reach full employment.
The only beneficial function unemployment plays in this efficient economy is to reduce
the search costs of creation. Note that if limzj...0 Cu = oo (which is the case with functional

form (3) when c2 > 0), then there is always a small enough positive value of U that
satisfies (7), so it is always efficient to have some unemployment. If, on the other hand,

0 and unemployment does not facilitate the creation process (which is the case
when c2 = 0), then we have full employment U = 0 as long as p(t) is small enough to
Cu

11

guarantee a minimum of profitability.
An equilibrium for the centrally planned economy is a path {a(t), H(i), U(i)}1>o that
satisfies the exit and entry equations (7)-(1O) and

a(t) = T(t —

(11)

U(i) =

(12)

—

H(i — a)e_5a do,

given a history {H(t)}1<0 that determines the initial distribution of jobs. Equation (ii)
gives the function TQ) implicitly as a transformation of ft(t), which holds as long as

destruction is always taking place. It states that the age (t) of the oldest job at i
—
equal to the maximumlifetime T that was planned for it at its time of creation t
Equation (12) gives unemployment as a function of the history of hiring, and follows

immediately from (1) and (6).

2.3 Decentralized Bargaining Equilibrium
We now turn to the determination of equilibrium in the economy when the labor market is governed by decentralized bargaining and the goods market may be subject to a
profitability distortion.

The Bargaining Siiuaiion. Abstracting away from internal labor markets and onthe-job search, we assume that all workers in new production units are hired from the
unemployment pool and all workers from destroyed production units return there. Firms

can freely enter the labor market at any time to create jobs. To create a job at time t,
a finn searches for a worker at the flow cost 5(i) described above. The match between
worker and firm creates a surplus 11(1) that must be bargained over. Assuming generalized

Nash bargaining, a share fi E]O, 1[ of the surplus goes to the worker and (1— fi) goes to

the finn.
The way the worker receives payment for his share over time is indeterminate, as
12

long as the present value at t of the payments is /311(t). One assumption could be that
all payments to the worker are made at t, and that a contract is signed that fixes the
planned maximum duration of employment to T(t), the value that maximizes the surplus

from the match. Alternatively, if such a contract is not enforceable, we could assume
a payment flow consistent with continuous Nash bargaining over the r.maining surplus.

In this case, one can show that the surplus reaches zero and separation takes place after

the same maximum duration T(t). Except for the time pattern of wage payments, both
assumptions are equivalent.

An important issue in calculating the surplus 11(t) is the way creation costs are taken

into account. The surplus from a match is the value it creates above the firm's and
worker's best alternatives. Thus, all search costs and match-specific setup costs incurred

before bargaining are "sunk" and cannot be subtracted in calculating the surplus. More-

over, even if match-specific setup costs are incurred after bargaining, there may not be

a way to get the worker to post a "bond" that would prevent him from renegotiating
his position after those costs are incurred.'0 To capture this distinction, we introduce a
parameter 4' c[O, 1J that measures the share of setup costs that are match-specific and

cannot be bonded away, and are therefore "sunk" for the firm. The two parameters 4'
and $ measure the relative bargaining power of workers over finS, 4' strengthening the
worker's threat point and /3 increasing the share he gets of the surplus.

Business Cycles. The distortion to profit margins is introduced as a flow subsidy
z(i)A(t) (or a tax, if it is negative) the government pays to each production unit in
operation, and finances through a lump-sum tax on households. As we mentioned in
the introduction, this goods-market distortion can be loosely thought of as a device that
captures the effect of aggregate demand on profit margins. Fom this perspective, cyclical

fluctuations in z(t) will have a similar effect to fluctuations in intermediate input prices

p(t). Those two variables enter the profit margin in parallel, and will sometimes be
'°For a discussion of "bondinc issues in the contat of the efficiency wage literature, see Katz (1987).
an expitzon of Nash bargaining in the prence of specific investment, see Grout (1984).

For

13

grouped into a single "business cycle" variable:
(13)

b(t)

z(t) —p(t).

Throughout the paper, we assume that the path {b(t)}1>0 is continuous and such that

positive creation and destruction are taking place at all points in time. Because our main

results do not depend on uncertainty, we assume that the path of b(t) is known with
certainty.
Equilibrium Conditions. Appendix A.1 derives the equations governing the equilibHum bargaining situation described above. Given a history {H(1)}<0 that determines the
initial distribution of jobs,. an equilibrium for this economy is a path {a(t), H(t), U(1))>0

that satisfies the system of equations

(14)
(15)

A(i — a(i)) — [t2°O) — b(t)] .4(t) = 0,

z"(i)A(t) = j+T(Q [A(t) — A(s — a(s))] +')(')

ds,

where
(16)

i23°(t) =

7)

aD(t) = (1 +

[#In(t) + SO)],

1

)

mO) +

1

as well as equations (11)-(12) that define T(t) and U(t).

The decentralized equilibrium conditions (14)-(17) have the same structure as the
first-order conditions (7)-(10) of the central planner problem, except that cost signals

may be distorted. The exit condition (7) states that the marginal profitability of an
exiting job should be zero, but now the "shadow" wage {n'(t)A(i) (the superscript D
stands for "Decentralized") and profit margins (through z(t)) may be distorted. Similarly,

in the free-entry condition (8), the "effective" creation cost '(i)A(i) — defined as the
14

marginal cost that is effectively being set equal to the present value of a production unit
— is in general distorted.

Both cost signals depend on the relative bargaining positions of workers and firms.
The shadow wage ñ5'(t)A(t) represents the opportunity cost to a worker of remaining on

the job rather than turning unemployed and searching for another job. It is equal to the

instantaneous probability H(t)/U(t) of finding another match times the part j9fl of the
surplus he would get there. By the free-entry condition, the latter turns out to depend

on the unbonded match-specific creation cost, and is naturally increasing (in partial
equilibrium) with the worker bargaining power parameters q and (3. It is important to
keep in mind that u3°Q)A(2) measures an opportunity cost, and not the actual flow of
wage payments received by employed workers."
The effective creation cost Z"(t)A(t) is also increasing (in partial equilibrium) with

worker bargaining power and fi. Intuitively, if finns lose a large share of the match
surplus to workers, their incentive to enter will be reduced and they will act as if they
faced an effectively higher entry cost.
The Nature of Unemployment Equilibrimn in this economy generally involves positive

unemployment, whose nature is intimately tied the bargaining situation between workers

and firms, If there were no unemployment, workers would find it infinitely easy to
find an alternative job. Their outside alternative of moving continuously from job to
job to capture their share of the match surpluses would make their shadow wage
infinite (equation 16). That would deter any job creation, which is inconsistent with full
employment. Unemployment thus acts as an equilibrium "discipline device" to limit the
bargaining power of workers and preserve firm profitability)2

Looking at equation (16), there is always a positive unemployment level U that gives
the shadow wage uW in (14), as long as c61n + S > 0. This last quantity measures the
"Under continuous Nash bargaining, it is equal to the actual wage paid at lirms that have reached the
scrapping age a(t).
'2Unemployinent plays a similar role as a discipline device in Borne efficiency wage models (e.g. Shapiro
and SLights 1984).
15

match-specific creation costs that cannot be bonded away, equal to unbonded specific
investment plus search costs. It is those match-specific expenditures that in equilibrium

lead to the creation of a match surplus, and are equal to the firm's share of this surplus
under free entry. As we will see later, whether it is specific investment or search costs that

are the primary cause of the match surplus and unemployment can lead to import ant
differences in aggregate behavior.13 Note that the economy can exhibit positive unemployment due to specific investment çbI > 0, even if search costs are zero (c2 = 0) and

+ S = 0, the
the centrally planned outcome requires full employment. Naturally if
match surplus is zero and no unemployment is needed to discipline workers. In this case
the economy will be in full employment, as long as 6(t) is small enough to guarantee a
minimum of profitability — which we always assume.

2.4 Efficiency of the Decentralized Equilibrium
Cost signals in the decentralized economy are in general distorted, and the outcome will

not generally be efficient. However, there are conditions on the economy's parameters
under which the decentralized outcome will be socially efficient. Those conditions provide

us with a very useful benchmark for analyzing market inefficiencies.
Clearly, the first condition is that the profit margin distortion z(i) be zero. In this case,

one can show that the following configuration for the bargaining parameters guarantees

that i2" =

E and = EE, and thus that the decentralized outcome is efficient:'4
(fi) =(O,r).

F\xll bonding # = 0 ensures that firms recover all of their investment I,,(i). Efficiency
requires giving this extreme bargaining position to firms because we have assumedthat all
'5A good synthesis of the literature on the second type of unemployment based on search cts can be
found in Pissaridee (1990).
'4Hosios (1990) discusses the efficiency condition in decentralized bargaining models based on search
costs. In general, this efficiency condition only exists if the matching function exhibits constant returns.

16

investment is done by them. The condition fi =

on

the share parameter helps equate
the private and soda! marginal costs of search, which are in general different because

of the well known "congestion" and "thick-market" externalities captured by the two
arguments in the function S(H, U).'5

3 Creation, Destruction, and Unemployment: Timing and Volatility
rn this section we focus on cyclical aspects of creative destruction. We contrast the
cyclica! response of an efficient economy with an inefficient economy in terms of observable

characteristics of timing and volatility of creation, destruction and unemployment)6

3.1

Efficient Restructuring over the Cycle

We start by considering the response of an efficient economy, where (, fi) = (0,'j), to
business cyc!e fluctuations in 6(t). To be consistent we assume all fluctuations in 6(1) are

due to real fluctuations in intermediate input prices p(t), but a decentralized economy
with the same bargaining parameters would behave exactly the same in response to an
(inefficient) demand distortion z(i).

A basic but fundamental feature of the efficient economy is that the only role of
unemployment is to facilitate labor reallocation. Thus, if job creation entails only investment but no search costs (c2 = 0), efficient equilibrium unemployment is zero. Aggregate
two externalities operate as follows: A decision to create a job and search for a worker makes
search costlier toy others (SH 0); a decision to destroy a job and add a worker to the unemployment
pool makes search cheaper for others (Se, 0).
"The distinction between efficient and inefficient economies is starker when leisure unemployment is not

an important source of employment fluctuations. Those are precisely the circumstances we wanted to stress
by assuming in section 2.3 that b(t) is always low enough to warrant a shadow wage above the value of
leisure (set to zero for simplicity).For an analysis of gross flows stressing the role of leisure in
employment
fluctuations, see Davis and Baltiwanger (1990).

17

shocks are entirely absorbed by fluctuations in the shadow wage, while all quantities
including labor market flows and stocks remain unaffected.
The introduction of search costs gives rise to unemployment, whose role is to facilitate
reallocation. Figure 1 simulates the path of such an efficient economy, with positive search

costs and linear investment costs (cc, c3 > 0 and c, = 0). Business cycles are generated
by a deterministic sine-wave in b(t).'7 Panel (a) shows one full business cycle in 6(t),

with its trough in the middle of the diagram. Panels (b)-(d) present the path of output,
creation and destruction, and unemployment.'8

The dynamics of those variables are driven by the fact that the opportunity cost of
creating unemployment is lowest at the bottom of a recession, when production is least
profitable. Given that unemployment is needed to facilitate reallocation, it is efficient to

concentrate this process around the trough of the recession.'9 Recessions are thus char-

acterized by a sharp increase in destruction that spills workers into the unemployment
pool, followed promptly by a large spurt of creation, which reaches its peak at the same
time as unemployment. Creation, destruction and unemployment are tightly coordinated

and positively correlated, although with a slight job destruction lead to let unemployment accumulate. F\irthermore, there is a motive to concentrate the reallocation process
sharply around the recession's trough. Consequently, despite the symmetry of the driving
force, the economy's observed cyclical response is asymmetric. Recessions and recoveries

are sharp and short-lived, while expansions are prolonged and fade away slowly before
the onset of the next recession.
The extreme synchronization of the reallocation process_is a distinctive feature of an

i

'tThe figure was generated with the following parameters: r = 0.065, = 0.028, 5 = 0.05, = Q3
1. Creation cost parameters are e = 0.0790, e1 = 0 and c2 = 0.045. The economy is efficient
with bargaining parameters fi = q and = 0. b(t) follows a sine-wave of period 4 years, mean 0.32 1, and
The simulation method used is the same as in Caballero and Hammour (1994).
amplitude

and I =

'8%Vhat may appear as Irregularities" in some of the figures are in fact the result of the "echo" effect of
previous cycles on the age-distribution of jobs at the start of the current cycle.
11This point is emphasised by Davis (1987) and Davis-Raltiwanger (1990). The literature contains
several similar "opportunity cost" models of different types of investment activities during recessions —
e.g., Ball (1991), Aghion and Saint-Paul (1992), Gall and Ilainmour (1992).

18

La: aggregate Shock

1.c: Creation and Destruction

me

'time

1.b: Gross Output (Detrended)

1.d: Unentployrnent

Ii.0

a

0.4 0.6

1.2

1.6

2.0 2.4 2.8 3.2 3.6 4.0
brne

d

4 O. 12

1.6

2.0 2.4 2.8
time

3.2

3.8 4.0

efficient economy with significant search costs, where sharp recessions are a preparation
for strong recoveries. An efficient decentralized economy supports this equilibrium with
a shadow wage that does not accommodate aggregate shocks one for one. This occurs

because unemployment facilitates creation, and the latter, by increasing the demand
for new hires, counteracts the direct downward pressures on the wage of an exogenous
squeeze in profit margins.

The incentive to concentrate reallocation near at the bottom of a recession may be

counteracted by an incentive to smooth the creation process. If marginal investment
costs are now increasing (ci > 0), creation must be smoothed, as it becomes expensive

to vary the intensity of creation over the cycle. Figure 2 presents the path of creation
and destruction in an efficient economy with both increasing marginal investment and
search costs (c.0, c1,

c2

> 0)?0 Since the only purpose of destruction and unemployment

in the acient economy is subsequent creation, destruction and unemployment remain
synchronized with creation, and are therefore also smoothed. This strong joint-smoothing

behavior is another aspect of the coupling of creation and destruction in an efficient
economy.

3.2 Inefficient Restructuring: Timing and Volatility
The dynamics of creation, destruction and unemployment in the efficient economy is
fundamentally determined by the usefulness of unemployment for worker reallocation. If
the decentralized outcome does not happen to be efficient, the creation-cost saving signals
driving unemployment may be distorted. More dramatically, the timing of creation and

destruction may be disrupted and the two processes may be completely decoupled. We
discuss those two aspects of inefficient restructuring in turn.
The figure was generated with the same parameters as figure 1, except that the creation ccst parameters
are now e0 = 0.0790,

c1

= 0.75 and c2 = 0.0113; and the b(i) wave is of mean 0.422 and amplitude OO64.

19

Figure 2: Efficient Joint—Smoothing

of Creation and Destruction
N
N

F— Creator,

I--

I.
cbO

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

ao
time

2.4

2.8

3.2

3.6

4.0

Distorted Reallocation Incentives. As we have seen, an efficient economy concentrates

reallocation during recessions, when the opportunity cost of generating the necessary un-

employment is lowest. The same intertemporal substitution incentives are also present in
an inefficient economy with significant search costs, but the extent to which restructuring

is concentrated in recessions may be out of line.
To see this point most clearly, we consider the same economy as in figure 1 (c<,, c2 > 0

and c1 = 0), but now introduce inefficiency in the form of /3 rj

(

remains zero). Figure

3 shows creation (panel a) and destruction (panel b) for two economies that are identicai
except for their different values of /3.21 It is clear that a higher /3 reduces intertemporal
substitution incentives. In such an economy, the presence of strong workers (/3 > tj) will

tend to muffle fluctuations in profit margins, and the economy will restructure less than
efficiently during recessions; weak workers (/3

< i) will lead to the opposite, and the

economy will restructure excessively during recessions.

Decoupling of Creation and Destruction. Distorted volatility results from models
of decentralized bargaining based on search costs. But whether the economy's cyclical
response is muted or amplified, creation and destruction remain tightly synchronized and

recessions remain a time of intense restructuring. New and potentially important effects
can result from the introduction of specific investment with imperfect bonding. Imperfect

bonding can derail the reallocation process over the cycle and decouple creation and
destruction, both in terms of synchronization and joint-smoothing. Recessions become a
time of wasteful unemployment, unassociated with greater reallocation activity.

The decoupling of creation and destruction is most clearly analyzed by temporarily
setting search costs to zero, so unemployment plays no role in facilitating reallocation.
Much of what happens in this case to the cyclical pattern of creation and destruction 1s

driven by "rigidity" in the shadow wage tii°(i). Recall that, when c2 = 0, the shadow
wage in the efficient economy ( = 0 or /3 = 0) absorbs one-to-one all fluctuations in b(t).
21The figure was generated with the same parameters as ligure 1, except that
0.2 or 0.5.

20

now tak

two values:

3.a: Creation
ID

N

0
C
cc.

C

I'0
NJ

0
C
0.4

0.8

12

1.6

2.0

2.4

2.6

3.2

3.6

40

2.8

3.2

3.6

4.0

tine

3.b: Destruction

0J

c?LO

0.4

0.9

12

1.6

2.
tine

2.4

The economy exhibits no unemployment and no quantity responses to cycle. If workers

have some bargaining power (, fi > 0), the economy becomes inefficient and generates
positive unemployment. Not only may the wage only partly offset movements in b(t), but

whatever part of the change in 6(t) it does offset will also require quantity movements
in unemployment and hiring to bring the wage to its new equilibrium (see equation 16).
The first type of shadow wage rigidity we call overt rigidity, and the second type covert
rigidity.
Creation-Driven Recessionj. The form of wage rigidity affects the nature of recessions,

whether they are principally time of depressed hiring or times of intense destruction and

cleansing of the productive structure. An interesting feature of our economy is that the
nature of wage rigidity is detennined by the — apparently unrelated — structure of
creation costs. Most inefficient parameter configurations involve both types of rigidity,

but in the extreme case where marginal investment costs are constant (c1 = 0), the
economy exhibits a pure form of covert rigidity. In this case, recessions are entirely
creation-driven.

To see this note that constant marginal creation costs implies that the free-entry condition (15), together with the definition of T(t) in (11), is solved for a constant scrapping

age ä. But the latter can occur only if the profitability (14) of exiting kr-year old jobs
remains unchanged over the cycle, which requires that the wage fully absorb fluctuations
in 6(t). Although the wage falls in a recession by the same amount as in an efficient econ-

omy, covertly it is rigid because this drop requires by (16) a fall in the hiring intensity

H(t)/U(i) — Le. a fall in hiring and/or a rise in unemployment.
The economy exhibits in this case a perfect "insulation" mechanism similar to that
discussed in Caballero and Hammour (1994), by which the fall in creation in response to
a negative profitability shock leads to a fall in shadow wages that insulates the profitabil-

ity of existing jobs.32 Recessions are completely driven by a fall in creation, while the
In Caballero and Hammour (1994) we model an industry in isolation facing an exogenous consumption
wage and downward-sloping demand. Insulation operates through the goods rather than the labor market,
21

scrapping age on the destruction margin does not respond.23 This leads to a breakdown

in efficiency and a complete decoupling of creation and destruction. Higher unemployment in recessions is wasteful, since the economy takes no advantage of it to intensify the

reallocation process. On the contrary, the rise in unemployment here is caused by a fall
in job creation, and the two are negatively correlated.

Destruction-Driven Recessions. Perfect insulation occurs in the extreme case where
marginal investment costs are constant. If investment costs are increasing (ci > 0), there
is an incentive to smooth creation over the cycle. This dampens the cyclical response of
creation and its effect on 11(t) and U(t), and therefore limits the extent to which wages can

fall to accommodate a negative profitability shock and insulate existing production units.

The shadow wage exhibits in this case a degree of overt rigidity. By the exit condition
(14), this means that the scrapping age(t) must fall and the rate of destruction must rise
to accommodate part of the aggregate shock. To the extent this happens, recessions are

destruction- rather than creation-driven, and lead to a cleansing of outdated production
units.

Figure 4 presents an example of the phenomenon discussed above, when aggregate
investment costs are convex (co, c1 > 0) and there are no search costs.24 The business

cycle nriable b(t) in panel (a) is similar to that in figure 1. In sharp contrast with the
efficient cycle in figure 1, creation and destruction. are decoupled and are now negatively

correlated (panel c). The stark difference between the efficient and inefficient cycles in
figures 1 and 4 can seen in figure 5, which displays the corresponding Beveridge curves.25

The upper panel reveals the strong synchronizing incentives of unemployment acting as a
via movements along the demand curve.
-.
'Tbis does not mean that the rate of job destruction remains constant over time. Despite the constant
scrapping age, destruction will vary as a result of the "echo" effect of past cyclical variations in hiring on
the current age distribution of jobs.

The figure was generated with the same parameters as figure I, except that the economy is now
inefficient with 0 = 1 and ft = 0.5; the creation cost parameters are c0 = 0.0790, c, = 1.00 arid r2 = 0;
and the bQ) wave is of mean 0.456 and amplitude
The free shift-parameter in the matching (unction (see section 2.1) was chasenarbitrarily to gencrate
this figure.

22

4.c: Creation and Destruction

4.a: Aggregate Shock
0
C
0

C
CU

0

—

C

ci

1

ci

0

5,

/

5,

//

S.

I.

F.

ci

ci
('I

d

.4 0.8

1.2

1.6

2.0 2.4 2.8 3.2 3.6 4.0

time

time

4.b: Gross Output (OetrendecfJ

4.d: Unemployment
U,

(U

ci
U,

ci
a.

U,

0
d
U,
C,

0
0
In
03

ci

0.4 0.8

1.2

1.6

2.0 2.4 2.6 3,2
time

3.6

4.0

q0

0.4 0.8

1.2

1.6

2.0 2.4 2.6 3.2 3.6 4.0
time

5.a: Efficient Economy
0
('a

.4:

>

rN
0
a'

0
a'
0

0
N
8.ao

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.14

0.16

Q.1R

0.120

0.125

0.130

U

5.b: Inefficient Economy
0

In

a
N

0
0
N

0
>

N

0

N

0N
0
N—
was

0.090

0.095

0.100

0.105

0.110

U

0.115

reallocation device in an efficient economy. Not only does creation rise as unemployment

rises, which could be the direct result of higher unemployment in the matching function,
but also creation efforts (vacancy posting) rise. Quite the opposite, the lower panel reveals

the downward-sloping Beveridge curve associated with the decoupling of creation and
destruction in an inefficient economy with unbonded specific investment. Contrary to the

identiing assumption used in the literature on the role allocative vs. aggregate shocks in
employment fluctuations (e.g., Abraham and Katz 1986, Blanchard and Diamond 1989),

the same type of aggregate shock can lead to either an upward or a downward sloping
Beveridge curve, depending on economic structure.26

In the presence of specific investment, imperfect bonding decouples creation and destruction not only in terms of timing, but also in terms of amplitude. Figure 6 presents

the cyclical response of an economy identical to the efficient economy in figure 2 (c0,
c1, c2 > 0), except that bonding is now imperfect (0 C = 1). Besides the obvious
level effects, imperfect bonding disrupts the precise timing of destruction followed by
immediate creation. Second, the smoothing of creation leads to more rather than less
volatility in destruction. The joint-smoothing behavior is also disrupted. In this inefficient case, destruction is too volatile and occurs too early relative to creation, leading to
an unnecessarily prolonged and volatile period of unemployment accumulation.
Search Costs

v. Specific Investment. As we have seen, the nature of the creation

costs that create the match surplus to be bargained over is a surprisingly central determinant of the cyclical dynamics in our economy. Inefficiency in decentralized-bargaining
models that focus on search costs takes the form of distorted volatility, while creation and

destruction remain synchronized. This is, for example, the one robust cyclical distortion

that arises in the model of Mortensen and Pissarides (1993).27 Shifting the emphasis
"Similarly, one should be careful in using the correlation between creation and destruction to identify
allocative vs. aggregate shocks (see Davis and Baltiwanger 1984).
"The Mortensen and Pissarides (1993) model also gives rise to negatively correlated creation and destruction, but that is a non-robust consequence of modeling choice in discrete time. It is assumed that
workers whose jobs are destroyed at time t only join the unemployment pool at I + I. Thus, a negative

23

Figure 6: Inefficient Decoupling

of Creation and Destruction
Cu

04

C

— Creaton

- - Destwbon
04

0
0
o
o
d

-,

—

N
0
cbO

0.8 12

1.6

2.0

trne

2.4

2.8

3.2

3.6

4.0

on the imperfect bonding of specific investment derails the tight synchronization of the
reallocation process, both in terms of timing and amplitude.
The mechanics behind the cyclical response of the creation and destruction margins
center around differences in the way and degree in which the shadow wage D() absorbs

aggregate shocks. Much of the difference between models based on search costs and
models based on lack of bonding can be traced back to differences in wage "rigidity." As

can be seen in equation (16), introducing greater worker bargaining power in the form of
a larger share parameter fi leads to more sensitive wages to S(t), a measure of the match-

surplus the worker can capture as an outside alternative. Thus, an inefficiently high
leads to excessive wage sensiiivity to hiring intensity H(i)/U(t) in the labor market. That
is why, in this case, strong workers tend to dampen the economy's cyclical responsiveness.

Introducing greater bargaining power in the form of imperfect bonding and a positive
shifts the weight in wage-determination from search costs to specific investment, as

a determinant of the match surplus. This now renders the shadow wage excessively
rigid and unresponsive to hiring intensity H(i)/U(i) in the labor market. By decoupling
creation and destruction, it changes the nature of recessions from being a time of intense
reallocation, in the right or wrong doses, to being a time of wasteful unemployment —
caused

either by depressed hiring or increased destruction — unassociated with greater

reallocation activity.

4 Market Failures: Unemployment and Sclerosis
In this section we turn to the effect of labor market inefficiencies on the pace of the
creative destruction process. Under what conditions will the restructuring of the proshock that increases destruction this period will only lead to high unemployment and cheap creation next
period. This leads firms to delay creation this period until the next, giving rise to a negative contemporaneous correlation between creation and destruction, present even in an efficient economy. Notwithstanding,
the counterpart of our strong synchronization result lies in the positive correlation that they find between
destruction at t and creation at I + 1.

24

ductive system be excessively slow, and result in technological "sclerosis"? When will

restructuring be, on the contrary, wastefully rapid, and result in what one might call
technological "hyperkinesis"? Surprisingly, we find that, regardless of whether workers
are excessively weak or strong, labor market inefficiencies whatever their direction always

le.d to sclerosis.

4.1 Weak and Strong Workers
To study the pace of creative destruction, we consider the economy in steady state as a
tool of analysis. Our results will, nevertheless, be instructive about the average pace of
reallocation in a fluctuating economy and even about the effect of relatively low-frequency

cycles.23 In this subsection we derive an "equivalence" result that will be useful in the
subsequent analysis. We show that there is a form of steady-state equivalence between

the two bargaining power parameters and fi, that allows us to compensate workers for
a reduction in one parameter by increasing the other. We can thus divide the parameter
space in two well-defined regions where workers are too "weak" and too "strong," even

when one parameter indicates weakness and the other strength (e.g. fi <q and > 0).
We use a "*" to denote a variable in steady state. A steady state is an equilibrium

path with constant (, H, U), and requires a constant path for the exogenous variable
?. The economy's equilibrium conditions (l1).(12) and (14)-(17) in steady state become
(18)

— [w_D

(19)

=

(20)

U. =1— !—

= 0,

—

—

With increasing marginai creation costs, the average level of different quantities in a fluctuating economy may be different from their steady-state level. This is because, given the convexity of C(H, U) in H,
volatility in H makes creation more expensive on average.

25

where

D=!Lfl[fl.+s.)

(21)
(22)

3.D_

l+ip4h

11 —

(23)

Il+1$S
—

e_&+5i — [e_i
_____________

(r+8)

We can now state our equivalence result, which is proved formally in appendix A.2.

Consider an economy with positive search costs (c2 > 0). Consider any pair
[0,1] x]0, 1[, and the steady state (u, H;, U) that corresponds to (, /3) =

/3)

C

(, $). Then

one can find a (weakly) decreasing function fo() over [0,1] such that, for any C [0, 1],

the corresponding steady state to (,fl)

= (,fo()) is (n,H;,Ufl. Naturally, we must

have fo(o) = fib.
Another way to state the result is that any steady-state outcome (, H,, Ufl corresponds to a whole schedule (,f0()) of bargaining parameters. Quite intuitively, this
schedule is decreasing because a rise in one bargaining parameter must be offset by a fall

in the other, if we are to keep worker bargaining power and the steady-state outcome

unchanged. It is in this sense that the parameters

and

/3

are

"equivalent" in steady

state.
This result allows us to divide the bargaining-parameter space into two clearly delineated regions of excessively "weak" and "strong" workers. In figure 7, we first draw

the "efficient" schedule (, fE()) that corresponds to the efficient steady-state. By the

result in section 2.4, this schedule crosses the fl-axis at the point (, /3) = (0,j). All
equivalence schedules that start below this point correspond to weaker workers than is

efficient, and remain below the efficient schedule? All schedules above correspond t
stronger-than-efficient workers, and remain above the efficient schedule. Thus the efficient

schedule divides the parameter space into two regions: a region below it where workers
"Schedules cannot crs because each is drawn for a different steady-state equilibrium.

26

Figure 7: Strong and Weak Workers Regions

r

0

0

1

0

are weak, and a region above it where they are strong.

4.2 Unemployment and Sclerosis
With the above classification of worker bargainingpower in steady-state, we are ready to
characterize the direction of inefficiency in the two regions. It is clear from (l8)-(20) that

(U,r) are sufficient statistics to describe a steady state, since H can then be obtained
from the unemployment equation (20). We will thus focus on those two variables. Our
results are clearest when we assume c1 = 0. Because differentiating between
c1 and
is much less interesting in steady state than over the cycle, we choose to assume c1 = 0
from now on and present our results in their clearest form.

Under- and Over-Employment Figure 8 traces the curve in (U, fl)-space that is
generated by increasing p.30 The trough of the curve corresponds to the efficient value
= fR() It is clear that unemployment is
increasing with fi. In other words, the
strong-worker region is characterized by under-employment, and the weak-worker region
by over-employment. This is what one would expect, given that strong workers take

an excessively large share of profits and discourage labor demand, while weak workers
take an excessively small share and encourage labor demand. As discussed earlier, the
economy offsets an increase in the worker bargaining power with an endogenous rise in
unemployment that weakens workers and restores adequate firm profitability.

More formally, appendix A.3 shows that dU/dfl > 0 in the weak-worker region and
in the strong-worker region near the efficient equivalence curve. Although we could not
show formally that it is positive everywhere in the strong-worker region, this was true in
all the numerical examples we have tried. Moreover, the appendix shows that U —. L
asfl —,

I.

Technological Sclerosis, If we turn to the scrapping age r, we find in figures that it is
3011e figure was generated with the following parameters; r = 0.065, = 0.028, 6 = 0I51
rj = 0.51 b
= 0.390 and I = 1. Creation cost parameters are to =
0.399, c, = 0 and c, = 0.004. The bargaining
parameters = 0.3 and 0.05 ft < 0.65.

27

Figure 8: Effects of Increasing ci in Steady State
0

too

0.02

0.04

0.08
U

0.08

0.10

0.12

minimized at the efficient level of fi. Thus, unlike what happens with unemployment, the
economy exhibits the same direction of inefficiency for ir in the weak- and strong-worker

regions. Appendix A.3 shows formally that, in both regions, r is above its efficient
value. Labor market failures whatever their direction always lead to sluggish renovation

and technological sclerosis. Sclerosis is thus a state of affairs that any policy program
will most likely have to face.

To get an intuition for this result, we set 9 = 0 and write steady-state wellre as
follows

(24)

W=
frt-0

+ PP+IPDTE

A(0).

]
This expression splits welfare in terms of the shadow income flows that go to different
factors of production. The first term JC corresponds to the present value of income that
goes to the owners of the initial distribution of production units. The second term is the
discounted value of income that flows to the owners of the intermediate input (pV) and

to workers (u?fl.

Note that the shadow wage goes to both employed and unemployed

workers, because the latter also receive an expected flow i based on the probability of
finding a job (see equation 29 in appendix A.1).

Now, we need to compare W across steady states that correspond to different con-

figurations of (, fi). The problem is that if we want to talk meaningfully about the
parameters (, fi) that maximize W, we need to start from the same initial distribution
of jobs. But this means that we will not be generally starting in steady state. For this

reason, despite the fact that our result is quite general, we limit our discussion to the
limit case where (r — goes to zero. In this undiscounted case, initial conditions do not
matter and we can ignore the term K.
In this case, equation (24) shows that the bargaining parameters that maximize welfare are the ones that maximize the shadow wage i?°. But the exit condition(18), which

= eTr + 6, implies that maximizing i25" amounts to minimizing
r. Thus the efficient parameter configurations are the ones that minimize .
can be written as

28

Intuitively, sclerosis in this economy — whether workers are weak or strong — is a
result of the undervaluation and misuse of labor as a factor of production. It is when labor

has the highest shadow value that the pressure to exit is highest on outdated techniques

and the pace of renovation is fastest.3' When workers have little bargaining power, the
reason for the undervaluation of labor is clear. When workers are strong, their shadow
wage should be high in partial equilibrium. But in general equilibrium, powerful workers
discourage job creation, leading to increased unemployment and a depressed shadow price

of an unemployed worker.

5 Policy
In this section we turn to government policy. What kind of policies can improve the pace

and cyclical features of the creative destruction process? What would be the effect of
those policies on unemployment and sclerosis? A simple answer is to recommend that
governments try to fix their problems at the root, and change the institutional aspects of
the labor market that are the source of what is essentially a supply-side problem. This is
often politically infeasible. In the absence of an institutional cure, we study two classes of
policies — production and creation incentives — that can provide at least a partial cure

for the economy's ills. As we will see, those two types of policies affect the economy's
unemployment and sclerosis problems very differently, and could actually be combined
optimally to bring the economy to its efficient outcome.
3tWithout making the connection with bargaining power, Salter (1960) describes the relation between
scrapping as follows: "When real wages are high, standards of obsolescence are high, and a high

wages and

level of replacement investment ensures rapid adjustment to new methods. Conversely when real wages
are low, the capital stock is adjusted slowly to new methods and average productivity is lower" (p. 73):'
52Note that this discussion is about shadow wages, not actual wage flows. In fact, one can show that
— with continuous Nash bargaining — average wage payments are generally maximized in the interior of
the strong-worker region. Politically, labor may thus find it advantageous to push for an outcome where
workers have greater than efficient bargaining power.

29

5.1 Production and Creation Incentives
At first sight, policies that directly encourage creation — e.g., an investment taic credit —
and those that directly encourage production — e.g., a reduction in the corporate income

tax — may appear equivalent. As long as their benefits are the same in present value
terms, shouldn't they affect investment in the same way? In the presence of two margins,

this argument misses important differences in the way those policies affect destruction.
Creation incentives directly affect the decision to invest, and, throughmore intense hiring

in the labor market, indirectly prop up wage pressures on exiting jobs. Production
incentives not only affect investment decisions, but also directly encourage firms to keep

outdated production units longer in operation.

We introduce production incentives in our model by simply reinterpreting the sub-

sidy z(t) as such. We introduce creation incentives by assuming a subsidy i(i)A(t) per
production unit created? In this case, the subsidy must be subtracted from the effective
creation cost in equilibrium conditions (I4)-(17):
(25)

[30(t) — 1(01 A(i)

=

ATW [A(i) — A(s

—

a(s))] e_(T)() ds,

We analyze those policies in a steady-state economy in terms of the sufficient statistics

(U,r). Appendix A.5 shows that an increase in the production incentive f reduces
unemployment but increases the scrapping age r. The subsidy protects outdated production units by absorbing the cost pressures to destroy them. The impact of creation
incentives is quite different. The appendix shows that an increase in i reduces the scrap-

ping age, while its effect on unemployment is ambiguous. A creation subsidy leads to
'3Distinguishing realistically between production and creation incentives can be quite tricky. Consider

an

investment tax credit. Although it is primarily a creation incentive, it can act simultaneously as&

production incentive if, through a Keynesian multiplier effect, it leads to an aggregate demand expansion.
As a second example, consider a tax holiday for new investments. It acts effectively as a creation incentive

if it lasts less than a production unit's lifetime, but as a production incentive if it lasts more.
We apply full bonding to the subsidy because it is not match specific: lithe worker quits, the firm will
still be able to get the same subsidy by hiring another employee.

30

greater hiring intensity that increases wage pressures to destroy outdated production
units. Its effect on unemployment depends on the degree to which destruction offsets the
positive effect of increased creation on employment.

Figure 9 illustrates the steady-state effects of production and creation incentives. The

solid and dashed lines represent the steady states that correspond to a range a values
for C and i, respectively (subsidies are positive and taxes are negative). The two lines
intersect at the point where C = = 0. The figure was generated with what we take to
be a realistically small value for the search cost.35 In this small-c2 case, the two policies

appear almost "orthogonal": production subsidies are the appropriate tool to reduce
steady-state unemployment with little effect on r, while creation subsidies are the tool
to reduce sclerosis with little effect on U.
How do those conclusions carry over to temporary increases in z and 1? If we think

of fluctuations as being driven by z(i), our previous analysis of business cycles indicates
that a temporary production subsidy will generally have a qualitatively similar effect to

a permanent one — lower U(t) and higher (i). However, the result that the effect on
(t) is small when search costs are small does not generalize. We saw in section 3.2 that
recessions can have a strong cleansing effect on the productive structure even when search

costs are zero? Similarly, the intuition for why permanent creation incentives decrease
clearly carries over to temporary ones. It will still be the case that the resulting rise in
hiring incentives will increase wage pressures on exiting production units.
The figure was generated with the same parameters as figure 8. We chose to model a s-inefficient
economy with bargaining parameters fi = 0.5 and th = 0.3. We calibrated yf and the creation cost
parameters e0 and c2 (we set c1 = 0 because it is not central for steady-state issues) so as to yield an
unemployment rate (P = 0.065, ahiring intensity of W/U' = 3, and a search costS equal to 3 weeks of
= 0).
the leading technology's quasi-rents. Calibration was done with zero government incentives (1' = f
It is the last restriction on that gives us the small value for c2. The implied scrapping age for the

r

calibrated economy is V = 8.47 years.
asThe cleansing effect of recessions a_rises in the imperfect-insulation case when c1 > 0. A large c1 is
much less important in steady state. We generated Ggure 9, for example, with a large e1 and obtained a
qualitatively very similar figure.

31

Figure 9: Increases in Production and Creation Incentives
q
if'

0
0
10

I

I
I

Ii,

t

ci

0
ci

I

•0

I
I
I

4

R
C
If'
N

4

0
N
In
th

—0.15

—020

q
V.04

0.05

0.06

0.07
U

0.08

0.09

z S +0.15
I S +0.29

0.10

5.2 Expansionary Policy, Liquidationism, and Accelerationisrn
Having characterized the effects of our two policy instruments, we can now assess them

in terms of welfare. We concentrate on the strong-worker region, where the economy
suffers from high unemployment and technological sderosis, and study the welfare effects

of introducing a small production or creation incentive.

Production Incentives and the "Liqtidaiionisin View of Recessions. In the strongworker region, the welfare effect of expanding the economy through a production subsidy

appears to be ambiguous. On the one hand, economic expansion can relieve the unemployment problem; on the other it exacerbates the state of technological sclerosis. Could

the second effect dominate the first and make the expansion undesirable on the whole?
In this case, what the economy really needs would be a recession that "cleanses" its pro-

ductive structure — an idea reminiscent of the pre-Keynesian "liquidationist" view (see
DeLong 1991).

To address this question, let us first look at the steady-state welfare effects of a small

production subsidy df starting from f = 0. As discussed in section 4.2, a meaningful
welfare comparison across steady states can only be undertaken in the limit case where
(r—y) goes to zero and initial conditions do not matter. In this case appendix A.4 shows
that the change in the flow of steady-state welfare in response to policy can be expressed

in terms of the response of the hiring intensity H/U:
(26)

= (uY' —

________

where & —Cu represents the .social shadow value of an unemployed worker. It is easy

to see that, when workers are strong, their decentralized-equilibrium shadow wage
is always greater that their social shadow wage tii5(t).3' Since a creation incentive always

increases H/U (see appendix A.5), equation (26) shows that a small production subsidy
37Since we are comparing ,i? and
for the same aggregate quantities, this statement corresponds to
the simple partial-equilibrium result that the shadow wage is increasing in the bargaining power of workers.

32

is always welfare-improving in the strong-worker region. The exit condition (14) gives a

good intuition why the liquidationist view cannot hold here. The "cleansing" that results
from depressing the economy amounts to moving a worker from a job at the destruction
margin to the unemployment pool. Since the exiting worker produces (beD on the job but

has a social value of only w in the unemployment pool, this produces a social loss of
((fleD — (beS) > 0.

This intuition carries over to temporary recessions as well, since the inequality tiS(t) <

D(j) holds also outside of steady state. Figure 10 shows the time path of the flow
of welfare that corresponds to the business-cycle simulation in figure 6, assuming the
business cycle is driven by fluctuations in z(i). it is clear that the flow of welfare is
procyclical.

Creation Incentives and "Acceleratjonisj" policies. Let us now turn to the steady-state

welfare effect of a small creation subsidy di starting from? = 0. In the strong-worker
region, this policy would provide a partial cure for sclerosis by reducing r. Although its
effect on unemployment is ambiguous, we know by equation (26) that, since it increases

H/U (see appendix A3), it must be welfare-improving.
Naturally, a creation subsidy can only be beneficial up to a point. When the subsidy
becomes too large, the economy wilt suffer from a state of "hyperkinesis" with restructur-

ing happening at an excessively fast and costly pace. Government policy can thus give
rise to a new phenomenon of excessively low a, that we saw would not arise out of pure
bargaining-related labor market failures.
The case of Singapore as documented by Young (1992) seems to match well this pat-

tern of government-induced high investment and excess restructuring. In the 1970s and
1980s aggregate investment in Singapore reached phenomenal levels as a share of GDP,

peaking at 43% in 1984. High investment was to a great extent related to a combination
of tax incentives and widespread government participation in the finance of local compaConverseIy, one can show that in the weak-worker region (uii —
S welfare-improving.

33

c

0 and a small

production

Lax

1O.a: Aggregate Demand Distortion

N

C

LO

0.4

0.0

1.2

1.8

2.0

2.4

2.0

3.2

3.6

4.0

3.6

4.0

tine

1O.b: Flow of Welfare (Detrended]

S

0

I3
a
In
cfLO

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

2.0

tine

2.4

2.9

3.2

nies (financed primarily by labor income taxation and forced saving). Not surprisingly,
during the same period the economy was undergoing one of the world's highest rates of
structural change in manufacturing, moving from one industry specialization to the next

at a very fist pace. Young's assessment of the Singaporean economy is that it invested
and restructured at excessively high rates. Compared to a laissez-faire economy like Hong

Kong, it reached a comparable growth rate but at a much higher cost.

5.3 Optimal Dynamic Policy
We have seen that production and creation subsidies affect the economy's creation and
destruction margins differently. This raises the question whether a judicious combination

of the two policies can correct the price signals that distort those two margins and restore
full efficiency.

In fact, the solution to this problem is quite simple. We can restore efficiency if we
use the creation subsidy to correct the distortion in the effective creation cost signal, and

the production subsidy to correct the shadow wage signal. In other words we need to set

(27)

f i(t) = E9i)

E5(t) =

1%I(t) +
I z(t) = iJ"(i) — 115(t) =

Taking (25) into account, it is straightforward to verify that the equilibrium conditions

(14)-(15) of the decentralized economy subject to those subsidies are identical to the
equilibrium conditions (7)-(8) of the corresponding efficient economy.

Consider what this implies for a strong-worker economy in steady state. Such an
economy suffers from high unemployment and sclerosis. In terms of figure 9, we need to

move it in the southwest direction. This can be achieved by a combination of positive
production and creation subsidies. The former mainjy reduces unemployment (westward

movement), and the latter mainly relieves sclerosis (southward movement). Thus, the
presence of strong workers — due to imperfect bonding or a large worker.share parameter — requires that firms be compensated via a combination creation and production
34

subsidies. The opposite policies are required when workers are weak.
In addition to the level effects above, equations (27) also solve for the cyclical aspect

of optimal policy design. In order to isolate this cyclical dimension, we remove level
effects by focusing on cases where (,fl) lie along the efficient steady-state equivalence
curve described in section 4.1? Figure 11 shows —p(2) in panel (a), the optimal creation

subsidy in panel (b), and the optimal production subsidy in panel (c).4° The last two
panels present curves for different configurations of bargaining parameters (, /9) along
the efficient equivalence curve. It is clear that optimal creation and production subsidies
are countercycical, and more so as the configuration of gives greater weight to imperfect

bonding .

As we have seen in section 3.2, as workers derive more of their bargaining

strength from imperfect bonding rather that from the share parameter 9, the shadow
wage becomes increasingly rigid. Relative to the efficient economy, workers become ex-

cessively strong during recessions, when wages do not fall enough and unemployment is
too high, and excessively weak during expansions for the opposite reason. This explains
why firms must be given incentives during recessions, and taxed during expansions.

6 Conclusion
Economies are hardly static entities occasionally perturbed by various shocks. Rather,

they are dynamic, continuously restructuring objects, with large and sustained factor
reallocation flows. Tecimological unemployment, as described by Schumpeter, is a natural result of the frictions indigenous to the process of reallocation. But it comes with

no guarantee that unemployment is at the rigM levej,.Jhat restructuring occurs at an
adequate pace, or that the cyclical features of reallocation'èows are efficient.

In this paper, we have focused on the disruptive effects on creative destruction of
Thi guarantees that in steady state workers are neither too strong nor too weak. It does not guarantee
that the same is true on averugc in an economy with ongoing fluctuations. Bowever, figure II below shows
that this difference is second order.
40The economy in question has the same parameters as in figures 2 and 6.
35

11.a: Business cycle indicator
CD

t
11.b: Optimal Creation Incentives

0
0

t
11.c: Optimal Production Incentives

ID.

0
d

t

1a malfunctioning labor market where, deprived of the benefits of a Wairasian auctioneer, workers and firma must meet and bargain in a decentralized manner. Interestingly,
we found that labor-market problems systematically lead to technological "sclerosis,"
wlether the bargaining-power balance is favorable or unfavorable to ricers. The basic
rason is that, in general equilibrium, labor-market inefficiencies lead to a misuse aHdTihdervaluation of labor, which loosens the cost pressures to shut down outdated production

units. Simultaneously i'ith sclerosis, excessive technological unemployment can arise if
the bargaining power of workers is too high.
With strong workers, an effective policy response to sclerosis lies in the introduction

of incentives to create which, by increasing the intensity of hiring in the labor market,

prop up wage pressures to scrap old technology. But, as far as high unemployment is
concerned, hiring incentives may not be a good remedy precisely because they lead to
increased scrapping. To partially reduce their effect on the destruction margin, creation
incentives must be complemented by means of policies that encourage firms to keep their

workers. Even the much-maligned imposition of firing costs may provide an acceptable

cure for unemployment, provided that they are conceived as a supplement to vigorous
hiring incentives.

Decentralized bargaining in the labor market can also disrupt the response of creative

destruction to aggregate shocks. In an efficient economy, there are strong reasons to
concentrate reallocation efforts in recessions, when the opportunity cost of generating
the unemployment needed to facilitate reallocation is low. Recessions should be times of

intense reailocation, when creation as well as destruction and unemployment are high.
With decentralized bargaining this process can be derailed, and creation can be decoupled

from destruction. Those effects are due to a form of real wage rigidity brought about
by a lack of bonding of match-specific investment — rather than the more usual search-

cost related factors. Such decoupling is consistent with the evidence on gross labor
flows documented by Davis and Haltiwanger (1990, 1992). Their evidence shows that

increased destruction and unemployment in recessions are associated with low rather
36

than high creation. Moreover, the apparent "smoothing" of creation over the cycle finds
no counterpart in the behavior of destruction (see Caballero and Hammour 1994).

Rather than being primarily times of mere

reall cation intensity, we interpret
recessions as times of productivity cleansi g. This d
not mean that we find a case
for a revived "liquidationist" view of re

sions as

in a recession is essentially wasteful in t

irable. Increased unemployment

ntext. When workers are strong, their

shadow wage in production is greater than their social shadow value, and the difference

is lost when they are moved from production to unemployment. In the absence of an
institutional cure for malfunctioning labor markets, cyclical policy may be called for. In
the face of wage rigidity induced by imperfect bonding, the provision of counter-cyclical
incentives to firms may help improve the timing of labor-reallocation flows over the cycle.

37

A Appendix
A.1 Decentralized Bargaining Equilibrium Conditions
This section derives the decentralized bargaining equilibrium conditions (14)-(17) for
our economy. Let W1(t) denote the value to the firm of a job created at t, We(t) the
human wealth of a worker just employed in such a job, and W5(i) the human wealth of

an unemployed worker. The setup cost of a single production unit is 11q(t). Assuming
positive free entry, we equate the value of a job to the match-specific creation costs that
cannot be bonded away:
(28)

[cbIH(i) + 5(1)) A(i) = W1(t)

Turning to workers' human wealth, the expected utility flow received by an unemployed
worker 38 given by

_jD()(j) = L?(wtQ) — Wu(t)).

(29)

It is equal to the instantaneous probability H(t)/U(i) of finding a job times the resulting
gain in human wealth (Wt(t) — W"(i)). This quantity determines the simple arbitrage
condition governing the evolution of unemployed workers' human wealth:
rW1t(t) = (1D(L)A(1) +

(30)

Once a match occurs, the surplus over which bargaining takes place is given by

(31)

11(1)

= t+T(t)

[A(t) — (.D(s) — b(s)) A(s)] e_(r44)(1_O ds
—(1— $)IHA(t).

The surplus is equal to the expected present value of the cash flow received from the job
over its lifetime — equal to output A(t) minus the intermediate input cost p(s)A(s) plus

the subsidy z(s)A(s) — from which we must subtract the utility flow

foregone

by the worker and the fraction of setup costs (1 — çb)Iy that is either not match-specific
38

or can be bonded away.
The surplus is fIrst maximized to find the maximum planned lifetimeT(t) of the job,
and then bargained over. It is easy to see that the first order condition frommaximization
Is

(32)

A(t) — 1i20U + T(t)) — 6Q + T(O)J A(i + TQ)) = 0.

It can be thought of as an exit condition, and states that, at the time of exit I + T(t),
the quasi-rents from the job should be zero. Finally the surplus is shared, with fractions
fi and (1 —

) going to the worker and the finn:

(33)

Wt(t) — Wt(t) = fifl(t);

(34)

W1(t) = (1 — fi)H(t).

Equations (14)-(15) in the main text are obtained as follows. Equation (14) is derived

using (29) and (33) from the exit condition (32), which can be written in terms of 5(t)
using (11):

(35)

A(i — W)

— [ti°U) — b(t4 A(I) = 0.

Equation (15) is the free entry condition (28), taking (31), (34) and (35) into account.

A.2 (., /3)-Equivalence in Steady State
In this section we prove the steady-state equivalence result between

and fi stated

in

section 4.1. For any steady state (, H, U), we must determine the corresponding
equivalence schedule (, )

= (, f()) along which the steady state remains unchanged.

kIom equations (18)-(19) we know that for this to happen urD and ED must be constant
along those schedules.

39

I'

Now, replacing (21) in (22) yields
I
C —&-rijC. mW

This means

that a schedule (,fo(#)) that keeps ,rD

constant given (u;, H0,U;) also

keeps rD constant. This schedule can be easily obtained by inverting (21) and solving
for the wage in (18):

ZIA\ — 1

na/Ar.
I C'
I 'LffT.J

+j b+ r''

(r,H•p•)=(,H,U;)

A.3 The Weak- and Strong-Worker Regions: Characterization
In this section we show that, in steady-state equilibrium, an increase in workers' bar-

gaining power (i) lowers the probability X H/U' of the unemployed finding a job,
(ii) lowers the scrapping age r if the worker is weak, but raises it if he is strong, and
(iii) raises unemployment. Given the equivalence result in section A.2, without loss of

generality we set = 0 in the proof of those statements.
Replacing &" from (21) in the exit condition (18), and differentiating, yields
(36)

...7_1rr = (1— 1 —

)dX + (1—)2

di3.

Replacing E.D from (22) in the free-entry condition (19), and differentiating, yields

(37)

PV'(r) = (1 _fi)2 df3 + 1

dX.

Solving out for S from (36) and (37), we get

dr
df3

— —
—

X(1 — flPV'(r)X + 7c_1G1
q(1 — $)[(fl/q)PV'(a)X + 7CV]'

which is strictly negative since PV'(r) > 0.
40

Solving out for dX rather than df from (36) and (37), we get
—
—

—

(1— fl)2[pXFV'(r)

+ ij7e']

Thus, r is decreasing (resp. increasing) with respect to worker power when workers are
weak (resp. strong), reaching a minimum at the efficient point.
As for unemployment, differentiating (20) we have

— — _2
dfl

cdX
S

dfi

This expression is clearly positive in the weak-worker region, since both X and r are
decreasing with respect to worker power. In the strong-worker region, this expression is

more difficult to sign. All the numerical examples we have tried show U rising with /3
throughout the region, but we could not prove this in general. What we can show is that

dU/df3 is positive near /3 = q (because there dX/d/3 > I) and dr/d/3
—I

I

as /3 —,

1

0), and that

(because the effective creation cost goes to infinity while the present

value of the quasi-rents is bounded from above by 1/(r + 5) < cc).

A.4 Steady-State Welfare
This appendix derives (I) expression (24) for steady-state welfare in terms of factor income

streams; and (ii) espression (26) for the effect of policy on the steady-state flow of welfare

in the limit case when r —. y.
Replacing the accounting identities (4) and (5) in the social planner's objective func-

tion yields welfare at time t:

W(i) = J [Q(s) — C(s)A(s) + p(s)A(s)(M — E(s))}

41

ds,

which can be re-written as

W(t) = A(t)

[q(s)

—

C(s) + p(s)(7J — E(s))] e_(?_1)(*_t) ds.

Using the expressions for output and employment, separating out the use and output of

factors committed before time t, adding and subtracting wages, subsidies and effective
costs, using the free-entry and exit conditions, and rearranging, yields

= j° j°(e' — C1 )C6a da c

(38)

J°' [p(s)M + (fljD — z(s))E(s) + (E°H(s) — C(s))J
Using

Sfls—t) ds+

—fr—){s—t) Si.

the fact that,

C(s) = FP(s)H(s) — ñi°(s)U(s) — —1nHH(s)2 + i(s)H(s),
assuming the economy is in steady-state, and setting A(O) = 1, transforms (38) into

=

+

' + G°L + iIunH2— e(Z — U) — iH

which corresponds to (24), expanded to include production and creation incentives and
rents due to decreasing returns to scale in 1(H). The rent ICE, accruing to the factors in
use at the time of computing welfare is

K—

1 —

e(T+5)V

°(r+6)(S+i)

Setting 's,,

r(540r — c_fr+s)r —

c'' — (r*6)V
(r+6—7)5

+

= 0, and defining the undiscounted welfare flow as

we obtain

?=pM+iZ—f(Z—U)-CH.

42

e(E1T)3 —

(r—)8
hm,\,(r —

Alternatively,
os =q

—C+pM-p(t-U),

which can be differentiated to yield
(39)

dcat=(qH—Cq)dH+(q+p—C)dU.

It is easy to verify that, in steady-state with r = 'y, we have q = -D_j and qj =
Replacing those expressions in (39), and recalling E4 = C, and
—C&, yields

dw =(6.D — — 35S)dH _(urD — I — w35)dU.
This immediately implies expression (26).

A.5 Effects of Production and Creation Incentives
This appendix analyzes the steady-state effect of production and creation incentives on
the hiring intensity, unemployment and the scrapping age.

Production Incentive.,. Assuming C =

17,H

= 0 and letting X H7U, we can

differentiate (18) and (19) with respect to C to obtain
(40)

fi I

da

-

S\dX
-

1—0 Y41" 1—q)
= 1 q-PV'(r)(i —

Since

PV'(r) = r

+

(C' — et+S)) > 0,
43

equation (41) implies
39hZ

I dr\

= sgn

I dr

But this condition is only consistent with (40) if

CC
—>0
and —>0.
d.c
dz
Using this result and differentiating equation (20) shows that unemployment decreases

with the subsidy f:

= —U2 {(i —

c4L. ÷sre-'1} <0.

Creation Incentives. Replacing (21) in (18) and differentiating the resulting expression

with respect to i yields
(42)

___

5

dX

'11—q

Subtracting i from the left-hand side of (22), substituting the resulting expression in

(19), differentiating the outcome with respect to i, and substituting da/d1 from (42)
yields
1—p
>0
di — S•' + /JçbI + S/(1 —
)J(1 —

e)/8

This, in conjunction with (42), implies:

dr <0.
Finally, as illustrated in figure 9, the response of unemployment to creation incentives

cannot be signed.

44

References
(1J Abraham, Katherine, and Lawrence Katz (1986): "Cyclical Unemployment: Sectors.!

Shifts or Aggregate Disturbances?" Journal of Political Economy, 94, pt. 1, 507-522.
12] Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt (1992a): "A Model of Growth through Creative
Destruction," Economeirica, 60, 323-352.

[3J — (1992b):

"Growth and Unemployment," typescript, University of Western On-

tario, May.

(4] Aghion, Philippe, and Gilles Saint-Paul (1991): "On the Virtue of Bad Times,"
typescript.
15]

Baily, Martin Neil, Charles Hulten and David Campbell

(1992): "Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing Plants," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microe.
conomics, 187-267.

[6J Barteisman, Eric 3., and Phoebius 3. Dhrymes (1991): "Productivity Dynamics:
U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1972-1986," Columbia University Department of Eco.
nomics Discussion Paper No. 584, September.
[7] Binniore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein and Asher Wolinsky (1986): "The Nash Bargaining

Solution in Economic Modeling," Rand Journal ofEconomics, 17, 176-188.

[8] Blanchard, Olivier, and Peter Diamond (1989): "The Beveridge Curve," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 85-155.

(9) — (1990): "The Cyclical Behavior of Gross Flows of Workers in the U.S.," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 85-155.

[10) Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Daniel M. G. Rail(1991): "Intra-Industry Heterogene-

ity and the Great Depression: The American Motor Vehicles Industry, 1929-35,"
Journal of Economic History, 51, 317-331.
45

[111 —(1992): "Thchnological Heterogeneity, Adjustment Costs, and the Dynamics of
Plant-Shut-Down Behavior The American Motor Vehicle Industry in the Time of
the Great Depression," typescript, Stanford University.
[121 Caballero, Ricaxdo 3., and Mohainad L. Hammour (1994): "The Cleansing Effect of
Recessions," American Economic Review, forthcoming.

[13] Cohen, Daniel, and Glues Saint-Paul (1994): "Uneven Technical Progress and Job
Destruction," typescript.
1141

Cooper, Russell, and John Haltiwanger (1993): "The Aggregate Implications of

Machine Replacement: Theory and Evidence," American Economic Review, 83,
360-380.

[15] Cox, W. Michael (1993): "Technological Unemployment," Federal Reserve Bank of

Dallas, Research Paper #9314, June.

(16] — and Richard AIm (1993): "The Churn," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 5-18.
[17] Davis, Steven 3. (1987): "Fluctuations in the Pace of Labor Reallocation," CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 27, 335-402.

[18] — and John Haltiwanger (1990): "Gross Job Creation and Destruction: Microeconomic Evidence and Macroeconomic Implications," fiBER Macroeconomics Annual,
5, 123-168.
[19]

(1992): "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction and Employment Reaflocation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 819-864.

[201 — (1994): "Driving Forces and Employment Fluctuations: New Evidence and
Alternative Interpretations," typescript, January.

[21] DeLong, 3. Bradford (1990): "Liquidation Cycles: Old Fashioned Real Business
Cycle Theory and the Great Depression," NBER Working Paper No. 3546.
46

[22] Diamond, Peter (1982): "Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search Equilibrium," Review of Economic Studies, 49, April, 217-227.
[23]

(1994): "On Time," typescript, MIT.

(24] Gall, Jordi, and Mohamad L. Haminour (1992): "Long Run Effects of Business
Cycles," typescript.
(25] Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Herkowitz and Per Krusell (1992): "Macroeconomic Im-

plications of investment-Specific Technological Change," typescript, Institute for
International Economic Studies Seminar Paper No. 527, October.
[261 Grossman, Gene M., and Ellianan Helpman (1991): Innovation and Growth in the
Global Economy, Cambridge: MIT Press.
[271 Grout, Paul A. (1984): "Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts:

A Nash Bargaining Approach," Econometrics, 52.2, March, 449-460.
[28] Hopenhayn, Hugo, and Richard Rogerson (1991): "Job Turnover and Policy Evalu-

ation: A General Equilibrium Analysis," typescript.
[29] Hail, Robert E. (1991): "Labor Demand, Labor Supply, and Employment Volatility,"

fIBER Macroeconomics Annual, 6, 1747.

[30] Hosios, Arthur 3. (1990): "On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of
Search and Unemployment," Review of Economic Siudicj, 57, 279-298.

[31] Hulten, Charles It. (1992): "Growth Accounting when Technical Change is Embodied in Capital," American Economic Review, 82, 964-980.

[32] Johansen, Leif (1959): "Substitution versus Fixed Production Coefficients in the
Theory of Economic Growth: A Synthesis," Econometrica, 27, 157-76.

[33] Jovanovic, Boyan, and Saul Lath, "Entry, Exit, and Diffusion with Learning by
Doing," American Economic Review, September 1989, 79, 690-699.
47

1341 Katz, Lawrence F. (1987): "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation," fIBER
Macroeconomics Annua4 1, 235-276.

(3S1 Lilien, D. M. (1982): "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment," Journal of
Political Economy, 90, 777-793.

[36] Lucas, Robert E., and Edward Prescott (1974): "Equilibrium Search and Unemployment," Journal of Economic Theory, 7, 188-209.

[371 Mortensen, Dale (1978): "Specific Capital and Labor Turnover," Bell Journal of
Economics 9 Autumn, 572-586.

138] — (1992): "The Cyclical Behavior of Job and Worker Flows," typescript, Northwestern University, July.

(391 — and Christopher Pissarides (1992): "The Cyclical Behavior of Job Creation
and Job Destruction," typescript, January.
(40] Phelps, Edmund S. (1963): "Substitution, Fixed Proportions, Growth and Distribution," International Economic Review, 4, 265-288.

[41) Pissarides, Christopher (1990): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Oxford: Basil
B lack well

(42] Saint-Paul, Gilles (1993): "Productivity Growth and the Structure of the Business
Cycle," European Economic Review.

(43] Salter, Wilfred E.G. (1960): Productivity and Technical Change, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[44] Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1942): Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, New York:

Harper and Brothers.

(45] Shapiro, C. and J.E. Stiglitz (1984): "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Discipline
Device," American Economic Review 73(3), June, 433-444.
48

(46) Sheshinski, Eytan, "Balanced Growth and Stability in the Johansen Vintage Model,"
Review of Economic Studies, 1967, 34, 239-248.

[47] Solow, Robert M. (1960): "Investment and Technological Progress," in K.J. Arrow,

S. Karlin and P. Suppes (eds.), Mathematical Methods in Social Sciences, Stanford
University Press, 89-104.

[48] Stiglitz, Joseph (1993): "Endogenous Growth and Cycles," NBER Working Paper
No. 4286, March.

[49] Young, Alwyn (1992): "A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical
Change in Hong Kong and Singapore," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 7, 13-53.

49

