                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MACROECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT WiTH
                            SEGMENTED LABOR MARKETS




                                    Pierre-Richard Agénor
                                      Joshua Aizenman




                                  Working Paper No. 4769




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 1994



We would like to thank, without
                                  implications, Donald J. Mathieson and Dennis Snower for
hdpful discussions and comments on a preliminary version. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the International Monetary Fund or of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4769
                                                                                    June 1994

                             MACROECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT WITH
                               SEGMENTED LABOR MARKETS

                                             ABSTRACT

            This paper analyzes the macroeconomic effects of fiscal and labor market policies in a
 small open developing country. The basic framework considers an economy with a large
 informal production sector and a heterogeneous work force. The labor market is segmented as
 a result of efficiency considerations and minimum wage laws. The basic model is then extended

 to account for unemployment benefits, income taxation, and imperfect labor mobility across
 sectors.

        Under the assumption of perfect labor mobility, we show that a permanent reduction in
government spending on nontraded goods leads in the long run to a depreciation of the real
exchange rate, a fall in the market-clearing wage for unskilled labor, an increase in output of
traded goods, and a lower stock of net foreign assets. A permanent reduction in the minimum

wage for unskilled workers improves competitiveness, and expands the formal sector at the
expense of the informal sector. Hence, in a two-sector economy in which the minimum wage
is enforced only in the formal sector and wages in one segment of the labor market are

competitively determined, efficiency wage considerations do not alter the standard neoclassical
presumption. A reduction in unemployment benefits is also shown to have a positive effect on
output of tradable goods by lowering both the level of efficiency wages and the employment rent
of skilled workers.


Pierre-Richard Agénor                                              Joshua Aizenman
Research Department                                                Department of Economics
International Monetary Fund                                        Dartmouth College
Washington, D.C. 20431                                             Hanover, NH 03755
                                                                   and NBER
                             I. Introduction


       Studies of urban labor markets in
                                        developing countries have come
 to distinguish between the formal and informal sectors on the basis of
 whether employment relationships are subject or not to various labor
 market regulations and other institutional constraints.'         In the
 formal sector, which consists of medium- and
                                                 large-scale enterprises,
 workers are entitled to a variety of benefits, such as minimum
 standards for working conditions, job security provisions, social
 security and disability protection, pension plans, and health
 insurance.  Skilled and unskilled workers are hired through formal
 contracts, with labor unions (or collective
                                              bargaining mechanisms)
 playing in some countries an important role in the
                                                    determination of
 wages.  The degree of compliance with minimum wage laws may vary
 considerably across production sectors. By contrast, in the informal
 segment of the urban labor market- -which includes
                                                           Self-employed
 individuals and small privately-owned
                                            enterprises producing mainly
 services and other nontradables- - labor
                                            regulations are usually not
enforced.     Activities in this sector rely mostly on the direct
provision of labor services by owners and their families. Paid labor
is used (usually without
                              any formal employment contract) only
occasionally. Although the informal labor market is characterized by
free entry, job insecurity is pervasive, wages are highly flexible,
and workers get very few benefits from their employers. Minimum wage
laws do not apply or are not consistently enforced, and collective
bargaining plays a limited role in the determination of wages.


     By most accounts, the informal sector represents a sizable


     1See, for instance, Mazumdar (1983) and Turnhani (1993).    Rural
labor markets, which account for a substantial component of employment
in many developing countries, are characterized by a large share of
self-employed persons and unpaid family workers. Wage earners bound
by explicit contracts are also employed in agriculture, but is a less
common occurence.
                                         -2-
  proportion- -between 30 and 60 percent- -of economic
                                                              activity and total
  employment in developing countries, particularly in some parts of
  Asia, the Middle East, and Sub-Saharan Africa.2 A consequence of the
  formal-informal dualism induced by the lack of                 enforcement of
  government legislation is the segmentation of the urban labor market,
 which plays a crucial role in explanations of urban poverty,
 unemployment and underemployment in developing countries.     Labor
 market segmentation can be defined as a situation where, because of
 barriers- -   institutional   or otherwise- - to
                                         occupational mobility between
 sectors, a worker in the "low-wage" sector does not have full access
 to a job in the "high-wage" sector held by an observationally
 identical worker (Taubman and Wachter, 1986). If there were no
 barriers, workers in the low-wage sector would enter the high-wage
 sector and bid wages down until        earnings across sectors were
 equalized.        More succintly, labor market segmentation implies
 persistent wage differentials for observationally identical workers.


      The best-known model of labor market segmentation in developing
 countries was developed by Harris and Todaro (1970), in their attempt
 to explain the persistence of migration from rural to urban areas,
 despite the existence of widespread urban
                                                    unemployment. A key feature
 of the model is the equality of
                                       expected (rather than actual) wages in
 the urban sector and the rural            areas as the basic equilibrium
condition of the labor market.           Harris and Todaro showed that the
existence of a binding minimum
                                     wage in the urban sector leads, even if
the rural labor market is             competitive, to a persistent wage
differential between the rural and urban sectors and to the emergence
of urban unemployment.


     In the Harrjs-Todaro framework, as in many models of labor market
adjustment, labor is homogeneous and
                                     perfectly mobile across sectors.


     2See Rosenzveig (1988) and Turnharn (1993).
                                                    Empirical estimates
usually measure ernployement in the informal sector as the sum of self-
employed workers, unpaid family workers, and domestic workers.
Existing data must, however, be interpreted with care.
                                   -3-
 Labor market segmentation emerges as a result of the        governjflenc
 imposing a minimum wage in urban areas. However, an important feature
 of urban labor markets in developing countries- -and, indeed, of labor
 markets everywhere- - is the observation that workers are endowed with

 different skills, and may face short-term constraints on mobility
 across sectors as well as across different skill categories.   In
addition, wage differentials may emerge not only as a result of
institutional constraints but also as a consequence of firms'
wage-setting decisions aimed at enhancing productivity of a given
category of workers.   Labor force heterogeneity, imperfect sectoral
mobility, and productivity considerations add new dimensions to the
analysis of labor market segmentation.   In particular, they provide
important elements for examining potential spillover effects across
different segments of the labor market, and the behavior of sectoral
wages. Accounting for these features has important implications for
understanding the effects of macroeconomic and structural policy
shocks in developing countries.3


     The purpose of this paper is to analyze the effects of fical and
labor market policies on output, wages, and unemployment in a dynamic,
general equilibrium model of a small open developing economy with a
large informal sector and segmented labor markets.    Our analysis is
based on the prevalent view among development economists that the
absence- -or lack of enforcement- -of government regulations is the
defining characteristic of the informal sector.  Section II develops
the basic framework, which distinguishes between skilled and unskilled
labor and assumes perfect mobility across sectors, and examines the
effect of changes in government expenditure and the minimum wage paid
to unskilled workers on the composition of employment.    Section III
introduces income taxation and unemployment benefits, and analyzes how
these modifications affect the determination of equilibrium wages,


     3The implications of labor market segmentation in the absence of
worker heterogeneity have been examined by Agénor and Santaella (1993)
and Demekas (1990) in a short-term macroeconomic context, and by
Edwards (1988) in the context of trade and structural reforms.
                                  .4-
  productivity, and employment.  Section IV extends further the basic
  framework to consider the case where mobility of unskilled workers
  between the formal and informal sectors is      imperfect.   Finally,
  Section V summarizes the main implications of the paper and discusses
  some possible extensions of the analysis.




                         II. A Basic Framework


      Consider a small open economy in which there are three types of
 agents: producers, households, and the government.        The economy
 consists of two sectors: a formal sector, which produces a traded good
 using skilled and unskilled labor, and the informal sector, which
 produces a nontraded good, using only unskilled labor.4   The relative
 price of the traded good is determined by the equilibrium condition of
 the nontraded good market.


      The capital stock in each sector and the composition of the labor
 force between skilled and unskilled workers are assumed fixed during
 the time frame of the analysis.
                                    Skilled and unskilled labor are
 perfect substitutes in the production of the nontraded good in the
 informal sector.   Workers are assumed initially perfectly mobile
across sectors.     A mininum wage for unskilled labor imposed by
government fiat exists, but is enforced only in the formal sector.
The wage rate for skilled labor in the formal sector is assumed set
                                                                    on
the basis of efficiency
                         considerations (taking into account workers'
opportunity earnings), leading to an above-equilibrium wage.5
                                                                    By
contrast, wages of unskilled workers in the informal sector are fully



     4Assuming that the formal sector produces also a nontraded good
would complicate the analysis without yielding additional insight.
     5There is by now a voluminous literature in developed countries
that views involuntary
                       unemployment as the result of efficiency wages.
See Weiss (1990) and, for a more critical view, Carmichael (1990).
Agénor and Santaella (1993) examine the impact of macroeconomic policy
shocks in a two-sector model of
                                an open economy with homogeneous labor
and relative wage rigidity induced by efficiency considerations.
                                 -5-
flexible.    Once employment decisions for both categories of labor
skills are taken by producers in the formal sector, the informal
sector absorbs all workers that are not hired in the formal sector.
Since all skilled workers that are unable to find a job in the formal
sector are willing to work as unskilled labor in the production of the
nontraded good in the informal sector, unemployment cannot emerge- -
although labor may be inefficiently allocated.  Equilibrium of the
labor market in the informal sector obtains once total supply and
demand are equalized through wage adjustment.6

     Households consume both traded and nontraded goods produced in
the formal and informal sectors, supply labor inelastically and hold a
traded bond, which bears a real rate of return determined on world
markets.    Domestic agents can borrow and lend freely at that rate,
which varies inversely with the economy's stock of bonds as well as
the composition of domestic output.    The government consumes traded
and nontraded goods, and finances its expenditure by varying lump-sum
taxes on households. Finally, wage and employment expectations- -which
affect, as discussed in section IV, the decision to migrate across
sectors- -are assumed to depend on prevailing conditions in the labor
market.

1. Production, effort, and the labor market

     The production technology in the formal sector is given by7

            —
                QF(eLS,LFLT),                                      (1)



     6The dichotomy in wage formation can be justified by assuming
that efficiency considerations result from firms' desire to avert
shirking (as discussed below) and minimize the cost of monitoring
workers' effort. Assume also, as argued in the introduction, that the
formal sector consists essentially of "large" firms, while the
informal sector consists only of "small" firms.    A plausible
conjecture is therefore that small firms can monitor nearly costlessly
the level of effort produced by their workers, thus obviating the need
to pay efficiency wages.
     7For convenience, time subscripts are omitted in what follows.
Except otherwise indicated, the total derivative of a function of a
single argument is denoted by a prime.
                                     -6-
  where    denotes output, e the level of effort per skilled worker
  (which is bounded between 0 and unity by an appropriate choice of
 units), Ls employment of skilled workers and L employment of
 unskilled workers, both measured in natural units.          Production takes
 place under decreasing returns to both categories of labor, which are
 assumed to be imperfectly substitutable. Setting the world price of
 traded goods to unity, the domestic price of output of the formal
 sector is equal to the nominal exchange rate, E, which is assumed
 fixed in what follows.


      The first step in the analysis of production decisions is to
 determine the level of effort that firms in the formal sector will
 demand from skilled workers.   Assume that consumption and effort
 decisi,ns are separable, and that the decision to provide effort
 depends only on the wage earned   and the disutility of effort. All
 workers share the same instantaneous
                                       utility function u(,e) which,
 after appropriate normalizations, is defined as 1n[w(l-e)1J, where
 0 < -y < 1.8 Let ir denote the probability (per unit time) that a
 skilled worker is detected shirking, in which case he is fired and
must seek employment as an unskilled worker in the informal sector.
The level of effort provided by skilled workers is positive (when
employed and not shirking) or zero (when shirking while employed, or
when working in the informal
                              sector). The optimal effort level of a
skilled worker is determined
                             so that the expected utility derived from
working is at least equal to the expected
                                          utility of shirking:


            hh''s   + (l-i)ln(1-e)         +
                                               (l-)-ylnws,              (2)


where       —   denotes the real product wage of skilled workers in
the formal sector,     —      the real wage (measured in terms of
traded goods) paid to unskilled workers in the informal sector, and



     8The   quantity l-e could be viewed here as measuring leasure,
although the supply of hours is assumed fixed for both categories of
workers (see below).
                                 -7-
(respectively wu) the nominal wage in the formal (respectively
informal) sector. The left-hand side in expression (2) measures the
expected utility derived by a skilled worker who is not shirking and
provides a level of effort equal to e, while the right-hand side
measures the expected utility of a shirking worker as a weighted
average of the wage earned if caught shirking and fired (with
probability ir), and if not caught (with probability 1 -    ir)--in   which
case the level of effort is zero.9


     The level of effort demanded by firms is assumed to be such that
skilled workers are indifferent between shirking and not shirking- - in
which case workers choose not to shirk--so that condition (2) holds
with equality. Solving for the required level of effort yields


                     U
         e — 1   -                        —         >0                  (3)
                     "S                       1-7
     Equation (3) shows that the level of effort produced by skilled
workers depends positively on the real wage in the formal sector and
negatively on the real wage in the informal sector, which measures the
opportunity cost of effort.   It can readily be established that the
marginal effect of an increase in the real wage in the formal sector
on effort is positive but decreasing, and that an increase in the
probabilibty of getting caught shirking raises the level of effort.


     The representative producer in the formal sector maximizes its


     9our formalization of the decision process that workers face
shares some common features with the well-known shirking model of
Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984).    It differs, however, in two crucial
aspects.  First,  the choice of  an effort level in our framework is
continuous, while it is a discrete one in the Shapiro-Stiglitz model.
Second, in our framework it is only the current market conditions that
matter while in the Shapiro-Stiglitz framework workers form their
decisions on the basis of the expected discounted utility stream
associated with alternative options. We have provided in a different
context (Agénor and Aizenman, 1994) an extension of the Shapiro-
Stiglitz model to the labor market setup considered here.
                                                 -8-

 real profits, that is, using equations (1) and (3) and assuming that
 firms incur no hiring or firing costs:


                          —            -          U

         S' LL
            S' FU
                              QF{LS
                                                         ,

                                                             L}   -
                                                                          Ls
                                                                               -
                                                                                   C4LF.U,


 where    denotes the legally-set minimum real wage (measured in terms
 of traded goods) for unskilled workers, which is assumed binding in
 the formal sector.           The first-order conditions for this optimization
 problem are:'°


                                   a
            8L
                      -   '            —
                                           WS,                                               (4a)
                 S             S


            3F w1 a            — a -1
                   )
            8L                       L3,                                                     (4b)
              S "S

          ÔQF.JÔLFU
                      —
                          4                                                                  (4c)

     Optimality conditions (4a) and (4b) can be solved to yield:


             —                                                  1/a
                                                  a —   (l+a)         >   1                   (5)


which indicates that, in equilibrium, formal-sector firms always set
the efficiency wage for skilled workers at a higher level than the
opportunity cost of effort.                      A graphical determination of the
efficiency wage is shown in Figure 1.11                      Note that skilled workers'


     '°Equations (4) yield the standard Solow condition, which indi-
cates that in equilibrium the
                              elasticity of effort with respect to the
product wage must be equal to unity. See Weiss (1990).
     '11f we had assumed that skilled workers provide a minimum level
of effort e when shirking while employed in the formal sector or when
hired in the informal sector, the term (l--y)lne would have appeared
on the right-hand side of equation (2) and the level of effort that
                                                     -9-

equilibrium wage depends only on the going wage in the informal
sector, and not on the minimum wage for unskilled workers in the
formal   sector.             This is because the only employment opportunity
available to a skilled worker who loses his job in the formal sector
as a result of inadequate performance is to join the informal sector
labor force.


     Equations (3) and (5) imply that in equilibrium effort is
constant   at       —    l-c          —   a/(l+a).       Substituting the optimal value of
from equation (5) in equation (4a), and solving the resulting equation
together with (4c) determines the equilibrium effort level and the
demand for skilled and unskilled labor in the formal sector:

                         —       +                           + —*
            d
           Ls
                —
                     d
                    Ls   (c w.v),
                             ,
                                 —*
                                              L L (c
                                               d     —
                                                         d
                                                               ,
                                                                   w1).                       (6)



     An increase in the market-clearing wage for unskilled workers
reduces the demand for skilled labor but has an ambiguous effect on
the demand for unskilled labor in the formal sector.                            A rise in the
real wage in the informal sector increases in the same proportion as
the efficiency wage paid to skilled workers in the formal sector, thus
maintaining effort constant.                       The resulting increase in labor costs
lowers the demand for skilled workers.                              An increase in the minimum
wage reduces the demand for unskilled workers but has an ambiguous
effect on the demand for skilled workers. As shown in Appendix I, a
sufficient condition for both ambiguities to disappear is that the
elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor in the
production of traded goods should not too large- -a fairly plausible
assumption in practice.


     Substituting (5) and (6) in (1) yields

                         —
            S
           QFCF(C)U,WU).                                                                      (7)


would obtain when the wage ratio is unity would be e instead                          of 0.
                                              - 10    -




 which indicates that, given the condition discussed above, the partial
 equilibrium effect of an increase in either the minimum wage for
 unskilled workers or the market-clearing wage in the informal sector
 on output of traded goods is unambiguously negative.


         Production in the informal sector is subject to decreasing
 returns to unskilled labor and is written as


              Q1 —        Q1(L1),                         > 0,
                                                                   Qj.'
                                                                          < 0,             (8)


 while real profits (in terms of traded goods) are given by


                  —        -1
                          Z Qi(Liu)      -
                                                                                            (9)

where Liu denotes employment of unskilled workers in the informal
sector, z —      the real exchange rate, and P1 the price of the
nontraded good produced in the informal sector.                            Profit maximization
yields the familiar equality between marginal revenue and marginal
cost,         —   z1Q,          from which labor demand can be derived as


                      —
                          QjJ (ZC)U)     — 14u (ZW)                         < 0          (10)


where zw measures the real product wage in the informal sector.
Substituting this result in (8) implies


                  —                                              < 0
                      0i '&.                               C;                            (11)


        From equations (7) and (11), real factor income--measured in
terms    of   traded goods- -       is   given by

                   -1
              q — z Qi(zwu) +
                                               *
                                         QFu,wU).                                        (12)

        Letdenote total labor supply in the economy, and   the pool
of skilled workers.  The pool of unskilled workers is thus given by
                                       - 11   -



  —    -           As indicated above, firms in the formal sector determine
the real efficiency wage of skilled workers and make their employment
decisions first, hiring randomly from the existing work force until
their optimal demand for labor is satisfied. Skilled workers who are
unable to obtain employment in the formal sector become suppliers in
the secondary market and, together with demand there, determine the
wage that equilibrates the market for unskilled labor. Formally, the
equilibrium condition of the unskilled labor market is given by

           —        d     *     —      d          *     d
           Ls - Ls(wu         + Lu -
                                       L(U    ,       — Liu(zu),       (13)


which can be solved for the equilibrium value of


               —
                   c(zj).                                              (14)



      Equation (14) shows that the market-clearing wage for unskilled
workers is inversely related to the legal minimum wage and the real
exchange rate. An increase in the minimum wage lowers the demand for
both categories of workers in the formal sector and increases the
supply of labor in the informal sector, exerting a downward pressure
on real wages there. A real exchange rate depreciation dampens the
demand for unskilled workers in the informal sector, requiring a fall
in the real wage (measured in terms of traded goods) to maintain
equilibrium of the unskilled labor market.


2. Consumption and asset accumulation


      Households supply labor in quantity L and consume traded and
nontraded goods produced by the formal and informal sectors.            The

representative household's lifetime discounted utility is given by'2



      '2For clarity, only the consumption part of households' utility is
explicitly specified in equation (15), since consumption and effort
decisions were assumed to be separable. To simplify calculations, the
instantaneous utility derived from total consumption is taken to be
logarithmic, while consumption itself is assumed to be a Cobb-Douglas
                                            - 12     -




           I 1n[cI(t)&cF(t)l]etdt,                       > 0      (15)



where fi   denotes the constant rate of time preference, c1 consumption
of nontraded goods, and , consumption of traded goods.


     Household hold an internationally traded bond, the stock of which
b is assumed to evolve over time according to


           b — pb + q -      z -1 C1 - CF   -
                                                r,                 (16)


where i    denotes real lump-sum taxes (measured in terms of traded
goods), and p the world interest rate. We assume in what follows that
households' initial position is one of net indebtedness (b0 < 0). The
interest rate facing the country considered varies inversely with the
economy's total stock of foreign assets and positively with the
long-run ratio of informal and formal sector outputs:13

                         ÷
                        * *
           p —   p(b,   I'F'                                      (17)


where Q and Q       denote the long-run values of Q1 and Q.'4



function   in the two categories of goods.
     '3See Agénor and Santaella (1993) for a discussion of the first
effect. The formulation used here captures the idea that the world
interest rate faced by a small country is a function not only of the
existing level of debt but also of the potential capacity to repay,
which in turn depends on the economy's ability to produce traded goods
as opposed to nontraded goods in the long run.    See Aizenman (1989b)
for a discussion of the role of openness in determining the
country-specific interest rate on world markets.
     '4For simplicity, we assume p() to be continuously differentiable.
More generally, the function could have a "kink" at a critical value
of the stock of bonds.    We also impose p(O,.) — , which fixes the
real interest rate, for a zero level of net indebtedness, to the rate
of time preference.
                                             - 13   -




    Households treat q, z, p and r as given and maximize (15) subject
to (16) by choosing a sequence (cI.cF.b}t_o.                    The solution to this
program is characterized by the following familiar conditions:


         6/ce —     p,                                                            (18a)



         c1 —      6zc/(l     -   6),                                             (l8b)


           —    (   - p)ji,                                                       (18c)



in addition to (16) and the transversality condition 1i1n(btet) — 0.

p, the costate variable associated with the asset accumulation
equation, measures the shadow value of wea1th.


                                                        with c < 0.   Substituting this
     Equation (18a) yields c —                cF(P)
result in equation (18b) yields the demand for nontraded goods
produced by the informal sector. Using this result together with
equation (11), the equilibrium condition for the nontraded goods
market is given by


                    —     Sz                                                       (19)
                                  cF(JL) +   g1,
                         1-6
where    denotes government spending on goods produced in the informal
sector of the economy.


     To close the model requires specifying the behavior of                         the

government. Public revenue consists of lump-sum taxes on households,
and public spending consists only of expenditure on nontraded goods.
To ensure solvency, we assume that the government maintains spending
on traded and nontraded goods at a constant level in real terms and
adjusts lump-sum taxes to balance the budget:


               —        + z11.                                                     (20)
                                         - 14   -




3.   Dynamics of fiscal and labor market policies


     We now examine the short- and long-run effects of fiscal and
labor market policies.         To do so, it is convenient to re-write the
model in a more compact form. Substituting equation (14) in equation
(7) yields

                     +
             —                                                           (21)

     A depreciation of the real exchange rate has a positive effect on
the supply of traded goods in the formal sector- - since it reduces the
market-clearing wage for unskilled workers- -but the net effect of an
increase in the minimum wage is in general ambiguous.             On the one
hand, it reduces directly the demand for unskilled workers.            On the
other hand, it reduces the market-clearing wage for unskilled workers
in the informal sector as well as, through the efficiency condition
(5), the real efficiency wage for skilled workers, thus raising
employment and output. We will determine below the conditions under
which the net effect can be unambiguously signed.


      Substituting equation (14) in the equilibrium condition of the
nontraded goods market (equation 19) yields


                 *
                     —    6z             —
                                     +
         q1(zw)          1-8 CF(P)       g1.                            (19')



      In general, the net effect of a real depreciation on output in
the informal sector is ambiguous.                   On the one hand, a real
depreciation raises directly the product wage in the informal sector,
thus exerting a negative effect on output.              On the other hand, it
reduces indirectly the product wage since it leads to a fall in the
real wage of unskilled workers in the informal sector, which in turn
lowers the real wage of skilled workers- -in order to maintain constant
the level of effort- -In the formal sector. The resulting increase in
the supply of labor in the informal sector exerts a downward pressure
                                              - 15   -




on the real wage earned by unskilled workers, which may be large
enough to dominate the upward direct effect associated with a
depreciation of the real exchange rate on the real product wage there.
As shown in Appendix I, the direct effect will dominate if as assumed
before the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled
labor in the production of traded goods is not too large.


        Solving equation (19') yields the equilibrium solution for the
real exchange rate:

                     + —
                           _*
           z —   z(p;g1t(l.).                                                    (22)



        Substituting equations (12), (19) and (20) in equation (16)
yields


             —                        + q[Z( g1,i.)w11)) -       - cF(JA),      (23)
                 p(b,Q7Q)b

which determines the rate of accumulation of traded bonds.                   Finally,
equation (18c) can be re-written as, using (17):


           IL/p —      - 'I"F     * *                                            (24)



        Equations (23) and (24) determine the behavior of foreign assets
and the marginal utility of wealth over time. Given the solution for
p, equation (22) determines the equilibrium level of the real exchange
rate.


        A linear approximation around the steady state to equations (23)

and (24) yields

                                                   *3        *
             p               0                   .p(..i) pp
                 —                                           *   ,               (25)
                       3q1       ôz     3CF      * op
                                                b (-)+p b - b
             b



where       and b* denote the steady-state solutions of the system. We
                                 - 16   -




will   assume in what follows that d(pb)/db > 0, or that the net effect
of an increase in the economy's total stock of debt is an increase in
interest payments. This assumption follows from the observation that
it is generally inefficient for a small country to operate in a region
where the supply of credit is backward bending (see Aizenman, 1989a).
The system described by (25) is locally saddlepoint stable.15        The

steady-state equilibrium is depicted in Figure 2.     Curves [jt — 0] and

(   — 0] give combinations of p and b for which the marginal utility of
wealth and the stock of bonds remain constant. The negatively-sloped
saddlepath SS leads to the steady-state equilibrium at point E.16


       Consider a permanent, unanticipated reduction at t — 0          in
government spending on nontraded goods.  The dynamics of adjustment
are illustrated in Figure 3.    A permanent reduction in government
spending implies that there is an incipient excess supply of nontraded
goods (for a given level of external debt), inducing a real
depreciation--a drop in the relative price of the non-traded goods.
Furthermore, the long-term openness of the country improves, reducing
the interest rate p facing the country. For a given marginal utility
of wealth there is an incipient current account surplus, which induces
a leftward shift in the [1 — 0] curve.        The improvement in the
creditworthiness of the country implies that the long-run equilibrium
calls for higher indebtedness, shifting the           0] curve also
                                                    [ii —

leftwards. The new long-run equilibrium obtains at point E', with the
associated saddlepath denoted S'S'. On impact, both the drop in the
interest rate facing the country and the drop in the relative price of
non-traded goods increase the consumption of both types of goods,
reducing the shadow value of wealth, moving the economy in the


     '5Given our sign assumptions, the determinant of the coefficient
matrix in equation (25) is negative.   Note that this condition holds
irrespective of the value taken by d(pb)/db.
     16The slope of the (i — 0] curve would be positive if we had
assumed that d(pb)/db < 0. ut since the slope of SS does not depend
on this derivative,       the dynamics of the model would remain
qualitatively the same.
                                 - 17   -




short-run   to point A. The move from point E to point A is associated
with a reduction in the production of nontraded goods, a drop in
(see equation (14)), and a consequent increase in the production of
traded goods.    However, the increase in consumption of traded goods
exceeds the increase in production of the formal sector, and the net
effect is a current account deficit.         Over time, the external
imbalance increases gradually the indebtedness of the country, moving
the economy from point A to point E'. In the transition towards the
new long-run equilibrium, the real exchange rate depreciates gradually
while consumption of traded goods falls, in order to accommodate the
greater deficit in the service account.


     Consider now a permanent, unanticipated reduction in the minimum
wage for unskilled workers.     The drop in the minimum wage affects
production in the formal sector via two channels. The direct effect
is to increase the demand for unskilled workers in the formal sector,

thus increasing production.    The indirect effect is a reduction in
labor supply in the informal sector, which therefore leads to an
increase in the market-clearing wage for unskilled workers. This in
turn translates, through the efficiency condition (5), in an upward
adjustment in the real wage earned by skilled workers.  Thus, while
the direct effect increases employment of unskilled workers in the
formal sector, the indirect effect works towards a reduction in
employment of skilled workers. In Appendix I we derive the sum of
these effects, and show that there is a strong presumption that the
direct effect will dominate.17 Hence, the presence of efficiency wages
and segmented labor markets does not alter the neoclassical
presumption in the two-sector framework considered here: a reduction
in the minimum wage that is enforced only in the formal sector
improves the competitiveness of the country, leading to an expansion
of the formal sector and a contraction of the informal sector.     The



     17More precisely, we show in Appendix I that the direct effect
dominates as long as the share of the informal sector is large, the
substitutability between skilled and unskilled workers is not too
large, or the formal sector is labor intensive.
                                     - 18   -




extent     to which this result continues to hold under imperfect labor
mobility is discussed below.


      The "pro-trade bias" associated with the drop in the minimum wage
implies that the adjustment path it induces will be qualitatively
similar to the transitional dynamics depicted in Figure 3. The
long-run reduction in the relative size of the informal sector
improves the creditworthiness of the country, shifting the curve
  —   0]    leftwards.   Similarly, the incipient excess supply of
nontraded goods induces a real depreciation, (that is, an increase in
                               —
z), shifting thereby the (b        0] curve leftwards. Hence, the long-run
effects of a reduction in the minimum wage are also qualitatively
similar to those induced by a fall in government spending on goods
produced in the informal sector: both imply a pro-trade bias.




                  III. Taxation and Unemployment Benefits


      In developing countries, taxation affect mostly firms and workers
operating in the formal sector- - in a similar manner to labor market

regulations.      While this asymmetric feature of tax systems in the
developing world may veil be the optimal policy response given
administrative and othe institutional constraints, it may lead to
severe distortions in supply and demand decisions in the short run.
In this section, We generalize the framework developed above so as to
account for direct income taxation and unemployment benefits for
skilled workers in the formal sector, and examine how these
modifications affect the determination of sectoral wages, productivity
and the composition of employment.


      Firms in the formal sector determine as before the optimal levels
of employment of both categories of labor as well as skilled workers'
wages, without facing a binding quantity constraint in either segment
of the labor market.        However, instead of assuming that skilled
workers who are not hired in the formal sector enter the labor force
                                      - 19   -




in   the informal sector, we now assume that unsuccessful applicants
choose to remain unemployed while perceiving a government-financed
unemployment benefit.' The unemployment insurance scheme is financed
in part by a tax on wage income, levied at the rate 0 <               < 1 on
skilled workers employed in the production of traded goods.


      Since skilled workers are now faced with a different opportunity
cost, the first step in examining the implications of the foregoing
assumptions is to determine their optimal level of effort.            Suppose
for the moment that the unemployment benefit, denoted , takes the
form of a flat real wage. As before, the optimal level of effort is
determined so that the expected utility derived from working without
shirking be equal in equilibrium to the expected utility derived if
caught shirking. Condition (2) becomes now


     fln[(lL)ws] + (l--y)ln(l-e)       -yir1n +   .y(l1)ln[(lL)wS),     (26)



so that
                          *
                          w
            e—l-   (1 -
                                  ,
                                                                         (27)
                          t)ws)

which indicates that skilled workers' effort depends negatively on the
rate of income taxation and positively on the level of unemployment
benefits.




     '8Assuxning that only a given proportion of excess supply in the
market for skilled workers enters the unskilled labor force would not
have any qualitative effect on the analysis. We do not elaborate here
on reasons why skilled workers may refuse to work as unskilled labor
in the informal economy. Important considerations however are likely
to be the loss of social prestige that such a decision may entail, the
potentially adverse signaling effect towards future employers, search
efficiency (it may be easier to look for a formal-sector job while
being unemployed), the perception that human capital may deteriorate
rapidly, thus hampering re-entry in the skilled labor force, or that
the wage in the informal sector provides less utility than a
combination of leisure and unemployment benefit.
                                               - 20   -




     Assuming for simplicity that government transfers consist only of
benefit payments to unemployed workers in the formal sector, the
government budget constraint (0) becomes


            £CLS      — 's - L)            +    + zg1.                            (20')



     Using equation (27), it is straightforward to verify that in
equilibrium the efficiency wage for skilled workers is equal to


                 —                                                                 (28)
                     c,4/(l-&),
and that the supply function of the formal sector becomes



                 —
                       ("s *
                           *
                                                                                   (29)
                        (1-6)


where both partial derivatives are negative.


     The market-clearing wage for unskilled workers now depends
indirectly on the efficiency wage for skilled workers (since it
affects the demand for unskilled workers in the formal sector) but is
independent of the level of employment of skilled workers- -since there
is no "spillover" effect resulting from a job shortage for that
category of labor in the formal economy.                      The equilibrium condition
between supply and demand for unskilled labor is now given by



             -
                 Es - LM (1-6)         ,       - L zwu),  (                        (30)



which can be solved for
                                  w.

     Using the budget constraint (20'), and equations (29), (30) and
the dynamic equations driving the economy, we can now examine the
effect of a modification of the income tax rate and unemployment
benefits.    Given that the level of emplo'9nent of skilled workers is
                               - 21   -




determined by firms in the formal sector, the government budget
constraint (20') establishes a link between the income tax on wages,
and the level of unemployment compensation for high-ability workers.
As long as the elasticity of the demand for skilled workers (with
respect to their own wage) is small relative to the wage premium c,
higher unemployment compensation requires a higher tax rate for a
given level of employment of skilled workers. There exists, thus, an
unemployment Laffer curve which, as derived formally in Appendix II
and as displayed in Figure 4--drawn for a given level of the real
                                                     *
exchange rate--has an inverted U-shape in the i- space.       Each wage
benefit level is thus supported by two tax rates. We can neglect the
higher one, obtaining an "efficient frontier," defined by the leftward
portion of the curve. At low levels of the wage benefit, the demand
for skilled labor is inelastic, and the efficient frontier is downward
sloping: lower unemployment compensation reduces the skilled workers'
wage (through the efficiency condition 28) and, for a given tax rate,
reduces tax revenue.   Hence a higher tax rate is required.        As we
reach a level of elasticity that is high enough, the curve becomes
upward sloping- -which corresponds        to   the   stage where   lower

unemployment compensation reduces the efficiency wage paid to skilled
workers, which in turn raises employment by an amount that is large
enough to reduce the total revenue needed to support the unemployment
compensation scheme.

     Assuming that the economy operates on the upward-sloping portion
of the efficient frontier of the Laffer curve (between points A and B
in Figure 4), a lower level of unemployment compensation raises the
level of employment of skilled workers as a result of                two

complementary effects. First, it reduces directly the efficiency wage
by lowering the opportunity cost of skilled workers' effort. Second,
it reduces the tax rate on skilled workers- -as a result of the
government budget constraint- -thus reducing the producer real wage
(see equation 28 for both effects). The net outcome is a higher level
of employment of skilled labor.       This generates spillover effects,
increasing the demand for unskilled labor, bidding the market-clearing
                                                     - 22   -



                                         the informal sector. Thus, a
wage up and reducing labor absorption in
lower level of unemployment benefits for skilled workers leads to an
expansion of the formal sector and a contraction of the informal
economy. The dynamic adjustment process is qualitatively similar to
the one depicted in Figure 3.


    An alternative formulation of the unemployment benefit scheme is
to assume that the level of compensation is set as a function of the
minimum wage for unskilled workers and the after-tax going wage for
skilled workers:


                                                                         (31)
               _w+8(l)c1)s.

     The relevant condition for deriving the effort function is given
by an equation similar to (26). Using (31) to substitute out for

yields
                                       *

         e   —       1   -
                             (
                                 +
                                     ?F
                                      '.'   a                            (32)
                                            }.   ,
                             '



where the level of effort depends now not only on the rate of
taxation, but also directly on the unemployment benefit rate 8, as
well as the minimum wage for unskilled workers. Solving as before the
optimization problem faced by producers in the formal sector yields a
relation of the form


          (1     -
                         )"[a(l-)       -            - a8(1-)   —   0,

where    denotes the equilibrium level of effort. It can be shown        that
                         —+
               — e(8,a),                                                 (33)

which indicates that in equilibrium, effort depends negatively on the
unemployment benefit rate and positively on the parameter a--and thus,
from equation (3), positively on the probability of getting caught
shirking- -but is independent from the income tax rate (as in the
                                         - 23   -




previous   case) and the minimum wage for unskilled workers.


     The efficiency wage for skilled workers in equilibrium is equal
to

              — 'u'
                   *
                                  a —
                                            (l)1
                                        ___________ — a(8,)
                                                             + +
                                                                               (34)
                                        (l-e) 1cz     -e

where      is given by equation (33).               An increase in the unemployment
benefit rate or in the income tax rate increase the relative rent
captured by skilled workers, measured by the coefficient a.


     Solving the complete model using equations (20'), (33) and (34),
we can now analyze the effect of a modification of the unemployment
benefit rate, e.19 Suppose that we operate along the "correct" portion
of the unemployment Laffer curve, implying that a drop in e calls for
a lower income tax rate.           Applying (33) and (34) it follows that a
drop in the unemployment benefit rate will reduce the efficiency
coefficient a as a result of both a lower opportunity wage and a lower
income tax rate, and will increase the equilibrium level of effort.
Applying the equilibrium conditions determining employment in the
formal economy, it can be shown that output expands in the formal
sector and contracts in the informal sector, at a rate proportional to
the difference between the increase in effort and the fall in skilled

workers' wage.20   While the mechanism through which these results
obtain are qualitatively similar to those discussed in the first part
of this section, there is an additional channel in the present case
that reinforces the expansion of the formal sector: the resulting
increase in equilibrium effort.


      '9The effects of a change in the income tax rate are qualitatively
 similar to those discussed previously.
        201f the production function in the formal sector is given by
                   in   Appendix I, it can readily be shown that

                                 ''
 equation (Al)

               -
                   1    -S -                        - (l.)(l5eS     -




 where 0 <             <1   are defined in Appendix I.
                                - 24   -




        IV.   Labor Mobility, Sectoral Wages, and Unemployment

    In the foregoing analysis, unskilled workers that were not hired
in the formal sector were able to join immediately the labor force in
the informal sector. By assuming that new entrants were successfully
bidding wages down, we obviated the possibility that involuntary
unemployment of that category of labor could emerge in equilibrium.
However, assuming perfect mobility across sectors may lack realism,
particularly in a short-run context.       Workers typically incur a
variety of costs (such as relocation expenses or congestion costs)
that may prevent instant reallocation of the labor force.  In this
section we consider the case where movements of unskilled labor across
sectors take place gradually, rather than instantaneously.       We also
maintain the assumptions made in section II regarding the effort
decision of skilled workers and continue to take the composition of
the labor force as given. In this extended framework, unemployment of
both categories of labor may emerge in the long run.


    As in the Harris-Todaro approach, potential migrants consider
alternative opportunities available to them in both sectors and
compare their expected utility in each location in order to choose the
option that maximizes their expected net utility gains. Suppose that
unskilled workers can only allocate time, not the level of effort.21
Formally, let     denote total work time that an unskilled worker is
required to commit (in a lump-sum fashion), and t       t the maximum
amount of leisure that he can possibly enjoy. Assuming as before that
consumption and labor supply decisions are separable, and that the
instantaneous utility of unskilled workers depends only on leisure and
the wage percieved, we have




     21This assumption is consistent with the observation made above
that firms in the informal sector can readily monitor the level of
effort provided by their workers.    Without loss of generality, we
normalize the constant level of effort to zero.
                                    - 25   -



                       — -ylnw + a1n(E-t).              a > 0              (35)
           lnu(w,tu)

where      is the real wage earned by the worker, which depends on the
sector of employment.


     Abstracting from migration and other relocation costs, the
expected utility derived from working in the formal sector consists of
two components. The first component is the utility derived from being
employed in the formal sector at the legal minimum wage, weighted by
the probability of being hired in that sector. This component obtains
by replacing w in (35) by                  and multiplying the resulting
expression- -assuming that hiring is random- -by the number of unskilled
workers actually employed in the formal economy over the number of
unskilled workers seeking jobs in the formal sector, L/L.22 The
second component is related to the possibility of being registered as

unemployed   in    the   formal   sector   and   earning    unemployment
benefits- -without allocating working time- -which is taken to represent
a fraction 0 <         < 1 of the minimun wage.23 The expected utility in
this case obtains by replacing w in (35) by              and setting       —   0,
and multiplying the resulting expression by the proportion of
unemployed unskilled workers in the total pool of unskilled workers
seeking jobs in the formal economy--that is, the probability of being
unemployed in the formal sector.         Thus, expected utility conditional




                                    '
on migrating to the formal sector E(uIF) is given by

                                    d                            s     d

E(uIF) -           +                    ) + {71neL, +
           {i1nw       a1n(- t)}(                               }FTJFU

     22The absence of a forward-looking component in wage expectations
formed by unskilled workers may be justified by the existence of large
costs associated with search, and by the lack of sophistication of the
unskilled labor force.
     23Note that the reason why the choice between being employed or
unemployed in the formal sector is not trivial is because unskilled
workers must supply labor in a lump-sum fashion. Put differently, t
is not a decision variable.
                                              - 26 -

                                                              in the
     By contrast, expected utility derived from working
informal sector obtains simply by replacing w in equation (35) by the
market-clearing wage                  since   the probability of being employed there

is unity:


            E(u11) —        -1nw,
                                      +
                                          aln(tt).
     The evolution over time of the unskilled labor force in the
formal sector is thus given by


          —                 -
              Ic(E(uIF)

where     denotes the speed of adjustment. Straightforward manipulations
of the above equations yields

                            U                                                   (36)
          —                       +
                                      XF[78U
                                                +   aln(
                                                                  )]}
                                                           t-tU

where XF —         (L   -  denotes the unemployment rate of unskilled
workers in the formal sector. In the long run, with
                                                        — 0, equation

(36) yields
                                      *                     +—+
              —                 llfl(Wu/Wu)                  *
                                                     —                            (37)
              XF                                         XF(WU,WU8U),
                    a1n((tt)/t) -


which indicates that an increase in the unemployment benefit rate or
the minimum wage raises the unemployment rate of unskilled workers in
the formal sector. By contrast, an increase in the market-clearing
wage in the informal sector lowers the unemployment rate.  This is
                                                                                raises
because it reduces the efficiency wage paid to skilled workers,
 labor demand and output in the formal sector and thus employment of
unskilled labor.


        To obtain the overall unemployment rate for unskilled workers,
                                                            - 27   -




note   first that the distribution of the labor force of unskilled labor

is given by

           —
           Lu —      Liu
                        d    +
                                 Ld
                                           +
                                               (L $     -
                                                              d


which, given the definition of XF is also equal to

                —
                     Lu      +
                                 L/        (1 -
                                                      XF).

       The overall unemployment rate of unskilled workers, defined as
x —    (E -                      is   thus given by


                        XF            d
                    I


so that in the steady state



              X -                                                                         (38)



       Equation (38) indicates that in the steady state, an increase in
the minimum wage has an ambiguous effect on the overall unemployment
rate of unskilled workers.                                  A rise in the market-clearing wage
(induced, for instance, by an increase in governemnt spending on goods
produced in the informal sector, g1) reduces overall unemployment of
unskilled labor.


        The aggregate unemployment rate is given by


                             L            Ld          LS          Ld
              xtot          (S S)(FU                               FL?)                   (39)



 or   equivalently:
                                          - 28      -




                     LS — Ld
           x   —(      —     S)   +   x(l   -
                                                 n5),                     (40)

                        L5


where 0 <      < 1 denotes the constant proportion of skilled workers in
the labor force.


     Given the dynamic equation (36), the extended framework described
above can also be used to examine the short-run effects of fiscal and
labor market policies unemployment.    By rewriting appropriately the
government budget constraint (20)24 and condensing the model yields now
a differential equation system in three variables: the marginal
utility of wealth, the stock of traded bonds, and the size of the
Labor force comprised of unskilled workers in the formal sector.
Although we omit mathenatical details here, it is intuitively clear
that the impact effect of a change in the fiscal and labor market
policy instruments discussed in previous sections will not alter the
qualitative features highlighted before.25               In particular, the net
effect of a reduction in government spending on aggregate output and
the unemployment rate is likely to be ambiguous on impact.


     An important implication of the foregoing analysis, thus, is that
there may be no close relationship between changes in output and the
unemployment rate--that is, no stable Okun's law- -as a result of
spillover effects between the formal and informal segments of the
urban   labor market.          In periods of adverse macroeconomic shocks


     24For instance, if government transfers consist of unemployment
benefits paid only to unskilled workers in the formal sector, and if
skilled workers continue to be subject to a tax on wages at the rate
&, the government budget constraint (20) would become

               d —      *             d
                                  L)        +   z
                                                    -1


     25This results, of course, from the fact that the proportion of
the unskilled labor force seeking employment in the formal sector
cannot change on impact. The transitional dynamics will in any case
differ, as shown by Agénor and Santaella (1993) in a somewhat similar
context.
                                - 29   -




(resulting,   for instance, from cuts in government expenditure),
skilled and unskilled workers laid off in the formal sector may seek
employment in the informal sector, exerting downward pressure on wages
there. Although the wage efficiency effect is likely to dampen the
initial reduction in the work force of the formal sector, the sectoral
reallocation of labor- -which may be particularly marked in the absence
of unemployment benefits in the formal sector and non-prohibitive
relocation costs- -may lead to large shifts in the composition of
employment, with little effect on the aggregate unemployment rate. To
the extent that labor productivity is lower in the informal sector,
negative shocks to output will lead to a fall in average productivity
rather than as a rise in open unemployment.


    The available evidence suggests indeed that spillover effects of
the type described above may have played a significant role in the
recent behavior of labor markets in developing countries.     Figure 5
displays the behavior of output and the open unemployment rate over
time for a group of 12 developing countries during the 1980s.
                                                26
Although the data must be interpreted with care,   they seem to
indicate the absence of a stable relation between the rate of output
growth and unemployment.    The more detailed evidence examined by
Horton et al. (1991), Riveros (1990) and Turnham (1993) also suggests
the occurence of large shifts in the composition of employment from
the formal to the informal sector in several countries in Latin
America, as well as in several other nations of Africa and Asia,
particularly during the recessionary years of the 1980s.27



     26Published measures of unemployment mostly include           only
unemployed workers looking for jobs in the formal sector, but not
underemployed workers in the informal and rural sectors.      The
effective degree of labor market slack may thus be understated.
     27Perceived constraints on the level of employment in the formal
sector may also discourage job seeking and lead some workers to simply
drop out (at least temporarily) of the labor force, following adverse
movements in output.   Conversely, positive output shocks may lead to
large inflows into the labor force. This "discouraged worker" effect,
which is not captured in our framework, may also play a role in
explaining the low correlation between output and the unemployment
                                - 30   -



                    VI.   Summary and conclusions


     The purpose of this paper has been to examine the implications of
fiscal and labor market policies on output, wages and unemployment in
a general equilibrium model of a small open developing economy with a
large informal sector, a heterogeneous work force, and segmented labor
markets.   The production structure that we considered assumes that
while production in the formal sector consists of traded goods and
uses skilled and unskilled labor, output in the informal sector
consists of nontraded goods produced using only unskilled labor.
Firms in the formal sector were assumed to set the wage rate for
skilled labor so as to minimize labor costs per efficiency unit.
Skilled workers' effort was shown to depend positively on their wage
relative to the wage paid in the informal sector. Unskilled workers
employed in the formal sector were assumed to earn a legally-fixed
minimum wage, while wages of unskilled workers hired in the informal
sector were taken to be fully flexible. In equilibrium, as a result
of efficiency considerations, a noncompetitive wage differential
emerges across skill categories.       The efficiency wage for skilled
workers, however, does not depend directly on the minimum wage.


     Under the assumption of perfect labor mobility across sectors, we
showed that a permanent, unanticipated reduction in government
spending on nontraded goods leads in the long run to a depreciation of
the real exchange rate, a fall in the market-clearing wage for
unskilled labor, an increase in the production of traded goods, and a
lower stock of net foreign assets held by the private sector.          A

permanent, unanticipated reduction in the minimum wage for unskilled
workers was also shown to increase output and the demand for labor in



rate in developing countries.      In addition, firms cart dampen the
effect of output shocks on employment by varying hours of work
(through overtime), rather than through adjustment in the workforce.
                                - 31   -




the   formal sector.   Hence, in a two-sector economy in which the
minimum wage is enforced only in the formal sector and wages in one
segment of the labor market are competitively determined, efficiency
wage considerations do not alter           the   standard neoclassical
presumption: a reduction in the minimum wage improves competitiveness,
and expands the formal sector at the expense of the informal sector.


      The basic framework was subsequently extended to introduce direct
income taxation and unemployment benefits for skilled workers in the
formal sector. Assuming first that the unemployment benefit scheme
consisted of paying a constant real wage to the unemployed, we showed
that the economy faces an unemployment Laffer curve relating the
minimum wage and the income tax rate. If the economy operates on the
"correct" portion of the Laffer curve, a reduction in the level of
unemployment compensation wil raise the level of employment of skilled
workers- -thus leading to an expansion of the relative size of the
formal sector.   If, alternatively, the unemployment benefit scheme is
assumed to link the level of compensation to the minimum wage for
unskilled workers and the after-tax wage for skilled workers, a
reduction in the unemployment benefit rate is also likely to lead to
an expansion of output, effort and employment in the formal sector- -at
a rate proportional to the difference between the increase in effort
and the fall in the premium associated with skilled workers' wage.


      Finally, we considered the case where unskilled workers face a
decision to migrate from the informal sector to the formal sector. We
derived the incentive structure on the basis of which workers form
their decision, along the lines suggested by Harris and Todaro (1970).
By focusing the analysis on the long run, we showed that the overall
unemployment rate of unskilled workers varies inversely with the
market-clearing wage for unskilled labor, but that a change in the
minimum wage for unskilled labor in the formal sector has an ambiguous
effect. An important prediction of the model, the absence of a stable
relation between output and unemployment in the short run, appeared to
be consistent with the available evidence for developing countries.
                                    - 32   -




                                                         be further extended
    The analytical framework developed here can
in a variety of directions. One area of investigation would be to
consider a situation where there exist technological "input-output"
links between the formal and the informal sectors. For instance, the
formal sector may be assumed to produce an intermediate good that is
used in the production process for informal-sector goods.
ComplementaritY effects of this type are likely to alter substantially
the effect of macroeconomic shocks on output and the allocation of
labor across sectors.  Another possibility would be to examine the
implications of alternatives to the               Harris-Todaro intersectoral
                                        introducing   the   kind   of
migration   mechanism,   perhaps   by
heterogeneities discussed by Lindbeck and Snower (1991). It may also
be useful to explore, in a growth context, the effects of alternative
mechanisms that may account for movements over time across skill
categories, thus explaining endogenously changes in the composition of
the labor force. Skill improvements take place through a variety of
institutional forms, such as apprenticeship programs, on-the-job
training, and internal labor markets. At the same time, training may
impose a cost on firms and thus affect the sensitivity of the demand
for labor with respect to changes in current wages. A final issue of
importance would be to explain why government impose minimum wage laws
in the first place--a phenomenon that creates, in our model, market
segmentation for unskilled workers. A political economy approach may
provide the critical elements necessary to account for the incentives
to restrict wage flexibility.28 A sensible point of departure might be
the recognition that formal-sector workers may be better organized
 (through pressure groups, for instance) than informal-sector workers,
                                                                           to
and may thus have a greater ability to force incumbent policymakers



      28A different approach is adopted by Drazen (1986), who argues
 that minimum wage legislation may be welfare-improving- -relative to
                                                                   worker
 the competitive equilibrium- - in a model where information about
 quality is imperfect and labor quality rises with      increases  in the
 average market wage, as in urban labor markets in developing
 countries where entrants are migrants from rural areas.
                               - 33   -




legislate   in their favor.


     Although these extensions may prove valuable in their own right,
they are unlikely to alter some of the key results of this paper. In
particular, worker heterogeneity and labor market segrnentatation
(induced by institutional constraints and firms' optimizing behavior)
are essential elements in explaining the functioning of urban labor
markets in developing countries, and play a key role in the
transmission process of macroeconomic and structural policy shocks on
output and employment. In a setting where the level of employment is
determined by firms, policymakers will typically face a tradeoff in
using unemployment benefits and direct taxation of income.      These

results have important implications for the design of macroeconomic
reform programs.
                                    - 34      -




                                  Appendix            I



     The purpose of this Appendix is to examine under what conditions
it is possible to sign unambiguously the effect of the minimum wage on
the supply of traded goods in the formal sector, and the effect of
changes in the real exchange rate on output of the informal sector.
To that effect, we assume that output in the formal sector is produced
with a Cobb-Douglas technology in capital and a composite labor input,
which takes the form of a CES function in skilled and unskilled labor.
Assuming that the capital stock is fixed and normalized to unity
                                                  -

yields:


                                                      el          O<i<l                   (Al)



where y measures the share of labor in production and E                      a   coefficient
related to the elasticity of substitution between skilled and
unskilled labor, which is equal to l/(l-E).


     Maximizing     profits    in       the           formal      sector      yields       the

following first-order conditions for the employment of skilled
and unskilled labor:

                    -1 — —*
              —
          (L/eL5)            e/1,                                                      (A2a)



          7Ljt(eL) +                      — wu,                                        (A2b)


where the result shown in (A2a) uses equation (5).                         Q/(l-4-a) denotes

the optimal level of effort1 which depends only on the parameter a.


     In percentage change form, equations (A2) yield


          (cl)fi;. +

               A       A
                                    +


                                    A
                                        eL,2,)
                                                          —
                                                              ,      0 <            < 1



          (E-l)(L      L5)   —w
                                                    - 35   -




where       —
                (eLS)E/((eLS)E
                                          +
                                               L],       and           — 1   -
                                                                                 8s                   Solving the above
equations yields


                —
                              1)8ti   -
                                              u(1              -
                                                                                                                    (Ala)


                 —
                      ((E7)esu
                                          -
                                              O(l    -
                                                                   - ceu)]/(le)(ly).                                (A3b)


        Since 1 -              - €8   <       1,           < 0 and                                   < 0.    A sufficient
condition for both                        and              to be negative is that e < -y,                              as
indicated in the text.


        From equations (Al), eF — 7(esf:s                      +                         Using (A3) yields
                                                                    8L,f.U).

                —          " us +
                          17                                                                                         (A4)


        The production function in the informal sector is given by


                —
           Q1        (L1)',
so that, using equation (10) in the text



           iu    —    -         + )/(l-i).                                                                           (AS)


        The equilibrium condition of the labor market in the informal
sector (equation 13) can also be written as


                                                                                             —
           -
                (1Y1du + )n1                   +                   +                                 0,              (A6)


where       —
                  L)/i
                (Ls
                          +
                          measures the proportion of the total labor
                                                                         — 1
force employed in the formal sector, and                                             -                    The coefficient
FS — Ls/(Ls +             L)     measures the proportion of skilled workers in
total employment in the formal                     sector,      and              —       1       -
                                                                                                     n.
                                                             - 36     -




      Substituting                   equations (A3) and (A5) in (A6) yields



                                                +            F
      -                              +                            {Ues(E-7) -                          (A7)
                                                        (l-)(l-')

                                                                 - o.
             +                             - nU(17)]}

      From (A4), we have



             sg(                 )
                                     — - sg(e +                                                        (A8)
                        3L1


      Using (A7) yields


                                                                  +
             ___         —
                                            nF(eU(1e)
                                     (l-i71n1+ Ftes' +

where     () —       (l-e)(l--y).           Substituting this result in (A8) yields

                                                                                            +
                                                    (                       eSz2F[eU(-YE)             )
                 sg(____                                                1
                                                           (l-i)                +               +


or,   after some manipulations,


                        aQF ) — -                                       +            -                    (A9)
                 sg(      *                                                  nF(eU
                                                         1-ti

      The sign of the partial effect of an increase in the minimum wage
for unskilled workers on the level of output in the formal sector
depends thus on the sign of (e -                                              Given the definitions above,



                 8               — _______ -    L                 ________                             (AlO)
                  U          U
                                         (as)
                                                E
                                                        +L        L5 +       L
                                              - 37       -




     If   c -*   0 (Cobb-Douglas technology), we have, using equation (5)
in the text,

                                                         *

    sg(e    -
                       — sg(L5   -
                                     L)       —
                                                      sg{_
                                                        °L1
                                                            - i}
                                                                   <   o,


as long as             < a, that is, as long as the minimuii wage for
unskilled labor in the formal sector is lower than the efficiency wage
earned by skilled workers.


     If     - - (Leontief            technology), we also have



          sg(e - su)
                             —
                                 sg(L
                                         -
                                              L) — sg(l        -   e) >     0.



     Thus, in the two particular cases considered above, the sign of
the partial effect of an increase in the minimum wage on output in the
formal sector differ.29                We can also derive, however, a general
condition for this result to obtain for 1 >                                      that   is, the case
for which the substitutability between skilled and unskilled workers
is not too large. Using equation (AlO) yields


                                                                   —             S
          sg(e -             — sg(L5L         -
                                                      (eLS)EL,]
                                                                                         -
                                                                       sg{(

which, using (A2a), yields

                                       *__E

                   -
                                      we          -                                            (A12)
          sg(e               — sg{
                                       0-wu




     29Note      that if         41     (the production function is linear and
skilled and unskilled labor are perfectly substitutable inputs), firms
in the formal sector would never hire skilled workers since in
equilibrium " >        wu•
                                                 - 38    -




which is always negative, regardless of the optimal level of effort.
Note that a sufficient condition for sg(3QF/&4) < 0 is that a1 or -y
be relatively close to unity. Equivalently, the share of the informal
sector must be large, or the formal sector must be labor intensive.


     Consider now the effect of a real exchange rate depreciation on
output of the informal sector. From the production function defined
earlier, we have


                              — - sg(l       A
          sg(             )              +




     Equation    (A7) yields

           A
          ___         -
                                         (l-) -1 n1
                              (l-Y1n1    +
                                             nF(8s(1E) +

so that


                8Q1           — - sg(e(-.rE) +
          sg(             )
                                                        n(l-1)].                      (Al2)




     The quantity in brackets on the right-hand side of equation (A12)
is unambiguously positive if -y > E.                         If   this condition holds, then

8q1/az < 0, as indicated in the text.
                                                        - 39         -




                                                 Appendix                     II



        This Appendix provides a formal derivation of the slope of the
 unemployment Laffer curve. From equations (20') and (28), we have


                         +                                        —
                                                s}           g            0,
                                           -            -
                                                                                                               (Al)


where g —           + z1g1.           From this equation we infer that



           sg
              d               —   - sg
                                                    a -
                                                             * d
                                                                (l+LaL)P1
                                                                                             ,                (A2)
                .   di                                                    -




where       —       - d1nI4/d1ni
                           denotes the elasticity of the demand for
skilled labor. It is readily apparent that if   is low, the curve is
downward sloping. From (Al) we have

                             *d   <   a,



so that the Laffer curve                   is
                             upward-sloping if the elasticity of the
demand for skilled labor in the formal sector satisfies


                                  <                         < a,

and it reaches the highest                      for                  —

     To    gain further insight,                                it is useful to use a linear
approximation of the demand for labor function,                                                  1 -         Using
equation (28) in the text,
                                                        10
                                                                 -
                                                                      ali1/(li).                 Substituting this
equation in (Al) yields

                                                            *
                                                c71 W
                                                    1
                     +                     -                          -            -g   -   0,                (A3)
                          1                     1
                                 - 40   -




which is represented in Figure 4.       The efficient frontier is defined
by the leftward portion of the ellipsoid.       Note that one should add
the requirement that expected utility of a skilled worker exceed his
utility as unskilled.     This implies that the lowest portion of the
efficient frontier is not attainable.


     It is straightforward to show that a reduction in total
government spending g leads to a leftward shift of the efficient
frontier- - thus   reducting the tax rate needed to support a given
level of unemployment compensation for skilled workers. An increase
in the parameter measuring the wage efficiency premium a shifts the
efficient frontier downwards, because it implies that a given
unemployment compensation and given taxes are associated with higher
cost for skilled labor.     To compensate for it, holding the tax rate
given, requires a lower wage benefit.        Finally, a reduction in the
supply of skilled labor implies that, for a given unemployment
benefit, that unemployment is smaller, hence the tax rate required to
finance the benefit scheme is lower. The efficient frontier shifts
leftwards in this case.
                                  - 41   -



                              References


Agénor, Pierre-Richard, and Joshua Aizerunan, "Technological Change,
Relative Wages,    and Unemployment,"        unpublished,   Internationnaj.
Monetary Fund (March 1994).


Agénor, Pierre-Richard, and Julio A. Santaella, "Efficiency wages and
Sectoral Labor Mobility in an Open Economy," Working Paper No 93/79,
International Monetary Fund (September 1993).


Aizenman, Joshua, "Country Risk, Incomplete Information and Taxes on
International Borrowing," Economic Journal, Vol. 99 (March 1989a),
pp. 147-61.


       "Investment, Openness, and Country Risk," in Analytical Issues
in Debt, ed. by Jacob A. Frenkel, Michael P. Dooley, and Peter
Wickham, International Monetary Fund (Washington, DC: l989b).


Carmichael, H. Lorne,   "Efficiency   Models of Unemployment," Economic
Inquiry, Vol. 28 (April 1990), pp. 269-95.


Demekas, Dimitri C., "Labor Market Segmentation in a Two-Sector Model
of an Open Economy," Staff Papers (International Monetary Fund), Vol.
37 (December 1990), pp. 849-64.


Drazen, Allan, "Optimal Minimum Wage Legislation," Economic Journal,
Vol. 96 (September 1986), pp. 774-84.


Edwards, Sebastian, "Terms of Trade, Tariffs and Labor Market
Adjustment in Developing Countries," World Bank Economic Review, Vol.
2 (May 1988), pp. 165-85.


Harris, John, and Michael P. Todaro, "Migration, Unemployment and
Development: A Two-Sector Analysis," American Economic Review, Vol. 60
(March 1970), pp. 126-43.
                               - 42   -




Horton, Susan, Ravi Kanbur, and Dipak Mazuxndar, "Labor Markets in an
Era of Adjustment" Economic Development Institute, Working Paper No
694, the World Bank (Washington, DC: May 1991).


Lindbeck, Assar, and Dennis J. Snower, "Segmented Labor Markets and
Unemployment," Discussion Paper No 523, Centre for Economic Policy
Research (April 1991).


Mazumdar, Dipak, "Segmented Labour Markets in LDCs," American Economic
Review, Vol. 73 (May 1983), pp. 254-59.


Riveros, Luis, "Recession, Adjusmtent and the Performance of Urban
Labor Markets in Latin America," Canadian Journal of Development
Studies, Vol. 11 (March 1990), pp. 34-59.


Rosenzweig, Mark, "Labour Markets in Low-Income Countries," in Hollis
Chenery, and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of Development Economics,
Vol. I, North Holland (Amsterdam: 1988).


Shapiro, Carl, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Equilthriuin Unemployment as a
Worker Discipline Device," American Economic Review, Vol. 74 (June
1984), pp. 433-44.


Taubman, Paul, and Michael L. Wachter, "Segmented Labor Markets," in
Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard
Layard, North Holland (Amsterdam: 1986).


Turnhani, David, Employment and Development: A New Review of Evidence,
Development Centre, OECD (Paris: 1993).


Weiss, Andrew, Efficiency Wages: Models of Unemployment, Layoffs, and
Wage Dispersion, Princeton University Press (Princeton, New jersey:
1990).
</ref_section>
                             Figure 1
          Productivity and Wages in the Formal Sector




      e

                                                     / /
                                                   /
 a                                         E
1+a




                                          cm)
                                               U           ('is
                   Figure 2

           Steady-State Equilibrium




/1


                         i=o
          bO

      S


                        E
/1*


                                      S




                       b*                 b
                       Figure 3
       Reduction in Government Spending




                                 j=0
                b =0




                                 E
/2*


/1*1




          b*s               b*            b
          Figure 4
The Unemployment Laffer Curve




                                1
                                                     Figure 5
                Output and Unemployment in Developing Countries
        Unemployment rate. in percent (lelt scale)              -.   Real GDP growth, in percent (right scale)




                                               15

                                               10

                                               5
                                               0
                                               -5
                                                                                                            2
                                               -10
                                               -15                                                          I
                                                           8
                                              -20                                   f5

10   CosuRica                                   10                                                          15

9                                                                                                           10
                                               5                                                           5
8
                                                                                                           0
7                                              0
                                                                                                           -5
6
                                                                                                           -10
                                               -5
5                                                                                                          -15

                     15                    1990 "                                                          -20



 Sources: ILO Yearbook and International Financial statistics.
                                        Figure 5 (concluded)

    — Uemploymcnt rate, in peitent (left scale)      *
                      Output and Unemployment in Developing Countries
                                                         Rcal GDP growth, in percent (right scaie)




7                                            10
                                             8
6                                            6
                                            4
                                            2
                                             0
                                            -2
                                            -4
                                            -6
                        1985



                                            8                                                        12
                                            6                                                        10
                                            4                                                        8
                                            2                                                        6
                                            0                                                        4
                                             -2
                                                                                                     2
                                             -4
                                             -6                                                      0
                                             -8                                                      -2
                                              10                                                     -4
                                        1990




7                                            14                                                       10
           Thailand
6                                            12
                                                                                                     5
5
                                                10
4
                                             8                                                       0
3
                                             6
                                                                                                     -5
                                             4

                                                                                                         10
    1980                1985                                              1985                 1990



Sources: ILO Yearbook and International Financial statistics.
