NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RELATIVE WAGE MOVEMENTS AND
THE DISTRIBUTION OF CONSUMPTION

Orazio Attanaslo
Steven J. Davis

Working Paper No. 4771

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1994

For many helpful conversations and comments, we thank John Cochrane. Lars Hansen, Costas
Meghir, Kevin M. Murphy, Rob Townsend, Guglielmo Weber and workshop participantsat
Mif, Stanford, the University of Southern California. the University of Chicago, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland. Boston College, and the 1993 NBER Summer Institute working
group on Consumption Behavior. Davis gratefully acknowledges research support by the
National Science Foundation. This paper is part of NBER's research program inEconomic
fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #4771
June 1994

RELATIVE WAGE MOVEMENTS AND
THE DISTRJBUTION OF CONSUMPTION

ABflRACF
We analyze how relative wage movements across birth cohorts and education groups
during the 1980s affected the distribution of householdconsumption. The analysis integrates the
labor economics literature on time variation in the wage structurewith the consumption insurance

literature. In contrast to previous tests of consumption insurance, we examine the impact of
systematic. publicly observable shifts in the hourly wage structure. To circumvent the extreme
scarcity of longitudinal data with high quality information on both consumption and labor market

outcomes, we draw upon the best available cross-sectional data sources to construct synthetic
panel data on consumption, labor supply and wages.
We find that low-frequency movements in the cohort-education structure of pre-tax hourly

wages drove large changes in the distribution of household consumption. The results constitute
a spectacular failure of the consumption insurance hypothesis, and one that is not explained by

existing theories of informationally constrained optimal consumption allocations. We also
develop a procedure for assessing the welfare consequences of deviations from full consumption
insurance and, in particular, from the failure to insulate the consumption distribution from relative
wage shifts across cohort-education groups. For a coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to
two, fully insulating households from group-specific endowment variation would raise welfare

by an amount equivaltnt to a uniform 2.7% consumption increase.

Orazio Attanasio
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 93305
and NBER

Steven I. Davis
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

June 1, 1994

I. Introduction
The U.S. economy underwent pronounced, persistent movements in the structure of
relative wages during the 1980s. This paper analyzes how relative hourly wage movements

across birth cohorts and education groups affected the distribution of household consump-

tion and economic welfare. The analysis partially integrates two distinct literatures and
contributes to each.

One literature, large and very active, examines time variation in the structure of
relative wages. Coldin and Margo (1992) and Katz and Murphy (1992) provide two of the
more comprehensive investigations of relative wage movements in the United States during

recent decades. The main research thrust in this literature seeks to describe and explain
time variation in the wage structure, but much of the motivation clearly derives from the
perceived welfare consequences of changes in relative wages and overall earnings inequality.

The prevailing belief, annunciated by Card (1991), seems to be that measured changes in

the structure of income and labor earnings closely parallel changes in the distribution of
household welfare. Few papers in this literature even question this belief, much less subject
it to any serious evaluation — Cutler and Katz (1991) is a notable exception. 2
In sharp contrast, research on risk sharing in consumption stresses the variety of ex-

plicit and implicit insurance mechanisms that insulate the distribution of consumption
from shocks to the distribution of earnings capacity and income. The empirical branch
of this second literature investigates whether observed consumption outcomes conform to
the implications of risk-sharing models — e.g., Mace (1991), Cochrane (1991), Townsend
(1994) and Altonji et al. (1992). This literature exploits a simple and rigorous theory of

consumption allocations that delivers, under plausible restrictions on preferences, strong
Levy and Murnane (1992) provide an extensive survey of research on recent U.S. wage

structure developments, and Davis (1992) examines patterns of relative wage movements
across several countries.
2 Some sociologists (Mayer and Jenks, 1991) also question whether U.S. wage and income statistics accurately portray changes in the level and distribution of economic wellbeing.
1

implications for the cross-sectional distribution of consumption growth. While this literature focuses on hypotheses that many economists view as implausible a priori, the empirical

specifications that emanate from the theory can serve more broadly as tools for investi-

gating and interpreting the extent, pattern, and nature of departures from full insurance
consumption outcomes.
--

Previous empirical research in the consumption insurance literature typically relates

variation in idiosyncratic aspects of individual earnings capacity and income to individual

or household consumption behavior. In contrast, we examine the impact of systematic,
publicly observable shifts in the hourly wage structure on the distribution of household
consumption. A focus on this type of wage structure variation offers four advantages.
First, systematic relative wage movements across large groups of workers are uncorre-

lated with idiosyncratic components of individual-level preference shifts (e.g., changes in
health status or household composition). Since these preference shifts plausibly affect both

individual earnings capacity and household marginal utility, they potentially induce false
rejections of consumption insurance hypotheses. Cochrane's (1991) analysis is especially
clear on this point.
Second, a focus on publicly observable relative wage movements means that our evidence against consumption insurance cannot be rationalized by theories that stress the role
of unobserved shocks in an informationally constrained optimal consumption allocation —
e.g.,

Green (1987), Townsend (1988), Phelan and Townsend (1991), and Atkeson and Lu-

cas (1992). These theories offer no explanation for why relative consumption growth rates

depend on publicly observed shocks under an optimal allocation. Rather, they suggest
perfect insurance against all publicly observed shocks. We return to this point in the con-

clusion, where we suggest how these theories can be modified to deliver informationaily
constrained optimal consumption allocations more consistent with our empirical findings.
Third, a focus on relative movements across observationally distinct groups of individuals and households facilitates the use of cross-sectional data sets that offer comprehensive,

high quality information on either consumption or earnings, but not both. In particular,
we show how to implement tests of the sort advocated by Cochrane (1991) using synthetic
panel data rather than longitudinal data on individuals. Given the extreme scarcity of ion-

2

gitudinal data sources with high quality information on both earnings and consumption,
our ability to draw on cross-sectional data sets is an attractive feature of our empirical
strategy.
Fourth, the focus on relative wage movements across groups of households enables us

to devise suitable tests of consumption insurance in the face of nonseparable preferences
between consumption and leisure and imperfect transferability of leisure across house-

holds. Given nonseparable preferences, previous consumption insurance tests rest upon
the maintained assumption that the social planner can freely transfer leisure across households (Cochrane, 1991 and Townsend, 1994). We explain why this maintained assumption
is unattractive and how its violation leads to false rejections of the consumption insurance

hypothesis. We circumvent the need to maintain this problematic assumption by examining the response of relative household consumption to relative wage movements among
groups of men with inelastic labor supply, while controlling for female labor supply. A
similar strategy would be difficult to implement in work that focuses on idiosyncratic com-

ponents of individual earnings capacity because of censored wage observations for jobless
persons-

Section II develops our basic approach to anaiyzing the nexus between systematic
relative wage movements and the distribution of consumption. We review the theory of
consumption insurance, and we use the theory to derive estimating equations suitable

for synthetic panel data. Section III treats several specification issues that pertain to
life-cycle and demographic factors and preference nonseparabilities. All of our empirical
specifications relate time variation in the structure of wages among observationallydistinct
groups of workers to the distribution of consumption among households headed by these
workers.

Section IV takes up econometric issues related to the error structure implied by the
theory1 the error structure induced by misineasurenient and sampling variation, and the
choice between level and difference specifications. We discuss potential pitfalls of least
squares estimation on the synthetic panel data, and we develop an instrumental variables
strategy designed to overcome these pitfalls.

Section V describes the data and the construction of the synthetic panels. Our syn3

thetic panels contain annual observations from 1980 to 1990 on five-year birth cohorts
crossed by four educational attainment categories. We calculate birth-education group
means for household consumption data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX),
and we calculate group means for individual wage and labor supply data from the March

Annual Demographic Files of the Current Population Survey (CPS). The CEX and CPS
represent the best large-scale, cross-sectional data sets on consumption and labor market
outcomes, respectively, for the U.S. economy.

Section VI presents a descriptive analysis of relative wage and consumption move-

ments during the 1980s. Focussing on households with an adult male, we describe relative consumption movements across cohort-education groups. We also describe relative

wage movements among men and their wives. In line with previous work, we document
pronounced relative wage movements across education groups and birth cohorts. Furthermore, measured wages show large absolute declines among several cohorts of less-educated

workers. These sharp relative wage movements across observationafly distinct groups of
workers provide considerable leverage for estimating the impact of wage changes on the
consumption distribution.

Section VI also offers a pictorial analysis of the nexus between relative wage and
consumption movements across birth-education groups. Simple scatterplots reveal a spec-

tacular failure of the consumption insurance hypothesis to account for relative wage and

consumption comovements at low frequencies. The scatterplots also reveal that the rejection of the consumption insurance hypothesis arises in connection with relative wage

movements across education groups and relative wage movements across birth cohorts
within education groups.
Section VII carries out formal tests of the consumption insurance hypothesis and char-

acterizes the impact of systematic relative wage movements on the consumption distribution. The results provide strikingly sharp rejections of the consumption insurance hypoth-

esis. Specifications that emphasize low-frequency comovements provide greater support
for an extreme alternative to the consumption insurance hypothesis: relative consumption
growth rates equal relative wage growth rates. For the decade as a whole, the results also
indicate that changes in men's pre-tax relative wage rates were the dominant driving force
4

behind the (large) changes in the distribution of household consumption. Higher frequency
comovements between relative wages and consumption show much weaker evidence against

the consumption insurance hypothesis and strong evidence against the extreme alternative
of no consumption smoothing.
Our finding that low-frequency relative wage movements influence the distribution of

household consumption may be unsurprising to many readers, but we view the magnitude

of the departure from the consumption insurance null as remarkable. There are many
mechanisms that potentially help insulate the household consumption distribution from

persistent shocks to the structure of pre-tax hourly wages among men: offsetting labor
supply responses by men, offsetting movements in relative wages or labor supply by their

wives and other household members, the progressivity of the income tax, changes in the

tax structure such as the 1986 increase in the earned income tax credit, public welfare
programs such as food stamps, altruistically motivated intra- or inter-generational transfers

that cut across birth cohorts or education groups, and consumption smoothing through
own holdings of real and financial assets. At least for the U.S. experience during the 1980s,

these smoothing mechanisms poorly insulated the distribution of household consumption

from shifts in the structure of pre-tax hourly wages among cohort-education groups of
men.

To assess the welfare consequences of these shifts in the household consumption cbs-

tribution, section Viii develops a procedure for quantifying the extent of departure from

an optimal consumption allocation. For plausible degrees of risk aversion, our calculitions reveal that large consumption variations are required to compensate households for

the observed shifts in the consumption distribution across cohort-education groups. For
example, with a relative risk aversion of two, compensating households for the type of cross-

group consumption risk they faced during the 1980s requires a uniform 2.7% consumption

increase in all states and dates.

II. Theory and Empirical Specifications
A. Testable Implications of the Consumption Insurance Hypothesis

5

Diamond (1967) and Wilson (1968) derive the risk-sharing properties of Paretooptimal consumption allocations in full information environments. Scheinkman (1984)
was apparently the first to emphasize the einpixical implications of optimal risk-sharing
behavior for the distribution of consumption growth. Like Mace (1991), Cochrane (1991)

and Townsend (1994), we use the theory of optimal risk sharing to formulate testable
hypotheses and guide our empirical analysis of relative consumption movements.

A full insurance Pareto-optimal consumption allocation maximizes the discounted
weighted sum of individual households' utility functions:

Ci(St)

> .\JE&i)t(5U[CJ(St)5J(5t)]
t=I Ss

(1)

j=1

where C'(St) is consumption by household j at time t when the state of the world is 5á;

\i is household j's Pareto weight, which reflects the initial distribution of wealth; (pfl'

is household j's discount factor at time t; ir(St) denotes the probability of state 5t; and
and ö3(St) indexes arbitrary cross-sectional and time variation in household preferences.

Feasibility requires that aggregate consumption be less than or equal to the aggregate
endowment (or aggregate production) at each date and in each state of the world.
The first-order conditions for Pareto-optimal consumption allocations are

(pi)t\iu [Ci(St), 8J(st)j = p(st)

for all 5' andj = 1,...,

(2)

where p(S') equals the Lagrange multiplier associated with the feasibility constraint, divided by the probability of state St. The set of first-order conditions given by

(2) embody
the implications of full insurance for consumption patterns across individuals, time periods

and states of nature. In more concise notation, we write these first-order conditions as

(p)00'c(C,,5,') = Pt.

(2)

Full insurance implies identical growth rates across households in the marginal utility

of consumption. To see this point, first note that themultiplier p in (2) varies with aggregate consumption but is constant across households for a particular state and date. Hence,

6

given aggregate consumption and the Pareto weights, individual households' consumption
allocations do not vary with their endowments. Second, since the Pareto weights are time

invariant, we can use observations at two points in time to remove the household fixed
effects:

fl
inn
CL''t+1 t+1J — /2g.
1

—

UCICI',Efl

.—

3—

.1

3

—,;;—-'

Equation (3) says that the growth between t and i + 1 in the discounted marginal utility
of consumption is the same for all households.
Thus, under the theory, measured consumption growth can vary across households for
only three reasons: (i) utility functions differ across households;3 (ii) households experience
idiosyncratic preference shocks; and (iii) observed household consumption growth contains

idiosyncratic measurement error components. In particular, any variable that is crosssectionally uncorrelated with preference variation and measurement error in consumption
growth is, under the theory, also uncorrelated with the cross-sectional distribution of consumption growth.
To test this implication of full consumption insurance, Cochrane (1991) runs regressions of the form

log(C1/Cj) = a + $X(..1 +

i = 1.. :,J,

(4)

and tests the null hypothesis that $ = 0. Here, Xj1 is a shock to household j's endowment or earnings capacity that is assumed to be uncorrelated with measurement error in
consumption growth and preference variation across households.
Cochrane derives (4) under the assumption that household j exhibits constant relative

risk aversion y and a multiplicative preference shock 14:

.U[Cf,5fl

U[C?,147'] =

(C)1+f
11+-(j

(5)

Differences in intertemporal substitution elasticities and discount rates imply differences in the volatility and average rates of consumption growth. If preferences are nonhomothetic, utility functions effectively differ across households at different wealth levels.
7

Under this preference specification, conditions (3) become

p' '"

=fi±.i.,
Pt

Taking logs and adding a measurement error

j=1,...,J.

(6)

t.o the growth of log consumption yields

iog(iti) = -[1ogQi±!) _iog(±') _log(pi)}

(7)

Hence, if X(.1 is cross-sectionally independent of preference shifts (log(b÷1/bfl, 1, and p.7)
and of measurement error (ef+1), then consumption insurance implies that X(+1 will have

no explanatory power in regressions of the form (4). Cochrane also considers counterparts

to (4) that are suitable under more general specifications for preferences and preference

variation. We take up these matters in the context of our synthetic panel specifications
below.

In his empirical implementation, Cochrane uses data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics to examine the response of household food consumption to changes in

the household head's health and employment status. He finds that long-term illness and

job loss indicators imply rejection of the consumption insurance hypothesis under the
maintained assumption that these variables are uncorrelated with preference variation and
measurement error in the dependent variable. Townsend (1994) reports evidence against
the consumption insurance hypothesis using household-level panel data for three Indian

villages. Mace (199i) finds only mild evidence against the consumption insurance hypothesis using household-level data from the CEX, but Attanasio and Weber (1992) and
Nelson (1994) show that careful treatment ofmeasurement issues leads to sharp rejections

of the consumption insurance hypothesis in her data. In other related work, Altonji et
al. (1992) reject the hypothesis of complete risk sharing among extended family members,
and Lewis (1993) investigates whether the pattern of aggregate consumption growth rates
among countries conforms to the full insurance hypothesis.
B. Empirical Specification, Suitable for Syntheiic Panel Data
8

Wherea.s Coclirane, Mace, Townsend and others use specifications like (4) to examine

the impact of individual-level endowment shocks on the distribution of household consumption growth, we focus on systematic relative wage movements across observationally

distinct groups of households. The introduction outlines the advantages of a focus on this
type of wage structure variation. Here, we concentrate on deriving synthetic panel analogs

to (4) that exploit this type of wage variation.
Let Ch and W/ denote consumption and the wage rate for the jth household in group
i at time t. Our empirical analysis considers households defined by five-year birth cohorts

crossed with four educational attainment categories. Here, we simply refer to them as
groups.
After partitioning the data into I groups, take logs in (2), and avenge over the sample

of group-i households at time t to obtain

it

—
=

EJE 1(i) log[U0(Cf 6)j

#i(i)

—
—
og /it

—

Ejegn log r'

#i(t)

—

EJE(t) log A1

#i(i)

(8)

T. Here, and below; the hat symbol denotes a sample mean
I and t = 1
for i = 1
quantity. It should be understood that the time index does not necessarily run over the
same periods for all groups.
Rewrite the sample average first-order conditions as

=logt1g—tI—Z1+cjt, 11,...,I, t1,...,T,

(9)

where Ti and Z are population counterparts to the corresponding sample means in (8), and

where e is an error term due to differences between population and sample means. This
formulation emphasizes that the sample mean of log marginal utility,

differs from the

corresponding population mean due to finite sampling from a heterogeneous population. In

practice,

also differs from the population mean due to measurement error in variables

that determine the marginal utility of consumption. Under the theory, the population
quantity depends on a fixed time effect (log/it) common to all groups, a time-invariant
group effect (L1), and a third term that varies linearly with time (IL). If the distribution

of time discount factors p3 is identical across groups, then the third term becomes the
9

same linear function of time for all groups. If this distribution differs across groups, then
the linear time trends also differ across groups.
Given a parametrization of the utility function, equation (9) leads to a "levels" regres-

sion specification for group-averaged data. Alternatively, we can derive a first-difference
specification from
—

= (log Pt — log p.) + Ct — s)A1 + a — ej,,

(10)

where, as before, the error terms reflect deviations between population and sample means

and imperfect measurement of variables that determine the marginal utility of consumption.
When preferences have the isoelastic form (5), the sample mean i7 becomes
-

= EJEI(e) Iog() + EjEIO) 7' log(C()
#1(t)

#1(t)

= " + E,E(t) 1log(C() +
—

#i(t)

where vu is an error term due to deviations between sample and population means. Com-

bining this equation with (9) yields
•

j€.(t) 7Jlog(Cfl

—

= logp — tR1 — L1

—

—

B + q— vj

(11)

Now consider a regression of the sample mean log consumption on a full set of time

and group fixed effects, plus a variable X, that captures time variation in relative group
endowments:

1ojjt=ci+gj+$Xj+eu, 1=1

I, t1

T.

(12)

Comparing (11) and (12), the consumption insurance hypothesis implies fi = 0 in this
regression specification, provided that X also satisfies a list of auxiliary statistical assumptions. In particular, conditional on control variables in the regression equation, we
require that
(i) Xu is independent of measurement errors in log consumption;
10

(ii) X is independent of cross-group differences in the distribution of the time discount
factors p1;
(iii) X1 is independent of cross-group differences in the distribution of intertemporal sub-

stitution parameters yJ; and
(iv) X is independent of variation in the mean preference disturbances
Restrictions (ii)-(iv) say that X1 must be independent of any preference variation

not captured by other controls in the regression specification. ' Assumption (ii) fails if,
coincidentally, groups with higher time discount factors happen to experience unusually
large relative wage increases during the sample period. Similarly, (iii) fails if groups with

greater intertemporal substitution elasticities happen to experience unusually large relative wage increases. While we cannot nile out such coincidental relationships between
preference variation and relative wage movements, they would constitute an extremely implausible interpretation of a consistent pattern of rejections of the null hypothesis, $ = 0.

In contrast, in a specification that includes only time and group fixed effects as controls,

both theoretical and empirical considerations point to plausible reasons for a systematic
violation of (iv). We take up this matter in section III.
The restriction (i) on the measurement error process for X1 can fail because of sys-

tematic changes over time in the accuracy of the sampling frame for particular groups,
misclassification of individuals or households among groups, or the noise induced by finite

sampling from groups with heterogeneous populations. Similar measurement problems
arise in most econometric work. Our reliance on different cross-sectional data sets to con-

struct left and right side variables in (12) greatly diminishes the likelihood of nonzero
correlation between the dependent variable and measurement error in X,.
Turning to the first-difference specification, equation (11) implies

EJeIo) 1 log(C) — EE(.) 1' log(C)

—

#i(t)
We could dispense with (ii) by introducing group-specific linear time trends in (12).
This modification to the regression specification is unappealing, because it would soak
up the persistent components of variation in candidate regressors X, i.e., the persistent
components of relative wage movements in the empirical analysis.
11

(log Pt — log p,)

÷ (s —

—

— Dr1,) +

(Cu — €1,) — (v — vi.)

(13)

Hence, the consumption insurance hypothesis implies $ = 0 in the regression specification

loju — lojj, = &g +f3.Xjg

+ eu —

e

I = 1,... ,I and t = (t— 3),... ,T,

(14)

provided that X. satisfies a list of statistical assumptions analogous to (i)-(iv).5

III. Specification Issues
Consumption insurance implies that relative wage movements have no effect on the

distribution of marginal utility growth. Testing this implication requires the maintained
assumption that measured relative wage movements not be coincidentally correlated with

omitted factors that drive a wedge between measured consumption growth and marginal
utility growth. This section treats potentially important sources of coincidental correlation
and their consequences for the empirical analysis.
A. Demograplizcs and Life-Cycle Effecis

One important source of coincidental correlation involves systematic life-cycle varia-

tion in earnings capacity and in the marginal utility of consumption. Earnings capacity
increases with experience over much of the life cycle. For a partially overlapping segment
of the life cycle, household-level consumption requirements also increase due to increases
in family size and age of children. Consequently, the typical cohort can be expected to
exhibit a coincidental cot-relation between relative wage growth and relative consumption

growth over much of its life cycle. To control for this correlation, the empirical specifica-

tions include high-order polynomials in the head's age plus measures of family size and
composition. In terms of the formal theory, these regression controls reflect components
of the individual and group preference shifters, W and

Both Mace and Townsend consider econometric specifications that follow from exponential preferences. Aggregating across household as above, one can easily show that
exponential preferences lead to versions of (12) and (14) in which the level of consumption
replaces the log of consumption.
12

B. Preference Non.ceparability wiTh Nontransferable Leisure

Consider the implications of relative wage movements when preferences are nonsep-

arable between consumption and leisure. To develop the argument, suppose that wage
movements reflect underlying disturbances to an aggregate production technology with

diminishing marginal factor products. Assume that nonmarket time is not transferable
across households, and that preferences exhibit diminishing marginal utility of leisure.
Then, if time devoted to market activity increases the marginal utility of consuming market goods, groups with growing relative wages also experience relative consumption growth
under a Pareto-optimal allocation. It follows that, even under a Pareto-optimal allocation,

$ exceeds zero in specifications like (12) and (14) that fail to condition on labor supply.
Consequently, the omission of labor supply (or leisure) controls can lead to false rejections

of the consumption insurance hypothesis.

To derive a synthetic panel specification that conditions on leisure, consider the generai.ization of (5)1

U[C(,1I — L, Sfl

where H

denotes

= b(C1)''C —

(5')

the time endowment in hours, and L denotes hours worked.6 This

specification implies that the sample mean log marginal utility function, Vi,, contains the
additional term EJEI()(1 + ')log(H — Lfl/#i(i). The appropriate level and difference
regression specifications now become

loj = a, + gj + log(— L1) + f3Xj + ei,, and
log C1 — log C,,, = at

+ '[log(H— L) — log(W— L,,)] +$Xu + et — e.,.

(12')

(14')

Thus, when preferences are nonseparable and leisure is nontransferable, one might
test the consumption insurance hypothesis by investigating whether fi = 0 in regressions

6 The parameter restrictions b c

0

and y, c

—1

imply that nonmarket time and

consumption expenditures are substitutes, as presumed in the text.
13

like (12') and (14') that condition on leisure. '

Unfortunately, when preferences are

nonseparable, using a wage measure as the K, variable in (12') or (14') gives rise to
an identification problem. Recall that the social planner equates the marginal rate of
substitution between consumption and leisure to the wage for households at an interior

solution. This intratemporal first-order condition has the same form as (12') when we
subàtitute the wage for Xg. Likewise, the first difference of this condition has the same
form as (14') when we substitute the first difference of the wage for X1. Consequently, we

cannot use relative wage movements to test the consumption insurance hypothesis in (12')

and (14') without additional information on he substitutability between consumption and

leisure. We achieved identification in (12) and (14) by relying upon the assumption of
separable preferences to exclude leisure.
We suggest two approaches to the identification problem that arises with nonseparable

preferences. The first consists in focussing on a sample for which male labor supply is
believed to be highly inelastic. This consideration is one reason we restrict the sample to
households headed by adult males between 23 and 59. We also report results for samples
restricted to households headed by males between 30 and 55 and to households who have at
least a high school education.

if we believe that male labor supply is highly inelastic, and

Using (12') or (14') to test the consumption insurance hypothesis under nonseparable

preferences requires, in addition to (i)-(iv), a further auxiliary assumption: Kg is independent of cross-group differences in the distribution of the J. We can dispense with this
assumption by allowing for group-specific slope terms on the leisure controls in (12') or
(14').

Specifications like (12) and (14) can also lead to an upwardly biased estimate of fi,
if preferences entail a nonseparability between household consumption and wife's leisure.
Suppose we test the hypothesis that fi = 0 in (12) or (14) using the husband's wage for Xii.
If relative wage movements for husbands and wives covary positively, and if reductions in
the wife's leisure increase the marginal utility of household consumption, then $ exceeds
zero under a Pareto-optimal allocation. Section VI below shows that husbands' and wives'
relative wage movements exhibit strong positive covariation in our sample.

Juhn, Murphy and Topel (1991) present evidence that less-educated men exhibit
greater labor supply elasticity.
14

we control for female leisure, then a finding that male wage growth enters the equation for

consumption growth constitutes convincing evidence against the consumption insurance
hypothesis. '°
Alternatively we can ask the question: can we explain the observed comovements

among relative wages1 consumption and hours worked appealing to nonseparability between consumption and wages? Our second approach to the identification problem entails

calibrating the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure to construct

the marginal utility of consumption. The parameters of the MRS are chosen to yield val-

ues for labor supply elasticities consistent with existing evidence. We can then estimate

equations like (12) or (14) with the (log of) the marginal utility of consumption (rather
than log consumption) on the left hand side of the regression, and test the hypothesis that
relative wages enter these equations. A rejection of the null would be an indication that
the consumption insurance hypothesis cannot be salvaged by appealing to nonseparability
between consumption and leisure.

C. Leisure Transfcrtzbility via Markd Transactions
Our emphasis on the potential importance of conditioning on leisure when testing the

consumption insurance hypothesis differs from previous research. Cochrane (1991) and
Townsend (1994), in particular, argue that free transferability of leisure across households

implies the suitability of their consumption insurance tests in the face of nonseparable
preferences. This argument fails when the social planner's optimal leisure allocation across

households is implemented through market transactions. These transactions for timesaving goods and services are recorded as additional consumption expenditures in the data.

Examples include prepared food, personal services that cover laundry and other household
chores, and expenditures on certain forms of transportation. Aside from time-saving goods

and services, more expensive clothing and other market goods are often complementary

inputs for market work activities. These observations bear out a problematic aspect of

'° Altug and Miller (1990) consider preferences defined over consumption, husband's
leisure and wife's leisure, but they assume separability between consumption and male
leisure.
15

previous consumption insurance tests that fail to condition on leisure.

Appendix A analyzes a model of leisure transferability via market transactions. The

model posits two types of market-produced commodities: goods that generate utility directly and time-saving goods. Households combine time-saving goods and nonmarket time

to produce effective leisure. Shocks to an aggregate production technology drive relativé wage movements. The social planner chooses hours worked in the market sector and

quantities of the two market-produced goods to implement a Pareto-optimal allocation.

As before, an optimal allocation entails identical growth rates across households in the
marginal utility of consumption.
In this model, the mechanism for tranferring leisure across households induces a nonseparability between leisure and measured consumption, even if the underlying preferences

are separable. In addition, thismechanism induces positive covariation across households

between relative wage growth and relative growth in measured consumption. Hence, if
expenditures on time-saving goods are the mechanism by which an optimal allocation is
implemented, then testing the consumption insurance hypothesis with specifications like
(12) and (14) involves a bias in favor of the alternative hypothesis fi > 0. Since changes

in health status, employment status, and income are also correlated with hours worked
and expenditures on time-saving goods, the consumption insurance tests carried out by
Cochrane, Mace and Townsend suffer from the same specification problem and biasagainst

the null hypothesis. Hence, one can construe their evidence against consumption insurance

as a failure of the maintained hypothesis that leisure is freely transferable through some
extra-market institution. An analogous point applies to Abel and Kotlikoff's (1992) test
of the intergenerational altruism hypothesis in cohort data.
In principle, one could address the bias caused by time-saving goods by associating
them with particular subsets of commodities observed in the data. One could then estimate
(12) and (14) for consumption meaures based only on utility-producing goods. Given a

correct identification of time-saving goods (and suitable separability assumptions), this
specification would provide an unbiased estimate of $ under the consumption insurance
null. As a practical empirical matter, however, it would be difficult to create a satisfactory

partition of observed commodities into utility-producing and time-saving goods. For this
16

reason, we pursue the approaches set out in the preceding section. We interpret the model
with nonseparable preferences and nontransferable leisure as a reduced form of the model

with leisure transferability via market transactions.
Our analysis of wages, time-saving goods, and effective leisure can be viewed as an

application of the general theory of household commodity production (Becker, 1965, es-

pecially section IV). Juster and Stafford (1991) summarize several pieces of empirical
evidence that support the importance of the wage-induced substitution effects stressed in
our analysis.

D. Other Preference Nonseparabilities

Our empirical investigation focuses on the consumption of nondurable goods and
services. If preferences are not separable between these components of consumption and

other components, then the left side of equations (12) and (14) mismeasure the marginal
utility of consumption. While this mismeasurement constitutes a potential source of bias,

we do not think it is a serious concern for two reasons. First, the different groups of
households in our synthetic panels are unlikely to experience very different patterS of
Second, even if the relative prices
relative price movements for, say, durable goods.
of durables vary systematically across groups in our synthetic panel, there is no apparent
reason why these omitted price movements would be correlated with the relative prices of

leisure (i.e., relative wages) that we use to test the consumption insurance hypothesis. In
other words, the auxilliary statistical assumption (iv) specified in section II.B is unlikely
to fail. If we were to condition on the consumption services derived from durable goods,
we would neediessly dilute the power of our tests.

IV. Econometric Issues
.4.

The Error Structure and Estimation Methods

" We have exploited the highly detailed information on household consumption in the
CEX to construct group-specific price indexes over nondurables and services. These indexes
revealed only trivial cross-group variation in inflation rates, and so we did not pursue the

matter.
17

Under the null hypothesis of full insurance against publicly observable shocks, the
equation errors in (12) and (14) arise only from preference variation and measurement error.

The expectational errors for the uninsurable aggregate shocks are captured by time effects.

Hence, if the X1 in (12) and (14) were measured without error — and maintaining the
awcilliary assumptions about preference variation —OLS would deliver consistent coefficient

estimates.

Sampling variation alone, however, induces measurement error in the sample mean

quantities that appear as regressors in (12) and (14). Of course, sampling variation is
unlikely to be the only source of measurement error in the constructed regressors. To
address the potential inconsistency of the OLS estimator for

caused by measurement
error, we devise an instrumental variable strategy for estimating (12) and (14).
To develop an approprate W strategy, represent the regression equation involving the
unobserved, true variables as

= controls

where kXIt

—

+ $Ae* +

(15)

X_ for k > 0, with A0X1 X, and where 0 and VP denote

true values of log consumption and log wages, respectively. C and W represent the corre-

sponding observed quantities. Under the null, the only

reasons

to instrument for Ak

are sampling variation and measurement error in W,.
Because we rely on different data sources to construct the C and W variables, sampling

variation and measurement error in W are uncorrelated with the equation error in the
regression model (15). Since our regression specifications entail differenced quantities (or

year and group fixed effects in the levels case), a reasonable error model for the log wage
measure is

=

+ U,

(16)

where the error u satisfies Cov(ug,*j,_*) = 0 for all k, Cov(u1t,C1,1_*) = 0 for all k,
Cov(u,t,u,t_k) = Ofor k 0, andCov(uI(,uI.,,_k) = Ofori 9. Giventheseassuxnptions,
we describe an IV estimation strategy designed to perform well, while minimizing the loss
of observations due to instrumenting. For reasons that will become apparent, we treat the
levels, one-year difference, and k-year difference specifications separately.
18

Before describing our IV estimators, one further observation is in order. Under the
null hypothesis of full insurance against observable relative wage movements, and given

the postulated measurement-error structure for (16), lags and leads of group means are
valid instruments for the contemporaneous wage measure in (15).

instrument Choice for the Levels Specification
This case fits the classical measurement error model. Thus, if we estimate (15) with
Ic = 0 by OLS, we will obtain a downward biased estimator for $. To address this problem,

consider the following instrument Z1 for W14:

if Wj_1 is unobserved;
= (1/2)(W+i + W1,1_1) if both W1.1 and W1,4_1 are observed;
I.

W_1

if W1

is unobserved.

(17)

The appeal of this scheme is three-fold. First, no observations are lost due to instrumenting.

Second, the averaging over the immediate past and immediate future values of the wage
meaure reduces the noise component in the instrument that arises from sampling variation

and measurement error. Third, since true relative wages change slowly over time, we
anticipate a high correlation between the true current wage and the measured wages in
adjacent years.

Instrument Choice for One-Year Difference Specification
Suppressing the i subscript for expositional convenience, we have

= (flJ + u) — (W...1 + ug_).
It follows that the once-Lagged value of jW is not a valid instrument for 1W in the
regression,
Aj C11 = controls + fl1W11 + eg,

because both A1P/4 and iWg_1 involve the error u4_1.

Thus, pursuing the same approach as before, consider the following instrument for

i 1W.2

if A1W4_2 is unobserved;

Z = (1/2)(A W11.2 + áW1_2) if both a11w12 and A1W1_2 are observed; (18)
1A1W4_2
ifaW11 is unobserved.
19

While this instrumenting scheme shares the first two virtues described above for the levels

scheme, it suffers from a serious shortcoming. True changes in wages contain much less

persistence through time than true levels. Thus, Z may not be highly correlated with
W. In practice, IV estimates based on (18) produced enormous standard errors.
In light of this shortcoming, consider an alternative instrument that brackets the time
interval of the true change. Let

Z = A3W1.
This instrument involves ue+i and Ut_3 but not

U1

(19)
and Ut_I. Since our CPS-based wage

measures extend further back in time than the CEX-based consumption measures, (19)
entails the loss of only one observation per group.
Instrument Chotce for k-Year Difference Specifications (k 2)
In this case, we could pursue the basic idea behind (17), and define an instrument that
involves averaging immediate lags and leads of k—year differences. However, the benefts of

two-sided averaging are less pronounced than in the levels case. Hence, we use the simple
instrumenting scheme,

Z =SkWI_I.

(20)

This scheme entails no loss of observations (except possibly for young cohorts), since our

wage data extends further back in time than our consumption data.
B. £at,matzng the Covariance Matrix
The regression residuals in (12) and (14) are likely to be characterized by heteroscedas-

ticity and (for the difference specifications) by autocorrelation. Heteroscedasticity arises
from variation across year-group cells in the extent of measurement error, the number of

sampling units, and the degree of within-group heterogeneity. Differencing over k-year
intervals induces a kth-order moving average term, as evident from (14) or (14'). We use

a robust method (a la White) to form a consistent estimator for the covariance matrix
in the levels specification. In the difference specifications, we use a more elaborate covariance matrix estimator that is consistent under heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.
Appendix B supplies details.
20

V. The Data
A. The Consumer Expenditure Stirvey and the Currenl Population Survey
Our empirical analysis draws on two large-scale, public-use micro data sources. The
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) gathers information on income, demographic char-

acièristics and expenditure patterns of consumer units. A consumer unit is a group of
individuals living in the same household who are related, or who share at least two of
three major expense categories: food, housing, and other living expenses. The CEX also
contains information on labor market outcomes for individual household members. Since
1980, the CEX has been carried out on a continuous basis with monthly rotation, surveying

approximately 5,000 households per year.
Barring attrition, each CEX household is surveyed for four consecutive quarters. A

quarterly interview elicits information about expenditure patterns during each of the pre-

ceding three months. Information about income and labor market outcomes refers to the

twelve months preceding the interview. Our investigation uses CEX data for calendar
years 1980 to 1990.

The Annual Demographic Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS) gath-

ers information on household income, demographic characteristics, and the labor market

outcomes of individual members. The survey, carried out in March, elicits information

about income and labor market outcomes for the preceding calendar year. The March
CPS files contain this information for roughly 40,000 to 60,000 households per year. Our
investigation uses CF'S data for calendar years 1975 to 1990.

The large CPS sample sizes constitute a major advantage to combining information

from these two data sources. By constructing wage and leisure measures from the Cl'S

rather than the CEX, we greatly reduce the sampling error component in our synthetic
panel regressors. Aside from considerations of sample size, CPS income and earnings data

are superior to the corresponding CEX data (Cutler and Katz, 1991).
B. Forming SyniheAic Panel Groups
Our empirical analysis restricts attention to households with a male head (all married
21

couples, plus single male consumers and a few households with a single male parent). The
only exception occurs when we use wage figures for all women. In the CEX data, we form

synthetic panel groups based on the birth year and educational attainment of the male
household head. We follow the same practice in the CPS, except when constructing the all

women sample. In that case only, we define groups of women in terms of their own birth

year and educational attainment.
Birth cohorts are defined in terms of five-year bands. The oldest cohort contains per-

sons born between March 1925 and February 1930, where the cutoff month is chosen to
maximize conformity between the CEX and CPS.'2 We consider four educational attainment categories: less than twelve years of schooling, exactly twelve years, more than twelve

but less than sixteen years, and sixteen or more years of schooling. Our synthetic panel
groups result by crossing these four education categories with the five-year birth cohorts.
C. Consumption and Wage Measures

Our consumption measure equals household expenditures on nondurable goods and

services We exclude expenditures on durables, health, education and housing. The main
motivation for excluding these components is to avoid treating dynamics and other prob-

lems connected with durability. In addition, the CEX includes only out-of-pocket health
expenditures,not insurance payments. We deflate group consumption expenditures using

group-specific price indexes that we constructed from the detailed expenditures data in
the CEX. It turns out, however, that cross-group variation in inflation rates is tiny, so that
we effectively applied the same deflator to all groups)3

In constructing the consumption measure, we exclude nonurban households, those
residing in student housing, those with a male head older than 59 or younger than 23, and
12

The CPS records age at the March survey date. The CEX records age at each quarterly

interview. Hence, increments in reported age between interviews enable us to bound
birth dates within three-month intervals in the CEX. Uncertainty about the exact date of
birth in the CEX implies a theoretical rate of misallocation to five-year birth cohorts of
approximately one percent under our procedures. In practice, missing and erroneous age
responses in the CEX generate a larger misallocation rate.
h The
standard deviation across groups of the 1980-to-1990 log change in the price
indexes is about one-half of one percent.
22

those with incomplete income responses. 14 We exclude nonurban households because the
CEX did not sample them in 1982 and 1983. By excluding young heads (and those residing

in student housing), we minimize migration to higher educational attainment categories

as a cohort ages. By excluding old heads, we minimize the impact of retirement and
retirement choices on our sample.
Since CEX households are interviewed on a staggered basis, consumption observations

for a typical household straddle two adjacent calendar years. Our annual consumption
measures weight each household in proportion to the number of monthly observations that
fall into the calendar year. For example, a household interviewed in July of 1990 contributes

six monthly expenditure observations to each of the 1989 and 1990 consumption measures.

We measure hourly earnings from the CPS, computed as annual earnings divided by
the product of weeks worked and usual hours per week. We converted to real wages using

the GDP deflator for personal consumption expenditures. We excluded persons who were

students or in the military for at least part year, those who failed the age restriction
described above, those who reported self-employment as their primary source of earnings,

and those who earned less than 75% of the minimum wage. We imputed an estimate of
the conditional mean earnings for top-coded individuals using the same procedure as Katz
and Murphy (1992). In constructing labor supply measures, we include the self employed.
Table 1 displays cell count summary statistics for the wage and consumption measures

used in our study. The large cell counts for the CPS-based wage measures bear out one
important advantage of our empirical strategy. Namely, the CPS enables us to construct
wage regressors with much smaller sampling error than we could obtain from CEX-based
wage measures. The sampling error component of the CEX-based consumption measures
is a less serious concern, because consumption is the dependent variable in our regression
specifications.

VI. Relative Wage and Consumption Behavior
14

It is standard practice among BLS statisticians to exclude CEX observations with

incomplete income responses, when computing means, on the basis of data quality.
23

A. Movements in Relative Wages
Table 2 summarizes movements in men's real hourly wages by birth cohort and edu-

cation group. u Each panel describes real wage movements for all cohorts in a particular
education category relative to the 1980 value for the 1945-50 birth cohort in the same ed-

ucation category. Several types of information about the wage structure can be read from

thulable. Looking across a single row traces out the cross-sectional age profile of wages

for the indicated year and education category. Looking down a column traces out the
evolution of real wages for a particular cohort-education group. For example, the 1950-55

cohort of men with fewer than twelve years of schooling suffered a real wage decline of
eleven log points between 1980 and 1990. Comparisons across columns reveal differences

in the evolution of real wages between cohorts and between cohort-educationgroups.
The most pronounced relative wage movements in Table 2 involve differences by ed-

ucational attainment. Among men with fewer than twelve years of schooling, real wages
fell between 1980 and 1990 for all birth cohorts. Real wages declined by about ten per-

cent for cohorts that satisfy the age restrictions throughout the decade. Real wages also
declined over the decade for all cohorts of high school educated men, although the declines were typically more modest. Among men with some post-secondary education, real

wages increased substantially for the youngest cohorts and modestly for older cohorts.
Finally, among college-educated men real wages rose for all cohorts, including rapid real

wage gains for the youngest cohorts. To pick out an extreme comparison, wages for the
1950-53 birth cohort of college educated men rose by 44 log points relative to wages of
their contemporaries with fewer than twelve years of schooling.
Table 2 shows more modest between-cohort movements in relative wages within most

education groups. However, among men with more than twelve years of schooling, the
younger cohorts experienced notably more rapid wage growth than the older cohorts. The
between-cohort variation in wage growth is especially pronounced among college educated
men.

Patterns of relative wage movements among birth-education groups of women are
Here, and throughout the paper, we use only the observations for which all members
of the group satisfy the age restrictions in the indicated year.
24

broadly similar during the 1980s. Table 3 highlights this similarity, summarizing the
covariation of wages between men and women in the same birth-education group and
between husbands and wives. The table reports, for example, regressions of five-year
changes in mean wages for men on the corresponding changes in mean wages for women
in the same birth-education group. The men/women regressions classify men and women

inta groups based on their separate characteristics, whereas the husbands/wives regressions
classify both sexes into groups based on the husband's characteristics. Table entries in
parentheses report results for specifications that include cohort fixed effects and thereby
isolate the between-education component of the covariation in men's and women's wage
movements. The large positive slope coefficients and the high R2 values in the table bear
out the strong similarity of relative wage movements among men and women during both
halves of the decade.
In summary, wages for highly educated men rose sharply during the I 980s relative to
wages of their less educated contemporaries. These relative wage movments involved real
wage increases for men with a college education and real wage declines for men with twelve

or fewer years of schooling. Between-cohort variation in wage growth was modest among

less-educated men and pronounced among the most educated men, with more rapid wage

growth for younger cohorts. Finally, the wage growth patterns among men were largely
reinforced by the relative wage movements among women and wives. The large relative

wage movements among birth-education groups of men, and the reinforcing pattern of
movements among women, indicate that our synthetic panel data offer ample leverage
for testing the consumption insurance hypothesis and estimating the effects of systematic
relative wage movements on the household consumption distribution.
B. Movements in Relative Consumption

Table 4 summarizes movements in real household consumption by birth cohort and

educational attainment of the male head. Although the consumption data are notably
noisier than the wage data, some key patterns are discernible. Among the least educated,
real consumption declines sharply over part or all of the decade for the 1945-50 and earlier

cohorts. Among the high school educated, real consumption also declines sharply for
25

several cohorts. In contrast, among the more educated, real consumption shows modest
to sharp gains for all but the oldest cohorts.

Table 5 condenses the information on real consumption growth by educational attainment status. This table reports simple means of the cohort-specific real consumption

changes in Table 4. The results reveal a sharp, systematic pattern of rapid relative consumption growth for more educated groups during both halves of the decade. The least
educated experienced a striking 15% decline in real household consumption from 1980 to

1985 and essentially no change over the remainder of the decade. The college educated
experienced reasonably strong consumption growth over both halves of the decade.

Although not shown here, we have also examined year-to-year movements in real
household consumption by cohort-education groups. The more detailed examination re-

veals that consumption declines among the less educated are concentrated in the early
1980s. After 1983 or 1984, consumption levels appear fairly flat for most cohorts of the

least educated and slowly rising for most cohorts of the high school educated. Among
the college educated, consumption by the younger cohorts rises strongly throughout the
decade
These descriptive results constitute a prima fade case against the consumption insurance hypothesis. While we have not placed household consumption on an adult equivalence

basis, it is hard to believe that exogenous differences in the growth of household consumption requirements explain the sharp differences in consumption growth rates by education

category. It is also noteworthy that real household consumption falls absolutely for some

groups while rising absolutely for others. This pattern, whereby consumption moves in
opposite directions for different groups, points towards the likely untenability of the consumption insurance hypothesis for any stable parametrization of preferences under which
agents care about consumption risk.
C. Comovements between Relative Wages an4 Consumption
Figure 1 plots the annual differences of mean log consumption against mean log wages

for the cohort-education groups in our sample. The plotted values are residuals from
regressions on a cubic polynomial in age and year fixed effects. The year effects control
26

for the uninsurable aggregate shocks in our sample, and the age polynomial represents a
crude control for systematic life-cycle variation in household consumption requirements.
The theory developed in section II delivers this specification when preferences are isoelastic

and separable between consumption and leisure.

The scatterplot in Figure 1 conforms well to the implications of the consumption insurance hypothesis or any other theory that predicts smoothing of high-frequency earnings
variation. The least squares regression slope is mildly positive but insignificantly different
from zero. As indicated by the low IV value, there is no apparent relationship between
year-to-year relative wage and consumption movements among cohort-education groups.

Figure 2 shows an analogous scatterplot for ten-year first differences in our sample.
This figure reveals a remarkably close relationship between low-frequency relative wage

and consumption movements during the 1980s. The slope coefficient equals .92 with a
standard error of .12. Cross-group differences in men's relative wage growth explain a
remarkable 82% of the considerable variation in relative consumption growth. The labels
on the individual points in the scatterplot indicate that the between-education components
of relative wage and consumption movements drive the regression line.

This second scatterplot points to a spectacular failure of the consumption insurance
hypothesis with respect to publicly observable, systematic components of relative wage
variation. Indeed, the evidence is highly favorable to an extreme alternative hypothesis
under which relative consumption growth equals relative wage growth. The sharp contrast

between Figures 1 and 2 also highlights another important advantage of our empirical
strategy. By drawing on cross-sectional data sets to construct long synthetic panels, we

can identifr persistent components of endowment shocks. Comparing Figures 1 and 2,
it is the persistent movements in relative endowments (i.e., low frequency relative wage
variation) that drives relative consumption movements.

Figure 3 shows a scatterplot that corresponds to the levels specification (12). The
plotted values are residuals from regressions on a quartic polynomial in age plus a maximally linearly independent set of year and group fixed effects. Given that these residuals

represent deviations from group-year means for an (unbalanced) panel that contains as

many as eleven annual observations per group, we also interpret this scatterplot as de27

picting the low-frequency covariation between relative wages and consumption. The least
squares regression line in Figure 3 exhibits a large, positive slope and is tightly estimated,
thereby confirming the failure of the consumption insurance hypothesis in Figure 2.
We know from Figure 2 that the covaz-iation in relative wages and consumption across

education groups generates a sharp rejection of the consumption insurance hypothesis.
Figure 4 shows that the between-cohort covariation within education groups also generates

a sharp rejection of the hypothesis. In this figure, we plot by education group the same
residuals that appear in Figure 316 Three of the four education groups generate large and
significantly positive slope coefficients on relative wages. The large cross-cohort variation

in wage growth among the college educated generates an especially stark rejection of the
consumption insurance hypothesis.

In summary, these scatterplots provide visually compelling evidence that the household consumption distribution is poorly insulated from persistent relative wage movements

among birth-education groups. Our evidence is consistent with the view that the consuinption distribution is well insulated from transitory relative wage movements, perhaps
through the smoothing mechanisms envisioned by life cycle and permanent income theories. The more formal econometric investigation carried out below shows how these results
are affected by inclusion of additional controls, women's wages, nonseparable preferences,

alternative samples, and instrumental variables estimation.

VH. Econometric Results
A. The Synthetic Panel Specifications

This section reports the results of estimating several versions of equations (12) and
(14) using synthetic panel data. We typically begin with a benchmark specification that
contains year effects, a polynomial in age, plus group fixed effects for the levels specifica]6

That is, we constrain the age polynomial to be the same for all education
groups.
This procedure reflects our belief in small exogenous differences across education groups

in the shape of life-cycle consumption requirements.
28

tions. We then consider alternative specifications that add wage and leisure measures for

women (or wives) and controls for family size and composition. We report OLS and IV
results for a sample of all households with a 23-to-59 year old male head and for a sample

of married couples only. In addition to the levels specification (i2) we estimated k-year
difference specifications (14) for all k from ito 9. We report a selected set of the difference

specifications to illustrate the general pattern of results.
The wage measure for women represents an alternative source of endowment shocks

to the household. The leisure controls for women reflect our concern for a potentially
important nonseparability between household consumption and the leisure of women or
wives. We experimented with several measures of female leisure without much effect on
the results. The reported results use CT'S-based means of the logarithm of annual leisure
hours, defined as 52 times 126 minus annual hours worked.
Our family size and composition controls are the (mean of) log family size, the number

of adults, the numbn of children under three years of age, and the number of other children.
These variables are intended to capture life-cycle preference variation that differs over time

and across groups. On a priori grounds, it is not dear that these controls belong in the
specification. While we believe that consumption requirements vary exogenously over the

life cycle, time and group variaüou in the shape of life cycle consumption requirements
could be driven by variation in relative wages. Thus, the indusion of these controls stacks

the deck in favor of the consumption insurance hypothesis. In any case, their inclusion
represents an easy and flSble alternative to an adult equivalence scheme.

The number of available observations varies with the control set, the estimation
method, and the differencing interval. To facilitate comparability, the reported results
use the largest sample available across all specifications and control sets, given a particular

differencing interval. This leads to a loss of observations for some specificaitons; results
were not affected by these minor sample changes.

In carrying out instrumental variables estimation, we instrument the wage measures
using the schemes described in section W.B. We instrument the leisure and demographic
variables in an analogous manner. In the difference specifications, we also use the group
fixed effects as instruments for the demographic variables.
29

B. Results for the Level Specifications

Table 6.1 contains results for the level specifications. The first two lines of Table 6.1

show, for the benchmark specification, an OLS coefficient estimate on malewages of .65

in the male-headed sample and .42 in the married couples sample. As expected in the
presence of measurement error, the corresponding IV estimates are considerably larger
0181 and 0.59. 17 These slope coefficients are precisely estimated and provide strong

—

evidence against the hypothesis of full insurance against publicly observable relative wage

movements. The estimates are closer to unity — indicating that relative wage changes
translate one-for-one into relative consumption changes — than to zero.
The next two lines add female wage measures. As expected from Table 3, the collinear-

ity between male and female wage movements inflates the standard errors on the individual

slope coefficients, especially under IV estimation. The OLS results reiterate the benchmark results, but the individual IV coefficients are too imprecisely estimated to draw any
inferences.

Lines 5 and 6 add controls for female leisure to the kenchmark specification. The
results indicate that increases in female leisure reduce household consumption expenditures, consistent with our prior views about the nature of preference nonseparability, but
inclusion of this control does not mitigate the size or statistical significance of male wage
effects.

Finally, the remaining lines add family size and composition variables, with and with-

out the controls for female leisure. Once again, the coefficient on male wages is little
affected, although the IV estimates for this coefficient are less precise when we include the
composition variables.
C. Resij its for the dzfference specifications

Tables 6.2-6.4 report results for the one-year, five-year and eight-year differencing
intervals. The results for two-year differencing intervals, like the results for one-year intervals, show no consistent effects of relative wage movements on relative consumption. For

The IV results are virtually unaffected when we use only lagged wage values to construct instruments.
30

differencing intervals of three or more years, we find sizable and statistically significant

departures from the consumption insurance hypothesis, as illustrated by tables 6.3 and
6.4. Relative wage movements over these longer differencing intervals are associated with

large relative consumption movements. These patterns in the estimation results emerged
for all sets of controls we considered, with the exception of IV estimates of specifications

that include female wages. This latter specification yielded imprecisely estimated slope
coefficients on male and female wage measures. In short, results obtained for differencing
intervals of three or more years closely parallel results for the level specifications.
D. Can Nonseparabiliiy Salvage the Consumphou Insurance Hypothesis?

As stressed in section III, one cannot test the hypothesis that men's relative wage
movements have no effect on the distribution of marginal utility growth while simultaneously controlling for nonseparability between men's leisure and household consumption,
unless one brings additional identifying information to bear. The tests in Table 6 achieve
indentification by maintaining strongseparability between consumption and men's leisure.
We now investigate whether the previous evidence against the consumption insurance hy-

pothesis hinges on the separability assumption.
%Ve proceed by considering nonseparable preference specifications of the form (5'),

which can easily be generalized to account for female leisure. This specification is quite
simple and probably inadequate for capturing many important features of the interaction
between consumption and labor supply. However, we aim only to assess whether a plausible

degree of complementarity between consumption and men's labor supply can rationalize

the covariance between men's relative wages and household consumption. "Plausible"
means consistent with available evidence on male labor supply elasticities. In particular,

we experimented with values of-y and that correspond to an intertemporal substitution
elasticity between 0.3 and 0.6 and an uncompensated wage elasticity (evaluated at sample

means) between -0.3 and 0.3.

Corresponding values for the compensated elasticity

lie between 0.21 and 0.82. These figures are roughly consistent with available evidence
IS

Denote the labor supply elasticities with respect to wage movements by e for

the

uncompensated elasticity, q for the compensated elasticity, and ' for the intertemporal
31

(Pencavel, 1986).

Given values for y and ,

+1

we

used the implied marginal utility of consumption,
log(ft — Li), as the dependent variable in regression specifications oth-

log(Cf)
erwise identical to the ones reported in Tables 6. The results were highly similar to Tables

6.1-6.4, and they are available upon request. From these results, we infer that our evidence
against the consumption insurance hypothesis cannot be rationalized by a plausible degree

of coinplementarity between consumption and men's labor supply.

As another check on the potential importance of nonseparable preferences, we con-

sidered samples restricted to men with relatively inelastic labor supply. To the extent
that labor supply is inelastic, there is little scope for complementarity between work and

consumption to drive variation in household consumption. A large empirical literature
holds that prime-age men supply labor inelastically with respect to the wage. Hence, we

considered samples restricted to men between 30 and 55. Since some evidence suggests
that less educated men exhibit greater supply elasticity, we also considered samples further

restricted to exclude groups with fewer than twelve years of schooling.
Tables 7 reports results for a sample restricted to all men between 30 and 55 who have

at least a high school education. (Results for the corresponding sample of married couples

and the sample that includes the least educated men are highly similar.) Due to smaller
elasticity. These elasticities satisfy
—

MII—1 in
ML—wMH'
1

ML—WMCH'

and

7
where M = U,,/U, 1 = OM/3c, Mt = a/8L, H is labor supply, L is leisure, c is
consumption, and in is the wage. We evaluated E and i at c = 23,000, in = 11, H = 2080,
and L = 5000 — 2080. For instance, .. = —3, = —4 implies $ = —0.037, q = 0.55 and
= 0.5.
32

sample sizes, the coefficient estimates are slightly less precise than before, but the effects

of male wages on consumption strongly confirm the previous results. If anything, the null

hypothesis is even more consistently rejected. Even the annual difference specifications
often show statistically significant evidence against the null hypothesis when estimated by

instrumental variables.
B. Assessing Ike CovnovemenI between Re/alive Wages and Consumplion

We interpret the results in Tables 6 and 7 as a spectacular rejection of the hypothesis
of consumption insurance against publicly observable relative wage movements. Regardless

of how one interprets these results, it is useful to precisely quantify the fraction of relative
consumption variation explained by relative wage variation. Because of sampling errors in

the synthetic panel variables, R2 values in the fitted regressions lie below one, even when

the true relationship between consumption and wages exhibits a perfect fit. To address
this difficulty, we estimate an upper bound on the R2 value in the presence of sampling
error. We then compare the actual fl2 values for the synthetic panel regressions to the
estimated upper bounds to assess the closeness of the consumption-wage relationship.
Suppose that (classical) measurement error and sampling variation are the only source
of the equation error in regressions (12) and (14). Suppose further, for the sake of simplicity,

that these errors are homoscedastic. Under these conditions, the R2 value in the level
specification is given by
V

a

(21)

a2_02CZ+Uv

(22)

Q+
where

and c are the within-cell variances of log consumption and X41 in equation (12),
N and Nr are the cell sizes of the sampies used to compute average consumption and
average X, and c is the variance of log consumption across cells not explained by the
regression controls. Equation (22) reflects the orthogonality of the measurement errors in
consumption and wages, as implied by their construction from independent samples. Fpr
33

the difference specifications theoretical bounds can be derived in a similar fashion, but
taking into account the MA structure induced by the measurement error in the levels.
Table 8 reports actual and estimated upper bounds on ft2 for the simplest specifications that include only male wages, after regressing out the effects of the age polynomial
and year effects plus group effects for the level specification. The actual B2 values equal
the, fraction of residual consumption variation accounted for by men's wages. The upper

bound values are given by (21) and (22) for the level specifications and by their analogs
for the difference specifications. We compute (21) and (22) separately for each cell, evalu-

ating at the IV estimates of /3 (reported in Table 6) and the cell-specific values of u/N

and o,/N,. We compute e as the cross-cell variance in the consumption measure after
regressing out the controls. The upper bound values reported in Table 8 are averages of
the cell-specific values.

The results in Table S make two points. First, sampling variation reduces the attainable ft2 value by 3-18%, depending on the length of the differencing interval. Thus

sampling variation in the CPS- and CEX-based means induces a nontrivial, but modest,
deterioration in the potential goodness of fit. Second, male relative wage movements alone
explain a large fraction of variation in relative household consumption movements at longer

differencing intervals. The table suggests that, over the decade as a whole, variation in
men's pre-tax hourly wages across cohort-education groups was the single most important

factor driving changes in the cross-group distribution of household consumption (for the
population encompassed by our selection criteria).

'TIII. Welfare Implications
How large are the welfare losses implied by differences among cohort-educationgroups

in consumption growth rates? How large are the welfare losses implied by the failure to
insulate the consumption distribution from relative wage shifts among cohort-education

groups? In this section, we propose and implement a procedure for addressing these
questions. Our welfare calculations do not reflect uninsured events that occur prior to
1980 or prior to age 23. Nor do they reflect idiosyncratic components of consumption and
34

Appendix B: Estimating the Covariance Matrix
The asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of / in equation (12) estimated by instrumental variables is given by
AsyV($) = PZZX'Z(Z'Z)'Z'11Z(Z'ZY' Z'XPn,

(3d)

where Z is the matrix of instruments, X is the regressor matrix, and fl = EVeI.
The dimension of fl is E5 Tj, where Tj is the number of periods over which group j
is observed. The structure of the residuals implies that Il is block diagonal. Blocks on the
main diagonal represent the variance-covariance matrix of the residuals of each group. 21
These matrices are diagonal for the level specification. They include nonzero entries along
the main diagonal and and the two kth bands around the main diagonal for the k-year
difference specification.
Our estimator for the Q matrix accommodates heteroscedasticity of unknown form.
The estimator for the variance-covariance matrix is obtained by substituting Z'QZ with
Po

+ .P1, where
=

N1T,

W Er>: Zi,rZr4r, and
5=1

P1

=

7

[zj,tz,...kuj,tujt_k + Zj,t_kZj,gUj,1Uj,t_k].

j1 rjr t=k

the number of groups,
and Jr equals the differencing interval. P1 = 0 for the level specification.
The main problem with this formula is that it does not guarantee that the estimated
z'czz is positive definite. We divide the second sum in the expression for P1 by T rather
than by Tj — Jr to alleviate this problem. This sort of problem commonly arises in the estimation of variance-covariance matrices that allow for autocorrelation. Following Fuller's
(1985) suggestion, we downweight the component P1 of the variance-covariance matrix.
Our procedure is asymptotically equivalent to the uncorrected one (as 7', increases).

2' is the number of periods over which group j is observed, N is

21
fi is block diagonal under the assumption that the residuals are contemporaneously
uncorrelated across groups. This assumption holds under the null, if shocks to preferences
are uncorrelated across groups.

43

first year such that Xit = 1. The term

reflects the growth in aggregate consumption

between and t + 1. It satisfies I99o = 1 and

=

=

Wo1t+1 [o — xit) + xe(l — x,t+iDCI,g+i

+ XitXi,t+Ig+I (b )

"c].

is a scaling factor on the consumption of continuing groups chosen to equate

In words,

actual and optimal per capita cosumption. This procedure effectively uses each group's
initial relative consumption to set the Pareto weights in the planner's problem.
Next, define the welfare level achieved under the optimal allocation,

Vt(C) = U(C,1).
We can now calculate the consumption variation required to compensate households for the
failure to insulate the consumption distribution from a/l sources of group-level consumption

risks as the value of A° that satisfies

U(C,A°)=V(C).
Likewise, we can calculate the consumption variation required to compensate households

for the failure to insure against relative wage variation among groups as the value of Aw
that satisfies

U(C,A'4') = V(C).
Here, (50 —

1)

denotes the uniform (across groups, dates and states) percentage increase

in actual consumption that would be required to bring average welfare to the same level
achieved by the optimal allocation. Similarly, (AW — 1) denotes the uniform percentage

increase in consumption required to compensate households for the failure to insulate the
consumption distribution from relative wage movements.
36

In carrying out these calculations, we set p = (1.02), and we estimate the multiplicative taste shifters from the shape of the average age-consumption profile during the
1980s. If one posits

=
theli a regression of the form

log C11 =

i + g + Sj(agS)g + et

delivers the estimated taste shifters

=

exp[—-y

E=1 S,(age')g].

As anticipated, these

estimated consumption requirement profiles are concave with respect to age.

To randomize over alternative paths, let 6 be the consumption path obtained by
reversing the observed relative movements: 6 = C — (C — C). This path implies the
same aggregate consumption but alters the distribution, so that winners become losers
and vice-versa. Finally, define A° by
O.5[U(C,.A°) + U(O,A°)) =

V,

and analogously for Aw. Thus, the compensating consumption variations, Ao — 1 and
Aw — 1. involve a randomization over two alternative consumption growth paths: the one
that actually occurred during the 1980s, and the "opposite" path.
Figure 5 displays the computed values of A" and Aw for various coefficients of relative risk aversion. The figure reveals large welfare losses associated with the failure to
insulate the household consumption distribution from group-specific endowment variation.
As the coefficient of relative risk aversion ranges from -9.5 to -0.5, the consumption varia-

tion required to compensate households from all sources of group-level risk ranges from a

staggering 24.8% to .6%. The consumption variation required to compensate households
for the risk associated with men's pre-tax relative wage movements ranges from 10.8% to
.4%. For a coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to two, the compensating consumption

variations equal 2.7% for all shocks and 1.8% for men's relative wage movements only.
37

Thus, for relative risk aversion equal to two, a household with an annual consumption
of $40,000 would have to be compensated by more than $1000 (in each period) to achieve
the same level of welfare as implied by full insurance against group-level endowment vari-

ation. This calculation ignores any potential gains associated with pooling consumption

risks within groups. The large welfare losses reported in Figure 5 indicate that there
are.powerful impediments to insurance against publicly observable endowment variation
among cohort-education groups.

IX. Concluding Remarks
We began this paper by observing that the U.S. economy underwent pronounced and
persistent movemersts in the structure of relative wages during the 1980s. We have shown

that relative wage movements among birth cohort-education groups of men drove large

changes in the distribution of household consumption. Among the less educated, real
household consumption fell sharply for most cohorts during the early 1980s, paralleling

their sharp declines in real wages. Among the college educated, and especially for the
younger cohorts, real wages and real household consumption rose throughout the decade.

Our econometric analysis shows that the close alignment between men's relative wage
movements and relative household consumption movements continues to hold after con-

ditioning on women's leisure, household size and composition, and samples restricted to
men with inelastic labor supply.
In our view, the magnitude of the covariance between relative wages and consumption

constitutes a spectacular failure of the consumption insurance hypothesis. This hypothesis
is not even remotely consistent with the evidence developed here. Our calculations suggest

that the observed departures from optimal consumption allocations carry large welfare
costs. In addition, our evidence against the consumption insurance hypothesis involves
publicly observed endowment shocks. Indeed, the sharp decline in relative and real wages

among the less educated has been a major public policy concern in recent years. Hence,
our findings cannot be rationalized as a consequence of unobserved shocks in environments

with infonnationally constrained insurance.
38

One potential line of explanation for our results stresses the interaction between pub-

licly observable shocks and private information about individual attributes that relate to

the acquisition of human capital. The costs of and expected returns to education, for
example,

are

likely to vary greatly across individuals, If differences in the net returns to

education (or other acquired skills) are private information, then the optimal consumptio allocation may vary with publicly observable endowment shocks. The link between
consumption and observable endowment shocks arises to call forth further human capital
acquisition by those agents who are best positioned to augment the stock of needed skills.

This line of explanation is in the spirit of existing theories of inforznationally constrained

optimal consumption allocations, although we are not aware of research in this tradition
that models the connection between observable shocks and private information about the
returns to human capital acquisition.
A second potential line of explanation for our results stresses the difficulties of devis-

ing and maintaining institutions that share consumption risks across broad social groups.

While informational problems may underlie these difficulties, they may also reflect the
absence of suitable mechanisms for enforcing risk-sharing agreements that are Pareto im-

proving ex ante, and the infeasibility of articulating complete risk-sharing contracts. The

barriers to devising, articulating and enforcing optimal contracts in private settings suggest that similar problems hamper political and social risk-sharing compacts. The scale of
political, social and even military resources deployed to alter the distribution of consump-

tion also suggests that actual consumption allocations deviate sharply from allocations
constrained only by production technologies and private information.
We hope that future research discriminates between these two lines of explanation
for the impact of publicly observable endowment shocks on the distribution of household
consumption. There seems ample scope for both theoretical and empirical research directed

towards this issue.

The empirical results in this paper largely confirm the view that animates much research on the earnings distribution by labor economists. As we noted in the introduction,

this literature typically takes for granted that measured changes in the structure of income and earnings closely parallel changes in the distribution of household welfare. The
39

close alignment between relative wage and consumption movements among birth-education
groups supports this view, but at least two caveats are in order. First, we devised our

empirical strategy to maximize the connection between relative wage and consumption

movements. In particular, our focus on households with a nonelderly adult male head
omits the groups that are most insulated from changes in the earnings structure. Second,
we adduced only modest evidence that relative wage movements over one- and two-year
intervals affect the consumption distribution. In this regard, our results are consistent with
the view that short-term changes in the earnings distribution, even when they involve large

groups of observationally distinct workers, carry unimportant welfare consequences.
To close, we remark upon one other direction for future research. Many advanced and
middle income economies experienced large relative wage movements among observation-

ally distinct groups of workers during the 1970s and 1980s (Davis, 1992). Several of these
countries offer cross-sectional datapets with information on consumption expenditures and

labor earnings comparable to the information contained in the U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey and Current Population Survey. These data sets provide the grist for synthetic
panel analyses of relative wage and consumption comovetnents in several countries. Developing this line of research would provide an empirical basis for quantifying and interpreting

cross-country differences in the extent of consumption insurance. Much existing research
considers cross-country differences in labor market institutions, tax structures and income

maintenance programs with an eye toward their distributional consequences (e.g., Card
and Freeman, 1993), but the focus typically falls on income rather than consumption out-

comes. Given the variety and complexity of private, public, market and extra-market
institutions that play risk-sharing roles, it would be useful to supplement the existing style

of research with more direct evidence on bow endowment shocks affect the consumption
distribution.

40

Appendix A: A Model of Leisure Transferability via Market Transactions
Consider a model in which time-saving goods allow for the transferability of leisure
across households. Represent the underlying preferences over true consumption and leisure
by the strictly concave function U(C, 14. Household j faces a time constraint

=

— H1, C1),

wb€re H denotes the time endowment, H1 denotes hours of market work activity, and
C' denotes expenditures on time-saving goods produced in the market. The function
—

if), C') represents the jth household's technology for transforming nonmarket

time and expenditures on time-saving goods into effective leisure, L.
We adopt the following assumptions regarding the household's technology for producing leisure: (i) Effective leisure increases with noninarket time and with expenditures
on time-saving goods. (ii) Nonmarket time and time-saving goods are substitutes in the
production of leisure, so that 912 S 0. (iii) The rate at which time-saving goods can be
substituted for noninarket time diminishes with greater expenditures on these goods, so
that iso-leisure curves are convex. (iv) g(H —H, C) H — H for all C.
Market goods C and C are produced from time inputs supplied by I types of workers.
The aggregate production function exhibits 4iTninshing marginal factor returns and is
separable across factor types. Hence, we can write the "wage" function for individual
in group i as WJ(H1, 51), where H' EJEI H1, and dWi/dH <0 for all j and i. The

j

dependence of the wage function on S captures technological or other disturbances that
drive relative wage movements.
Under these assumptions, the Pareto problem becomes

Ci(5'), Hi(5'), Cl(S')

>

A1

ptlr(St)U[Ci(st)gi(H —

subject to the aggregate feasibility constraint,

[C(S') + C1(S')j, for all 5', and

C'O,

foralljandS'.

If households have identical technologies for producing leisure, the first-order conditions for an interior solution to this problem become

H1:

p'UL(C1, L)g1(7f — H, G1) = W1(H1, S')pA',

C1:

p'Ut(C',L1)g2(— H',G') = mA1,
41

(A.1)
(A.2)

C'

Pt Uc(C1 L') = øA',
(A.3)
for all j and at all dates and states. In particular, at an interior solution for hours worked
and time-saving goods, each household satisfies the tangency condition,

9i_

• / = W(H,St).

92(H—H',G')

(A.4)

It follows from convexity of the iso-leisure curves that the ratio of nonmarket time to
expenditures on time-saving goods moves inversely with the wage.

This analysis delivers three useful insights. First, it is apparent that the technology
for transferring leisure across households induces a nonseparability between measured consumption expenditures, C+G, and measured leisure, H—H, even when the true underlying
preferences are separable.
Second, the optimal allocation entails complete consumption insurance in the sense

that the marginal utility of consumption, Uc, is equated across households. Thus, the
imperfect transferability of leisure across households does not upset the consumption insurance property of the optimal allocation.
ThiM, although the optimal allocation retains the consumption insurance property,
relative levels of measured consumption covary positively with relative wages. To see this
point, consider an increase in j's (relative) wage that leaves aggregate production and pg
unchanged. The wage increase raises the (opportunity) cost of producing leisure for j, so
that L declines and UI rises. Both the scale effect associated with the decline in L and
the substitution effect reflected in (A.4) imply a decline in H — H1 and, hence, an increase
in j's hours of work. H In addition, a substitution effect (gn 0) and a price effect (rise
in UI) both increase j's optimal allocation of time-saving goods. Thus, relative levels of
measured consumption expenditures, C + C, covazy positively with relative wages under
the consumption insurance allocation. 20

Condition (Al) is directly analogous to the wage-equals-marginal-revenue-product
condition for a firm with a downward sloping product demand schedule. Leisure corresponds to output, Ut corresponds to the demand schedule, and nonma.rket time corresponds to the factor input subject to a price increase.
20 If C and .1, are utility complements, then the decline in L induces a decline in C under
the optimal allocation. The conclusion in the text presumes that such an effect, if present,
is smaller than the rise in C. Such a high degree of complementarity between C and L
strikes us as implausible. In any case, extreme complementarity between C and L would
create a bias towards acceptance of the consumption insurance hypothesis in our empirical
work. It cannot account for our rejections of the hypothesis.
42

Appendix B: Estimating the Covariance Matrix
The asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of / in equation (12) estimated by instrumental variables is given by
AsyV($) = PZZX'Z(Z'Z)'Z'11Z(Z'ZY' Z'XPn,

(3d)

where Z is the matrix of instruments, X is the regressor matrix, and fl = EVeI.
The dimension of fl is E5 Tj, where Tj is the number of periods over which group j
is observed. The structure of the residuals implies that Il is block diagonal. Blocks on the
main diagonal represent the variance-covariance matrix of the residuals of each group. 21
These matrices are diagonal for the level specification. They include nonzero entries along
the main diagonal and and the two kth bands around the main diagonal for the k-year
difference specification.
Our estimator for the Q matrix accommodates heteroscedasticity of unknown form.
The estimator for the variance-covariance matrix is obtained by substituting Z'QZ with
Po

+ .P1, where
=

N1T,

W Er>: Zi,rZr4r, and
5=1

P1

=

7

[zj,tz,...kuj,tujt_k + Zj,t_kZj,gUj,1Uj,t_k].

j1 rjr t=k

the number of groups,
and Jr equals the differencing interval. P1 = 0 for the level specification.
The main problem with this formula is that it does not guarantee that the estimated
z'czz is positive definite. We divide the second sum in the expression for P1 by T rather
than by Tj — Jr to alleviate this problem. This sort of problem commonly arises in the estimation of variance-covariance matrices that allow for autocorrelation. Following Fuller's
(1985) suggestion, we downweight the component P1 of the variance-covariance matrix.
Our procedure is asymptotically equivalent to the uncorrected one (as 7', increases).

2' is the number of periods over which group j is observed, N is

21
fi is block diagonal under the assumption that the residuals are contemporaneously
uncorrelated across groups. This assumption holds under the null, if shocks to preferences
are uncorrelated across groups.

43

References
Abel, Andrew and Kotlikoff, Laurence 3. (1992) "Intergenerational Altruism and the
Effectiveness of Fiscal Policy - New Tests Based on Cohort Data," forthcoming in Toshiaki
Tachibanaki, ed., SaVings and Bequests, University of Michigan Press.
Altonji, Joseph G., Hayashi, Fumio and Kotlikoff, Laurence 3. "Is the Extended Family
Altruistically Linked?" American Economic Review, 82, no.5 (December 1992), 1177-1198
Altug, Sumru and Miller, Robert A. "Household Choices in Equilibrium." Econometrica, 58, no. 3 (May 1990), 543-570.
Atkeson, Andrew G. and Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1992) "On Efficient Distribution with
Private Information," Review of Economic Sits dies,
Attanasio, Orazio and Weber, Guglielmo (1992) "Consumption Growth and Excess
Sensitivity to Income: Evidence from U.S. Micro Data," manuscript, Stanford University.
Card, David "Comments and Discussion" to Cutler and Katz (1991) Brookings Papers
on Economic Aclivily, (1991:2), 62-68.
Card, David and Richard Freeman (1993) Small Difference3 that Matter: Labor Markets and Income Maintenance in Canada and the United States, Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cochrane, John H. "A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance." Jovrnal of Political
Economy, 99, no. 5 (October 1991), 957-976.
Cutler, David M. and Katz, Lawrence F. "Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1991:2), 1-74.

Davis, Steven J. "Cross-Country Patterns of Change in Relative Wages," NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 7 (1992), 239-292.

Diamond, Peter (1967) "The Role of a Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model
with Technological Uncertainty," American Economic Review, 57, 759-776.
Fuller, Wayne A. (1985) : Measurement Error Models , New York: John Wiley.
Goldin, Claudia and Margo, Robert "The Great Compression: The Wage Structure in
the United States at Mid-Century." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, no 1 (February
1992), 1-34.

Green, Edward (1987) "Lending and the Smoothing of Uthnsurable Income," in
Prescott and Wallace, eds., Contractual Arrangements for Jntertemporal Trade. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
.Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (1991) "Why Has the Natural
Rate of Unemployment Increased over Time?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activily,
1991:2, 75-142.

Katz. Lawrence F. and Murphy, Kevin M. "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:

Supply and Demand Factors," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, no. 1 (February
1992), 35-78.

Levy, Frank and Murnane, Richard 3. "U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality:
44

A Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations" Journal of Economic Literature,
80, no. 3 (September 1992), 1333-1381.
Lewis, Karen (1993): "What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Consumption Risk Sharing?", Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Mace, Barbara J. "Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty." Journal
of Political Economy, 99, no. 5 (October 1991), 928-956.
Mayer, Susan E. and Christopher Jenks (1991) "Recent Trends in Economic Inequality
in the United States: Income vs. Expenditures vs. Material Well-Being," unpublished.
Nelson, Julie (1994) "On Testing Full Insurance Using Consumer Expenditure Survey
Data," Journal of Political Economy, JOE, no. 2 (April), 384—94.
Pencavel, John (1986) "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey," in Orley C. Ashenfelter
and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, I, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
Publishers.
Phelan, Christopher and Townsend, Robert "Computing Multiperiod InformationConstrained Optima." Review of Economic Studies, (1991).
Scheinkman, Jose (1984) "General Equilibrium Models of Economic Fluctuations: A
Survey of Theory," University of Chicago.
Townsend, Robert M. (1988) "Information Constrained Insurance: The Revelation
Principle Extended," Journal of Mon etarij Economics, 21, no. 2/3 (March/May), 411450

Townsend, Robert M. (194) "Risk and Insurance in Village India," Econometrica 62,
no. 3 (May), 539-591.
White, Halbert (1980) "A Heteroskedasticity-Consisteut Covariance Matrix Estimator
and a Direct Test for Reteroskedasticity," Ecovaomctnca, 4B, 817-838.

Wilson, Robert (1968) "The Theory of Syndicates," Econometnca, 36, 1 (January),
119-13 2

45

Table 1

Cell Count Summary Statistics for Group-Level CPS and CEX Data
Number
Variable Type

Source

of Cells

Wages. Men
Wages. \Vomen
\Vages. Husbands

CPS
CPS

420

Mean Cell
Count
Minimum Maidmum
227

2291.

420

902
762

192

CPS

420

695

190

2056
1576

CPS
All
CEX
Consumpion.
Consumpion. Married CEX

420

509

148

1166

288

499
414

137

1071

117

396

Wages. Wives

288

Notes:
1)

Groups are defined by crossing five-year birth cohorts with four educational attainment
categories.

(2) Each cell corresponds to one annual observation on a group. The number of cells
equals the total number of annual group-level observations that are admissible under
our sample selection criteria. For CPS data, an admissible cell is one in which all
men are between 23 and 59 years of age. CPS samples of wives are restricted to
women with husbands between 23 and 59 years of age. CEX samples are restricted
ro households with a male head or husband of female head between 23 and 59 years
Ut age. See the text for other selection criteria.
3 The number of admissible cells and the cell count summary statistics for CPS (CEX)
data pertain to the 1975 (1980) to 1990 sample period. The cell count equals the
-

number of nonmissing observations for the indicated variable type.

Table 2

Real Wage Movements for Men by Birth Cohort and Education Group Deviations
from the 1980 Value for Osa-Education Group and 1945-50 COhort

Educational Attainment = Less than High School (0-11 Years)

Year
1975
1980.
1985
1990

60-65

-0.29

55-eQ

-0.18
-0.19

Five-Year Bitth Cohort
45-50
40-45
-0.06
0.06
-0.07
0.00
0.08
-0.06
-0.06
0.01
-0.19
-0.09
-0.03

50-55

35-40
0.09
0.10
0.06
-0.02

30-35
0.15
0.15

25-30
0.18
0.14

20-25
0.14

0.09

Educational Attainment High School
Year
1975
1980
1985
1990

60-85

55-60

-0.21

-0.31

-0.18

Five-Year Birth Cohort
45-50
40-45
-0.06
0.02
-0.12
0.00
0.04
-0.12
0.00
0.04
-0.13
-0.07
0.02

50-55

35-40
0.04
0.07
0.08
-0.03

30-35
0.09
0.13
0.06

25-30

0.10
0.13

20-25
0.10

Educational Attainment Some Post-Secondary (13-15 Yean)

Year
1975
1980
1985
1990

60-65

55-60

-017
-0.26

-0.09

Five-Year Birth Cohort
45-50
40-45
-0.10
0.05
-0.15
000
0.12
-0.06
0.08
00Q
-0.02
0.04
0.08

50-55

35-40
0.14
0.09

0.13
0.12

30-35

0.13
.

0.14

25-30
0.12
0.14

20-25

25-30
0.28
0.28

20-25

0.19

0.12

Educational Attainment = College (16+ Years)

Year
1975
1980
1985
1990

60-85

55-60

-0.11

-0.16

0.03

Five-Year Birth Cohort
45-50
40-45
-0.15
0.10
-0.18
0.00
0.17
0.03
0.17
0.25
0.14
0.17
0.24

50-55

35-40
0.22
0.19
0.29

0.23

30-35

0.26
0.23
0.30

Table 3
The Covariance Between Men's and Women's Wage Growth, 1980 to 1990
Reqresszons Uszng Five- Year Changes in the Mean Log Wage for Cohort-Education Groups

Time

Dependent

Interval

Sample

Variable

1080-85

All

Men

1080-35

Married

Husbands Wives

1030-35

All

Women

Men

1930-3.5

Married

Wives

tOSS-GO

Men

1935-90

All
Married

1935-00

All

1035-90

Married

Slope

Regressor
Women

Coeff.

Stand.
Error
.22(.20)

.53(31)

.29(.24)

.37(.70)

.12(.13)

.53(.66)

Husbands

.97(.99)
.95(1.16)
.54(.64)
.39(.53)

.12(.11)

.37(66)

\Vomen

1.11(.93)

.25(j6)

.32(70)

.33(.22)

.24(.75)

Husbands Wives
.13(80)
Women
Men
.47(.52)
Wives
Husbands .31(.62)

.11(.14)

.52(.60)

(.13)(.17)

.24(.51)

Notes:

(1) Groups are defined by crossing five-year birth cohorts with four educational attainment

classes.
(2) In the sample of married persons. women are assigned to groups based on the characteristics of their husbands.
3)

The samples are restricted to groups that satisfy the restriction,

23

age 59, for

all members over the entire five-year interval.
(4) The entries in parentheses correspond to a specification that includes cohort fixed
efteccs. The other entries correspond to a specification that includes a constant but
no cohort effects.

5) Each regression contains twenty observations.

Table 4

Real Household Consumption Movements by Birth Cohort and Education
Households with an Adult Male Head between 23 and 59
Deviations from the 1980 Value for Own-Education Group and 1945-50 Cohort

Educational Attainment Less than High Sthool (0-11 Years)

Year

60-65

55-60

1980

1981
1990

-0.51

-0.20

-0.37

Five-Year Birth Cohort
50-55
45-50
40-45
-0.21
0.00
-0.05
-0.18
-0.18
-0.17
-0.18
-0.22
-0.23

35-40
0.09
-0.19
-0.17

30-35
-0.01

35-40
0.18
0.15

30-35

25-30
-0.14

-0.22

Educational Attainment = High School

Year
1980
1985
1990

60-65

-0.30

55-60
-0.32
-0.10

Five-Year Birth Cohort
50-55
45-50
40-45
-0.17
0.00
0.05
-0.16
-0.06
0.09
-0.06
0.01
0.01

0.31

25-30
0.20

0.06

-0.01

Educational Attainment = Some Post-Secondary (13-15 Years)

Year
1980
1985
1990

60-65

55-60

-0.21

-0.21
-0.07

Five-Year Birth Cohort
50-55
45-50
40-45
-0.16
0.00
0.13
-0.11
0.06
0.13
0.00
0.13
0.20

35-40
0.34
0.21
0.12

30-35
0.31
0.10

25-30
0.25

30-35
0.47
0.38

25-30
0.42

Educational Attainment = College (16+ Years)

Year
1980

60-65

55-60

-0.24

-0.21
0.00

1985

1990

Five-Year Birth Cohort
50-55
45-50
40-45
-0.19
0.00
0.25
0.01
0.18
0.32
0.17
0.27
0.36

35-40
0.34
0.36
0.39

Table 5
Consumption Growth by Educational Attainment of Male Head, 1980 to 1990
Simple Averages of Changes in the Mean of Log(Consumption) fbr Five-Year Cohorts
Time
Interval

<

980-85

-0.15

1985-90

0.01

12

Educational Attainment of Male
Years
Post HS
High School
-0.06
0.03

-0.05
0.06

College
0.07
0.10

Notes:

(1) The sample is restricted to cohorts for which the male head (or husband of female
head) is between 23 and 59 years of age throughout the indicated time interval.
(2) The consumption measure equals household expenditures on nondurable goods and
services, as defined in the text.

1

Table 6.1

Synthetic Panel Regression,. Level, SpeCifiCationt

Households with a 23-59 Year

Menial Couples Only

Old Male Head

Estimation Household
Meth&1
Controls"
OLS

IV

OLS

IV

No

No

No

No

OLS

IV

No

No

Mans

Woman's

Woman's

Hwbaas

Wage

Wage

Leisure

Wige

W.

0.653

0.419

(0.072)

—

(0.063)

0.814
(0,079)

—

0.616

0.063

(0.094)

(0.105)

1.760
(0.640)

-1.392
(0.941)

0.712
(0.077)

—

1.068

IV

Yes

OLS

IV

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.592
(0.076)

0.380

(0.084)

-

7.807

(25.534)
-0.654

(0.315)

0.477
(0.068)

Wife.
Leisure

—

0.070
(0.098)
-10.036
(35.248)

—

—

.0.633

(0.295)

-2.162

0.885

(0.450)

(0.107)

(0.433)

(0.070)

0.462
(0.061)

-

0.824
(0.245)

(0.665)

—

(0.111)
OLS

—

Wilds

0.476

0.500
(0.070)
0.898
(0.245)

—

-2.321

1.272

-

.0.347

(0.289)

—

0.488
(0.061)

-1.343

1.250

(0.899)

(0.665)

• Each regression contains 288 observations.
The household controls arc log of family size, the number of adult,. the number of children
under three and the nwnber of other children.

—

-0.330

(0292)
0.914

(4.346)

Table 6.2
Synthetic Panel Rcçmaiona -Annual Diflence Specification

MathS Coupla Only

Households with a 23-59 Year
OIdMalc Head
Eatunation
Meth

Household

OLS

No

Controls"

No

IV

Man's
Wage

Woman's
Wage

0.019

Woman's
Leisure

Husband's
Wage

—

-0.057

(0.157)

(0.124)

0.463

0.370
(0.235)

(0.269)

015

No

IV

No

015

IV

No

No

-0.006
(0.161)

-0.114
(0.126)

0.093
(0.135)

-0.356

1.276

(1.882)

(2.714)

.0.003
(0.158)

0.564

—

(0.310)

0.661

a067

-

(0.124)

0.444

(1.400)

(0.278)

-0.011
(0.134)

-0.063
(0.118)

IV

Yes

0,270
(0.394)

(0.271)

.0.028

Ye,

0.257

(0.394)

•

(2-fl)

—

—

0.521

(0.483)

—

.0.575

(1.004)

.0.075
(0.118)

0.447
(0.284)

Each regression contains 192 observations.

The household controls arc log ol family size, the number of adults, the number of cbildran
under three and the number of other children.

0.568
(0.520)

-1.229

(1.075)

-

0.571

(0.134)

IV

0.240
(0.124)

(0.567)

-1.539

Wife's
Leisure

-

-0.772

Yes

Yes

Wan

0.807
(1.541)

OLS

015

Wife's

—

—

—

0.610
(0.490)

-0,910

(0.160)

Table 6.3
Synthetic Panel Regessious - Five-Year Diffcaice Specificaiiai

Households with a 23-59 Year
Old Male Head

imation
Method

OLS

IV

Household

Conbol,"
No

No

Mans
Wage

Warned,
Wage

0.557

Woniad,
Leisure

IV

No

No

013

No

0.485

—

(0.098)

0.670

0.572
(0.117)

0.405
(0.168)

0.237
(0.193)

0.913
(0.698)

(0.876)

0.663

—

No

013

IV

Yes

Yes

—

0.916
(0.180)

0.380
(0.116)

0.445

-0.316

—

-1.635

(0.580)

—

-

IV

Yes

Yes

0.426
(0.116)

0,554
(0.162)

0.235
(0.178)

0.333

-

1.546

(1.322)

(1.685)

0.644
(0.110)

—

0.903
(0.152)

-1.195

(0.421)

—

.

-2.081

(0.509)

0.528

0.654

—

—

(0.150)

—

-0.624

(0.462)

—

-1,108

(0.502)

0.613
(0.105)
0.765
(0.150)

• Each regession contains 108 observations.
The household cootrob are log of family sin, the numba ofadu1ts the numba of thildrea
under three and the number of other children.

Leisure

(0.105)

(0.162)

013

Wife,

Wage

—

1.738

(0.482)

Wiks

—

(0.150)

-0.332

(0.130)

IV

Husbanits
Wage

(0.115)

(0.133)

OLS

Married Couples Only

—

.0.813

(0.448)

—

-1.102

(0.487)

Table 6.4

Synthetic Panel Regrniiais - Eight-Yen Diffaaice Specification

Households with • 23-59 Year
Old Male Head

Estimation Household
Contiols"
Method
01.5

No

No

IV

Man's
Wage

Woman's

Woman's

Husbands

Wiks

Wage

Leinre

Wage

Wage

0.699
(0.129)

0.701

—

No

—

No

IV

OLS

No

No

IV

OLS

Yes

0.020
(0.404)

1.434
(2.426)

-1.139
(3.796)

0.910
(0.132)
0.976

—

—

—

Yes

-1.991

(0.625)

—

-2.444

(0.135)

(0.668)

0.869

—

IV

•

Yes

0,897

Yes

0.865
(0.173)
0.866
(0.142)

0.428
(0.307)

0.173
(0.416)

2.409

-2.763
(10.560)

0.778
(0.147)
0.843
(0.145)
0.720

—

—

-2.131

(0.668)

—

-2.507

(0.682)

-

—

—

—

(0.155)

—

0.690

(0.131)

(0.142)

OLS

0.523

(7.153)

(0.173)

IV

0.541

(0.157)

(0.286)

0.686

Wife's
Leisure

(0.144)

(0.133)

OLS

Married Coupla Only

—

-1.385

(0.648)

0.773
(0.155)

-1.283

0.737

(0.473)

(0.131)

Each regression contains 36 observations.
The household conuols are log of family size, the number ofadults, the number of children

under three and the number of other children.

—

t407
(0.776)
-1.324

(0.564)

Table 7
Synthetic Panel Regressions - Restricted Sample Households with a 30-55 Year-Old Male Head
Who Has at Least a High School Education

Levels Speciflcation

Estimation
Method

Controls'"

OLS

No

IV

Household

No

Man's
Wage

Woman's
Wage

0.764
(0.096)

Annual Dillàencc Speciflcation••
Woman's
Leisure

—

No

IV

No

OLS

No

IV

No

0.981

—

0.778

-0.050

(0.147)

1.278

-1.049

(0.208)

(0.643)

0.859
(0.104)

—

—

(0122)
OLS

Yes

—

Yea

OLS

Yes

IV

Yes

0.056

1.084

0.035
(0.245)

0.110
(0.230)

0.978

0.359

(0.7784)"' (l.7677)"'•
-0.978

0.014

(0.457)

(0.244)

1.368

(1.991)

0.336
(0.200)

—

1.507

1.056

(0.576)

2.412
(0.742)

-0.206

(0.409)

—

0.884

(0.891)

(0.621)

(0.742)

-

—

-2.880

0.556

0.577
(0.742)

—

—

(0.648)

(0.086)

IV

Woman'.
Leisure

(0.429)

(0.304)

1.310

Wanga's
Wage

(0.241)

(0.086)
OLS

Man's
Wage

0.107
(0.200)

-6.163

1.308

(12.845)

(0.713)

regression contains 144 obsen'ations.
""• Each repession
contains 93 observations.
household controls are log of family size, the nwnbu of adults, the number of cbildrci
three and the number of other cbildren.
" understandard
clots for this specilication are not corrected for hetcoscedasticity or auto
Each

The
The

correlation because the estimated variance covariance matrix was not positive deflnite.

—

-2.452

—

-

0.646

(0.736)

—

-2.724

(2.141)

Table 7 (continued)
Synthetic Pauel Regressions - Restricted Sample Households 4th a 30-55 Year-Old Male Head
Who Has at Least a High School Pihw.ti,.,

Five-Year Difference Specification

Estimation Household
Method
Controls"

01$

No

Man's
Wage

Woman's
Wage

Woman's
Leisure

0457

No

0.768

0.796

—

(0.153)

01.8

No

0.527
(0.184)

IV

No

OLS

IV

OLS

No

No

Yes

Yes

0.050
(0.260)

IV

•

Yes

Yes

Woman's
Leisure

—

—

—

—

0.349
(0.306)

1.034

—

(0.629)

1.279

-1.116

0.150

(0.534)

(1.087)

(0.602)

1.444
(1.196)

—

0.722
(0.179)

1.269

—

—

.1.107

1.112

(0.659)

(0.170)

-2.683

1.290
(0.132)

(0.241)

(1.019)

0.495

-

-

0.666

0.507
(0.147)

0.976
(0.143)

—

-2.661

(0.992)

—

-3.718

(1.519)

-

0.666

(0.265)

(0.143)
OLS

Wage

Woman's

(0.139)

(0.147)

IV

Man's
Wage

0.800
(0.147)

(0.149)

IV

Eight-Year Difference Specification"

0.699

-

(0.138)

—

.0.083

(0.699)

—

-1.562

(0.865)

0.908
(0.265)

0.908
(0.138)

Each regression contains 48 observations.
Each regression concains 18 observations.
The household controls are log of family size, the number of adults, the number of children
under three and the nmnber of other children.

—

-2.746

(1.035)

—

.2746
(0.564)

Table 8

Fraction of Cross-Cell Consumption Variation Explained by Men's Wages

2.3 4

Length of Differencing Interval
0

1

Actual 112

.21

.00

Upper Bound

.91

.82

:02
.88

.07

.15

.90

.92

5

6

7

8

9

.18
.94

.21
.95

.39

.45

.96

.96

.61
.97

Notes:

(1) The "actual R21 value reports the fraction of residual consumption variation accounted
for by men's relative wages. Residuals are obtained from regressions of log consumption (levels or differences) on an age polynomial andyear effects plus group effects for
the level specifications.

(2) For a differencing inteval of length zero, the "upper bound" values report the results
of implementing equations (21) and (22) in the text, evaluating fi at the IV estimates
reported in Table 6. For differencing intervals greater than zero, upper bound values
are computed in a similar fashion that takes into account the moving average structure
induced by measurement error in the levels.

1

Figure 1
Household Consumption vs. Mans wage— Annual log change resIduals— 1981—1990

groups defined by 4—way education crossed with 5—year birth cohorts

C

10

a
E

slope • 0.010 (0.15)

U)

C
0U

A

A
A

U
-I

A

op

0

A

a

0

Rsqz0.001

6

68

A.

C
In

a

A

A

4

0

A

6

A

A

C
p-s

A

C

A

a
A

0
C
op

A

A

so

C
U

A

A

-.2
A

I

-.05

p

0

I

.05

I
.1

change in man's log wage
Plotted values are residuals from regressions on a cubic in age and year effects

Figure 2

Household Consumption vs. Man's Wage— 1900-1990 log change residuals
groups defined by 4—way education crossed with 5—year birth cohorts

.2 C

0
a
C
C
C
0
U

3

0

slope
Psq

C
-4

D.92

0.82

I denotes less than HS education

Qi

2. denotes High School
'0

C
o

3 denotes post secondary group
4 denotes college educated

—.4.
I

I

0
change in man's log wage
Plotted values are residuals Iron regressions on a Cubic n age

Figure 3
Household Log Consumption vs. Man's Wage— Annual aata from 1980—1990
groups defined by four—way education crossed with 5—year birth cohorts
solid line shows 015 regression

ulope 0.E3 10.07). Rsq:0.2i

with

A

.2

£
A

C

o .1

£

£

.11

a
E

A

S

tAg

C',

A

A
A

A

U

a'

-Ia

£
A

A AA

A

A
A

A

A

£
I

-.t3

I
—.09

I
—.05

A
I
—.01

A

I

.03

man's log wage

.07

.11

plotted values are residuals of regressions on a quartic in age
plus year and group fixed effects

Figure ii
Household log Consu.pt.ion vs. Man's log Wage by Education Category — igeo—iggo

Less than high school
slope

0.57 (0.16), flag: 0.14

C

High school graduates
slope : 0.55 (0.18), flsq:O.12

o .2
•

4. 4_s •. •

S

-.2 _________________
I
I
I
1
I
I
Post Secondary

C

o .2'

slope

—0.04 (0.2fl,

Rag: 0.00

_________________
I
I
I I
I
1

college graduates

slope

0.82(0.0Y) flsq:0,60

.4-4

a.

E.1'
U

.

al-i.
o

.

•
44

•.

•4

4

-4

-.3-.69-.bs-.ôj .03 .ohi
man's log wage

It

-3-69-b56j 43 ii Ii

man's log wage
Plotted values are residuals from regressions on a quartic in age
pIus year and group fixed etfects

Figure 5
Welfare Losses Implied by Cross—Group Differences ;n Marginal Utility Growth
Groups Defined by Four—Way Education Crossed with 5—Year 6irth Cohorts
- ASS Seuroea of crop—.rtel conswwtien Risks' Lasnbaao
nsn•s aslative Wage Shocks Only. LasnbdaW

Lambdal.
0.35

.

0.30

0.15

0.05

0.00
.10

—,

—6

—9

—G

-s

-4

-,

—2

coefficSsflt ot pelative Risk Aversion

increase in consumption rscjuttod
pjottecj vnItoa sI,o the tinJ.tor.n percelIttagS
Tn tnet,re against the S tntt cat cci ohocka
I

Tn innipenfla

te

liutirioI1C

ide

for the

—t

