                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL' POLICY
                            REFORM IN LATIN AMERICA




                                    Sebastian Edwards




                                 Working Paper No. 4772



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1994



This is a revised version of a paper presented at the conference "Macroeconomic Structural
and Social Policies for Growth: The Evolving Latin American Experience", Mangaratiba, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, March 1994. I am indebted to my discussants and conference participants
for useful comments. I am thankful to Fernando Losada for excellent research assistance.
This paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Fmance and
Macroeconomics and International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Ecoiomic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4772
                                                                                   June 1994

                             TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY
                               REFORM IN LATIN AMERICA

                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper documents and evaluates the process of trade refonns in Latin America from
the mid-1980s until 1993. It provides an analytical and historical discussion of the consequences
of industrial policies in the region, from the early 1950s when import-substitution ideas were
supported by the Economic Commission for Latin America to the 1 990s when liberal regimes
were embraced.
       A careful distinction is made between policies based on strict import substitution and
policies that combine high and uneven import tariffs with export promotion. Additionally, the
role of supporting policies to assure the success of trade liberalization is assessed. Important
questions related to the sequencing of economic reform are discussed in detail, with particular
emphasis on the proper sequencing of stabilization and trade reform policies.
       The extent of trade reform in Latin America is also discussed. The analysis concentrates
on the evolution of productivity and exports, and it deals with several countries' experiences.
The role of real exchange rates in the trade liberalization process is studied, and the recent trend
towards appreciation observed in many countries in the region is scrutinized.
       Finally the paper contains an analysis of the recent attempts at reviving regional
integration agreements, and of the consequences of the completion of OAT!' for Latin American
nations.


Sebastian Edwards
The World Bank
Room 1-8459
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20034
and NBER
                                                    1


         Most of the Latin American countries began to open up to the rest of the world in the late
1980s. This process is perhaps the most impressive achievement of the structural adjustment
program that followed the debt crisis, and it has effectively put an end to more than four decades of
active industrial policies based on import substitution.
         However, the process leading to these trade reforms has not been easy. As recently as the
mid-1980s the protectionist view was still influential in many parts of Latin America. In fact, the
debt crisis of 1982 provided a new impetus to the protectionist paradigm. In a way that resembled
the arguments of the 1930s and 1940s, since a number of authors interpreted the crisis as a failure of
"the world economic order" and argued that the only way for Latin America to avoid a recurrence of
this type of shock was to further isolate itself from the rest of the world through selective
protectionism and government intervention.1 This perspective was vividly defended by Lance
Taylor (1991, p. 119) who argued that "trade liberalization strategy is intellectually moribund" and
that "development strategies oriented internally may be a wise choice towards the century's end" (p.
141).
         In the mid-1980s Latin America's external sector was the most distorted in the world. For
example, as can be seen in Table 1, Central America had the highest degree of import
protection—both in terms of tariff and non-tariff barriers—among developing countries, with South
America following closely behind. However, by 1987-88 it became apparent that a permanent
solution to the region's economic problems would imply a fundamental change in its development
strategy. In particular policymakers began to realize that the long-standing protectionisttrade policy
was at the heart of the regions problems. During the late 1980s and early 1990s and with the
assistance of the multilateral institutions, a larger and larger number of countries began to reduce their
levels of protection and to reform their development views. The trade reform process has proceeded
at an increasingly rapid pace. Tariffs have been drastically slashed, in many countries importlicenses
 and prohibitions have been completely eliminated, and a number of countries are actively trying to
 sign free trade agreements with other Latin American nations as well as with theUnited States.
          The purpose of this paper is to document and evaluate the process of trade reform in Latin




        1Griffith-Jones and Sunkel (1986).
Table 1        IMPORT PROTECTION IN THE
                DEVELOPING WORLD: 1985
                                             (Percent)
                        TOTAL TARIFF                     NON-TARIFF BARRIERS
                        PROTECTION (a)                        COVERAGE (b)

South America                 51                               60

Central America               66                              100

Caribbean                     17                               23

North Africa                  39                               85

Other Africa                  36                               86

WestAsia                        5                              11

Other Asia                    25                               21



(a) Includes tariffs and para-tariffs
(b) Measures as a percentage of import lines covered by non-tariff barriers. The data
    on both tariffs and NTBs reported here are weighted averages


Source: Erzan et al. (1989)
                                                    2
America.2 The paper is organized as follows. Section I provides an analytical and historical
discuss ion of the consequence of the traditional industrial policies in Latin America. A distinction is
made between policies based Ofl Strict import substitution, and policies that combined high and uneven
import tariffs with export promotion. Section II deals with some of the analytics of trade
liberalization reforms. This section also includes a discussion on the role of supporting policies in
assuring the success of a trade liberalization reforms. Important questions related to the sequencing
of economic reform are discussed in some detail. In particular, emphasis is given to the issue of the
appropriate sequencing of stabilization and trade reform policies. In Sections III and IV the extent of
trade reform in Latin America is discussed, and some of the results of the reforms are analyzed. The
analysis concentrates on productivity and exports, and deals with the experiences of several countries.
Section V deals with the role of real exchange rates in a trade liberalization process, and analyzes the
recent trend towards real appreciation in most countries in the region. Section VI concentrates on
recent attempts at reviving regional integration agreements, on the future prospects for free trade
agreements with the United States, and on the significance of the recent GATT agreement for the
Latin American countries.


I.- Protectionism, Industrial Policy and Export Promotion in Latin America: Analytical Issues
and Historical Experience
        The recent trade liberalization programs in Latin America have sought to reverse protectionist
policies that for decades have been at the heart of the region's development strategy. In order to
place these reforms in perspective it is useful to first analyze the way in which the protectionist
policies affected the economic structure of Latin America, and to discuss what were the expected
effects of the liberalization policies.


I. 1. The Economic Consequences of Prorectionist Industrial Policies
             The Great Depression had a fundamental impact on the Latin American economies.
Terms of trade plummeted—in some cases such as Brazil, Chile and Colombia by almost
50%—capital inflows stopped, and real income was severely reduced. The effects of the decline in


    2 The material presented in this paper is based on some of the work I have done on this
subject during the last few years. In particular, it draws on Chapter 5 of the report Lat:n
America and the Caribbean a Decade After the Debt Crisis, The World Bank, September
1993. See the references to this paper for a list of works related to this topic.
                                                    3

world-wide demand for raw materials in 1929-30 was compounded by the adoption of protectionist
policies in the U.S. and Europe, including the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act in 1930 and the British
Abnormal Importations Act of 1931.
       Most Latin American countries reacted to these events by abandoning convertibility, devaluing
their currencies and imposing tariff barriers. Diaz-Alejandro (1981) has described these policies as
follows :


       Exchange rate devaluations were not the only measures undertaken .... mhere were
       also increased tariffs, import and exchange controls, bilateral clearing agreements and
          multiple exchange rates.
                                                             (p. 340)
       It has generally been thought that sustained protectionism became dominant throughout Latin
America in the early 1930s, if not earlier.4 However, Thorp (1992) has recently argued that in the
mid- to late-1930s a number of countries in the region—especially Argentina, Brazil and
Chile—implemented substantial trade liberalization policies aimed at encouraging openness and
outward orientation. She ha argued that export expansion played a key role in the Latin American
recovery towards the end of the decade of the 1930s. The eruption of World War II put an end to
this episode of export-led growth, and once again the Latin American countries faced the adverse
world shocks by resorting to protectionism and inward-looking policies. However, this time the end
of the foreign disturbances was not followed by a new period of openness and reinsertion into the
world trade economic system. By the late 1940s and early 1950s protectionist policies based on
import substitution were well entrenched and constituted, by far, the dominant perspective.5
       The creation of the United Nations Commission for Latin America (CEPAL/ECLAC) helped
provide an intellectual underpinning for the protectionist position. In particular, the writings of Raul
Prebisch (1950)6 and Hans Singer (1950) provided an aura of respectability to import substitution


    3See, also, Furtado (1969) and Bianchi and Nohara (1988).

  4See Leff (1969) on Brazil. Bianchi and Nohara (1988) discuss this issue for Latin
America as a whole.

    5Diaz-Alejandro (1981).
   6u1 Prebisch was a remarkable intellectual force that greatly shaped early Latin
American economic thinking. He was the governor of the Argentinean Central Bank in the
1930s and early 1940s, a period when he applied orthodox policies. In 1947 Prebisch
                                                   4
policies. These authors' thinking was based on two fundamental premises: (1) a secular
deterioration in the international price of raw materials and commodities would result, in the absence
of industrialization in the LDCs, in an ever-growing widening of the gap between rich and poor
countries, and (2) in order to industrialize, the smaller countries required (temporary) assistance in
the form of protection to the newly emerging manufacturing sector. This reasoning was closely
related to the infaiu industry argument for industrialization.7 Between the 1950s and 1970s a large
number of development economists embraced the inward-oriented view, and devoted enormous energy
to design planning models that relied heavily on the import substitution ideas. This view became
clearly dominant, being taught in most Latin American universities with great zeaL8
       Prebisch's position developed as a criticism of outward orientation, which he considered to be
incapable of permitting the full development of the Latin American countries. He argued that
development required industrialization through import substitution, and that this could be "stimulated
by moderate and selective protection policy" (Prebisch, 1984, p. 179). Eventually, however, the
degree of protection to the incipient industries was anything but moderate, as more and more sectors
required additional tariffs and other types of government support to continue facing foreign
competition.9
      During the early years of import substitution important heavy industries were created in the
larger countries, and the basis for the development of a domestic manufacturing sector were set.
During the 1950s the industrial sector grew at rapid real rates, topping in some cases—Brazil and



published the first Spanish language guide to Keynes' General Theory. On the evolution of
his thinking, see Prebisch (1984). See also, chapter 1 of Iglesias (1992) and Solis (1988).
    7An interesting sununary of this view can be found in Prebisch (1984). Albert
Hirschman (1968) provided an early "soul-searching" assessment of the disappointing results
experienced under ISI. A review of import substitution theories appears in Henry Bruton
(1989). For a discussion of trade policies in the context of Latin America's historical
development, see Albert Fishlow (1987).

    8See, for example, the popular Paz and Sunkel (1971) textbook for discussion on
economic policy in the context of the structuralist and protectionist view. See also the text
on international economics by Ffrench-Davis and Griffm (1967). Castro and Lessa (1969)
provided a popular, and widely used, principles text that discussed basic economic issues
from a structuralist perspective.

     9Balassa (1982); Little et al. (1971).
                                                    5

Mexico, for example—the 8% annual mark (Elias, 1992). With the industrialization process,
however, an array of restrictions, controls, and often contradictory regulations evolved. In most
countries lobbying developed swiftly as a way to secure the rents created by the maze of controls. It
was, in fact, because of import restrictions that many of the domestic industries were able to survive.
As a consequence, many of the industries created under the import substitution strategy were quite
inefficient. Krueger (1981) and Balassa (1982) found that this inward-looking strategy generated rent-
seeking activities and resulted in the use of highly capital-intensive techniques, which hampered the
creation of employment throughout the region.
       In most countries, starting in the late 1940s, import substitution was accompanied by an
overvalued domestic currency that precluded the development of a vigorous nontraditional export
sector.11 In an early study using data from the 1960s Balassa (1971) found that the Latin American
countries in his sample—Brazil, Chile and Mexico—had some of the most distorted foreign trade
sectors in the world. These findings coincide with those obtained by Little et al (1970) in their
pioneer study on trade policy and industrialization in the developing world. These authors
persuasively argued that the high degree of protection granted to manufacturing in Latin America
resulted in a serious discrimination against exports, in resource misallocation, inefficient investment
and deteriorating income distribution. They further argued in favor of the reversal of protectionist
policies as the center of any reformulation of Latin America's development strategy. The agricultural
sector was particularly harmed by real exchange rate overvaluation. The lagging of agriculture
became one of the most noticeable symptoms of many countries economic problems of the 1950s and
1960s. The overvaluation of the real exchange rate played an important political role during this
period, since it kept down prices of imported goods consumed by urban dwellers.12



    t0See chapter 5 for a further elaboration.

     1tThis point was strongly made by Diaz-Alejandro (1970) in his monumental study on
the external sector in Argentina. See also Diaz-Alejandro (1978) work on Colombia. See
Edwards (1988, 1989) for discussions on real exchange rate misalignment. It may be argued
that, given the level of protectionism that prevailed during this period, observed (and
appreciated) real exchange rates were at an "equilibrium" level. However, under this
interpretation the highly appreciated real exchange rates still discourage non-traditional
exports. See chapter 5 for greater details.
    12The discrimination of agriculture during this period contrasts sharply with the case of
East Asia, where serious efforts were made to avoid harming that sector. See The World
                                                    6
       In many countries—especially in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru, Uruguay and
Venezuela—fiscal imbalances became a staple of government policies. However, the dominant view
did not consider this to be an overly serious matter; it was, in fact, believed that fiscal disequilibrium
was only indirectly related to inflation.13 The inflationary problem became particularly serious in
Chile where the rate of increase of consumer prices averaged 36% per annum during the 1950s,
reaching a peak of 84% in 1955.
       The discouragement of export activities took place through two main channels: first, import
tariffs, quotas and prohibitions increased the cost of imported intermediate materials and capital goods
used in the production of exportables, reducing their effective rate of protection. In fact, for years a
vast number of exportable goods, especially those in the agricultural sector, had negative rates of
protection to their value added. Second, the maze of protectionist policies resulted in real exchange
rate overvaluation that reduced the degree of competitiveness of exports. This anti-export bias
explains the poor performance of the export sector, including the inability to aggressively develop
non-traditional exports, during the twenty years preceding the debt crisis. Paradoxically, policies
which were supposed to reduce Latin America's dependency on the world-wide business cycle, ended
up creating a highly vulnerable economic structure where the sources of foreign exchange were
concentrated on a few products intensive in natural resources, and where imports were concentrated
on a relatively small group of essential goods (CEPAL, 1992a).
       A second general and important consequence of traditional protective trade policies was the
creation of a largely inefficient manufacturing sector in most countries. Instead of granting short term
protection to help launch new activities, high tariffs, quotas and prohibitions became a fixture of the
region's economic landscape. An important consequence of the pressures exercised by lobbyists and
interest groups was that the protective structure in Latin America became extremely uneven, with
some sectors enjoying effective tariff rates in the thousands, and others suffering from negative value
added protection (Edwards 1992). Moreover, as it is argued below, in the 1970s interest group
pressures resulted in the superimposition of an array of special export subsidies for a handful of firms
that were deemed to be strategically important (Nogues, 1990).



Bank (1993).

    t3See Sunkel (1960) for the classical piece on the structuralist view on inflation.
Dornbusch and Edwards (1990) examine these issues from the more extreme populist
perspective,
                                                   7

       The protectionist policies also had serious effects on labor markets. In particular, the
protection of capital-intensive industries affected the region's ability to create employment. A number
of studies have shown that in developing countries more open trade regimes have resulted in higher
employment and in a more even income distribution than protectionist regimes. For example, after
analyzing in detail the experiences of ten countries Krueger (1983) concluded that exportable
industries tended to be significantly more labor intensive than import competing sectors. In the
conclusions to this massive study Krueger argues that employment has tended to grow faster in
outward-oriented economies and that the removal of external sector distortions tends to help the
employment creation process in most developing nations. These results were broadly supported by
other cross country studies, including Balassa (1982) and Michaely et at (1991).
       In terms of income distribution the protective system generated large benefits to local
industrialists—and in particular to those able to obtain import licenses and concessions—and to urban
workers. This, of course, was achieved at the cost of depressing earnings and incomes of rural
workers. As is discussed in Edwards (1993), for example, during the 1970s ihcome distribution was
significantly more unequal in Latin America than in Asia.
       To sum up, although several decades of protectionist policies accomplished the goat of
creating an industrial sector in Latin America, this was achieved at a high cost. Exports were
discouraged, the exchange rate became overvalued, employment creation lagged behind, and massive
amounts of resources—including skilled human talent—were withdrawn from the productive sphere
and devoted to lobbying for an ever-favorable treatment of different sectors of the economy.14 An
increasing number of comparative studies in the 1980s made the shortcomings of the Latin American
development strategies particularly apparent. In the aftermath of the debt crisis the tong stagnation,
and even retrogression, of the region's export sector—with an average rate of decline of 1 % per year
between 1965 and 1980—became particularly painful to the local public, analysts and policymakers.


1.2. industrial Policy and Export Promotion
        As discussed above, after an auspicious beginning, the import substitution strategy began to



    t4As discussed in some detail in chapter 3, most authors agree that the import
substitution process rapidly run into difficulties once low-technology consumer goods had
been "substituted". As countries tried to move towards producing more sophisticated
goods—including capital goods and machinery—they ran into an increasingly up-hill battle.
See Hirschman (1968) and Fishlow (1985). See also the discussion in chapter 8.
                                                    8

run into difficulties during the late 1950s and early 1960s. At that time most of the obvious substitu-
tions of imported goods had already taken place, and the process was rapidly becoming less dynamic
(Hirschman, 1968). For example, during the 1960s total real industrial production grew in most
countries at one half the annual rate of the previous decade (Elias, 1992). During the 1960s an
increasing number of politicians and economists began to agree that Latin America was facing long-
run economic problems. It was generally recognized that the easy phase of the import substitution
process had ended, and that inflation and the recurrent crises of the external and agricultural sectors
had become serious obstacles for reassuming growth (CEPAL, 1967). Further, the increasingly
unequal distribution of income and the unemployment problem represented serious challenges to any
new economic program. Although most experts pointed out that low rates ofdomestic savings and
investment represented an important obstacle for growth, they differed markedly on some other
aspects of their diagnosis, and on the proposed policy packages to take the country out of its relative
stagnation.15 At this time the simple import substitution policies came under attack from two
flanks: on the one hand, a small number of economists, sometimes associated with the monetarist
position, argued for orthodox-type stabilization programs based on fiscal restraint and a greater
reliance on market forces.16 On the other hand, a growing number of intellectuals in the Marxist
tradition—including the group known as "dependencistas"—argUed that there was too little
government presence in economic decisions, and postulated amassive move towards full-fledged
planning, in the Eastern-European style.17
        Facing this two-prong attack, the structuralist thinkers eventually concluded that their policies
 had to be reformed. Fishlow (1985) notes that the dominant economic view in Latin America
 experienced two important developments during the 1960s. First, import substitution was expanded
 from the country sphere to the regional level, and a number of attempts to create regionaltrading
 agreements were undertaken. Perhaps the most comprehensive of these was the Andean Pact created



      '5CEPAL played an important role in developing this diagnosis.
     16No serious recommendations were made, however, at introducing deep structural
 changes, such as privatizing government-owned firms.
      t7See Fishlow (1987) for a discussion of these competing criticisms of import
 substitution. Edwards and Edwards (1991) discuss this problem from Chile's perspective.
 See, also, Sheahan (1987) and Cardoso and Helwege (1991). VuskoviC (1969) provides one
 of the most eloquent defenses of the dependencista position.
                                                    9
in 1969 and grouping Chile, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia, and later, Venezuela. However,
the proposed regional arrangements did not tackle the high levels of protection and distortions
imposed in the previous 20 years. In fact, in the Andean Pact the proposed common external tariff
was extremely high and uneven, representing the expansion of the traditional structuralist thinking to
a supra-nationai level.18 The evolution of integrationist attempts in the region is addressed in
greater detail in Section IV of this paper.
       The second development discussed by Fishlow (1985) was the recognition of the importance of
capital inflows as a way to supplement domestic savings and fmance higher rates of capital
accumulation. However, this option was centered around official capital flows through multilateral
institutions, and did not give private flows a significant role. Also, no specific recommendations
were made to alter the basic incentive structure of the economy, or to provide a greater role to market
forces in long run development strategies.
       In the late 1960s and 1970s the structuralist view continued to evolve, as it became
increasingly evident that the degree of dynamism of most Latin American economies was in rapid
decline. In particular, in a number of countries the expansion of exports became an important
component of otherwise traditional economic programs. Brazil provides, perhaps, the clearest
example of a strategy based on expanding manufacturing exports with the aid of an aggressive
industrial policy, based on export subsidies, tax allowances and subsidized credit to selected
industries. At the macroeconomic level this industrial policy was supplemented by an active crawling
peg exchange rate system aimed at avoiding real exchange rate overvaluation.19
       Although this policy resulted in a very rapid rate of growth of GDP and manufacturing
exports, Brazil's economic base remained somewhat rigid and fragile.20 As Fishlow (1991) has
argued, after decades of an industrialization strategy based on protective policies, Latin America, and
especially Brazil, had relatively high wages and its exports could not become the enginc of growth
as in East Asia. In spite of expanding at a rapid pace, exports still failed to relax the required foreign
exchange constraint that for years had affected most countries. As a consequence of this, during the


    18See Edwards and Savastano (1988).

    19 See Rabello de Castro and Ronci (1991) for a critical view of 60 years of
development policy in Brazil.

    20Cs (1991) provides a thorough evaluation of Brazil's attempts at encouraging exports
during the 1970s.
                                                   10

1970s virtually every country in the region resorted to heavy foreign borrowing in order to obtain
foreign exchange. The rapid accumulation of debt made these economies particularly vulnerable, as
the region painfully learned in 1982.
       An important question is why wasn't export promotion more successful in Latin America?
After all, industrial policies explicitly aimed at encouraging exports were implemented aggressively
and very successfully in many East Asian countries. For example, starting in the 1960s an aggressive
export promotion scheme became an important complement of the Korean trade liberalization
strategy. Throughout the years exports have been subsidized through a number of channels, including
(a) direct cash subsidies (until 1964); (b) direct tax reductions (until 1973); (C) interest rate
preferences; (d) indirect tax reductions on intermediate inputs; and (e) tariff exemptions to
imported intermediate materials.21 Kim (1991) has recently calculated that these subsidies were
reduced from 23% to zero between 1963 and 1983. He has argued, as others have, that in the case
of Korea, export subsidies played an important role during the earlier years of the Korean export
boom.2 A recent massive study undertaken by the World Bank (1993) has explored with great
detail the causes behind the East Asian export success. It is argued that in most cases the government
organized "contests" among private firms, with export performance as the main criteria to determine
"winners". Those firms with a strong export record were rewarded with access to preferential credit
and other types of special treatment. This study suggests that by picking "exports" as the general
activity to be rewarded, rather than production in a particular sector (e.g., steel), the East Asian
nations avoided major distortions and, in particular, were able to minimize the extent of rent seeking
activities. In that sense it may be argued that while the Latin American export promotion policies —
and especially those developed in Brazil — subsidized selected "industries" which were deemed as
having an export potential, the East Asia government policies were based on whether the final
destination of production was, in effect, the world market.
        Liii (1988) has compared trade policies in Korea, Taiwan and Argentina. His computations
indicate that in the 1970s the overall rate of effective protection was 10% in South Korea, 5% in
Taiwan and 47% in Argentina. The contrast was even bigger in the manufacturing sector, where the
effective rates of protection were -1% in Korea, 19% in Taiwan and almost 100% in Argentina.


    2tSee Kim (1991) for details on the different export promotion schemes used.

   221n Latin America, there has been a controversy on the actual effectiveness of export
subsidies. See, for example, Nogues et al. (1992).
                                                    11

These differences in protective rates affected relative incentives, generating a substantial anti-export
bias in Argentina. Modern theories of economic growth have linked openness with productivity
growth: more open economies tend to engage in technological innovation faster, exhibiting more
rapid productivity improvements. According to Lin (1988) labor productivity increased at an 8.7%
annual rate in Korea during 1973-85, and only at 0.5% per year in Argentina. The vigorous growth
experienced by other East Asian countries—including the second generation "miracle" countries,
Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia—since the late 1980s has added impetus to the idea that a
development path based on openness and market orientation can be extremely rewarding.
Increasingly Latin American leaders are turning towards East Asia for inspiration and economic

partnership.
       A number of authors have argued that the conduct of macroeconomic policy constitutes a
second crucial difference between East Asia and Latin America. As has been extensively
documented by a number of authors, inflation has been significantly higher in the Latin American
nations than in the East Asian countries. Moreover, Latin America has also been affected by higher
inflation variability and real exchange rate volatility. The greatest advantage of a stable
macroeconomic environment is that it reduces uncertainty, encouraging investment. Moreover, to the
extent that the real exchange rate is stable, investment in the tradables sector will increase, as will
exports. Sachs (1988) and Fischer (1988), among others, have pointed Out that in the adjustment-
cum-reform process, it is more convenient to achieve macroeconomic stability before trade is
liberalized in the developing countries. Based on the experiences of Korea, Taiwan and Japan, Sachs
(1988) has argued that massive and deep tariff reduction has to take place after macro stabilization is
firmly in place.24 This issue is addressed with greater detail in the next section.


H. Trade Liberalization: Expected Results and Transitional Problems
        The main objective of trade liberalization programs is to reverse the negative consequences of
protectionism and, especially, its anti-export bias. According to basic theory, a trade liberalization
process will result in a reallocation of resources according to comparative advantage, in a reduction of




     23Sachs (1987).

   24See Edwards (1992) for a general discussion on the sequencing of economic reform.
See, also the discussion in chapter 4 of this report.
                                                   12

waste, and in a decline in imported goods prices. Moreover, to the extent that the new trade
regime is more transparent—for example, through a relatively uniform import tariff—it is expected
that lobbying activities will be greatly reduced, releasing highly skilled work from "unproductive"
jobs. According to traditional international trade theory it is expected that once negative effective
rates of protection and overvalued exchange rates are eliminated, exports will not only grow rapidly,
but will also become more diversified.
       From a growth perspective the fundamental objective of trade reforms is to transform
international trade into "the engine of growth". In fact, newly developed models of "endogenous"
growth have stressed the role of openness.26 For example, Romer (1989) has developed a model
where by taking advantage of larger markets— "the" world market— an open economy can specialize
in the production of a relatively larger number of intermediate goods and, thus, grow faster. Other
authors have recently concentrated on the relationship between openness, technological progress, and
productivity growth. Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Edwards (1992), for example, have argued
that openness affects the speed and efficiency with which small countries can absorb technological
innovations developed in the industrial world. This idea, based on an insight first proposed by John
Stuart Mill, implies that countries with a lower level of trade distortions will experience faster growth
in total factor productivity (TFP) and, with other things given, will grow faster than countries that
inhibit international competition.
        In recent papers a number of authors have tried to test the general implications of these




    250f course, this amounts to the important textbook notion that freer trade increases the
level of domestic welfare. However, modern approaches go beyond this goal and also
consider the acceleration of growth as a goal of trade policy (see Edwards, 1992c).
     26Traditional neoclassical growth models concentrated on the effect of national economic
policies on the jyJ of income per capita. The new generation of endogenous growth
models have shifted the attention to relationship between different policies and the rate of
growth of the economy. See Lucas (1988).
     271n chapter 17 of his Principles of Political Economy (1848) Mill said that "a country
 that produces for a larger market than its own can introduce a more extended division of
 labor, can make greater use of machinery, and is more likely to make inventions and
 improvements in the process of production". Arthur Lewis makes a similar proposition in
 his 1955 classical book on economic growth.
                                                     13

theories using cross country data sets.28 Although different empirical models have yielded different
results, the general thrust of this line of research is that indeed countries with less distorted external
sectors appear to grow faster. As Dornbusch (1991) has pointed out recently, openness possibly
affects growth not only through one channel, but through a combination of channels, including the
introduction of new goods, the adoption of new methods of production, the new organization of
industries, the expansion in the number of intermediate goods available, and the conquest of new
markets that permit the expansion of exports.
       The importance placed by liberalization strategists on the reduction of the anti-export bias has
resulted in significant emphasis on the role of exchange rate policy during a trade reform effort. A
number of authors have argued that a large devaluation is a crucial first step in a trade reform
process. Bhagwati (1978) and Krueger (1978) have pointed out that in the presence of quotas and
import licenses a (real) exchange rate depreciation will reduce the rents received by importers,
shifting relative prices in favor of export-oriented activities and, thus, reducing the extent of the anti-
export bias.29


11.1. The Speed and Sequencing of Trade Liberalization Reform
       Two fundamental problems have to be addressed in the transition towards freer trade: first, it
is important to determine what is the adequate speed of reform. For a long time analysts argued for
gradual liberalization programs (Little et al. 1970, Michaely 1985). The reason for this is that.
according to these authors, gradual reforms would give firms time for restructuring their productive
processes and, thus, would result in low dislocation costs in the form of unemployment and
bankruptcies. These reduced adjustment costs would, in turn, provide the needed political support for
the liberalization program. Recently, however,, the gradualist position has been under attack. There
is increasing agreement that slower reforms tend to lack credibility, inhibiting firms from actually
engaging in serious restructuring. Moreover, the experience of Argentina in the 1970s has shown that
a gradual (and preannounced) reform allows those firms negatively affected by it to (successfully)
lobby against the reduction in tariffs. According to this line of reasoning, faster reforms are more



    28See Tybout (1992) for a general survey on empirical models on the relationship
between trade orientation and growth of total factor productivity. See also Edwards (1992c)
and de Gregorlo (1 992).

    29See Krueger (1978, 1981) and Michaely et a! (1991).
                                                   14

credible, and thus tend to be sustained through time (Stockrnan, 1982).
       The thinking on the speed of reform has also been influenced by recent empirical work on the
short run unemployment consequences of trade liberalization. Contrary to conventional wisdom, a
World Bank study directed by Michaely et a!. (1991) on liberalization episodes in 19 countries
strongly suggests that, even in the short run, the costs of reform can be small. Although contracting
industries will release workers, those expanding sectors positively affected by the reform process will
tend to create a large number of employment positions. The Michaely et a!. (1991) study shows that
in sustainable and successful reforms the j effect—thai is the effect that nets out contracting and
expanding sectors—on short run employment has been negligible.
       The second problem that has to be addressed when designing a liberalization strategy refers to
the sequencing of reform (Edwards, 1984). This issue was first addressed in the 1980s in discussions
dealing with the Southern Cone (Argentina, Chile and Uruguay) experience, and emphasized the
macroeconomic consequences of alternative sequences. It is now generally agreed that resolving the
fiscal imbalance and attaining some degree of macroeconomic reform is a priority in implementing a
structural reform. Most analysts also agree that the trade liberalization reform has to precede the
liberalization of the capital account, and that financial reform cannot be implemented before a modern
and efficient supervisory framework is in place.3°
       The behavior of the real exchange rate is at the heart of this policy prescription. The central
issue is that liberalizing the capital account would, under some conditions, result in large capital
inflows and in an appreciation of the real exchange rate (McKinnon, 1982; Edwards, 1984;
Harberger, 1985).' The problem with this is that an appreciation of the real exchange ratesends
the "wrong' signal to the real sector, frustrating the reallocation of resources called for by the trade
reform. The effects of this real exchange rate appreciation will be particularly serious if, as argued
by McKinnon (1982) and Edwards (1984), the transitional period is characterized by "abnormally"
high capital inflows that result in temporary real appreciations. If, however, the openingof the
capital account is postponed, the real sector will be able to adjust arid the new allocation of resources


    30L.al (1985) presents a dissenting view. Hanson (1992) has argued that under some
circumstances the capital account should be liberalized early on. See chapter 7 for a
discussion on sequencing issues with financial reform.

      This would be the case if the opening of the capital account is done in the context of
an overall liberalization program, where the country becomes attractive for foreign mvestors
and speculators.
                                                    15

will be consolidated. According to this view, this is the right time to liberalize the capital account.
       More recent discussions on the sequencing of reform have expanded the analysis, and have
included other markets. An increasing number of authors has argued that the reform of the labor
market—and in particular the removal of distortions that discourage labor mobility—has to be dealt
with before the trade reform and the relaxation of capital controls are implemented. As is argued by
Edwards (1992b) it is even possible that the liberalization of trade in the presence of highly distorted
labor markets will be counterproductive, generating overall welfare losses in the country in question.
Interestingly enough, the discussions on the sequencing of reform have only addressed in detail the
proper order in which the liberalization of various "real" sectors in society has to proceed. For
instance only a few studies, such as Krueger (1981) and Edwards (1984), have dealt with the order of
reform of agriculture, industry, government (privatization), financial services, and education. The
key question here, is the extent to which independent reforms will bear all their potential fruits, or
whether the existence of synergism implies that in a broad based liberalization process the reforms in
different sectors reinforce each other.32
       As the preceding discussion has suggested real exchange rate behavior is a key element during
a trade liberalization transition. According to traditional manuals on "how to liberalize", a large
devaluation constitutes the first step in a trade reform process. Maintaining a depreciated and
competitive real exchange rate during a trade liberalization process is also important in order to avoid
an explosion in imports growth and a balance of payments crisis. Under most circumstances a
reduction in the extent of protection will tend to generate a rapid and immediate surge in imports. On
the other hand, the expansion of exports usually takes some time. Consequently, there is a danger
that a trade liberalization reform will generate a large trade balance disequilibrium in the short run.
This, however, will not happen if there is a depreciated real exchange rate that encourages exports
and helps maintain imports in check.
       Many countries have historically failed to sustain a depreciated real exchange rate during the
transition. This has mainly been the result of expansionary macroeconomic policies that generate
speculation, international reserves losses and, in many cases, in the reversal of the reform effort. in-
the conclusions to the massive World Bank project on trade reform Michaely et al (1991) succinctly




    320f course, this discussion is related to second best analysis of policy measures. See
Edwards (1992b) for a formal multisector model to analyze the welfare consequences of
alternative reform packages.
                                                      16
summarizes the key role of the real exchange rate in determining the success of liberalization
programs: "The long term performance of the real exchange rate clearly differentiates "liberalizers"
from "non-liberalizers" (p. 119). Edwards (1989e) used data on 39 exchange rate crises and found
that in almost every case, real exchange rate overvaluation ended up drastic increases in the degree of
protectionism.


11.2 The Order of Stabilization and Trade Liberalization Policies
         The question of the sequencing between macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform —
especially trade reform — has recently become an important policy issue in a number of places,
including Latin America, Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Analysts asked whether fiscal
reform should precede structural reform, or whether both types of policies should be implemented
simultaneously. By the late 1980 most analysts began to agree that in countries with serious
macroeconomic imbalances the most appropriate sequencing required early and decisive action on the
macroeconomic front, including solving the "debt-overhang" problem.33 It was argued that the
reason for this was that the uncertainty associated with very high inflation, including high relative
price variability, would reduce the effectiveness of market-oriented structural reforms, and especially
of trade liberalization policies. In particular, this high degree of uncertainty would result in low
investment and, in some cases, could even direct investment towards the "wrong" sectors (Fischer
1986).
         A second argument for the "stabilization first" sequencing refers to the contribution of foreign
trade taxes to public revenues. It has been argued that if the public finances have not been brought
under control, the reduction of import tariffs would make things worse by increasing the fiscal deficit.
This argument is considered to be particularly valid for low income countries, that rely very heavily
on taxes on international trade.
         As in the case of trade vs. capital account liberalization, the real exchange rate is at the center
of the debate. Under a set of (very) plausible conditions macroeconomic stabilization programs will
tend to result in an appreciation of the real exchange rate while, as pointed out above, a successful
trade reform will require a real depreciation.
         A limitation of the 'stabilization first" view discussed above is that it does not distinguish



       See Edwards (1992a) for an account of the sequencing debates. For early discussions
see Edwards (1984) and Fischer (1986).
                                                     17

 between different degrees of macroeconomic disequilibria at the time the reforms are initiated. While
 the relative price variability and real exchange appreciation arguments are eminently plausible for
 very high inflationary cases, they are unlikely to be too important in countries that start from
 moderate inflation. For example, Krueger (1981) has argued that the Asian and Middle Eastern
 experiences suggest that there is very little connection between the determinants of inflation and the
 orientation of the trade regime. Along similar lines, Edwards (1992) has argued that in countries
 with moderate rates of inflation trade liberalization and macro stabilization will tend to reinforce
 themselves. In particular, the reduction of import tariffs and the exposure of the domesticindustry to
 foreign competition will tend to introduce "price discipline". Moreover, the increase in productivity
 growth usually associated with trade reforms will tend to offset (mild) real exchange rate
 appreciations that take place during the stabilization effort. A second limitation of the "stabilization
 first" view is that it tends to ignore the political economy of reform. Two pointsare in order
regarding this issue. First, when embarked in a major transformation process, reform-prone policy
makers tend to take advantage to whatever opportunity they have. Second, in many cases it is easier
to attack the protectionist lobby — which is fairly well defined and concentrated in specific industries -
-, than dealing with the interest groups that lead to fiscal imbalances and inflation.
        In spite of these limitations the "stabilization first" approach has become the dominant view
among policy analysts, including the staff of the multilateral financial institutions such as the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund. However, as is documented in Edwards (1994) almost
every country in Latin America ignored this piece of advice, and either embarked on trade reform
first, or implemented trade liberalization and stabilization policies simultaneously.


11.3 The Determinants of Successful Trade Liberalization Policies
       Two economic aspects of trade liberalization are particularly important for analyzing the
political economy of transition, and the likelihood of reforms to be sustained through time. First, it
has to be recognized that it takes some time for the structural reforms to bear fruit. This means that
even though in the long run the refonris will have a positive effect on the aggregate economy, there
will be some costs in the short run. These transitional costs, however, will not be even and will
affect some groups more heavily than others. Second, even in the long run some groups will lose and
will see their real incomes diminished. These groups will be those that have benefitted from the pre-
reform maze of regulations and, in most cases, will tend to oppose the reforms from the beginning.
Politically, then, trade reforms only survive if they show some benefits early on and if these benefits
                                                    18

expand gradually, affecting larger and larger segments of society.
        The extensive comparative studies by Little et al (1970), Balassa (1971, 1982), Krueger (1978,
 1980), Bhagwati (1978) and Michaely et al (1991) have provided abundant evidence on what are the
key determinants of a successful trade reform that persists through time, changing the trade structure
of a country. These elements can serve as a guide for policymakers who want to implement trade
liberalization policies that will be sustained through time. Existing historical evidence suggests that
successful (in the sense of sustained) reforms have been characterized, in the short- and medium-run,
by at least some of the following elements:
    •   Exports, and in particular non-traditional exports, expand at a pace that exceeds the historical
        rate.

    • Productivity growth increases at a fast pace, helping generate rapid growth for the economy as
        a whole.
   • The trade balance does not exhibit "unreasonable" deficits. If this is the case the public will
        be skeptical about the viability of the reform, and will speculate against the domestic currency.
   • The overall level of unemployment stays at a relatively low level.
   •    Real wages exhibit, at least in the medium run, increases. In order for this increase in wages
        to affect a broad sector of society, trade liberalization and other structural reforms aimed at
        deregulating and liberalization other sectors of the economy have to be implemented
        simultaneously.


III. The Recent Trade Liberalization Reforms in Latin America and the Caribbean
        The pioneer in the Latin American trade liberalization process was Chile, which between 1975
and 1979 unilaterally eliminated QRs and reduced import tariffs to a uniform level of 10%. After a
brief interlude with higher tariffs (at the uniform level of 35%) by 1992 Chile had reduced its degree
of protection to a uniform tariff of 11% and no licenses or other forms of quantitative controls.
Uruguay implemented a reform in 1978, and after a brief reversal, push forward once again in 1986.
Bolivia and Mexico embarked on their reforms in 1985-86, followed by a series of countries in the
late 1980s. By early 1992 a number of Latin American nations, including Brazil, were proceeding



    These elements have been present in most sustained reforms studied in recent times.
See, for example, Little et al (1970), Krueger (1978), and Michaely et al (1991) for
extensive case studies.
                                                     19
 steadily with scheduled rounds of tariff reduction and the dismantling of quantitative restrictions.
 However, at the time of this writing it is still unclear whether all these reforms will be sustained,
 becoming a permanent feature of the Latin economies, or whether some of them will be reversed.
 Recent developments in Argentina and Colombia indeed suggest that in some countries higher tariffs
 may be implemented, once again, in the near future.
        The Latin American trade reforms have been characterized by four basic elements: (1) The
 reduction of the coverage of non-tariff barriers, including quotas and prohibitions; (2) The reduction
 of the average level of import tariffs; (3) The reduction of the degree of dispersion of the tariff
 structure; (4) The reduction of export taxes. These measures have generally been supported by
 exchange rate policies aimed at maintaining a competitive real exchange rate. In this section, the
 extent of the recent liberalization programs is discussed. Section IV deals with the effects of the
 reform and provide a preliminary evaluation on how these reforms have affected productivitygrowth
and exports expansion.35 Section V. on the other hand, deals with integration schemes and with the
 recent evolution of industrial countries' commercial policy with respect to Latin American exports.


111.1 Non-Tarff Barriers
        A key component of the trade reform programs has been the elimination, or at least the severe
reduction, of non-tariff barriers (NTBs) coverage. During the early and mid-1980s in some countries,
such as Colombia and Peru, more than 50% of import positions were subject to licenses or outright
prohibitions. In Mexico NIBs coverage reached almost 100% of import categories in 1984, as was
the case in most of Central America in 1984 (Table 1).
        Table 2 contains data on protectionism in 1985-87 and 1991-92, and shows that in almost
every country the coverage of NTBs has been very substantially reduced. In fact, in a number of
cases NTBs have been fully eliminated. The process through which NTBs have been eased has varied


    35Portions of this section partially draw on Edwards (1992a).
    36These are tm'weighted averages, and thus are not comparable to those presented on
Table 5.1. There has been a long discussion in applied international trade theory on whether
tariffs and NTBs should be measured as weighted or unweighted averages. Both views have
some merits and some limitations. An obvious problem of the weighted average approach
(where the weights are the import shares) is that more restrictive distortions will tend to have
a very small weight. In the extreme case, prohibitive tariffs that effectively ban the
importation of a particular item will have a zero weight! Corden (1966) provides an early,
and still highly relevant discussion on these issues.
Table 2 - THE OPENING OF LATIN AMERICA - SELECTED COUNTRIES


                                AVERAGE TARIFF PROTECTION                      COVERAGE OF NON-TARIFF BARRIERS             RANGE OF IMPORT TARIFFS

                                          AVERAGETOTAL CHARGES     ()
                                          (TARIFI'8 + PARAIARIFFS. %)                            AVERAGE,11. (1                    1960•i. %                   OJIT6flI• 11.

COUNTRY                                  1Q65                      100142              1965-87                    199142   YEAR      MIN       MAX     VEAII      MIII         MAX


EARLY REFORMERS
6M                                       20.0                            5.0              2S.O                       0.0    1Q55      0.0       20.0   1091        5.0         10.0
CS.                                      36.0                           11.0              10.1                       0.0    1007      0.0       20.0   1902       11.0         11.0
Maxico                                   340                             4.0              12.7                      20.0    1Q05      0.0      100.0   1092        0.0         20.0


RECENT REFORMERS
Cota IC.                                 92.0                           15.0              0.5                       0.0     lOSS      1.0      100.0   1002        5.0         30.0
Uuguey                                   32.0                           12.0             14.1                       0.0     1960     10.0       46.0   1002       10,0         30.0

VERYRECENT
REFORMERS
                                         26.0                           160              319                        90     1667       0.0       55.0   1091        0.0         22.0
                                         50.0                           21.1             55.3                       10.0   1067       0.0      106.0   1902        0.0         66.0
Cdcxnbl.                                 53.0                           5.?              73.2                       1.0    1066       0.0      200.0   1991        0.0         150
Gunt,na                                  60.0                           19.0              7,4                       6.0    1090       1.0      100.0   1002        6.0         20.0
PACnfOQUO                                54.0                            nO              27.5                              1966       1.0      100.0   1900        0.0         10.0
POISQUSy                                 71.7                           160               0.2                       00     1Q04       0.0       44.0   1991        3.0         66.0
Pu                                       64.0                           16.0             53.4                       0.0    1057       0.0      120.0   1002        5.0         15.0
                                         30.0                           17.0             a,1                        5.0    1067       0.0      135.0   1991        0.0         50.0

FUTUREREFORMERS
Ecuodor                                  50.0                           1*0              6Q3                               1Q60       0.0      200.0   1001        2.0         40.0


() UnwUgNsd

Sa.jrcs:   W1d Bai*.UNCTAD, wld Ersi .1 U. (1060)
                                                    20
 from country to country. In some cases, such as Honduras, they were initially replaced by (quasi)
 equivalent import tariffs, and then slowly phased out. In other countries, like Chile, NTBs were
 eliminated rapidly without a compensating hike in tariffs.
        As Table 2 shows, in spite of the progress experienced in the last few years, significant NTB
coverage remains in a number of countries. In most cases these non-tariff barriers correspond to
agricultural products. For example, in Mexico approximately 60% of the agriculture's sector tariff
positions were still subject to import licenses in mid-1992 — scheduled to be eliminated with respect
to U.S. imports as a result of NAFTA. An important feature of the region's liberalization programs
is that they have proceeded much slower in agriculture than in industry. This has largely been the
result of the authorities desire to isolate agriculture from fluctuations in world prices, and unfair trade
practices by foreign countries.37 However, as a recent study by Valdes (1992), has shown this
approach based on quantitative restrictions entails serious efficiency costs. Slowly, however, more
and more countries are addressing these concerns by replacing quantitative restrictions by variable
levies, and by introducing a system for smoothing price fluctuations based on price bands.38


111.2 Tariff Dispersion
       The import substitution development strategy pursued for decades in Latin America created
highly dispersed protective structures. According to the World Bank (1987), Brazil, Chile and
Colombia had some of the highest degrees of dispersion in effective protection in the world during the
1960s. Also, Heitger (1987) shows that during the 1960s Chile had the highest rate of tariff
dispersion in the World—with a standard deviation of 634%—closely followed by Colombia and
Uruguay. Cardoso and Helwege (1991) have pointed out that highly dispersed protective structures
generate high welfare costs, by increasing uncertainty and negatively affecting the investment process.
These highly dispersed tariffs and NTBs were the result of decades of lobbying by different sectors to
obtain preferential treatment. As the relative power of the different lobbies changed, so did their


    37The issue of protecting local producers from "dumping is an important one in the
design of the new liberalized trade regimes. The crucial problem is to enact legislation that
is able to distinguish true cases of unfair trade practices from simple cases of increased
foreign competition stemming from more efficient productive processes. At this time the
approval of a dynamic and flexible anti-dumping legislation should be high in the region's
agenda for legal and institutional reform.
    38See Valdes (1992).
                                                    21
tariff concessions arid the protective landscape.
       An important goal of the Latin trade reforms has been the reduction of the degree of
dispersion of import tariffs. Table 2 contains data on the tariff range for a group of countries for two
points in time—mid-1980s (1985-87) and 1991-92—and clearly documents the fact that the reforms
have indeed reduced the range between minimum and maximum tariffs. In many cases this has meant
increasing tariffs on goods that were originally exempted from import duties. In fact, this Table
shows that in many countries the minimum tariff was zero percent in the mid-1980s. Generally, zero
tariffs have been applied to intermediate inputs used in the manufacturing process.39 From a
political economy perspective the process of raising some tariffs, while maintaining a pro-
liberalization rhetoric, has not always been easy. Those sectors that had traditionally benefitted from
the exemptions tried to oppose them strongly as they suddenly saw their privileged situation coming
to an end.
       An important question addressed by policymakers throughout the region refers to the extent of
reduction in tariff dispersion. Should the reforms implement a uniform tariff, or is some (small)
degree dispersion desirable? Although from a strict welfare perspective uniform tariffs are only
advisable under very special cases, they have a strong administrative and political-economy appeal.
In particular, a uniform tariff system is very transparent, making it difficult for the authorities to
grant special treatments to particular firms or sectors (Harberger, 1990).


111.3 Average Tariffs

       Reducing the average degree of protection is, perhaps, the fundamental policy goal of trade
liberalization reforms. Traditional policy manuals on the subject suggest that once the exchange rate
has been devalued and quantitative restrictions have been reduced or eliminated, the next step is to




    39This system with very low (or zero) tariffs on intermediate inputs and high tariffs on
final goods generated very high rates of effective protection or protection to domestic value
added. In recent years a number of authors have argued that the use of effective protection
is misleading. The reason for this is that ERPs are unable to provide much information on
the general equilibrium consequences of tariff changes (Dixit, 1986). In spite of this, ERP
measures are still useful, since they provide an indication on the degree of "inefficiency" a
country is willing to accept for a particular sector.
                                                   22
slash tariffs in such a way that both their range and average are reduced. Table 2 contains data
on average total tariffs (tariffs plus paratariffs) in 1985 and 1991-92. As can be seen, the extent of
tariff reduction has been significant in almost every country. Even nations that have acted somewhat
cautiously on the reform front, have experienced important cuts in import tariffs, allowing a more
competitive environment and reducing the degree of anti-export bias of the trade regime.
       Countries that have embarked on trade liberalization in recent years have moved at a much
faster speed than those nations that decided to open up earlier. There has, in fact, been a clear
change in what is perceived to be abrupt and 1:j removal of imports impediments. What only 15
years ago were seen as brutally fast reforms, are now looked at as mild and gradual liberalizations.
When Chile initiated the trade reform in 1975 most analysts thought that the announced tariff
reduction from an average of 52% to 10% in four and a half years was an extremely aggressive move
that would cause major dislocations, including large increases in unemployment. The view on the
speed of reform has become very different in the early 1990s, when an increasing number of
countries have been opening up their external sectors very rapidly. For instance, Colombia slashed
(total) import tariffs by 65% in one year, reducing them from 34% in 1990 to 12% in 1991. This
fast approach to liberalization has also been followed by Argentina, Peru and Nicaragua. This latter
country eliminated quantitative restrictions in one bold move and slashed import tariffs from an
average of 110% in 1990 to 15% in March of 1992.


111.4 Exchange Rate Policy
       In the vast majority of countries the first step in the recent trade reform process was the
implementation of large (nominal) devaluations. In many cases this measure represented a unification
of the exchange rate market. Most countries implemented large exchange rate adjustments as early as
1982 in order to face the urgencies of the adjustment process. The purpose of these policies was to
generate     exchange rate devaluations, as a way to reduce the degree of anti-export bias of
incentives systems.
       Many countries adopted crawling peg regimes, characterized by a periodic small devaluation




    40However, "tariffs" is sometimes a misleading term, since many countries have
traditionally relied on both import duties (that is tariffs proper) and import duty surcharges or
paratariffs. See Harberger (1992) for a discussion on the actual mechanics for reducing
uneven tariffs.
                                                    23
of the nominal exchange rate, as a way to protect the real exchange rate from the effects of
inflation.41 Table 3 contains data on real exchange rates for a group of Latin American countries
for 1980, 1987 and 1992. Once again, an increase in the index represents a real exchange rate
depreciation and thus an improvement in the degree of competitiveness. Between 1980 and 1987
almost every country in the sample experienced very large real depreciations (see Edwards, 1994). In
many cases, however, these have been partially reversed in the last few years. This has been the
consequence of a combination of factors, including the inflow of large volumes of foreign capital into
these countries since 1990, and the use of the exchange rate as the cornerstone of the disinflation
policies. This is addressed in Section IV of this paper. Overall, however, in most countries the real
exchange rate was depreciated significantly more by late 1991 than in 1981. This greatly encouraged
exports, helping revert decades of discriminatory policies.


IV. The Effects of Trade Liberalization
          The trade liberalization reforms implemented in Latin America had three fundamental
objectives: (a) to reduce the anti-export bias of the old regime and, thus, to encourage exports; (b) to
help create an increase in total factor productivity growth through greater competition and enhanced
efficiency; and (c) to increase consumer welfare by reducing the real prices of importable goods. In
this section the evolution of productivity and exports in the post-reform period are analyzed in some
detail.


IV. I Trade Liberalization and Productivity Growth
          The relaxation of trade impediments has had a fiuidamental impact on the region's economies.
Suddenly, Latin America's industry, which to a large extent had developed and grown behind
protective walls, was forced to compete. Many firms have not been able to survive this shock and
have become bankrupt. Others, however, have faced the challenge of lower protection by embarking
on major restructuring and increased their level of productivity.
          The ability (and willingness) of firms to implement significant adjustment depends on two
main factors: the degree of credibility of the reform and the level of distortions in the labor market.



    4tSome countries, most notably Brazil, Chile and Colombia, experimented with crawling
pegs as early as the 1960s. However, only Colombia maintained a regime that avoided real
exchange rate overvaluation.
       Table 3- REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN
SELECTED LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES (a)
                             (1985= 100)




COU NTRY                 1980      1983      1987      1992      1993 (b)

Argentina                 35.8      96.4     80.8      36.9      34.0
Bolivia                   88.1      84.6    107.9     109.6     113.3
Brazil                    70.7      88.7     78.0      51.7      45.7
Chile                     55.3      75.3     94.8      75.1      75.2
Colombia                  79.2      78.3    115.9     119.9     102.6
Costa Rica                65.8     103.0     94.9       882      82.9
Ecuador                  105.6     104.5    153.3     165.7     153.9
El Salvador              172.6     133.9    121.0     103.7        na
Guatemala                124.9     120.5    162.0     149.5        na
Honduras                 121.6     106.2     93.2     141.5     152.3
Jamaica                   60.1      54.8      80.1     94.5      70.7
Mexico                    83.3     119.8    123.9      68.7      63.8
Panama                   102.0     100.7     98.8     107.8     106.5
Paraguay                  74.4      60.7    111.4     113.0        na
Peru                      77.3     80.6      46.2      21.7      23.6
Trinidad and Tobago 152.9         117.3     122.8     112.1'    129.0
Uruguay                   49.7     89.4      77.2      55.5      40.5
Venezuela                 84.2     70.3     134.8     122.3     119.1



(a) Increases indicate currency depreciation against the US$.
(b) Preliminary.


Source: Calculated using data from the International Financial Statistics
         database, IMF.
                                                    24
If entrepreneurs believe that the reform will not persist through time, there will be no incentives to
incur the costs of adjusting the product mix and of increasing the degree of productive efficiency. In
fact, if the reform is perceived as temporary, the optimal behavior is not to adjust; instead it is
profitable to speculate through the accumulation of imported durable goods. This was, as Rodriguez
(1982) has documented, the case in Argentina during the failed Martinez de Hoz's reforms.42
       In their studies on the interaction between labor markets and structural reforms Krueger (1980)
and Michaely et al. (1991) found that most successful trade reforms have indeed resulted in major
increases in labor productivity. In most cases where this has happened labor markets have been
characterized by some degree of flexibility. Countries with rigid and highly distorted labor
markets—including countries with high costs of dismissal, limitations on temporary contracts and rigid
minimum wage legislation—have generally exhibited modest improvements in labor productivity after
the trade reform process.
       Some of the early Latin American reformers have experienced important labor productivity
improvements. For example, according to Edwards and Edwards (1991) labor productivity in the
Chilean manufacturing sector increased at an average annual rate of 13.4% between 1978 and 1981.
The available evidence also suggests that the increases in labor productivity in the Mexican
manufacturing sector in the post reform period has been significant. According to Sanchez (1992),
labor productivity in Mexico's manufacturing sector increased at an annual rate of almost 4% between
1986 and 1991. This figure is more than double the historical annual rate of growth of labor
productivity in the manufacturing sector between 1960 and 1982—1.6% (Elias, 1992).
       As discussed above, recent models of growth have suggested that countries that are more open
to the rest of the world will exhibit a faster rate of technological improvement and productivity
growth than countries that isolate themselves from the rest of the world. From an empirical point of
view, this means that countries that open up their external sectors and engage in trade liberalization
reforms will experience an increase in total factor productivity growth relative to the pre-reform
period. The empirical analysis presented in Edwards (1992) supports the idea that, when other
variables (such as human capital formation, government size, political volatility and the development
gap) are held constant, the degree of openness of the economy is positively associated with the rate of
growth of productivity. What is particularly important is that this result appears to be robust to the



    42See Corbo et. al. (1985) for a detailed microeconomic account of the process of
adjustment in a large group of Chilean manufacturing firms.
                                                     25

proxy used to measure trade policy orientation.
         Table 4 contains data on the change in aggregate total factor productivity growth in the period
following the implementation of trade liberalization reform in six Latin Countries.43 Although these
data cannot be interpreted as capturing causality, they are still suggestive. As can be seen, Chile and
Costa Rica, two of the earlier reformers, experienced very large increases in TFP growth in the post
reform period. The results for Chile coincide with those obtained by Edwards (1985), who found that
in the late 1970s, after the trade reforms had been completed, TFP growth was approximately three
times higher than the historical average. Although the outcome has been less spectacular,
Argentina and Uruguay still exhibit important improvements in productivity growth in the period
following the opening up. Bolivia, on the other band, presents a flat profile of TFP growth.
Sturzenegger (1992) argues that the very slow improvement in Bolivian productivity growth has been,
to a large extent, the result of negative terms of trade shocks and, in particular, the collapse of the tin
market
         Perhaps   the most puzzling result in Table 4 is the slight decline in aggregate TFP growth in
Mexico after the reforms. Martin (1992) shows that this fmding is robust to alternative methods of
measuring TFP growth, including different procedures for correcting for capacity utilization. Also,
Harberger (1992) has found a slowing down of TFP growth in Mexico in 1986-90 relative to 1975-




    43The original TFP growth data comes from Martin's (1992) study on sources of growth
in Latin America. The countries in Table 5.4 are those that initiated the reform before 1988.
In order to compute series on TFP growth Martin (1992) analyzed the contributions of capital
and labor, and explicitly incorporated the role of changes in the degree of capital utilization.
The countries considered in this study are: Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru,
Uruguay and Venezuela. Harberger (1992) presents data on TFP growth before and after a
series of historical trade reform episodes. He finds that in the majority of the cases
productivity growth increased after the liberalization process.

    1t may be argued, however, that the major increase in TFP growth in Chile has been
the result of the complete structural reform package implemented in that country.

    451n a series of recent studies Ocampo (1991) has calculated total factor productivity
growth in Colombia. He found that the increase in protectionism in 1982-85 was
accompanied by a decline in productivity growth.
Table 4- CHANGES IN TOTAL
FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH
                                 Percentages

Argentina                           1.91


Bolivia                             0.11

Chile                               4.96

Costa Rica                           3.25

Mexico                              -0.32

Uruguay                              2.02


For all countries but Chile, computed as the difference of TFP growth for
1987-91 and 1978-82. For Chile the pro-reform period Is 1972-78.


Source: Martin (1992)
                                                    26
82. However, the aggregate nature of the TFP growth data in Table 4 tends to obscure the actual
sectoral response to trade reform in Mexico. According to new theories on endogenous growth,
faster productivity will be observed in those sectors where protectionism has been reduced and not in
those still subject to trade barriers or other forms of regulation.
       A distinctive characteristic of the Mexican reform is that, contrary to the Chilean case, it
proceeded at an uneven pace. In particular, while most of the manufacturing sector—with the
exception of automobiles— experienced early on a significant reduction in protection, agriculture
continues to be subject to relatively high tariffs and substantial nontariff barriers. Moreover, until
very recently the Mexican land tenure system was subject to a legal system that, among other things,
severely restricted the market for land and distorts economic incentives in many other directions—the
jio system. Although most agricultural sector regulations were legally eliminated in early 1992,
these reforms still have to have a practical impact. The reason for this is that the titling process,
where property rights are actually assigned, is only in its infancy; by mid-1993 practically no ejidos
have yet been converted into private landholdings.47 Also, during much of the post-debt crisis
period large fragments of services sector in Mexico—including telecommunications and financial
services—were under direct government control and subject to distortions.
       Table 5 contaim data on TFP growth in Mexico's manufacturing sector for 1940_89.48
Interestingly enough, these figures indicate that in the post-trade reform period the rate of productivity
growth in the Mexican manufacturing sector has exceeded every subperiod since 1940 for which there
are data. This provides evidence in favor of the view that, once the sectors actually subject to
increased competition are considered, Mexican productivity growth has indeed improved after the
trade reform. This proposition is supported by results recently obtained by Weiss (1992), who used
regression analysis to investigate the impact of the trade reforms on productivity and cost margins.



    46However, according to Harberger's data, TFP growth in 1986-90 exceeds the level of
immediate post-crisis years. The actual TFP growth numbers calculated by Harberger are
the following: 1950-60 = 3.8; 1960-75 = 3.9; 1975-82 - 2.5; 1982-86 = -2.8; 1986-90
0.8. An important difference between the Martin and Harberger computations is that the
former does not make corrections for different degrees of capacity utilization.

    47A number of observers have argued that the titling process will, by itself, take between
five and ten years.

    48Since these figures come from two different sources they may not be fully comparable
and, thus, should be interpreted with care.
Table 5- TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH
   IN MANUFACTURING IN MEXICO: 1940-1 990

                                  Manufacturing
                                   TFP Growth
                                  (percentage)

           1940-50                      0.46

           1950-60                      0.53

           1960-70                      3.00

           1970-80                      na.

           1985-89                      3.40




Sources: The data for 1940-80 are from ElIas (1992). The figure
            for 1985-89 is from Ibarra (1992).
                                                   27
       An important question in evaluating the effects of trade reform refers to the speed with which
productivity growth will react to the new incentives. Will the response be rapid, or will it be
necessary to wait for a long period of time before seeing the fruits of the reforms? Existing data for
the case of Chile provides some support for the idea that total factor productivity growth will react
quite fast. For example, Edwards (1985) found that already by 1979—the year the trade reform
reached its goal of a uniform 10% import tariff—aggregate total factor productivity growth in Chile
had reached 5.4%, significantly higher than the historical level. More recently, Agacino et al. (1992)
have found that total factor productivity growth averaged 3.9% per year during 1976-81, greatly
exceeding the historical average of approximately 1 %. These authors also found that there had been
significant variations across industries, during 1976-81. In some cases average productivity growth
exceeded the 10% annual mark—wood odts, glass industries—while in others it was
negative—non-electric machinery, for example.


IV. 2. Trade Reforms and Erports
       An important goal of the trade reforms has been to reduce the traditional degree of anti-export
bias of Latin American trade regimes and to generate a surge in exports. In fact, based on the East
Asian model, Latin American leaders have increasingly called for the transformation of the external
sector into the region's "engine of growth". As pointed out previously, it is expected that the
reduction of the traditional anti-exports bias will take place through three channels: a more
competitive—that is more devalued—real exchange rate; a reduction in the cost of imported capital
goods and intermediate inputs used in the production of exportable; and a direct shift in relative prices
in favor of exports.
       The volume of international trade in Latin America, and in particular the volume of exports,
increased significantly after the reforms were initiated.49 For example, while the volume of exports
for the region as a whole grew at an annual rate of only 2.0% between 1970 and 1980, it grew at a
rate of 5.5% between 1980 and 1985 and at an annual average of 6.7% between 1986 and 1990. The
real value of exports, however, has evolved at a somewhat slower pace. The reason for this is that



    49Trade liberalization aims at increasing a country's total volume of trade. Under
textbook conditions it is expected that at the end of the reform trade will be balanced.
However, there are a number of circumstances, including the need to pay the country's
foreign debt, under which trade will not grow in a balanced way after a reform. This has
been the case in the majority of the Latin American Countries.
                                                   28
terms of trade have experienced, in every subgroup of countries, a significant deterioration during
1980-93 (see CEPAL 1993). Although, strictly speaking, it is not possible to attribute this export
surge fully to the opening up reforms, there is significant country-specific evidence suggesting that a
more open economy, and in particular a more depreciated real exchange rate, has positively affected
exports growth.50 Some countries, especially Costa Rica, have accompanied the opening process
with the implementation of a battery of export promotion schemes, including tax credits—through the
"Certificado de Abono Tributario"—duty free imports and income tax exemptions. However, some
authors, including Nogues and Gulati (1992), have argued that these systems have been fiscally
expensive and have not been an effective way of encouraging exports.5'
       Table 6 presents detailed country level data on the rate of growth of the total value of exports
(in constant dollars) for three different periods. Table 7, on the other hand, contains information on
the evolution of exports volume throughout the period. A number of facts emerge from these tables.
First, while there has been a rapid growth in exports for the region as a whole, there are nontrivial
variations across countries; in some cases there has even been a decline in the real value of ex-
ports—this is the case, for example, of Peru. Second, exports performance during the two sub-
periods (1982-87 and 1987-92) has not been homogeneous. In the majority of the countries exports
performed significantly better during 1987-92, than in the previous five years reflecting, among other
things, the fact that it takes some time for exports to actually respond to greater incentives.
        An interesting fact that emerges from these tables is that in the country that has lagged behind
in terms of trade reform — Ecuador — the performance of exports volume has been, in the recent
years, below the 1970-80 historical average. On the other hand, in two ofthe early reformers —
Bolivia and Chile — exports have had a very strong behavior in the 1987-90 subperiod.
        The case of Chile is particularly interesting. Since most of its liberalization effort was
undertaken prior to 1980, there are enough data points as to provide a more detailed evaluation of
export response to the new regime. Between 1975 and 1980 — when tariffs were reduced to a
uniform 10% and NTBs were completely eliminated — the behavior of Chilean exports was



     50See, for example, Nogues and Gulati (1992).
    51This, however, remains a controversial issue. Some authors (Sachs, 1987), for
 example, have pointed to the Korean experience to suggest that government policies m
 support of exports may be beneficial. For a brief account of the Korean experience, see
 chapter 3.
Table 6- GROWTH IN VALUE OF EXPORTS OF GOODS
              AND NON-FACTOR SERVICES
  (Annual percentage growth rates at constant prices)
                                                                          Avg.
                     1970-80 1982-87 1987-92   1991    1992    1993 (b) 1991-93

Argentina                4.8    -0.1     6.6    -3.0    2.1     6.3        1.8
Bolivia                  0.6    0.6      8.1    -8.5   -20.0    3.6       -8.3
Brazil                   9.9    9.7      5.5     0.7   142      7.7        7.5
Chile                   10.2     6.5    10.9    7.4    11.9    -7.7        3.9
Colombia                 5.7    10.2     6.7    6.0    -3.3     5.9        2.9
Costa Rica               5.9     5.7    10.9   10.6    14.4    11.7       12.2
Ecuador                 14.0     3.3     9.1    5.0     5.5    -2.8        2.6
Mexico                   8.3     5.8     3.5    0.1     2.5     6.8        3.1
Paraguay                 6.1     5.4     9.5   -19.2 -102      32.6        1.1
Peru                     2.7    -4.5     0.8     3.0    4.7     -2.8       1.6
Uruguay                  7.2     4.2     7.1    -5.2    6.1     -6.0      -1.7
Venezuela               -7.3 (a) 3.6     4.4   -14.2    -6.8   -0.1       -7.0


(a) 1974-80
(b) Preliminary

Source: World Bank
Table 7- GROWTH IN VOLUME OF EXPORTS OF GOODS
             (Annual percentage growth rates)
                                                                     Avg.
                  1970-60 1982-87 1987-92   1991    1992   1993 (a) 1991-93

Argentina             2.1     0.8    12.8   -0.5    -0.6    0.8       -0.1
Bolivia              -1.7    -5.2    13.2   -4.2     3.7   16.3        5.3
Brazil                8.2     8.0     1.5    3.5    18.5   11.7       11.2
Chile                 7.4     7.6     7.4    6.6    21.8    3.1       10.5
Colombia              3.6    14.8     7.3   19.6     7.9   10.3       12.6
Costa Rica            3.8     6.2     7.5    14.0   19.9   12.2       15.4
Ecuador              14.6     6.8     8.2    12.7    6.7    0.7        6.7
Mexico               10.2     6.1     5.5    10.6    7.7    7.9        8.7
Paraguay              7.3     9.2    17.2   -19.0   -5.8   31.3        2.2
Peru                  2.3    -4.0     1.3    -0.9    6.0   10.4        5.2
Uruguay               5.4    -0.5     4.8    -0.7    6.8   -7.8       -0.6
Venezuela            -5.8     2.1     7.5     5.9    0.6   13.0        6.5



(a) Preliminary

Source: CEPAL
                                                   29

spectacular, growing (in volume terms) at an average of 12% per year — many times higber than the
historical average of 1960-70 of only 2.6% per annum. What is particularly impressive is that most
of the export surge has taken place in the nontraditional sector (CEPAL, 1991).
       The story of Chile's success in the last few years has been closely related to a boom in
agriculture, forestry and fishing exports. During the 1960-70 period Chile was basically a net
importer of agricultural goods. Today, on the other hand, agriculture—as well as forestry and
fishing—exports are becoming increasingly important in the Chilean economy. In 1970 Chile
exported US$33 million in agriculture, forestry and fishing products; by 1991 this figure had jumped
to US$1.2 billion! Notice, that this figure excludes those manufactured goods based on the
elaboration of the agriculture sector. There is little doubt that economic policy lies behind the stellar
behavior of the Chilean agriculture and export sectors in the last few years. First, the liberalization
of international trade substantially lowered the costs of agriculture imported inputs and capital goods,
making the sector more competitive. In fact, the liberalization of international trade put an end to a
long trend of discrimination against agriculture. This, as was pointed out above, contrasts with
Mexico, where agriculture has not benefitted yet from the very recent liberalization measures,
including the reform of the old ejido system. Second, the exchange rate policy pursued aggressively
in Chile since 1985 has provided clear incentives for the expansion of exports. However, as is
discussed in some detail in Section V.4, the current trend towards real exchange rate appreciation
represents a cloud in the future of the sector. A third fundamental policy-based explanation of the
Chilean agriculture success has to do with the pursue of a stable macroeconomic policy. This has
allowed entrepreneurs to have confidence in the system and to plan their activities over the longer
run. Many of the export-oriented agriculture activities have required sizable investments that are only
undertaken in an environment of stability and policy continuity. And fourth, the strict respect for
property rights, and the emergence of a stable and legal framework, also had significant, positive
effects on the evolution of Chilean agriculture exports.
        As Tables 6 and 7 show, Mexico has exhibited a slower rate of growth of total exports in the
post reform period than during 1970-80. This, however, is largely an illusion stemming from the fact
that during the l970s Mexico's oil production increased very rapidly—at a rate exceeding 18% per
year. When nontraditional exports are considered the post-reform performance is remarkable with an
                                                   30
annual average rate of growth for 1985-91 exceeding 25% (see Table 8).52
       After two successive years of decline, the volume of exports increased very rapidly in Brazil
during 1992—14.9%. In 1993 Brazilian exports expanded, in volume terms at almost 12 %.
Although it is too early to tell what are the exact forces behind this rapid growth, and whether it will
be sustained, there is some indication that the highly depreciated real exchange rate and the reduction
in the degree of protection in the country have helped increase the degree of international
competitiveness of Brazil's exports.53 This interpretation is supported by recent empirical results by
Bonelli (1992) who found that productivity growth in Brazil's manufacturing sector has been
positively affected by export orientation.
       A stated objective of trade reforms has been to increase the degree of diversification of
exports. Table 9 contains data for a large number of countries on the share of manufacturing exports
and shows that in the period following the trade reforms their importance has increased steadily in the
early reformers—Bolivia, Chile and Mexico. Also, in the majority of the countries, the share of the
ten most important export goods in total exports has declined significantly in the last few years
(CEPAL, 1991).
     A somewhat troublesome recent development is that during 1993 the rate of export growth
(measured in constant value) has slowed down significantly in many Latin American countries. This
has been the result of a host of factors, including the sluggishness of the world economy, the slowing
down of productivity gains and, especially, the recent trends towards real exchange rate appreciation
observed in most countries in the region.


V.     Real Exchange Rate Behavior, Capital Inflows and the Future of Trade Reforms In Latin
       America
        In the last few years, competitive real exchange rates have been at the center of the vigorous
performance of most of Latin America's external sectors. In fact, it is not an exaggeration to say that
the trade reforms have been driven by highly competitive real exchange rates, making Latin products
very attractive in world markets. However, as pointed out previously, in most Latin countries real



    52A large percentage of this growth, however, has been in the maquiladora or in-bond
sector.

   53Also, the reduction in internal demand could have affected the recent rapid growth in
exports.
Table 8- NONTRADITIONAL EXPORTS


                        Nontraditional exports as a share of all exports (percent)

  Country            1.980          1982           1985          1987          1991

  Argentina          0.27           0.31           0.28          0.31          0.35
  Bolivia            0.15           0.09           0.05          0.19          0.30
  Brazil W           0.57           0.59           0.66          0.69          0.71
  Chile              0.38           0.22           0.35          0.39          0.36 hI
  Colombia           0.41           0.42           0.41          0.55          0.64
  Costa Rica         0.36           0.38           0.37          0.42          0.50
  Ecuador J          0.24           0.09           0.12          0.14          0.12
  Mexico             0.13           0.20           0.18          0.38          0.50
  Paraguay           0.58           0.71           0.82          0.68          0.69
  Peru               0.21           0.23           0.24          0.27          0.28
  Uruguay            0.61           0.58           0.66          0.67          0.71
  Venezuela          0.04           0.07           0.09          0.13          0.17


  / Industrial products.
  hI 1989 data; subsequent data are classified differently.
  ci 1990 data.
  d/ Manufactured products.


  Source: CEPAL, Economic Survey of Latin America, several issues.
Table 9- EXPORTS OF MANUFACTURED GOODS


                       Manufactured exports as a share of all exports (percent)

COUNTRY         1970        1980         1982         1985         1987           1991

Argentina       0.14         0.23         0.24         0.21        0.31           0.28
Bolivia         0.03         0.02         0.03         0.01        0.03           0.05 /
Brazil          0.15         0.37         0.38         0.44        0.50           0.55
Chile           0.04         0.09         0.07         0.11        0.09           0.11
Colombia        0.11         0.20         0.24         0.17        0.19           0.33
Costa Rica      0.19         0.28         0.25         0.22        0.24           0.25
Ecuador         0.02         0.03         0.03         0.01        0.02           0.02
Mexico          0.33         0.11         0.10         0.21        0.38           0.44 /
Paraguay        0.08         0.04         0.09         0.06        0.10           0.11
Peru            0.01         0.17         0.16         0.13        0.17           0.19 a/
Uruguay         0.15         0.38         0.32         0.35        0.55           0.52
Venezuela       0.01         0.02         0.02         0.10        0.06           0.11 a/


J 1990 data.
Source: CEPAL, Statistical Yearbook for Latin America, several issues.
                                                    31
exchange rates have recently experienced significant real appreciations and losses in competitiveness.
Figure 1 presents the evolution of real exchange rates for selected countries. As in previous diagrams
and tables, an increase (decline) in the real exchange rate index captures a real exchange rate
depreciation (appreciation).
       These real appreciations (and losses in international competitiveness) have generated
considerable concern among policymalcers and political leadersM and have been the result of two
basic factors: first, a large number of countries are using exchange rate policy as an anti-inflationary
tool and, second, recent massive capital inflows into Latin America that have made foreign exchange
"overabundant".
          Tables 10 and 11 contain data on capital inflows into Latin America and show that, after eight
years of negative resource transfers, there has been a significant turnaround in 1991-92. This
increased availability of foreign funds has affected the real exchange rate through increased aggregate
expenditure. A proportion of the newly available resources has been spent on nontradables—includ-
ing the real estate sector—putting pressure on their relative prices and on domestic inflation. An
interesting feature of the recent capital movements is that a large proportion corresponds to portfolio
investment and relatively little is direct foreign investment. As can be seen, Mexico has been the
most important recipient of foreign funds in the region in the last years. Indeed it has been this very
large availability of foreign financing what has allowed that country to have a current account deficit
of the order of 5-6 percent of GDP. An important question, however, is whether this situation will
be sustainable through time, or if a decline in the level of funds available is foreseen in the near
future.
          Real exchange rate appreciations generated by increased capita] inflows are not a completely
new phenomenon in Latin America. In the late 1970s most countries in the region, but especially the
Southern Cone nations, were flooded with foreign resources that led to large real appreciations. The
fact that this previous episode ended in the debt crisis has added dramaticism to the current concern
about the possible negative effects of these capital flows.
          Whether these capital movements are temporary—and thus subject to sudden reversals as in
1982—is particularly important in evaluating their possible consequences. In a recent study, Calvo,
Leiderman, and Reinhart (1992) argue that the most important causes behind the generalized inflow of
resources are external. In particular, their empirical analysis suggests that the two main reasons



    54See Calvo, et a1 (1992).
                                                      Figure 1
REAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES IN SELECTED LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES

                    ARGENINA
          Rsá Ee Exç. AC. (1 9e5-l                                      RuN EIsi. Exawi. R (1 906—I




     I.
     I.




                       CHLE
          RIC Ee.aW. Exwç. AC. (1 905-I (X                              RuN
                                                                                 cow
                                                                           EIsu Ei R (1 905—I


                                                                  I.
                                                                  I.
                                                                  tlI
                                                                  I.
                                                                        ,s_ I

                      MECO                                                            PERU
          RsC   Eflu £xwgaPee (1905.1                                   R. EIue Exsç. Re. (I 906-I




                     URUGUAY
          R.E9.VS Exaw19. Age   Cl                                      PIN E1uv. E   Re. (1906-1

    I.
    a
    a
    7




    Note: An Increase In the Index denotes a real depreciation.


    Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF
Table 10- CAPITAL INFLOWS AND NET RESOURCE TRANSFERS,
                      LATIN AMERICA, 1981-92


                          Net Capital    Interest and   Net Resource
          Years            Inflows      Profit Income    Transfers


          1982-85            55.3          -111.7           -56.4

          1986-89            33.5          -138.7          -105.2

          1990               17.0           -35.7           -18.7

          1991               36.3           -31.1            5.2

          1992 a!            42.8           -21.2           21.6


          a! Projection
          Source: Jaspersen (1992).
            Table 11- NET CAPiTAL INFLOWS AS A PERCENTAGE OF GDP
                     IN SELECTED LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES



Country           1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 p/
Argentina          2.5   0.4   2.3    2.8    1.6   2.2    2.8    0.3    0.5    3.0    5.7
Brazil             4.1   2.7   2.4    0.1    0.7   1.5    -0.5   0.3    1.1    0.2    n.a.
Chile              4.2   2.6 10.5     8.6    4.3   5.4    5.0    5.5 11.7      3.0    7.8
Colombia           5.7   3.7   2.5    6.4    3.3   0.0    2.4    1.2    0.0    -1.9   n.a.
Mexico             5.5 -1.6 -0.6      -1.1   0.9 -0.7     -0.8   0.7    3.5    7.1    n.a.
Peru               7.8   3.8    5.3   2.4    3.6   3.7    5.4    2.9    3.6    2.2    3.4
Venezuela         -1.9   -4.7 -3.4 -1.7 -1.8        1.1   -1.7   -7.9   -7.4   3.7    5.8


p/ Preliminary.
Sources:            World Bank, International Economics Department database (GD?) and 1MF,
                    Balance of Payments Statistics database (Capital Inflows).
                                                   32
triggering these capital movements are the recession in the industrialized world and the reduction in
US interest rates. These authors suggest that once these world economic conditions change, the
volume capital of capital flowing to Latin America will be reduced. This means that at that point the
pressure over the real exchange rate will subside and a real exchange rate depreciation will be
required.
       The countries in the region have tried to cope with the real appreciation pressures in several
ways. Colombia, for instance, tried to sterilize the accumulation of reserves by placing domestic
bonds (OMAs) on the local market in 1991. However, in order to place these bonds, the local
interest rate had to increase making them relatively more attractive. This generated a widening
interest rate differential in favor of Colombia, which attracted new capital flows that, in order to be
sterilized, required new bond placements. This process generated a vicious cycle that contributed to a
very large accumulation of domestic debt, without significantly affecting the real exchange rate. This
experience shows vividly the difficulties faced by the authorities wishing to handle real exchange rate
movements. In particular, this case indicates that real shocks—such as an increase in foreign capital
inflows—cannot be tackled successfully using monetary policy instruments.
       During 1993 Argentina tried to deal with the real appreciation by engineering a "pseudo"
devaluation through a simultaneous increase in import tariffs and export subsidies. Although it is too
early to know how this measure will affect the degree of competitiveness in the country, preliminary
computations suggest that the magnitude of the adjustment obtained via tariffs-cuni-subsidies package
may be rather small. Mexico has followed a different route, and has decided to postpone the adoption
of a completely fixed exchange rate. In October of 1992 the pace of the daily nominal exchange rate
adjustment was doubled to 40 cents. As in the case of Argentina, it is too early to evaluate how
effective these measures have been in dealing with the real appreciation trend. However, as pointed
out earlier, a number of analysts of the Mexican scene have already argued that this measure is
clearly not enough and that at some point in the near future other measures will have to be
undertaken. At this point, however, it is difficult to know the exact way in which the implementation
of the NAFTA will affect Mexico's equilibrium real exchange rate and its sustainable degree of
competitiveness.
      Chile has tackled the real appreciation by implementing a broad set of measures, including



    An important peculiarity of the Colombian case is that the original inflow of foreign
exchange came through the trade account.
                                                   33

conducting exchange rate policy relative to a three-currency basket, imposing reserve requirements on
capital inflows, allowing the nominal exchange rate to appreciate somewhat and undertaking
significant sterilization operations. In spite of this multi-front approach, Chile has not avoided real
exchange rate pressures. Between December of 1991 and December 1992 the Chilean bilateral real
exchange rate appreciated by approximately 10%. As a result of this, exporters and agriculture
producers have been mounting increasing pressure on the government for special treatment, arguing
that an implicit contract had been broken by allowing the real exchange rate to appreciate. This type
of political reaction is, in fact, becoming more and more generalized throughout the region, and has
been particularly important in Colombia, adding a difficult social dimension to the real exchange rate
issue.
         Although there is no easy way to handle the real appreciation pressures, historical experience
shows that there are, at least, two possible avenues that the authorities can follow. First, in those
countries where the dominant force behind real exchange rate movements is price inertia in the
presence of nominal exchange rate anchor policies, the adoption of a pragmatic crawling peg system
will usually help. This means that, to some extent, the inflationary targets will have to be less
ambitious as a periodic exchange rate adjustment will result in some inflation. However, to the
extent that this policy is supplemented by tight overall fiscal policy there is no room for concern
regarding inflationary explosions.
       Second, the discrimination between short term (speculative) capital and longer term capital
goes a long way in helping resolve the preoccupations regarding the effects of capital movements on
real exchange rates. To the extent that short term capital flows are more volatile, and thus capital
inflows are genuinely long term, especially if they help finance investment projects in the tradables
sector, the change in the RER will be a true equilibrium" phenomenon, therefore it has to be
recognized as such by implementing the required adjustment resource allocation. In practice,
however, discriminating between "permanent" and "transitory" capital inflows is difficult; at the end
policyrnakers are forced to make a judgment call.


VI. Regional Trading Blocks, Multilateralism and Industrial Countries Protectionism
         As we approach the 21st century, the world economy is moving towards the formation of a
small number of trading blocks. Although the EEC and the North American Free Trade Agreement



     56More specifically, with this option the one digit inflationary goal will be postponed.
                                                    34
(NAFTA) are considered as the most formidable ones, a number of other trading blocks, with differ-
ent degrees of cohesion, are rapidly emerging. Among these, ASEAN in Southeast Asia, with its
dynamic and aggressive members, is especially promising. This is particularly so if the often-feared
formation of a Yen Zone in the Pacific—including Japan and the ASEAN countries—takes shape in
the next few years.57
       In the last few years, however, some new important trading blocks in the Western Hemisphere
have emerged, and are now attracting increasing attention from policy analysts. Among these,
MERCOSUR and the Andean Pact, which jointly group nine Latin American countries, are two of the
most important ones and have a volume of international trade that is expected to approach US$250
billion per year by the year 2000.58 What makes this new integrationist effort in Latin America
particularly interesting is that it is taking place within a context that strongly favors export promotion
and the expansion of international trade throughout most of the developing world.
       Interestingly enough, in addition to the somewhat large multi members trade agreements there
has recently been a proliferation of bilateral integration agreements. Table 12 presents a brief
summary of recently (post 1990) trade agreements negotiated trade agreements. The majority of the
Latin countries have expressed keen interest in joining the NAFTA, and see the bilateral — or small
multilateral, for that matter — agreements as an intermediate step. Table 13 contains data on the
evolution of intraregional trade, and table 14 on bilateral trade for selected countries. Several
important facts emerge from these tables. First, after having reached a low in 1985, intraregional
trade has expanded greatly in the last few years. Interestingly enough, and contrary to popular belief,
intaregional trade as a proportion of total trade is still significantly below its 1975-80 level.
Naturally, this means that there is significant room for further expanding intraregional trade. In this
context it is interesting to notice that intraregional trade in East Asia borders 30 % of total trade. In
a recent study Losada (1993) has found that, with reduced trade impediments, distance is the main
determinant of bilateral trade.




    575ee Schott (1991) for a general discussion on the recent formation, and prospects, of
trading blocks in the World economy.

   58MERCOSUR groups Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay. The members of the
Andean Pact are Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela.
Table 12- REGIONAL INTEGRA11ON AGREEMENTS IN ThE AMERICAS AFTER 1990
NAME AND MEMBERSHIP           DATE    OBJECTIVE                  CURRENT STATUS             MEMORANDA (1990)

And..1 Trad. Pr.latsnc. Act   1991    Duty-fr.. itbjs lot        Opatattonal
 BalM.                                $324 mIfl nknporta
Co4oinbla                             from And..n coa*ts.
Ecuador                               Ioth.U.S.
Peru
 United Stat.s

CM.-Colembt. FTA              1993    EstablMhnwd of             Op.rstton.J as of
                                      air.. bad. area            January 1994.

CM.-Meako PTA                 1991    EatabU.vnatd of a          Pr..atd masbntan           AQgr.gMs GOP: (.194240.2 MOan
                                      irs. bud. arsa             t.clptocal tarS! 7.5%      Poptiatton: 99.4 mIlton
                                      by January 1999                                       Tofal foreIgn bad.: 03$ 75.5 MOon
                                                                                            b*-r.glonaL trad• as S of
                                                                                            tofal foreIgn bud. 0.1

CM.-Van.zu.&a FTA             1993    EserIard of                Masbnwn tarS! to           A991.gatS GOP: 05$ 240.2 MOon
                                      a *. fred. area            bnpeqto from CM.           Pop iatton: 32.2 mIlton
                                      by 1999                    .cMdut.d to b. 20%         Total fendgr. fred.: 0947$s blion
                                                                 , 1994. CM.. tartS!        Vifra-t.glonaJ fred... S .4
                                                                 rat. rsmám .211%.          tot.J Ion sIgn frad.: 0.1
                                                                 TarWI. .cMdmMd to
                                                                 mach 0% kt 1999.

Ciombla-Vsn.u&a PTA           1992    EatabUslvnantS of          Common 1.1W! agr,.d        Agr.gat. GOP: US$ 91.3 biSon
                                      a frs. bud. at..           bt 1992. Conyvirsatlons    PopnAattan: 52 mIlton
                                      by 1992                    frilSatad .4th Made.       Total foralgn fred.. U5$ 34.7 biSon
                                                                 (Group of Th,.. to         kttre.r.glonal ...... S .1
                                                                 .slabllah fr. bud. area.   total fat.Ign bud.: 1.4

El Salvador-Guat.mals PTA     1991    EztablIsbuwtS of           Erdsr.d kdo
                                      a irs. bud. area.          oparabo In Octobat 1991

North Am.iican
Agzs.m.rut
                    Trade     I 992                 of a
                                      irs. bad, at.. by          and rattl.d.
                                                                                                               •1 .I
                                                                                            Popufabon: 352.7 riSen
 Canada                               2009. Ebm*matton of        In phase o4                Total foreIgn bad.: 03$ 1223.5 biSon
Matdco                                IsInLIBorIS                Januaryl 1994.             frmb.-t.glonalb.4.aa%.t
Unitad Stat..                         year. dep.ndIng on Si.                                tot.I foreIgn bad.: 15$
                                      product Exc.Øon. to

                                      and Madc.n p.Vofotan
                                      producto. PWTA cong.M.
                                      pmc.dartS-eat*t sigN.
                                      and obigattora tsQNdInQ
                                      IntaS.ctjal propMy flgM
                                      wttc... bad. and
                                      Inv.sbn,nt. U5.Casmada
                                      depute iettt.matS ryitsm
                                      sxt.nd.d to Mexlco
REGIONAL INTEGRATiON AGREEMENTS IN THE AMERICAS AFTER 1990 (Cont)
P4'.UE AMO EMBMP                   DATE    O1JECT1VE                  c*jP5)4T   STAT'J$           uEo&jo (toQa

Cdu.-C,sd M,s$cs PTA               19S3    PIudd.. P a too N.gododi. g.d W,Q,aa
                                           5w.aboo p.4od m al1d &w 03 p.sd.9
 Co cs                                            ,d( mds b.    .m,,gt bi ØO3 bA
 0 SUmdo'                                  mad, by Cavdss. siV S.     p.vc.sdsd do.y ma.
                                                      go d a PTA

 ws
 V.jUe-.
       T).. Cdoob
V.ds PTA
                                   19      .cIv    Ccawids
                                           cocp,sI bi A4 15)3
                                                                      E,wgy   s.c                  AQgrag.&. GOP US) 4 ba
                                                                      Pgn.d. N.gods)uis            PopsisI 352 ITdI&a
                                           Si.5.,. ca,*4.. ..d ud ooy. A sccd                      Tood       514. UlS 544 bSIo
                                           sslab14l a   5.. 5.4. ..     Noo 19E3   po4d.s t i.     Wd..d.Øa 5.4. as S.
                                           by 15)4.                   koois. 0 iIt I aooi.         51 bgn 5.4. 55
                                                                      Sasi. and .10 yaw 5an
                                                                      1w 5IWI. S0
                                                                      nds4.s and
                                                                      good. M.d..
                                                                      5)55,5,55w   SC
                                                                      and Vui..i.Ia.
                                                                                           aid

                                                                                       $9*ig 4..
                                                                        Jan 15)4 paiad
                                                                      5..... d Cd.p.sr.b.ISan.
                                                                      .lq..nwd m5)sd by nan
                                                                      Vanania saøw$S..
                                                                      '—'5.4.
Ccii. ci-I4a4c. PTA                1254    Eai.bd.Jvnwd     a         NagodaSu. bi
                                           5ss 5.4.                               5)55 and Nil.
                                                                      — b caisaibi.
                                                                      Mod.., .u goods Sod
                                                                      Cu oo do n55 —
                                                                      .Iwaw4t5i.ig5).
                                                                      Taiws an l naI55.
                                                                              555. mm.d w I 10
                                                                       WIS yanai M4.55 Co R..i
                                                                      —    aS b. 55an.d
                                                                      by Mc.bl las yaw. w lana.
                                                                      Ød Us 55 a4gln rsqiâY.g good.
                                                                      55 b. .1.4. aSI b)3 Sua U% v.giat

Uco-Cw555     AManca PTA           1052    Eai.bliWw,s.4 55'          S&.giand mgM.. tsdydcl       Aqgr.go2. QOP UU 255.3 b5)a,
 C..sa aic.                                P.. Sad. aw by             iii..and 55aaod ,and.Sal     PUIci. I 154 odlan
 0                                         O.cayøw lOSS               ..m ,idw                     lood 1w55go 5)4w US)   74.3 b
                                                                      ii&j..I..... Pmm5            b5i.c.g5u 5.4.5) S. 55
Mi.d.Jas
Ua,cc                                                                 — -—
                                                                      .Ssaw1 5) 554.
                                                                      lOSt CU ca aitUy
                                                                      angaQ.d bi bW,iW
                                                                                                   14. 5)55n 5.4.11



                                                                                   55ai Uodc.

                fr.,,adc. PTA      I 252   Prqdd.s 5) a nww.dp.oc55   145g4.Ia.s 955n.d b.,çi.Sa
Cu aica                                    v.i.4an p.4cd bi           aflw 0-3 pa.á4w4.
B E&'.do                                   ,d.tw55 55*      aS 5.     aaan-A Si 15)3 baA hans
                                           mad,by Van55s. san TI.     paoo..d.d 4..4y abica.
                                           5)55 g4. 55 a PTA
Mq
Paw,s



      Uslg (1904) and Wuid Oanl.
  REGIONAL INTEGRATiON AGREEMENTS IN ThE AMERICAS AFTER 1990 (Cont)
  NM&E A?40 MEM$Edp                 DATE     O5JECTrVE                      OJARENT $TAT1J$                   MEMOPA)43A (19



  Cd.             A4yoois FTA        p993    PPOdCss    tS n.cooj Nidida. 9id rpsiji
                                             Pwi*oi ps4od r ds              mAw 34 piddsds
  Co c.                                      vd.s.d    SAl            I.    amid b 1is3 b4 Aw.
   a SA.d                                    m.d. by Cdanofs. idi l.        poc.sd.d ddsy
                                                        god of. PTA

  ws
  '—'I.,,.


         of 1.s                      i9      j.cvs £oolav.                  gnwgy ..c                         AQgmgi. GOP: U$$ S bAhai
     co.Vwoo.ofs PTA                         osopidmi. ApI 19

                                                                                                   f
                                                                            dgnmd. Nmgid.la.                  Pp.4mson 13&2 ffdbol
                                             V. ha. COj*4a. s..d            imdw isy. .ft accad T (ordgn bads VU 54.4 bUU%
                                             SS*Al4E11 a fras bad. wa.      of Nov Ia3 pvua4da.

                                                                            kl sImt Sg
                                                                                                              mhisØaid bad... S of
                                             by 1aG4.                                0 adI I ama.            laid Imdgn bad. 0*
                                                                                 and iIO yaw hndboi

                                                                            kAwIdli. and          ioiAltd
                                                                            goods. lAnd.. Is la
                                                                                 Isds hi CdTh.
                                                                            mdVancas.. $Ig,Wig d..
                                                                            of Jan 1.54 pcsa1sd
                                                                            ba.sa. of 4sp.. r.bof5an.
                                                                           Aq.SnanImU.d by nsa
                                                                           Van..jofmr    is

 Cami lbca4lidco PTA                 IbgA    8tab4iNnsd of a               Nsgdsdaa bb pvoas..
                                             54. aø. a...                  Awnowof of an          and Nib.
                                                                           bsai bd camila..
                                                                           Undo..       of goods bid
                                                                           Cods c. do.. lid pidjc.
                                                                               mis — hi.
                                                                           lads an Ii. nolda of Madam
                                                                                 lab. iidwssd .. I. 10
                                                                           and 11 ysa Usa of Coda can
                                                                                 am b.a0sa.d Ay*.•
                                                                           Dy &lideo fl lv. yaw     a
                                                                           Ngid iii of a4i reqilWwg goads
                                                                           U b. slid. adI       baa l. rsan.
Uoo-Caa.f Ammo. PTA                 1952    Eilab4iWwnw of.
 Cam. Sc.
                                                                           $&mgusrd r.gba.. l.ofwdd.         Aqgi.g.l. GOP: UU 340..3 bisan
                                            54. bad. a.. by                aS.. and spu95 i.sduS PUSma 112.4 5is
                                            Osoanw tao..                   sanais .rda           Tad b.dw bids USI 74.3 Dan
                                                                           nsgd.dm.. Ptwnt       D*.4.gImid l%d. U S of
 MOld.v.s
                                                                                                             tad loofgn bids Ii
 Misc.
                                                                           — did
                                                                           Sgoana.d Pa bad.

                                                                           1952. Cods cs marway
                                                                           angog.d Is bAwad
                                                                                       of*t Mad..
Vanisc.-C.nds Amano. PTA            iGQ3    Pwadd.. Pa S na..o.dpvsc.d     N.gadida. gat.d Ispis.s
 Coca o.                                    Dadam patod Is ofdda           .49w 04 ptiddanad
 9 *.4a.a                                           lawN SAl am b.         MIVadI Di 1095. ba how.
                                            sad. by Vancaidi. *91 01q      pioc..d.d dady Iso..
 I4osa                                      owanLa god of. FTA




Eo.c. t.oDg (I 904) and W1d 6.114
Table 13 - INTRA REGIONAL TRADE IN LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
Intra Regional Exports as a Percentage of Total Exports
                                                                                                                                Jan Oct
                      1970    1975    1980   1981   1982   1963   1984   1965   1968   1967   1988   1969 1990     1991   1992 1992 1993


Argentina              21.1   25.9    23.8   19.7   20.4   14.1   18.5   18.7   23.9   21.6   20.5   25.9   26.3   30.3   34.1   35.5   37.3
Bolivia                 9.7   35.9    36.7   42.6   51.6   55.0   52.8   60.2   64.5   57.8   47.7   44.0   45.6   51.2   40.7   42.1   44.6
Brazil                 11.8    15.7   18.1   19.3   15.6   10.4   11.5    9.7   12.4   12.4   12.1   12.1   11.6   16.7   22.6   22.2   22.9
Chile                  12.2   23.7    24.3   21.9   19.4   12.1   15.0   14.5   17.0   17.0   12.8   12.1   12.5   14.4   17.1   16.3   18.5
Colombia               10.5   21.7    17.6   23.7   21.7   14.0   13.5   14.0   11.4   17.3   16.0   16.0   16.9   24.1   23.0   22.5   24.8
Costa Rica            23.9    29.3    35.0   35.7   29.3   30.6   26.6   23.2   17.6   16.6   17.1   17.8   16.5   18.1   19.8   20.2   16.5
Mexico                 9.8     14.3    6.9    9.8    8.8    7.5    6.4    5.4    6.7    7.8    7.5    7.1    6.6    4.3    4.8    4.7    4.9
Peru                   6.5     16.7   212    12.8   15.4   10.4   11.9   14.1   14.5   16.1   14.5   15.3   15.4   16.1   18.1   18.7   21.7
                       12.8   29.3    37.3   26.6   30.8   23.7   26.2   27.8   392    30.3   27.4   36.8   39.0   40.4   41.9   432    45.7
Uruguay
Venezuela             33.5    33.2    37.4   36.6   21.4   20.9   19.2   18.3   20.0   23.9   21.6   21.5   22.8   20.1   27.2   27.5   30.3


LAG                    17.6   21.0    22.2   21.1   17.5   14.0   13.7   12.6   14.1   14.9   14.3   15.4   16.0   16.1   18.6   18.6   19.0



Source: Direction of Trade Statistics, IMF
Table 14- INTRA-REGIONAL EXPORTS
Fob values, percentage of total


From      To             1980 1961 1982 1983 1984 1985 1980 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 r',
ARO       BRA             9.5     6.5    7.4    4.6   5.9   5.9 10.2       8.5    6.7   11.5   11.5    12.4 13.7 30.4
ARO       CMI.            2.7     2.1    2.2    2.4   1.8   1.3     2.0    2.3    2.0    3.7    3.7     4.1    4.7    6.7
ARQ       COt.             0.5    0.6    0.9    0.8   0.7   1.6     0.9    1.0    0.9    0.8    0.6     0.7    0.9    1.0
ARG       PER              1.5    1.0    1.4    1.2   1.6   1.9     2.5    2.2    1.9    1.7     1.5    1.7    1.9    2.2
ARO       VEN              0.8    1.1    1.3    0.7   1.4   0.9     0.7    0.9    1.4    1.0     1.2    1.7    1.7    1.8

BRA MG                     5.4    3.8    3.2    3.0   3.2   2.1     3.0    3.2    2.9    22     2.1     4.7    5.5    9.2
BRA       Cl-IL            2.2    2.7    1.4    1.0   1.0   0.9     1.1    1.4    1.6    2.1    1.5     2.1    2.6    2.3
BRA       COt              0.7    0.9    1.3    0.7   0.5   0.4     0.5    0.5    0.7    0.6    0.5     0.5    1.0    1.0
BRA       PER              0.0    1.2     1.1   0.3   0.5   0.4     0.7    0.3    0.6    0.4    0.5     0.7    0.6    0.5
BRA       VEN              1.1    1.5    2.3    1.2   1.4   1.2     1.6    1.4    1.5    0.5    0.9     1.4    1.2    12
CML       ARG              6.0    4.8    4.1    3.1   3.2   2.2     3.8    3.4    2.3    1.3     1.3    2.9    4.5    5.1
CML.      BRA              9.6    7.3    8.3    4.3   6.2   5.4     6.9    6.3    4.7    6.4     5.7    6.0    4.5 52
CML       COt              1.0    1.8    1.2    1.1   1.2    1.4    1.0    1.0    0.5    1.0     0.9    0.8    0.7    0.3
CHI.      PER              1.5    1.8    1.3    1.0   1.2    1.2    1.6    1.7    0.9    0.7     0.9    1.6    1.7    1.5
CHI.      VEN              1.7    1.6 12 0.8          1.1   0.9     1.0    1.4    1.5    0.4     0.4    0.8    0.7    0.8

COt       ARG              1.7    1.7    1.2    1.4   1.7   1.0     1.3    0.3    1.0    0.0     0.4    0.5    1.0    1.3
COt       BRA             02 0.2         0.1    0.2   0.4   0.2     02 0.4        0.2    0.4     0.4    0.7    0.9    2.0
COt.      CML              1.6    1.0    0.4    0.4   0.5   0.6     0.6    2.0    2.4    2.3     2.4    2.2    1.3    1.3
COt.      PER              0.7    1.5    1.1    0.6   0.7   0.9     1.4    2.4    1.7    1.1     1.3    2.9    4.2    4.6
COt.      yEN              7.1   11.5   11.5    3.8   2.8   3.6     2.9    4.4    4.4    3.2    3.0     6.9    6.8    7.3

PER       ARO              1.5    0.6    0.8    1.2   1.1   1.2     2.3    1.5    0.5    0.5    0.9     0.9    0.8    1.0
PER       BRA             3.2     1.5    2.2    2.0   1.5   1.6     2.9    4.2    3.0    4.5    3.9     3.1    4.7    0.0
PER       CML.            1.2     1.5    12     1.5   1.6   1.7    2.0     1.2    1.5    1.9    1.7     1.3    1.2    12
PER       CCI.            1.4     2.8 42        1.7   2.4   2.5    2.6     2.4    3.1    3.0    2.9     3.2    2.5 32
PER       VEN             1.3     1.4    1.7    1.0   1.0   1.4     16     2.4    3.1    12     1.7     2.4    3.1    3.6

VEN       ARG             0.3     0.2    0.1    0.0   0.0   0.0    0.1     0.0    0.2    02     0.0     0.1    0.2    0.2
VEN       BRA             35 4.7         8.3    3.7   3.2   1.8    0.8     1.4    1.5    2.0    1.9     1.8    2.3    2.9
VEN       Cl-IL           13      1.7    1.4    1.4   1.4   1.7     1.4    1.3    1.4    1.2    1.0     0.8    0.8    0.3
VEIl      COt.            1.4     1.6    1.8    2.2   2.0   1.5     1.2    0.1    1.7    2.1    2.1     1.5    2.2    2.5
VEN       PER             0.1     0.1    0.1    0.1   0.1   0.2    0.4     0.1    0.5 02 0.2            0.5    0.5    0.9


(') Data through October 1993 except br the case of exports from AI9entlna to Braxfl, that corresponds to May 1993.


Source: DIr.ctiori of Trade StatIstic.. IMF
                                                    35
Vi.) MERCOSUR
        The Mercado ComUn del Sur (MERCOSUR) is a trade agreement signed by Argentina, Brazil,
Paraguay and Uruguay in 1991.       Its main goal is to eliminate all tariffs for intra-regional trade by
December of 1994, and to establish a common external tariff that would guide international trade
between the member countries and the rest of the world. What is particularly interesting about
MERCOSUR is that it groups the two largest countries in South America — Argentina and Brazil —
with two of the smailest. Table 15 contaim data on some basic indicators on these countries, as
well as of Andean Pact members (see below). These data clearly highlight some of the differences
across them—including size, recent performance and extent of international indebtedness. There is
little doubt that the future of MERCOSUR will depend on the policies of the two largest countries —
Argentina and Brazil; Umguay and Paraguay, as (much) smaller members, will play a very limited
role in the political-diplomatic process that will determine the actual characteristics of the agreement.
        Table 15, however, does not capture some important recent economic developments that are
likely to impact on the future of this agreement. While Argentina has recently been able to make
substantial progress in attaining macroeconomic stability and in launching an ambitious privatization
program, Brazil has faced economic and political problems. The resignation of President Collor
added further uncertainty to the future of Brazil's reform programs. Brazil's inability to control
inflation is particularly serious. In fact there is widespread agreement that many of the troubles
encountered by early integrationist attempts in Latin America during the 1960s and 1970s, had their
roots in the marked differences in macroeconomic performance, including inflation and exchange rate
policies.61
       The differences in strategy regarding the speed and depth of privatization and trade reform
suggest that disagreements could easily erupt between Argentina and Brazil with regard to points
closely related to MERCOSUR. In particular, an increasingly large number of observers in Argentina


     59The legal document that sets the basis for MERCOSUR is the Asunción Treaty. This
treaty had its origins in an integration act signed between Argentina and Brazil in 1986.
New acts were signed between these two countries in 1989 and 1990. For details see
Nogues and Quintanilla (1992).
    Chile was invited to join, but declined. Chile, however, is moving briskly towards
integration with Argentina through the signature of bilateral agreements.
  61Baldinelli (1991) discusses some of the most important macroeconomic policies in the
MERCOSUR countries.
Table 15- ECONOMIC INDICATORS FOR MERCOSUR AND ANDEAN PACT COUNTRIES


                                                        MERCOSUR                                                       Andean Pact

                                      Argentina        Brazil        Paraguay   Uruguay   Bolivia        Colombia      Ecuador        Peru        Venezuela

GDP, 1992 (USS million)                154,400 406,500                 6,500    11,400    5,300          46,200        12,400        26,300       61,100

GNP per capita, 1992 (US$)     i         4,160         2,940    /      1,410    2,840      680            1,300         1,060         1,080        2,920

GDP growth, 1980-92
 (annual average, percent)                 0.6           1.2             2.7      0.7       0.7             3.4           2.4          -0.7          2.1

Share of Manufacturing                      22            22    gi        17       25        16     gi      20    gi       21   d/     n.a.           16
 in GD?, 1992 (percent)

Investment ratio, 1992 (percent)            17            19              24       13        16              18           20             16 d/        23

Merchandise Exports, 1992
 (USS million)                         12,000     36,200                 920    1,700      600           7,300         3,000          3,500       14,000

Exports growth, 1980-92 hI
 (annual average, percent)                 3.5           7.1             7.2      4.2       3.4            5.7            5.0          0.9    /      2.0

Total External Debt, 1992
 (USS million)                         66,500 118,700                  1,800    5,200     4,200          16,700        12,300        21,000       33,700

Inflation, 1980-92  /
  (annual average, percent)               341           373              23       63       170              25            38           287            22


/    Calculated according to the World Bank Arla.r method,
hi   Exports of Goods and Non-Factor Services. in oonstant prices.
     Growth in GD? deflator, compound rate.
     1991 data.
iI
Source: World Bank;      World Development Indicators (1993), International Economics Department databases, and country department staff
            estimates.
Note:       All 1992 data are preliminary estimates.
                                                   36
are concerned that Brazil will insist on a higher common external tariff than what would be acceptable
to Argentina. The current structure of protection in the individual members of MERCOSUR,
discussed above, shows that there may indeed be some room for disagreement. While Argentina has
recently embraced a significant free trade stance—slashing tariffs, reducing non-tariff barriers (NTBs)
considerably and completely eliminating export taxes—Brazil is aiming at a higher and more variable
tariff structure.
        Table 16 contains data on the recent level of intra-regional trade for the MERCOSUR
members. As can be seen, intra-regional trade is more important for Argentina (with 17%) than for
Brazil (11 %).62 This suggests that it is in fact Argentina who is bound to lose more in the
eventuality that MERCOSUR is aborted. From a political economy perspective this means that it is
likely that in negotiations regarding policies toward third parties, Brazil may have an important edge.
If this is the case, and MERCOSUR is implemented around high import tariffs—with a range of 0-
40%, which corresponds to the Brazilian liberalization target—it is very unlikely that its members
would experience a net gain over the long run. More specifically, in the case of Argentina joining a
trade agreement with Brazilian-level common external tariff it is likely to result in "trade diversion"
that would more than offset any benefits derived from trade creation.63
        Table 17 presents the expected path of elimination of tariffs for intra-regional trade within
MERCOSUR. Two main differences with respect to previous attempts at integration immediately
stand out. First, there is a very high degree of automaticity in the integration process within
MERCOSUR, and second, the total time frame allowed for integration is significantly shorter than
those attempted previously (Edwards and Savastano, 1989). These features of the Asuncion Treaty



    62The data in the table refer to 1992. Historically, Brazil's intra-regional trade has been
significantly lower—on the order of 4% of total exports.
     63The higher the common external tariff, the more likely it is that a Customs Union will
have net negative welfare effects on its members. The reason is that in this case there will
be additional trade diversion. Commodities that, at the original tariff, were imported from
the least expensive source will be imported from a less efficient regional member. On trade
creation and trade diversion see, for example, Dornbusch (1989). Notice, however, that
GATT does not allow for a common tariff exceeding the members average before the union.
It is unclear, however, whether this provision can actually be enforced.

    On historical integrationist attempts in Latin America see Edwards and Savastano
(1989).
    Table 16- TRADE AMONG MERCOSUR COUNTRIES, 1992


                           Percentage            Value
                           of Exports        (USS Mlilions)

        Argentina             17                2,100
        Brazil                11                4,100

        Paraguay              37                  220

        Uruguay               34                  540



Source: Direction of Trade Statistics, IMP
Table 17- PERCENTAGE OF IMPORTS SUBJECT TO
           FREE TRADE IN MERCOSUR



          Date                  Percentage
          6/91                     47

          12/91                    54

          6/92                     61

          12/92                    68

          6/93                     75

          12/93                    82

          6/94                     89

          12/94                   100


          Source: Treaty of Asuncion (1991)
                                                    37

are a clear reflection that, even in an agreement dominated by a not fully enthusiastic reformer such
as Brazil, the rules governing opening up are quite aggressive and dynamic. An important, and as yet
unresolved question, however, is whether this ambitious automatic intra-regional liberalization
program can be sustained in the presence of major macroeconomic imbalances in Brazil.


VL2 The Revival of the Andean Pact
         In November of 1990, more than two decades after its initial launching, the Andean Pact was
renewed by the Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela.65 The new
agreement, which came to be known as the Ada de Ia Paz, established a number of ambitious targets,
including: (1) the implementation of a free trade zone in the region by 1992; (2) an agreement on
the level nd structure of the Common External Tariff (CET) by December 1991; (3) the
implementation of the CET by December 1995; (4) the liberalization of maritime and air
transportation; and (5) the facilitation of foreign investment and capital mobility within the Andean
group.
         It is important to notice that there is great heterogeneity among the countries in the pact (see
table 15). These differences refer both to the economic structure, as well as to macroeconomic
policy. For instance, while Bolivia and Venezuela are moving steadily towards low inflation and
price stability, Peru continues to struggle in the area of macroeconomic management and Venezuela
is in a sort of macroeconomic limbo due to the recent political upheaval. Despite large increases
during 1992 and 1993, the volume of intra-regional trade remains somewhat limited (see table 18).
This reflects both the fact that factor endowments are rather similar across these countries, and that
there have been significant impediments to intra-regional trade. These have been related both to
administrative and commercial regulations, as well as to an extremely poor land transportation system
within the countries in the region. The low level of current intraregional trade suggests, in fact, that
there is a possibility of significant trade diversion once the Customs Union is launched. Whether this
actually happens will depend largely on the level and structure of the Common External Tariff. This,
in fact, has become a highly controversial issue that is currently threatening the future of the Pact.
         As the discussion on the extent of the reforms in Section V.2 showed, the Andean Pact nations
have a significantly more homogeneous structure of protection than the MERCOSUR countries (see


    65Chile, an original signatory of the Pact declined to participate.

    66Nogues and Quintanilla (1992) provide a detailed account of the Acra de Ia Paz.
        Table 18- TRADE AMONG ANDEAN PACT COUNTRIES, 1992



                                  Percentage       Value
                                  of Exports   (tJS$ Millions)
              Bolivia                 13            90

              Colombia                13           920

              Ecuador                  3            90
              Peru                     8           270

              Venezuela                3          .510


Source: Direction of Trade Statistics, IMP
                                                   38
Table 2). However, in spite of this, there are still some important differences regarding the
objectives of overall trade policy. While Bolivia and Peru have been pursuing aggressive free trade
reforms, Colombia and Venezuela have maintained a more protectionist stance, arguing that higher
tariffs are still necessary to encourage the formation of a strong industrial base. More recently,
however, the Colombian government has been more inclined to accelerate its opening up and its
integration to the rest of the world. The differences regarding commercial policies have already
generated some serious friction within the Ada de Ia Paz signatories, with Peru's threatening to
abandon the Pact altogether if the common external tax is set at a rate that is considered by its
authorities as "excessively" protectionist.67
         In December of 1991, and in accordance with the Acta deLa Paz, a new agreement was
signed by the Andean Group's political authorities. The Act of Barahona established free trade zones
between Bolivia, Colombia and Venezuela, starting on January 1, 1992. Ecuador and Peru were
expected to join the free trade zone later in July of 1992. With respect to the common external tariff
the Act of Barahona established an extremely cumbersome mechanism, with exceptions across both
countries and goods. More specifically, according to this act the CET should have four levels (0, 5,
10, 15 percent), except for Bolivia who would only have levels of 5 and 10 percent. There were also
exceptions for agricultural goods, automobiles and non-competing regional products, where the tariff
levels are still to be determined. From the beginning this agreement on CET had a serious problem,
including the fact that Rules of Origin were not determined. This means that for practical purposes it
is possible that the lowest tariffs (those of Bolivia) will become the effective CET for the region as a
whole.
         In May of 1992, only a few months after the CET agreement, the future of the Andean Pact
suffered a blow, when Peru unilaterally decided to suspend the preferential treatment granted to
imports from within the Pact. This action was part of a general Peruvian policy aimed at forcing a
lower CET on the Pact. As a consequence of this the governments of Colombia and Venezuela
decided to suspend negotiations with Peru on the Common External Tariff. It is too early to say
whether the Andean integrationist movement will continue to move forward, or whether it will result
in its (second) death. While negotiations at the diplomatic level are still on their way the individual
Pact members have proceeded with their policies.



   67The new political development in Peru, and especially the Fujimori "Coup", have
added considerable uncertainty to the integrationist process.
                                                    39
VI. 3 The Revitalization of the Central American Common Market
       During the early and mid-1980s, and largely as a result of the international debt crisis, the
Central American Common Market began to break down. Most countries in the area responded to
the debt crisis by imposing massive nontariff barriers, including multiple exchange rates. The most
important consequence of this increase in protectionism was that soon the CACM common external
tariff ceased to be relevant as, de facto, the different members had different implicit tariffs for
imports corning from outside the region. In 1986 the CACM received a fatal blow when the Central
American payments clearing mechanism collapsed.
       In July of 1991, and after several years of independently undertaking trade adjustment, the
Presidents of the Central American nations decided to revitalize the Central American Common
Market.69 Three important features of the renewed CACM are worth noting: first, the agreed-
upon common external tariff contemplates a range between 5 and 20 percent. This is significantly
lower than the tariff structure most Central American countries have had until recently and represents
a clear move towards trade liberalization (see Table 19). Second, the newly revitalized CACM
includes two new countries: Panama, which never joined the original agreement, and Honduras
which had withdrawn in 1969. And, third, in recent years the members of the CACM have very
actively utilized export promotion schemes as ways to diversiir and increase exports.7° Although it
is still too early to know how successful these schemes have been, recent evidence presented by
Saborio and Michalopoulos (1992) suggest that these have been very costly from a fiscal perspective,
without having accomplished significant effects on export expansion over and above what has been
obtained through more competitive real exchange rates.
       The renewed CACM is a far cry from the agreement originally enacted in the 1960s.
Nowadays, instead of promoting an inefficient and forced industrialization process behind protective
walls, the countries in the region are uniting forces as a way to compete internationally and rapidly
expand exports.




    68'flij collapse was partially the result of Nicaragua's accumulation of very large debt.
See Saborio and Michalopoulos (1992).

     69The details of the agreement appear in the Declaration of San Salvador, July 17, 1991.

     70See, for example, Saborio and Michalopoulos (1992).
                                           Mr
Table 19- TARIFF STRUCTURES IN THE CENTRAL AMERICAN COMMON

                                           (percentages)



              Prereform
           average tariffs   /   Average legal
                                  tariff 1987      1991 range 1993 range 1995 range

Costa Rica        52                  26             10-50       5-30      5-20
El Salvador       48                  23              5-35       5-25      5-20

Guatemala         50                  25              5-37       5-20      5-20

Honduras          41                  20              4-35       5-20      5-20

Nicaragua         54                  21              5-20       5-20      5-20


/   Ad valorem equivalent of average external tariff.

Source: Saborio and Michalopoulos (1992).
                                                     40
VI. 4 The North American Free Trade Agreement
       As in most of Latin America, Mexico's trade policy was characterized for decades by a
significant degree of protectionism and inward orientation. As discussed above, starting in late 1985
and as a component of a major structural adjustment plan, Mexico embarked on an ambitious
unilateral trade liberalization program. Import tariffs were halved and import licenses were reduced
from 92% to 20%.
       After almost a decade of intensive, and often confrontational, trade negotiations, the U.S. and
Mexico agreed in November of 1990 to move towards a free trade agreement. In February of 1991,
Canada, Mexico and the U.S. decided to start negotiating a North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), and later that year the U.S. Congress approved the "fast track" treatment to the
agreement. On August 12, 1992 the three parties announced that an agreement had been reached on
the exact nature of the proposed agreement.
       Both the U.S. and Mexican negotiators had originally expected that the U.S. government
would have submitted the agreement to Congress in the summer of 1992. However, U.S. presidential
politics, plus some deep disagreements regarding some details of the agreement delayed its submission
to the U.S. Congress until late 1993. The most important areas of contention between U.S. and
Mexican negotiators referred to: (1) defining rules of origin for specific products, including
automobiles; (2) establishing the rules for agricultural trade; (3) determining the treatment that will be
given to automobiles: (4) workers' protection in Mexico; and (5) environmental rules in Mexico,
especially on the border. Of these, perhaps the most important problem is defining rules of origin.
After a grueling debate, and the hasty implementation of a number of "side agreements", the NA.fTA
was finally passed by the U.S. Congress in November of 1993. The agreement establishes very
different speeds of liberalization for different sectors. For example, according to the final text, in
order for motor vehicles to be subject to free trade within NAFTA, their regional value added should
initially be at least 50%. This figure, however, will increase slowly for a period of eight years until
it reaches 62.5%. Regarding the agriculture sector, the agreement proposes, for most items, a very
slow tariff elimination over a period of 15 years.
       A number of authors have argued that the NAFFA will have a severely negative effect on
Mexico's agricultural sector (ITAM, 1994). In fact, the January 1993 uprising in Chiapas by the
Zaparistas Mayan indians was, at least in part, the result of the perception that the NAFTA would
"wipe out" traditional agriculture in that state. A recent study by Velez and Rubio (1994) indicates
that production of most grains in Mexico — sorghum, wheat, barley, soy beans, beans, and maize —
                                                    41
will uffer considerably by the implementation of the free trade agreement. Grain production in
Mexico is highly inefficient, and subject to a significant degree of protection. In order to avoid a
devastating impact of free trade on Mexican agricultura, the NAFTA considered the implementation
of high initial tariffs — at a height that would replicate the protection granted by traditional licenses.
These tariffs will be phased out gradually through time. For instance, the agreement established an
initial import tariff on barley of 128%, which will be subject to gradual elimination in ten years.
Maize is, perhaps, the most dramatic case of inneficient production. Mexico's average yields are
approximately 1.7 tons per hectare, barely one fourth of average yields in the U.S. The NAFTA
established a tariff-quota for maize imports into Mexico. Initially it will be possible to import 2.5
millions tons free of duties. During the first year of NAFFA, imports above that level will be subject
to a 215% tariff, which will be subject to complete liberalization in 15 years.
       As Nogues and Quintanilla (1992) have argued, the heavy media coverage received by
NAFTA negotiations has tended to overshadow the broader commitment made by the Mexican
government towards freer trade. In fact, after becoming a member of GAll' in 1986, Mexico has
consistent and systematically pursued freer trade policies. This has been reflected in the reduction in
trade impediments, in the signing of bilateral trade agreements with Chile (1991), and in the current
discussions to sign free trade agreements with Venezuela (1993), Colombia and Central America.
The recent negotiations to become a member of the OECD also underlie the Mexican government
vision of the importance of freer trade as a fundamental component for the national development
strategy for the next decades. However, in order for this policy position to be translated into
additional gains in productivity and welfare, it will be necessary to further reduce tariffs and license
coverage, and, as discussed in the preceding sections, to effectively broaden the reforms to all areas
of the economy, and especially agriculture. Although Mexico has come a long way, there is still a
long road towards achieving a protective structure similar to that of its most important trade partners,
including the U.S. and Canada.


VJ.5. GAIT and the Prospects for Global Trade Liberalization
       There is little doubt that Latin America has embarked on one of the most substantial unilateral
trade liberalization reforms in modern economic history. However, a serious concern among the
region's political leaders has been the lack of reciprocity on behalf of the industrial countries. While
the Latin American nations have greatly opened up their trade sector to foreign competition, most
industrial nations have continued to follow protectionist practices. In fact, as captured in Table 20,
Table 20 - PROTECTION AGAINST LATIN AMERICAN EXPORTS
                     BY OECD COUNTRIES
       Non-Tariff Barrier Coverage Ratios, mid-i 980s (percent)

                                     IMPORT-WEIGHTED
       COUNTRY                       LEVEL OF THE NIB



       Argentina                            63.0

       Brazil                               38.3

       Chile                                23.8

       Mexico                                8.4

       Pew                                  12.8

       Uruguay                              23.2

       Venezuela                             3.2

       Central America                      17.1



       Average LAC                          28.6




       Source: Learner (1990)
                                                  42
the industrial countries have traditionally imposed significant restrictions on Latin American exports.
These trade impediments have taken mostly the form of non tariff barriers (NTBs), including quotas,
prohibitions and licenses. The approval of GAIT's Uruguay Round package in December 1993
provides some hope that in the years to come multilateralism could result in a more open world trade
system — see Table 21 for a summary of the Uruguay Round most important implications for Latin
America.
       Before 1947, when the first round of multilateral trade negotiations was held in Geneva,
average tariff protection in industrial countries was above 100% •71 Fueled by the Smoot-Hawley
Tariff Act of 1930, protectionist ideas grew during the first decades of the century leading the world
economy to the Great Depression. After seven rounds of GATT-sponsored negotiations, that average
had been reduced to 5% by 1993. However, in spite of this lowering in import tariffs, most
industrial countries continued to use extensively an array of NTBs that effectively raised the degree of
protectionism. In fact, by 1993 LDCs imports into some industrial countries were, for all practical
purposes, prohibited.
      The liberalization of world trade contemplated in the Uruguay Round will be implemented
gradually throughout a ten years period. From an institutional point of view one of the most
important elements of the agreement is the creation of the, World Trade Organizationwhich is
suppose to replace the GATT in 1995. Market access negotiations, which will largely determine the
actual extent of the liberalization effort, are expected to be completed in the Morocco ministerial
meeting of April 1994.
        Some authors (Corden 1984, for example), have argued that regional integration schemes will
act as intermediate steps towards a more perfect multilateral system based on GATTIWTO. There
are, however, some problems with this idea. The current structure of trading blocs is not cooperative
across groups, so that the gains from more intra-bloc trade have to be compared with the losses from
less trade between groups. Moreover, the U.S. is currently pushing forward a policy of reciprocity
rather than free trade.
        The Uruguay Round covers trade in agriculture and textiles, services and investment
regulations. Overall, according to the agreement industrial countries' average trade-weighted tariffs
on LDC's exports will have to be reduced in 34% in ten years (from 6.4 to 4%). Developing
countries, in turn, have committed themselves to increase the coverage of duties bound and to remove



     71 This, and the paragraphs that follow are based on Losada (1994).
Table 21 - MAIN RESULTS OF THE URUGUAY ROUND
             SIGNIFICANCE FOR LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES


AREA                 RESULTS


1.   Market Access   Overall cut of 33% In Import tariffs on Industrial products, reductions in peaks and escalation. Tariffs reduced In five
                     equal annual steps, starting with entry Into force of Woild Trade Organization. Weightedaverage tariff down from
                     6.4% to 4.0% in industrial countries. Share of duty free imports from 20% to 43% in industrial countries. Developing
                     country tariff bindings Increased from 12% to 56% of imports.
                     Lower than average tariff cuts made in 'sensitive' sectors, such as textiles, clothing, footwear,and transport
                     equipment.
                     42% reductionIn tariffs on agriculturaltropical products and 57% on industrial tropical products in
                     Industrial countries. Some developIngcountries will experienceerosion of preference margins.
                     34% cut In tariffs on natural resourcebased products. Larger than average gains In some metals and minerals,
                     lower gains for fish.
                     LDCs with high per capita Incomeare required    to phase-out subsidies within eight years.


2. AgrIculture       Gradual liberalization process In the sector - over 6 years for Industrial countriesand 10 years for developing countries.
                     Bindings on agricultural tariffs increasedfrom 81% to 95% of Imports(Industrial countries) and from 23% to 90% (LDCs),
                     virtualeliminationof all NTBs. Minimumtariff cut of 15% on all tariff lines by Industrial countries,
                     average tariff reduction of 36% over 6 years from a 1986-88 base, Restrictions againstimports subject to a
                     tarifficatlon commitment
                     Reduction in exportsubsidies by 36% In value and 21% In volume over the Implementation period. Reduction of
                     domesticsupport programs by 20%.
                     Spedal safeguardprovisions permit the imposition of additional duties up to certain limits, triggered.
                     by both price and volume clauses.
Table 21 - MAIN RESULTS OF THE URUGUAY ROUND (cont.)

AREA                  RESULTS



3. Textiles and       Fours-step phaseoutof the Multi-Fiber Agreementover 10 years. Gradual integrationof the sector
    Clothing          into the WTO. Expansionof outstanding quota restrictions. Provisions to redistibute quotas
                      in favor of quota-constrained and efficient exporters. LDC exporters accountingfor less than 3%
                      of a countrys imports of a product are exempted from safeguardaction, provided that all developing
                      members with less than 3% share account for less than 0% overall.



4. Intellectual       National treatmentand Most favored nation clauses are to apply in respect of all intellectual property rights.
    Property Rights   Subsidiesto research activities are declared non-actionable. Provisionof minimum standards for copyrights,
                      trademarks,Industrial design, patents, etc.
                      Patent protection for 20 years In all areas of technology, induding pharmaceuticals.
                      One year delay period for the Implementationof trade-related Intellectual property rights after the
                      establishment of WTO. The delay for developing and transitional economies Is extendedto five years,
                      except   for the Most favored nation and National treatmentdauses.

5. Servrces           Extension of multilateral rules to a large segment of world trade (20%). General Agreementon Trade In
                      Services establishes the non-discriminationprinciple, Induding.most of the GAIT-type provisions.
                      Framework   for establishing and maintaining liberalizationcommitments. Continuing negotiations related
                      to safeguards, subsidiesand government procurement Special annexes addressspecificity of sectors.
                                                  43
export subsidies. In some cases the reduction is expected to be impressive; Brazil for instance
committed herself to lowering import tariffs from a maximum of 105 percent to a ceiling of 35

percent. Trade distorting investment measures, such as local content requirements, are also to be
eliminated in 5 to 7 years.
       The streamlining of intellectual property protection is expected to help some developing
countries that have started exporting knowledge-intensive goods, such as software and agriculture-
related technology.
However, the liberalization measures agreed upon in December 1993 are rather timid in some areas —

especially in agriculture --, and the implementation timetable is too lengthy. Safeguard rules are
expected to be softened, and could be introduced in the future in a discriminatory way and without
compensation. Unfortunately, it is possible that these antidumping measures will give rise to a new
form of disguised protectionism.
       The successful completion of the Round is expected to provide both static arid dynamic gains
to the world economy. The developing countries' share of these gains will be about one third. Trade
is expected to grow by 12% in the next 10 years, due exclusively to the Round. LDCs will not
receive a significant share of the dynamic gains, since economies of scale and technological spillovers
through greater innovation are likely to accrue to exporters of industrial goods.
                                                44


References

Agacino, R., 0. Rivas, and E. Roman. 1992. "Apertura y eficiencia productiva: La experiencia
Chilena, 1975—1989." Working Paper 113. Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, D.C.

Balassa, Bela. 1971. The Structure of Protection in Developing Countries. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

Balassa, Bela. 1982. Development Strategies in Semi-Industrial Economies. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

Baldinelli, EIvio. 1991. "Armonización de Politicas Fiscales, Crediticias, y de Promoción de
Exportaciones." buegraciOn Latinoatnericana 16 (May).

Barro, Robert. 1991. "Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 106 (2).

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1978. Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Anatomy and
Consequences of E.rchange Control Regimes. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Bianchi, Andres and Takahashi Nohara, eds., 1988. A Comparative Study on Economic Development
between Asia and Latin America. Tokyo: Institute of Developing Economies.

Bonelli, Regis. 1992. "Growth and Productivity in Brazilian Industries: Impacts of Trade
Orientation." Journal of Development Economics 39 (1).

Bruton, Henry. 1989. "Import Substitution." In Hollis Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan, eds.,
Handbook of Development Economics. Vol. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhardt. 1992. "Capital Inflows and Real
Exchange Rate Appreciation." IMF Working Paper 62. International Monetary Fund, Washington,
D.C.

Cardoso, Eliana, and Ann Helwege. 1992. Latin America's Economy: Diversity, Trends and Conflict.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Castro, Antonio, and Carlos Lessa. 1969. Introducción a Ia Economla: Un Enfoque Estructuralista.
Santiago: Editorial Universitaria.

CEPAL (Comisión EconOniica para America Latina). 1991. Balance Preliminar de Ia Economfa de
America Latina y el Caribe. Santiago: CEPAL.

CEPAL (Cornisión Económica para America Latina). 1992. Equidad y TransformaciOn Productiva:
Un Enfoque Integrado. Santiago: CEPAL.
                                                 45
CEPAL (Comisión Econdmica para America Latina). 1993. Statistical Yearbook of Latin America.
Santiago: CEPAL.

Coes, Donald. 1991. "Brazil." In Michael Michaely, Armeane Choksi, and Demetris Papageorgiou,
eds., Liberalizing Foreign Trade. New York: Basil Blackwell.

Corbo, Viuorio, Timothy Condon, and Jaime de Melo. 1985. "Productivity Growth, External Shocks,
and Capital Inflows in Chile: A General Equilibrium Analysis." Journal of Policy Modelling 7 (3).

Corden, Warner Max. 1966. "The Structure of a Tariff System and the Effective Protection Rate."
Journal of Political Economy 74 (3).

Corden, Warner Max. 1984. "The Normative Theory of International Trade." In Ronald Jones and
Peter Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 1. Amsterdam, North-Holland.

Dc Gregorio, José. 1992. "Economic Growth in Latin America." Journal of Development Economics
39(1).
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos. 1970. Essays on the Economic History of the Argentine Republic. New
Haven: Yale University Press.

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos. 1978. Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Colombia.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos. 1981. "Southern Cone Stabilization Plans." In William Cline and Sidney
Weintraub, eds., Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution.

Dixit, Avinash. 1986. "Tax Policy in Open Economies." In Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein,
eds., Handbook of Public Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1989. "Los Costes y Beneficios de Ia Integracion Econémica Regional: Una
Revision." Pensamiento Iberoamericano 15 (January—June).

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1991. "Policies to Move From Stabilization to Growth." Proceedings of the
World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Sebastian Edwards. 1990. "Macroeconomic Populism." Journal of
Development Economics 32 (2).

Edwards, Sebastian. 1984. "The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in Developing
Countries." Princeton Essays in International Finance No. 156. Princeton University, Princeton, N.J.

Edwards, Sebastian. 1985. "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten Years of Chile's
Experiment with Free Market Policies, 1973—1983." Economic Development and Cultural Change 33
(January).
                                                46

Edwards, Sebastian. 1988. Exchange Rate Misalignment in Developing Countries. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Edwards, Sebastian. 1989. Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and Adjustment: Exchange Rate Policy
in Developing Countries. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Edwards, Sebastian. 1992. "Trade Orientation, Distortions and Growth in Developing Countries."
Journal of Development Economics 39 (1).

Edwards, Sebastian. 1993a. "Exchange Rates as Nominal Anchors." Welrwirtschafthiches Archly 129
(1).

Edwards, Sebastian. 1993b. "Openness, Trade Liberalization, and Growth in Developing Countries."
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 31, September.

Edwards, Sebastian, and Alejandra Edwards. 1991. Monetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean
Experiment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Edwards, Sebastian, and Miguel Savastano. 1988. "Latin America's Intra-Regional Trade: Evolution
and Future Prospects." NBER Working Paper 2738. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Mass.

Elias, Victor. 1992. Sources of Growth: A Study of Seven Latin American Economies. San Francisco:
ICS Press.

Erzan, Refik, Kiroaki Kuwahara, Saratino Marchese, and Rene Vossenar. 1989. "The Profile of
Protection in Developing Countries." UNCTAD Review 1 (1).

Ffrench-Davis, Ricardo and Thomas Griffin. 1967. Teoria del Comercia Internacional. Mexico City:
Fondo de Cultura Económica.

Fischer, Stanley. 1986. "Issues in Medium-Term Macroeconomic Adjustment." World Bank Research
Observer 1 (2).

Fischer, Stanley. 1988. "Recent Developments in Macroeconomics." Economic Journal 98 (2).

Fishlow, Albert. 1985. "Revisiting the Great Debt Crisis of 1982." In Kwang Suk Kim and David
Ruccio, eds., Debt and Development in Latin America. North Bend, Indiana: University of Notre
Dame Press.

Fishlow, Albert. 1991. "Liberalization in Latin America." In Tariq Banuri, ed., Economic
Liberalization: No Panacea. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Furtado, Celso. 1969. La Economla Latinoamericana Desde Ia Conquis:a Ibérica Hasta la
RevoluciOn Cubana. Santiago: Editorial Universitaria.

Griffith-Jones, Stefany, and Osvaldo Sunkel. 1986. Debt and Development Crises in Latin America:
                                                  47
The End of an illusion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Hanson, James. 1992. "Opening the Capital Account." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
901. Washington, D.C.

Harberger, Arnold. 1982. "The Chilean Economy in the 1970s: Crisis, Stabilization, Liberalization,
Reform." In Karl Brunner and Allan Metzler, eds., Economic Policy in a World of Change,
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 17. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Harberger, Arnold. 1985. "Observations on the Chilean Economy, 1973—1983." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 33 (3).

Harberger, Arnold. 1990. 'Towards a Uniform Tariff Structure." University of Chicago, Department
of Economics.

Heitger, Bernhard. 1987. "Import Protection and Export Performance: Their Impact on Economic
Growth." Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 132 (2).

l-lirschman, Albert. 1968. "The Political Economy of Import Substituting Industrialization in Latin
America." Quarterly Journal of Economics 82 (1).

Ibarra, Luis. 1992. 'Credibility of Trade Policy Reform: The Mexican Experience." Ph.D. diss.,
University of California, Los Angeles, Department of Economics.

Iglesias, Enrique. 1992. Reflections on Economic Development: Toward a New Latin American
Consensus. Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.

Kim, Kwang Suk. 1991. 'Korea." In Michael Michaely, Armeane Choksi, and Demetris
Papageorgiou, eds., Liberalizing Foreign Trade. New York: Basil Blackwell.

Krueger, Ann. 1978. Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Liberalization Attempts and
Consequences. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Krueger, Ann. 1980. "Trade Policy as an Input to Development." American Economic Review 70 (2).

Krueger, Aim. 1981. Trade and Employment in Developing Countries. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Krueger, Aim. 1983. Exchange Rate Determination. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Lal, Deepak. 1985. "The Real Aspects of Stabilization and Structural Adjustment Policies: An
Extension of the Australian Adjustment Model." World Bank Staff Working Paper 636.
Washington, D.C.
                                                 48
Lin, Cling-Yuan. 1988. "East Asia and Latin America as Contrasting Models." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 36, S153-197 (April).

Little, Ian, Tibor Scitovsky, and Maurice Scott. 1970. Industry and Trade in Some Developing
Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Losada, Fernando. 1993. "Partners, Neighbors and Distant Cousins: Explaining Bilateral Trade Flows
in Latin America." Working paper, University of California, Los Angeles, June.

Losada, Fernando. 1994. "The Uruguay Round, OAT!' and Regionalism." Mimeo, World Bank,
Latin America and the Caribbean Region - Office of the Chief Economist, March.

Lucas, Robert. 1988. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development." Journal of Monetary
Economics 22 (1).

Lustig, Nora. 1994. "The Future of Trade Policy in Latin America." Working Paper, Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C., February.

Martin, Ricardo D. 1992. "Sources of Growth in Latin America." World Bank, Latin America and
Caribbean Region, Washington, D.C.

McGreevey, William Paul. 1990. "Social Security in Latin America: Issues and Options for the
World Bank." World Bank Discussion Paper 110. Washington, D.C.

McKinnon, Ronald. 1982. "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from Chile and
Argentina." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 17, Autumn.

Michaely, Michael. 1985. "The Demand for Protection against Exports of Newly Industrialized
Countries." Journal of Policy Making 7 (1).

Michaely, Michael, Armeane Choksi, and Demetris Papageorgiou, eds. 1991. Liberalizing Foreign
Trade. New York: Basil Blackwell.

Mill, John Stuart. 1884. Principles of Political Economy. New York: Appleton and Co.

Nogués, Julio, and Neera Gulati. 1992. "Economic Policies and Performance Under Alternative
Trade Regimes: Latin America During the 1980s." LAC Technical Department Report 16. World
Bank, Latin America and Caribbean Region, Washington, D.C.

Nogues, Julio, and Rosalinda Quintanilla. 1992. "Latin America's Integration and the Multilateral
Trading System." Paper presented at the World Bank/CEPR Conference on New Dimensions in
Regional Integration, Washington, D.C., April.

Ocampo, José Antonio. 1991. "Determinants and Prospects for Medium-Term Growth in Colombia."
Paper presented at the Lehigh University Conference on the Colombian Economy: Issues of Debt,
Trade, and Development, Lehigh University, Department of Economics, Bethlehem, Penn., April.
                                                49
Paz, Pedro, and Osvaldo Sunkel. 1971. El Subdesarrollo Latinoatnericano y Ia Teorla del Desarrollo.
Madrid: Siglo Veintiuno de Espafia.

Prebisch, Raül. 1950. "Commercial Policy in the Underdeveloped Countries. American Economic
Review 40 (2).

Prebisch, Ratul. 1984. "Five Stages in my Thinking on Development." In Dudley Seers, Cd., Pioneers
in Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Rodriguez, Carlos. 1982. "The Argentine Stabilization Plan of December 20th." World Development
10(9).
Roubini, Nouriel, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1992. "Financial Repression and Economic Growth."
Journal of Development Economic.s 39 (1).

Saborio, Sylvia, and Constantine Michalopoulos. 1992. 'Central America at a Crossroads." Policy
Research Working Paper 922. World Bank, Washington. D.C.

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1987. "Trade and Exchange Rate Policies in Trade-Oriented Adjustment Programs."
In Vittorio Corbo, Morris Goldstein, and Mohsin Khan, eds., Growth-Oriented Adjustment Programs.
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1988. "Conditionality, Debt Relief, and the Developing Country Debt Crisis. NBER
Working Paper 2644. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Sanchez, Manuel. 1992. "Entorno Macroeconómico Frente al Tratado de Libre Comercio." In ITAM,
Mexico: y el Tratado Trilateral de L.ibre Comercio. Mexico City: ITAM/McGraw-Hiil.

Schott, Jeffrey. 1991. "Trading Blocks and the World Trading System." The World Economy 14 (1).

Sheahan, John. 1987. Patterns of Developmnent in Latin America: Poverty, Repression, and Economic
Strategy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Singer, Hans. 1950. "The Distribution of Gains Between Investing and Borrowing Countries."
American Economic Review 40 (2).

Soils, Leopoldo. 1988. "Raul Prebisch at ECLA: Years of Creative Intellectual Effort," ICEG
Occasional Paper 10. International Center for Economic Growth, San Francisco.

Stockman, Alan C. 1982. "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Comment." In Karl Brunner and
Allan Meltzer, eds., Economic Policy in a World of Change. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Sturzenegger, Federico. 1992. "Bolivia: Stabilization and Growth." University of California, Los
Angeles, Department of Economics.

Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston. 1988. "A New Set of International Comparisons of Real Product
and Price Level Estimates for 130 Countries." Review of Income and Wealth 34 (March).
                                                50
Sunkel, Osvaldo. 1960. "Inflation in Chile: An Unorthodox Approach." international Economic
Papers 10 (August).
Taylor, Lance. 1991. "Economic Openness: Problems to the Century's End." In Tariq Banuri, ed.,
Economic Liberalization: No Panacea. New York: Clarendon Press.

Thorp, Rosemary. 1992. "A Reappraisal of the Origins of Import-Substitution Industrialization,
1930-1950." Journal of Latin American Studies 24 (supplement).

Tybout, James, 1992. "Linking Trade and Productivity: New Research Directions." World Bank
Economic Review 6 (2).

Valdés, Alberto. 1992. "The Performance of the Agricultural Sector in Latin America." World Bank,
Latin America and Caribbean Region, Washington, D.C.

Vuskovic, Pedro. 1970. "Distribución del Ingreso y Opciones de Desarrollo." Cuadernos de La
Realidad Nacional 7 (September).

Weiss, John. 1992. "Trade Policy Reform and Performance in Manufacturing: Mexico 1975—1988."
Journal of Development Studies 29 (1).

World Bank. 1987. World Development Report. New York: Oxford University Press.

World Bank. 1993. The Asian Economic Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy. New York:
Oxford University Press.
