                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TECHNOLOGICAL LINKAGES,
                             MARKET SThUCTURE, AND
                          OPTIMUM PRODUCTION POLICIES




                                    Douglas Holtz-Eakin
                                      Mary E Lovely




                                  Working Paper No. 4779



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1994



We thank Alan Deardorff, Doug Nelson. John Yinger, and pathcipants in the Mid-West
International Economics Meetings for valuable comments on an earlier draft, and Esther Gray,
Jennifer Gantt, and Ann Wicks for their aid in preparing the manuscript. This paper is part of
NB ER's reseaich program in Public Economics. Anyopinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Reseaich.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4779
                                                                                  June 1994

                               TECHNOLOGICAL LINKAGES,
                                MARKET STRUCTURE, AND
                             OPTIMUM PRODUCtiON POLICIES

                                          ABSTRACT



       There has been an increased intemst in the efficacy of industrial policy. We show that

policy design for vertically-related industries hinges on the nature of market interactions as well

as technological linkages. Using a model in which final-good producers realize productivity

gains from increasing domestic specialization of intermediate processes, we find no theoretical

basis for presuming that an imperfectly competitive intermediates sector restricts output below

the optimal level or that the market produces too many varieties. The direction of distortion

depends on the relationship between the extent of the external economy and the market power

of individual intermediates producers. Optimal corrective policies require two instruments: an

output subsidy and a lump-sum tax or subsidy. if only one instrument is available, it may be

optimai to tax instead of subsidize the externality-generating activity.



Douglas Holtz-Eakin                                         Mary E. Lovely
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
Center for Policy Research                                  Syracuse University
Syracuse University                                         Syracuse. NY 13244-1090
Syracuse. NY 13244-1090
and NBER
1.     INTRODUCTION

       The potential to benefit by exploiting scale economies and externalities has attracted

the attention of policymakers and has generated a heated debate over the efficacy of

industrial policy. At the heart of this debate is whether governments must intervene to

correct a market that would otherwise produce too little of an externality-generating activity.

Activities that generate spillover benefits for interconnected industries dominate the

discussion, in principle both because the spillovers may be large and because the inability of

the private sector to appropriate the gains seems assured. In such cases public subsidies

would seemingly offset private-sector underinvestment caused by limited appropriability.'

       We show that policy design for interconnected industries is not dictated by

technological linkages alone. Rather, optimal policies hinge as well on the nature of market

interactions among the affected industries. Using a model in which fmal-good producers

realize productivity gains from increasing domestic specialization of intermediate processes,

we compare the market equilibrium to the social optimum. We show that laissezfaire may

be characterized by either too few or too many varieties of intermediate goods and also by

either over- or under-exploitation of internal scale economies by the producers of each

variety. Thus, we find no basis for presuming that an imperfectly competitive intermediates

sector restricts output below the socially optimal level, or that the market produces too many

varieties. The model has the appealing feature of highlighting both technological and market

forces: the direction of the distortion depends on the relationship between the extent of the

external scale economies and the market power of each producer of differentiated

intermediates. Optimal corrective policies require two instruments to obtain the best

combination of specialized intermediate-good varieties and output per intermediates producer.


                                              —1—
       To focus on the relationship between market linkages and spillovers. we use a

framework that eliminates problems of appropriability caused by international returns to scale

and trade in intermediates? When scale economies are international in scope, trade

propagates the externality worldwide and calls into question the abilityof any single country

to affect the source of the returns to scale.3 With international returns to scale, policy

design must weigh the ability of one country to influence and capture the benefits of scale
economies, and the concomitant terms-of-trade effects of such manipulation. In contrast,

national returns to scale are more easily influenced by country-specific policies. Thus, while

we examine a country that is small on final-good markets, the government can control the

source of the scale economies and the domestic economy captures fully the benefits of scale

economies.

       While this framework provides a fertile setting for interventionist policies, we show

that the form of intervention may run counter to simple prescriptions for subsidizing

industries with external economies. If the government is able to offer both an output subsidy

and a lump-sum subsidy, the first-best policy offsets fully the fixed costs of production. This

offset, however, is composed of two parts: an output subsidy that ensures marginal cost

pricing and either a lump-sum subsidy or a lump-sum tax to ensure that the correct number

of firms enters the intermediates market. Whether the optimal lump-sum policy is a tax or

subsidy is determined by comparing the rate at which additional varieties generate external

economies to the rate at which imperfectly competitive input producers appropriate rents.

Only if the former exceeds the latter is the optimal policy a lump-sum subsidy.

       Even when the government is limited in its choice of instruments, the direction of

intervention is indeterminate. For example, if the government can only offer a lump-sum tax

or subsidy (such as a precommertial development subsidy), we show that a lump-sum tax


                                              -2-
may be required for the economy to achieve the second-best combination of scale and

diversity in the intermediates sector. Hence, the analysis emphasizes that there is no

presumption on technological grounds that the externality-generating activity should be

subsidized, even in the absence of an instrument to ensure marginal cost pricing.



2       PREVIOUS STUDIES

       The modern literature on product diversity and monopolistic competition dates to

Spence [1976] and Dixit and Stiglitz [1977]. Dixit and Stiglitz examine the welfare

properties of a model distinguished by household preferences that reflect a desire for variety

in consumption and by its adoption of the Chamberlinian notion of monopolistic competition.

Increasing returns in the production of each variety of consumption good limit the extent of

diversity that the market can provide. Dixit and Stiglitz show that when monopoly power

enables firms to pay fixed costs and entry cannot be prevented, the relationship between

monopoly power and the direction of market distortion is not obvious. They do not

characterize the optimal interventions but it is clear that the first-best entails pricing at

marginal cost and the financing of fixed costs by a lump-sum tax on consumer's income.4

       There are numerous applications of the Dixit-Stiglitz model to open economy settings;

we focus briefly on those concerned with policy design.5 Venables [1982] considers a

country that produces a homogenous good and differentiated goods but is a price taker on

world markets and cannot export profitably. He characterizes the social optimum and notes

that, in general, two policy instruments are needed to ensure that the optimal quantity and

number of commodities are produced. His main purpose, however, is to derive optimal

import tariffs. He finds that tariffs may increase welfare in this setting because they act as

second-best instruments to correct domestic distortions and because they can alter the number


                                                -3-
of commodities imported. Gros [1987] emphasizes terms-of-trade effects and argues that

even a small country is a unique supplier of its differentiated export good and thus can

influence its external price. Ham and Helpman [19871 investigate a variety of industrial

policies, including an output subsidy and an R&D subsidy. They emphasize that each policy

has consequences for both the number of finns producing differentiated products and output

per tb-rn. Policies may have terms-of-trade implications as well. They conclude that

intersectoral interactions and entry and exit opportunities in the differentiated-products

industry weaken the case for policy intervention.

         The model developed by Ethier [1979, 1982], which we adapt for the current

analysis, is similar to Dixit-Stiglitz. but differs because variety matters to. final-goods

producers rather than to consumers. Ethier posits that the finished-manufactures sector

experiences increasing returns in the number of intermediate input varieties, reflecting a

greater division of labor. He refers to these economies as international returns to scale and

notes that they do not require that all manufacturing output be concentrated in a single

location. Ethier uses the model to describe the pattern of interindustzy and intraindustry

trade.

         In the context of the Ethier model, Francois [1992] emphasizes the dependence of

policy design on whether the benefits of increased scale are contained within national

boundaries. He examines the justification for output subsidies to producers of differentiated

inputs and emphasizes the effect of subsidization on the terms of trade.6 With international

trade in intermediates, he argues that the first-best policy for small countries operating on

their own behalf is no subsidy. His reasoning is based on the inability of a small country to

influence distortions arising at the final-good level because domestic intermediates producers

are an insignificant share of world producers. In contrast, when intermediates are not


                                              -4-
traded, he argues that the first-best policy for a small county is an output subsidy that

induces intermediates producers to price at marginal cost.

       This paper, like Francois', emphasizes policy design but it shows that two

insthiments, an output subsidy and a lump-sum tax or subsidy, are needed for optimality.

We begin with a description of the model. Next, we derive the conditions necessary for a

sqcial optimum, depict the laissez-faire equilibrium, and compare the scale of output and the

number of intermediates produced in each instance. We derive the output subsidy and lump-

sum policy needed to support the social optimum as a competitive equilibrium. Finally, we

discuss the use of either an output or lump-sum subsidy when only one instrument is

available.



3.     THE MODEL

       We employ a model, drawn from Ethier [1979,1982], of a small, open economy

producing two final goods, "wheat' and finished "manufactures". Fixed supplies of capital

and labor are intersectorally mobile and are allocated in competitive factor markets. Wheat

is supplied by perfect competitors using capital and labor in a constant-returns-to-scale

technology. Capital and labor may also be used, again in a constant-returns-to-scale

technology, to produce "factor bundles" that serve as inputs into the production of

intermediate goods, referred to as 'components." In the final production stage, components

are transformed into the finished manufactured good.



       3.1 Factor SunDlies and Technolov

       The fixed endowments of capital and labor, and the technology for producing wheat

(B') and factor bundles (f) define a transformation function for the economy:


                                              -5-
                                                                                                 (1)
        W=T(f),
which may be rep resented by a familiar concave-to-the-origin production possibilities

frontier, with T' (1) <0 and TI' U) S 0. Competitive pricing for wheat and factor

bundles implies that the relative price of factor bundles in terms of wheat, which serves as

our numeraire throughout, is given by the opportunity cost

                                                                                                 (2)
        P1= -T'(f)
It is useful to summarize the elasticity of     with respect tof as

        6_LLT"o.
          df T'(f)
                                                                                                 (3)

       Turning now to the manufacturing sector of the economy, finished manufactures are

costlessly assembled from intermediate goods according to the production function


                                                                                                 (4)


where x, is the input of intermediate component i into the production of manufactures, M.

The production function (4) has two features of note. First, components are imperfect

substitutes; 0   (0 C 0 <   1)   measures the degree of 'differentiation" as the elasticity of

substitution between any pair of x is 11(1-8). Higher values of P indicate easier substitution

of components during assembly, hence less differentiation among the components.

       The second feature of (4) is the role played by ii, the number of differentiated

components employed in manufactures. As written, a measures returns to diversity in

intermediates, with a> 1 indicating increasing returns. Hence, the production function

embodies increases in output stemming from either greater scale (higher values of x? or

greater diversity (larger values of n). One might think of the latter effect as indicating

returns to more specialized domestic inputs, with the intermediates sector characterized by a

variety of active firms. We assume that there are many intermediates producers, each of

                                                -6-
whom views n and total input demand in the M sector as fixed. Thus, while a greaser

variety of intermediate-producing firms has beneficial productivity effects, no single private

agent has a direct interest in n, raising doubt as to whether a laissez-faire equilibrium will

generate the appropriate degree of diversity.7

       As in Ethier [1982] and Markusen (1989), we assume that all varieties of components

have identical production technologies. Since each variety enters symmetrically into the

production technology for finished manufactures, in equilibrium any produced variety will be

produced in the common quantity, x. Thus, (4) collapses to

       M=nax.                                                                                (4a)

We see from (4a) that finished manufactures are linearly homogeneous in the scale of

production, x, but homogeneous of degree a in n. These economies are external to the

finished-manufactures industry as components are assembled into finished manufactures by

many competitive firms, each of which takes n as given.



       3.2 Pricing and Production Decisions

       We assume that wheat and finished manufactures are tradeable; unlimited quantities of

either final good may be purchased or sold at the relative price given by        In contrast,

intermediate components are not traded, thereby capturing the notion that it is the local

intermediates sector that contributes uniquely to manufacturing productivity.8

       Because components are imperfectly substitutable, each producer experiences some

market power. However, there is free enny into each industry and we assume that

component producers behave as monopolistic competitors, niHng the behavior of other

component producers as given.9 The number of factor bundles required to produce x units

ofanyvarietyisax+b(a.b> O)indicadngreturnstoscaleatthefffmleveL The

                                              -7-
parameter Li defines the factor bundles that must be purchased prior to producing any single

variety of components, with these fixed costs serving to limit the number of active

intermediates producers in equilibrium. With n varieties of intermediate goods, the

aggregate demand for factor bundles isf = n(ax + Li).

       In analyzing production policies, we permit the government to affect both the

marginal and fixed costs of producing components by providing factor bundles to the

intermediate-goods sector. Specifically, the government may provide a lump-sum subsidy to

each finn equal to G factor bundles, and an output subsidy of s factor bundles per unit of

production of x. Note, however, that G < 0 and s C 0 are not precluded; the government

may choose to levy fixed and output-based taxes on producers of components. In the

presence of these policies, the per-firm demand for factor bundles is (a-s)x + (b-G), at a

private total cost of production equal to PA(a-s)x + (b-G)}. Note, however, there is an

offsetting demand for factor bundles generated by government purchases of &x + G, leaving

total bundles required to produce any variety unchanged at ax + Li. We assume the

availability of a lump-sum instrument to finance the purchase of factor bundles offered by the

government to component producers.

       Component producers equate marginal cost and marginal revenue, setting a price for

each component of


       q     P(a-s)                                                                           (5)
                a
Notice that as fi rises, components become less differentiated, market power of each

component producer declines, and the mark-up of price over marginal cost diminiches. Of

the two policy instruments, only the output subsidy directly influences the market price of

components. Given        an increase in $ reduces private marginal cost and thus q.



                                             -8-
       The profit. qx - P1((a —s)x + (Li -G)), of each firm supplying a component is driven
to zero in equilibrium by free entry and exit. Employing the pricing rule of each finn

(equation (5)) and the zero-profit condition, the scale of production for each component is

               j3(b-G)                                                                         (6)
             (1 —fl)(a-s)
It is useful to note that x is increasing in fi; each firm produces more when its variety is

more easily substituted by other varieties and hence faces greater competition. The two

policy instruments have opposing effects on x: an increase in the lump-sum subsidy reduces

output per finn while an increase in the output subsidy raises output per firm.

       The price of finished manufactures is fixed by trade at M• Further, free entzy

implies zero profits in the assembly of components into manufactures, implying

PMM = qx n. Using the relationship M = n"x, the price of manufactures generates a

demand price for components via

        q flU1PM
Note that an increase in n raises productivity and, therefore, permits a higher price for

component producers. However, the reverse is true as well: higher prices for components

may be sustained in equilibrium only by an increase in the number of varieties produced.



4.     FIRST-BEST DIVERSITY AN!) SCALE

       What are the socially preferred values for intermediates scale and diversity, x and )i?

If domestic welfare depends upon aggregate consumption of wheat and finished
manufactures, U= U(Cw, CM). domestic consumers will equate the domestic rate of

substitution in consumption with world relative prices: UdUw = M• Hence, welfare-

improving policies are those that expand the value of domestic production at world prices

and, thus, the resouxtes available for consumption.

                                               -9-
       A social planner would maximize welfare by choosing x and it to maximize

           PMflX + T(f),                                                                      (8)

wheref = n(ar + I'). Optimal values are characterized by the first-order conditions
                 =   -T'(f)na                                                                (9a)

and

           aPMflX = -Tf)(ax÷b)                                                               (9b)

       Equation (9a) characterizes the optimal scale of component production, x, obtained by

equating the additional manufacturing output gained by increasing x with the marginal

resource cost (measured in foregone wheat, or the social cost of factor bundles) of expanding

the scale of each variety by the same increment. Similarly, equation (9b) characterizes the

optimal diversity of components. The right side is the resource cost of introducing a new

variety of component, while the left side indicates the value of additional manufacturing

output that derives from the new variety. Notice that if a=1, the latter is simply PMX. In

the presence of returns to diversity, however, manufacturing output rises by a larger amount

when another specialized input is introduced.

       Substituting (9a) into (9b) and solving yields the optimal scale of production for each

variety:

             =       b
                                                                                             (10)
                 (ct-l)a
where the superscript ' " denotes optimal values. The optimal scale depends on the ratio of

fixed to marginal costs, with marginal costs weighted by cx-l•   the   rate at which the economy

realizes the external economy. The larger this rate is, the smaller the optimal scale for each

firm. The implied per-firm use of factor bundles is




                                            - 10 -
       ax'- b=_f_
              a—I
                  ,                                                                        (11)


which is easily shown to be a decreasing function of a. Finally, using (9a), the optimal

diversity of components is implicitly defined by


            =     —T'(f)a       T                                                          (12)




5.     LAISSEZ-FAIRE EOUILIBRIUM AND ITS WELFARE PROPERTIES

       5.1 Ecuilibrium

       We compute the competitive equilibrium in the absence of government intervention by

setting s=G=O. From (6), equilibrium scale for each variety of components is

           =      fib                                                                      (13)
                (1-fi)a
where the superscript "e" denotes an equilibrium value. The greater the extent of each

differentiated-input producer's market power, thelower is output per firm. Demand for

factor bundles by each producer is

       axt+b =              -                                                              (14)
                    I—fl

Aggregating demands for factor bundles from all producers of components yields the

equilibrium price of factor bundles

           =    _Tf(ft)   = _TI(nC(axe+b))                                                 (15)

       Producers of components set prices above marginal cost, using a markup of 11$.

Hence, in equilibrium components are priced according to




                                             —
                                                 11—
                  _________                                                                    (16)
                     $
Recall, however, that prices charged by producers of components are constrained by the

demand price of producers of finished manufactures (see (7)). Hence, the equilibrium must

satisfy

          p       ca-I - _____
                         _Tt'(ft)a                                                             (17)


or


              =    TI'(fe)a      T                                                             (18)


With equilibrium production of each variety set by equation (13), f depends only upon n'.

Hence, equation (18) determines the number of varieties produced in equilibrium.

          An interesting feature of the model is that the aggregate demand curve for factor

bundles is upward-sloping. Output per firm is unaffected by Pp while the number of

intermediates rises with P, (see (18)). Hence, aggregate demand forf = n(ax + b) rises

with I. Stability in the market for factor bundles requires that the slope of the supply curve

(givenby P1 —T'(f)) exceed the slope ofthedemandcurve, ore > a—i.
          The degree of market power affects the number of varieties in two ways. First,

greater market power (smaller a) implies a higher price of components and, holding           fixed.

necessitates a larger number of firms to maintain zero profits in fmished manufactures

assembly. However,            is also affected by /3 (greater market power, smaller per-firm output

and lower price for factor bundles) and by changes in it (more firms, higher price for factor

bundles). It can be shown that greater market power for each components producer implies a

greater number of active firms if e > (1-$)I a. This condition ensures that q' is an




                                                 -   12   -
decreasing function of fi, and thus that n must be larger when input differentiation is greater.



       5.2 Welfare Properties

       We begin our exploration of the efficiency properties of the competitive equilibrium

by examining the scale of production for each producer of components. Comparing

equations (13) and (10) one finds that the competitive equilibrium may generate either

inefficiently small or inefficiently large output of each variety. Specifically,


                     as a—1.j                                                               (19)

Here, cr-i represents the rate at which returns to diversity are realized in the economy (see

Ethier [1982]). (1-i3)/fl is the markup over marginal cost (as a percentage of marginal cost),

which is used to cover fixed costs for each variety. Hence, it represents the rate at which

individual firms are able to appropriate the surplus generated by returns to diversity.

Efficient production of each variety occurs only if firms appropriate the surplus from each

variety at exactly the same rate as it is generated in the economy.

       We turn now to the issue of whether the laissez-faire equilibrium provides sufficient

varieties of intermediate products. Equations (18) and (12) provide the framework for

examining the relationship between it and x in the laissez-faire equilibrium and the first-best

allocation. These relationships are graphed in Figure 1, which shows the orderings oft and

r and it and n for possible values of the return to diversity (a - .1) and percentage markup
(1O) 10
  a
       As the figure makes transparent, the degree to which the laissez-faire equilibrium

over- or under-provides diversity of intermediate components is intimately linked to the

relationship betweent and x'. As a benchmark, consider the case in which t =?; i.e..

points along the diagonal in Figure 1. Here I < n; while the market provides the right
                                              -   13   -
amount of each differentiated input, it provides too few varieties of inputs.t1 The reason

for the underprovision of input varieties is that finished manufactures assemblers are charged

a markup over the marginal cost dictated by the factor-bundle content of components.

Rearranging equation (18) yields

                 1 -T"(f)a                                                                    (20)
         M
                      (e)a-l
The left side of this expression is the world price of manufactures, which also constrains

production relationships in the first-best equilibrium. The right side, however, is

distinguished by the markup of 1/fl. The remainder of the right-side expression is an

increasing function of n. Thus, for the expression to hold in the laissez-faire equilibrium

when? = 1, , must be less than?. With the price of manufactures fixed by world
markets, the domestic economy must adjust to mark-up pricing of components by reducing

the production of varieties, the demand for components, and thus the cost of components.

       However, a wider range of outcomes is possible. Returning to Figure 1, note that in

any instance when x' > x,    C ?. That is, inefficiently large production of each
component is associated with inadequate diversity of inputs. Essentially, for a given return

to diversity (a-i) the market meets competitive pressure on M by producing too few

varieties and hence lowering demand for factor bundles. The first-best would require

sacrificing output per component firm, increasing the number of varieties, and meeting

competitive pressure through exploiting the return to diversity.
       As shown in the figure, however, the picture is less clear when? <f. Again,

consider a specific value of a-i. As the percentage markup rises (and fi declines), initially

   remains below the first-best. Eventually, however, the equilibrium is characterized by too

little output per component firm and excessive reliance on returns to diversity in order to

meet the world price of finished manufactures.

                                             -   14   -
6.     DECENTRALIZING THE SOCIAL OPTIMUM

       It is straightforward to design policies that support the first-best outcome as a

competitive equilibrium. Equation (9a) may be interpreted as a first-best rule for pricing of

components; that is

            —    M( *)Q1 = -T1(f")a                                                         (21)

indicating that components should be priced at their social marginal cost. Assume

temporarily that t=x. A comparison of (12) and (18) indicates that the number of firms

will be correct if components are priced at marginal cost; that is, ,9=n if !J! = a.       mis

suggests an optimal subsidy of s=(1-fl)a. Under these circumstances, the post-subsidy

marginal cost is Pf(a-s')=Fffla which is 'marked-up" by 1/fl to yield marginal cost

pricing.

       Is it possible to have .zt=f? Substituting the optimal subsidy into (6), equating (6)

with (10) and solving for (9 yields

                       ____                                                                 (22)
                       (a -1)
The sign of 6 is dictated by the relationship between post-subsidy t and I. Specifically,

after receiving the production-based subsidy the scale of activity for each component

producer is related to the first-best according to

            =     1'
                                = _____ as (a—i)             (1—fl)                         (23)
                (1—fl)a           (a—i)a
which relates directly to the conditions under which ct is employed to raise (Ct <0) or

lower (G>O) output per firm in the intermediate sector.'2

       The existence of fixed production costs (b) dictates the need for the producer of each

variety to price above marginal cost. At a heuristic level, one might suspect that the optimal

production policy would elimin2te fixed costs in order to permit marginal cost pricing.


                                              - 15 -
Computing the subsidy (in factor bundles) per firm yields: s'x + (3* sib. Hence, the
optimal policy indeed eliminates fixed costs.

        Importantly, however, the policies do not directly eliminate fixed costs as G

Instead,   the optimal subsidy, f, must be positive to correct markup pricing. In turn, Cf will
be negative if ix' > b. Using the expressions for I and        I,
        (3'        0   as   (a-i)         (1-$)                                                   (24)

Optimal production policies may call for lump-sum taxes upon intermediate producers. Such

taxes raise fixed costs for producers and, recalling (6). serve to raise the x necessary to break

even.

        Using s'   and (3*, the   scale of production of each component will achieve the first-

best, each variety of component will be priced equal to its marginal production cost, and the

diversity of components will be chosen to maximize output subject to the price pressures

generated by trade in finished manufactures. Thus, the availability of two policy instniments

is critical to achieving efficient production.

        Francois [l992J also examines optimal policies in the context of firm-level returns to

scale and industry-level returns to variety. lie proposes s'=(l-$)a as the optimal

commercial policy when intermediates are nontraded, implicitly setting (3=0. In the

Francois version of the model, the aggregate production function for finished manufactures is

written in such a way that (in our notation) a = 1/ fl.13 Thus, the market equilibrium

achieves the first-best output per firm. Francois suggests an output subsidy of (l-fl)a to

ensure that firms price at marginal cost. Recalling (18), this subsidy will lead to the socially

efficient number of varieties for a given scale of production per variety. However, Francois

ignores the effect this subsidy will have on output per firm. Using expression (6), we can

see that the output subsidy will raise output per firm above its socially optimal level.


                                                  - 16 -
Optimality in the Francois fonnulation requires an output subsidy of (1-$)a coupled with a

lump-sum subsidy of b(l-8). By employing a lump-sum subsidy, the government may alter

not only pricing but also the private fixed costs of production, the break-even scale of

production, and incentives to enter or exit production of new varieties.14



7..      OPTIMAL POLICY WITH LIMITED INSTRUMENTS

         Implementation of first-best policies is a formidable task. While, it is straightforward

to develop a "rule"   for I — provide subsidies sufficient to induce marginal-cost pricing —
the   moral of Figure 1 is clear: designing the appropriate fixed tax/subsidy depends upon a

sophisticated knowledge of the ordering of laissez-faire and optimal diversity.

         As noted above • total subsidies to the firm should precisely compensate for fixed

costs. Hence, a "rule" for (I    is to subsidize any remaining fixed costs, or tax away any

surplus. In practice, however, even this guideline requires a sophisticated understanding of

firms' cost structures and output decisions.

         Given these difficulties, one might be tempted to avoid use of G altogether, and

restrict policies to the use of output-based subsidies. As emphasized above, however, using

a single instrument does not permit one to control both x and n and reach the efficient

production plan. Instead, the second-best subsidy rate, s', must balance the relative benefits

of altering scale and diversity. A subsidy that eliminates markup pricing (s'=a(l-P)) does

not in general achieve the first-best level of output.15 Similarly, setting s' to achieve x

does not provide for efficient pricing, and hence diversity.16 As a result, the optimal

subsidy when G is constrained to zero is below a, but may be negative.11

         An alternative strategy toward the policy problem is to avoid use of direct subsidies,

instead employing policy toward exit and entry to guide competitive pressures. In this light,


                                               -   17   -
interpret the choice of G as a policy toward entry and exit in the industry. Our discussion

above indicates that the use of enny policy in isolation will not be sufficient to achieve the

efficient production policy. The second-best value of G. denoted a', is

             =   b   e(l÷ft÷a$)-(a-1)(l—$)1                                                   (25)
                         e(2-cx)-a(l-13)        J
As with the second-best s'.   it is not in general feasible to determine the sign of the second-
best fixed tax/subsidy, casting doubt upon the ease of developing administrable guidelines for

policies of this type.



8.     SUMMARY

       The existence of firm-level economies of scale suggests the "commonsense" solution

of subsidizing firms to exploit these scale economies. In the presence of additional national-

level returns to variety, the weight of evidence in favor of policies to reduce fixed costs

appears even greater. Our investigation of optimal policies toward intermediate-good

production suggests that the actual design of these industrial policies is far from

straightforward. First-best policies eliminate fixed costs, but the interaction between scale

and diversity leads to a mix of lump-sum and output subsidies, and may even involve lump-

sum taxes on firms. Further, access to two separate policy instruments is crucial. In the

absence of either instrument, the optimal second-best policy may not be a subsidy at all.

       Laissez faire may yield either too few or too many varieties of intermediate goods. It

may also lead to either over- or under-exploitation of internal scale economies. Thus, as in

other contexts, there can be no presumption that a monopolistically competitive intermediates

sector restricts output below the socially optimal level nor that it produces too many

varieties. To intervene productively, policy makers need information on market structure as



                                               -   18   -
well as technological relationships. Providing adequate empirical support for industrial
policy decisions remains a formidable challenge.




                                           -   19   -
      LAISSEZ-FAIRE VERSUS FIRST-BEST SCALE AND DiVERSITY

                                      FIGURE 1




iip
                    flu     fl•
                                                    xe= Ku
        I
        1




  I                                     I.x•   x•

  I
                                        lb 11< ii




                                                             a-I
                          Return to Variety
                                          Notes

     These policy issues have been raised in the context of investment in new technologies.
     In a discussion of the "Economics of Appropriabiity,' the 1994 EconomicReport of
     the President (pp.190-i) notes that "... The most important innovations generate
     spillover benefits for interconnected sectors, creating economic gains well beyond any
     that eventually accrue to their inventors. ...public actions can offset the effects of
     underinvestment by the private sector that is caused by limitations on appropriabiity.'

     Similar arguments have been raised concerning spillovers from other types of
     investment. For example, the Clinton Administration recently received front-page
     coverage by endorsing a $1 billion proposal to assist the American advanced flat-panel
     computer-display screen industry. At least in part, the rationale for such a subsidy
     rests on the belief that a larger domestic intermediate-good industry will raise
     productivity of final-good producers. As reported in The New York limes, computer
     screens were chosen for assistance because of their defense uses and because of
     concerns that the lack of a display-screen industry could weaken the American
     telecommunications and computer industries [Bradsher, 1994].

2.   Markuseri [1991] uses a similar structure in which the intermediates are described as
     noncraded business services. Markusen [1989] shows that when scale economies in
     final manufactures depend on the number of input varieties produced worldwide, there
     are gains from trade in these inputs.
3.   The standard reference on national versus international returns to scale is Ethier
     [1982]. Francois [1992] emphasizes terms-of-trade effects in policy design. A large
     and diverse literature on international propagation of diseconomies of scale also
     exists, particularly in reference to global environmental issues.

4.   Tirole [1988, pp. 298-300] provides an overview of the Dixit-Stiglitz model and its
     normative properties.

5.   Kruginan [1990] provides an overview of developments in the modelling of trade in
     differentiated products.
6.   Markusen [1990] shows that a small tariff may reduce the number of domestic inputs
     enough that domestic welfare falls.

7.   One need not interpret the terms "components" and "assembly" literally. Instead, the
     structure is intended to embody the reliance of final-goods manufacturing on a wide
     variety of specialized business services and products as inputs. In other studies, these
     components have been interpreted in several ways. Ethier (1982] emphasizes
     specialized intermediate inputs. He intends to capture, via the endogenous
     determination of the number of component varieties, the.possibility of returns to scale
     arising from the division of labor. He notes that, alternatively, one could interpret
     the intermediate goods as successive nintrnfacturing stages. Markusen (1989)
     interprets the intermediate goods as producer services that are biowledge-intensive,
     requiring a high initial investment in learning. -


                                          - 20 -
8.    Ethier [1979,1982] assumes components are traded, emphasizing division of labor that
      depends on the size of the world market rather than upon the geographical
      concentration of the industry. Markusen [1991] assumes that intermediates are
      nontradeable, identifying them as knowledge-based, specialized business services.
      Markusen argues that such services are costly to trade internationally or face high
      tariff barriers.

9.    As is standard, we assume that n is "large" and we ignore any integer constraint
      placed on n.

10.   The figure reflects e > a-i and z >      .1/. Inthe language of Ethier [1982], e is the
      "intersectoral effect," while a is the 'le effect." For the planningproblem,
      e > a - I is necessary for the second-order condition to hold. In the market
      economy, the same condition implies stability in the market for factor bundles. The
      restriction on the relative size of e and fi ensures that n' ii" locus is upward
      sloping. As noted in the text, this restriction implies that qt is a decreasing function
      of fi and, hence, that it is a decreasing function of 5. The condition thus ensures that
      it rises as the markup rises.
11.   As noted earlier, Dixit and Stiglilz [1977] examine similar issues in the context of the
      provision of varieties of consumer goods. In the circumstaices that most closely
      parallel this investigation (the constant-elasticity case), they find that the laissez-faire
      equilibrium generates efficient scale, but insufficient diversity. In their model, the
      same parameter determines substitutability (and, thus, markup) and the value to
      consumers of additional variety.

12.   Note that in Francois' version of the model, Ct is unambiguously positive because the
      formulation ensures that f =
13.   The aggregate production function for manufactures used by Francois [1992] is
      identical to that used by Markusen [1989].

14.   This result is reminiscent of Canton and Lousy [1980] who e,2mine optimal control
      of a detrimental production externality. Pigouvian taxes "solve' the problem of
      external costs and induce efficient production per firm in the short run. However, by
      altering the cost structure of firms, they may also induce entry or exit into the
      industry, and lead to inefficient aggregate emissions of the externality. Carlton and
      Loury propose a fixed tax/subsidy in addition to an output tax to control not only
      output per firm, but also the number of firms.

                                                                                       1'
15.   lathe presence of s, output of each variety 1sf = _____                    —
                                                               (I-fl)a               (a-l)a
16.   Setting s" to reach x results in q P/f)a P1a.



                                             - 21   -
17.   It is not possible to derive a closed-form expression for s. Details of the analysis of
           are available from the authors.




                                           - 22 -
                                        References


Bradsher, K.. 1994, "U.S. to Aid Industry in Computer Battle with the Japanese," The New
      York Tunes, April 27, p. Al.

Carlton, D. and 0. Loury, "The Limitations of Pigouvian Taxes as a Long-Run Remedy for
       Externalities," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1980, pp. 559-566.

Dixit, A. and J. Stigli, "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity,"
       American Economic Review, 1977, pp. 297-308.

Ethier, W. J., 1979, "Internationally Decreasing Costs and World Trade," Journal of
        International Economics, Vol. 9, pp. 1-24.

Echier, W. J., 1982. "National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of
       International Trade," American Economic Review, Vol. 72, pp.388-405.

Flain, H. and E. Helpman, 1987, "Industrial Policy under Monopolistic Competition,"
       Journal of International Economics, Vol. 22, pp. 79-102.

Francois, J., 1992, "Optimal Commercial Policy with Increasing Returns to Scale,"
      Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, pp. 85-95.

Gros, D., 1987, A Note on the Optimal Tariff, Retaliation, and the Welfare Loss from Tariff
      Wars in a Framework with Intra-industry Trade," Journal of International Economics,
      Vol. 23, pp. 357-367.

Grossman, G.M.. 1992, "Introduction" in G.M. Grossman (ed.) Imperfect Competition and
      International Trade, Cambridge:The MIT Press.

Krugman, P. R.. 1990, Rethinking International Trade, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Markusen, J. R., 1989, "Trade in Producer Services and in Other Specialized Intermediate
     Inputs," American Economic Review, Vol. 79, pp. 85-95.

Markusen, J. R., 1990, "Derationalizing Tariffs with Specialized Intermediate Inputs and
      Differentiated Final Goods," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 28, pp. 375-
     383.

Markusen, J. R., 1991, "First Mover Advantages, Blockaded Entry, and the Economics of
     Uneven Development," in E. Helpman and A. Razin (eds.) International Trade and
     Trade Policy, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Spence, A.M., 1976, "Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition."
      Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 43, pp. 217-35.



                                          - 23   -
Tirole, J., 1988, The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Venabtes, A.J., 1982, 'Opdmal Tariffs for Trade in Monopolistically Competitive
      Commodities." Journal of Inurnational Economics, Vol. 12, pp.225-242.




                                          - 24 -
