                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                CAN STATE TAXES
                              REDISTRIBUTE INCOME?




                                    Martin Feldstein
                                    Marian Vaillant




                                Working Paper No. 4785




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        June 1994


                                                                               of the National
Martin Feldstein is Professor of Economics at Harvard University and President
                                                                       Harvard  University and
Bureau of Economic Research. Marian Vaillant is a graduate student at
a research assistant at the NBER. We are grateful to members   of the NBER  Public Economics
                                                                        and  comments   on this
Program and the Harvard-MIT Public Finance Seminar for discussions
                                                               calculations reported in section
work and to Daniel Feenberg for assistance with the TAXSIM
5. This paper is part of NBER's research program    Public
                                                       in Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER. Working Paper #4785
                                                                                        June 1994

                                    CAN STATE TAXES
                                  REDISTRIBUTE INCOME?

                                          ABSTRA

       The evidence presented in this paper supports the basic theoretical presumption that state

and local governments cannot redistribute income. Since individuals can avoid unfavorable taxes

by migrating to jurisdictions that offer more favorable tax conditions, a relatively unfavorable tax

will cause gross wages to adjust until the resulting net wage is equal to that available elsewhere.

The cuirent empirical findings go beyond confirming this long-run tendency and show that gross

wages adjust rapidly to the changing tax environment. Thus, states cannot redistribute income

for a period of even a few years.

        The adjustment of gross wages to tax rates implies that a more progressive tax system

raises the cost to firms of hiring more highly skilled employees and reduces the cost of lower

skilled labor. A more progressive tax thus induces finns to hire fewer high skilled employees

and to hire more low skilled employees.

        Since state taxes cannot alter net wages. there can be no trade-off at the state level

between distribution goals and economic efficiency. Shifts in state tax progressivity, by altering

the structure of employment in the state and distorting the mix of labor inputs used by firms in

the state, create deadweight efficiency losses without achieving any net redistribution of income.


Martin Feldstein                                      Marian Vaillant
National Bureau of Economic Research                  National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Cambridge. MA 02138
and NBER
                            Can State Taxes Redistribute Income?

                             Martin Feldstein and Marian Vaillant


         State governments cannot redistribute income if individuals can migrate among political

jurisdictions. Although state tax structures may appear to be redistributive. real pretax wages

must adjust in the long run to make each individual's potential after-tax real income the same

in all jurisdictions. If the after-tax real income available to an individual were higher in one

state than in another, individuals would locate in states where real net incomes were more

favorable. In response to differences in the progressivity of tax rates, migration would raise

pretax real incomes of high income individuals in states where such individuals were taxed more

heavily and lower pretax incomes of lower income individuals in such states. In equilibrium.

the real after tax income would be independent of the state tax structure)

          Although a relatively more progressive state tax structure cannot achieve a long-run

redistribution of income, it does distort economic choices and thereby reduces total real incomes.

This distortion of economic choices involves more than the traditional impact on the intensity

of work effort and on portfolio allocation that cause progressive taxes in a closed economy to




        This theory of long-run spatial fiscal equilibrium is implied by the original Tiebout
 (1956) analysis and has been recognized by Oates (1972), Stiglitz (1988), etc.. Gordon (1986)
 makes a similar point with respect to capital income in open economies.
 * Martin Feldstein is Professor of Economics at Harvard University and President of the
 National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Marian Vaillant is a graduate student at
 Harvard University and a research assistant at the NBER. We are grateful to members of the
 NBER Public Economics Program and the Harvard-MIT Public Finance Seminar for discussions
 and comments on this work and to Daniel Feenberg for assistance with the TAXSIM calculations
 reported in section 5.
 staiclaN.(,0794
have a greater dead weight loss than a proportional tax that raises an equal amount of revenue

(Musgrave. 1973; Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1980). A change in the progressivity of the state tax

also induces a geographic reallocation of resources and a change in the production technology

within the state. As pretax wages of highly skilled individuals rise and pretax wages of lower

skilled individuals fall, firms are induced to reduce the number of higher paying jobs and to

increase   the number of lower paying jobs.

        In short, there is no long-run tradeoff between income redistribution and economic

efficiency when individuals are free to migrate. A more redistributive state tax structure reduces

economic efficiency without changing the distribution of net income. And yet some states and

even some cities do enact graduated income taxes and differential sales taxes. In 1992, seven

states had no income tax at all while five states had graduated income taxes with marginal tax

rates that reached 10 percent or more. More generally, as part of this study we have calculated

the overall state tax rate (including the personal income tax, state sales tax and local property

tax) in each state in 1983 for taxpayers with incomes of $25,000 and $100,00(Y. The average

tax rate at the $25,000 income level varied from less than two percent to more than 9 percent.

At an income of $100,000, the avenge tax rate varied from a low of 1.2 percent to a high of

9.6 percent. The degree of progressivity, as measured by the difference between the average

tax rates at $100,000 and at $25,000. varied from a high of 3.4 percent in Vennont to a low of



    \Ve calculate these tax rates for 1983 because that permits us to use the estimated sales tax
rates by income and family type previously estimated by Feenberg and Rosen (1986). Our
estimates are for a married couple with two dependents. The method of calculating the property
taxes is described in section 4 of the current paper. The NBER TAXSIM model is used to
calculate the state income tax which is then combined with sales tax rates and the property taxes
to estimate the overall tax burden at each income level The actual rates for 1983 (and
corresponding rates for 1989 excluding sales taxes) appear in the Appendix.

                                                 2
minus 1.7 percent in Wyoming. In 20 of the states the average tax rate was higher at $25,000

than at $100.000.

       Since a state tax structure that is more graduated than average does not change the long-

run distribution of real net income in the state but does reduce economic efficiency, why do

states enact such tax structures? There are five possible explanations.

       First, the transition to the long-mn equilibrium in which changes in pretax real incomes

offset changes in tax rates may take such a long time to occur that a substantial amount of fiscal

redistribution is possible. Voting majorities may enact graduated tax structures to redistribute

income during this transition period. Even though there is no long-run opportunity for a tradeoff

between income redistribution and economic efficiency, there could in principle be a present

value tradeoff between the politically desired income redistribution and the loss of economic

efficiency. We shall refer to this explanation as the delayed a4iusflnent hypothesis. An
important purpose of the current study is to assess not only whether the independence of net

wages from the state tax structure occurs in the long run but also whether the adjustment to

changes in state tax structures happens very slowly or so quickly that the delayed adjustment

hypothesis cannot justify attempts at redistributive tax policy.

        The second possible explanation is that a more graduated tax structure may reflect the

structure of benefits provided by the state, leaving no net fiscal redistribution. We refer to this

as the benefit taxation hypothesis. Although much of state spending is on services like Medicaid

that benefit lower income households, some state spending like higher education programs and

state education grants to local governments may favor higher income households. What malters

for this explanation is that the extent to which any state's tax structure is more graduated than


                                                 3
the tax structures in other states is matched by a distribution of benefits that differs from that

available elsewhere by a compensating amount. If the tax structure and the benefit structure

are balanced in this way, the individual has no reason to migrate. To the extent that this benefit

taxation hypothesis is true, the degree of tax progressivity in the state will not alter real pretax

wages.

         The third possible explanation, which we denote the tax capitalization hypothesis, is that

the change in real pretax wages is achieved in part by changes in property values rather than (or

in addition to) changes in money wages. In the extreme, if money wages were unchanged and

the state tax structure was reflected wholly in property values, there would be no deadweight

loss and a once and for all redistribution based on the initial distribution of property ownership.

More generally, even if the capitalization of taxes in property values were only partially true,

an increase in progressivity might lower the value of property in the high income areas of the

state and raise the value of property in low income ares of the state. A state that wanted to

reduce the wealth of current high income residents and to increase the wealth of the owners of

lower income housing (many of whom would be the higher income owners of the apartments of

the lower income renters) could achieve this by an increase in the progressivity of the state

income and sales tax.

         A fourth possible explanation is federal tar deductibility. A more graduated tax structure

causes the federal government to increase its indirect fiscal subsidy to the state because higher

income residents are more likely to deduct taxes in calculating federal taxable income and

because these deductions will generally be subject to higher federal marginal tax rates. The

federal deductibility reduces but does not eliminate the local deadweight loss and does provide



                                                 4
some compensation for accepting that loss. In a separate paper we have examined the hypothesis

that federal tax deductibility explains state tax progressivity and find no statistical support. State

taxes are not more progressive where deductibility is more common or where the federal

marginal tax rate of itemizers is greater (Feldstein and Vaillant, 1994).

       The rmal possible explanation that we consider is fiscal illusion. Even if the adjustment

delays are very small, so that essentially no redistribution of real income is achieved, politicians

may promote a graduated tax structure because they expect it to be popular with a majority of

voters who do not understand that pretax real wages would adjust, leaving no change in real

disposable incomes. Alternatively, the politicians themselves may not understand that no real

income redistribution is achieved by changing the rate structure.

       l'hese alternative explanations have very different implications for the relation between

the state tax structure and the wages of individuals in that state. Each of the first three

explanations implies that the money wages of employees in the state will not have adjusted

enough to offset differences in state tax rates. Individuals with the same human capital would

earn different net-of-tax money wages because the equilibrium adjustment has not yet occurred

(the delayed adjustment hypothesis) or because those differences in net money wages arc

compensated by differences in benefits (the benefit taxation hypothesis) or by differences in

property values and associated rental costs (the capitalization hypothesis).
        The econometric estimates that we present in this paper imply the opposite: pretax

money wages have adjusted so that state tax rates (net of federal deductibility) do not affect net-

of-tax money wages. The net-of-tax money wage that an individual earns reflects his or her

human capital (education, experience, etc.) and not the tax rate that the individual faces in the



                                                  5
particular state. This indicates that the adjustment of wages to tax rates is fast enough so that

the delayed adjustment hypothesis cannot justify the desire to have a more progressive tax

structure. Similarly, it shows that there are not differences in property values or state benefit

distributions (or a combination of the two) that need to be compensated by differences in net-of-

tax money wages. The data therefore suggest that attempts at using state taxes to redistribute

income are based on fiscal illusion, i.e., that the true effect of changing state tax progressivity

is not understood by politicians, voters, or both. Only the federal government or, equivalently,

states acting in concert can achieve a redistribution of after-tax income?

        Section 1 of this paper discusses our approach to analyzing the effect of state tax

progressivity and some of the caveats that should be borne in mind when interpreting the

econometric evidence. The second section presents a formal model of the relation between

progressivity, property values and wages. Section 3 discusses our data and the construction of

key variables. The econometric issues of endogeneity and state-specific effects are discussed

briefly in the fourth section. The statistical estimates are presented in section 5. The final

section comments on the implications of the findings for the use of graduated taxes at the state

and local level and, more generally, in countries when there is substantial scope for inward and

outward migration.




    'If a large enough number of states raised tax progressivity, the individuals in those states
would have a more limited opportunity to migrate elsewhere and the migration would cause
pretax wages in the remaining states to decline by more than a marginal amount. No single
'small" state can achieve a redistribution olafler-tax income.

                                                  6
1.     State Tax Progressivitv and Real Net Wages

       In the very long nm, an individual's utility level must be independent of the state where

he or she lives. If a higher utility level were available elsewhere, the individual would move

to the alternative jurisdiction. In a simplified model, this is equivalent to saying that the net-of-

tax wage does not reflect the local tax structure. The net wage depends only on the individual's

human capital attributes (education, age, experience, etc) and on the characteristics that make

the state a more or less desirable place to live (e.g., climate, recreational opportunities, public

services, general cost of living, etc.). Thus,



(1) w = f           { human capital   attributes of individual i, characteristics of state s } + e1



where wNI is the net wage of individual i who works in state s. This net wage is the difference

between the gross pretax wage and the combined tax paid to the federal, state and local

governments.
        To test this simplified version of the constant net wage hypothesis, we modify the

standard toglinear wage equation relating gross wages to human capital attributes of individual

i (2Q and characteristics of state s (i,) by adding an appropriate tax variable:



(2)     lnw1,=cr +3 ln[l-NATR_]+y'x1+ 6'z,+


where NATK. the effective overall tax rate (not the marginal tax rate) for individual i in state s with

proper attention to the fact that state and local taxes are deductible in calculating income subject to


                                                  7
the federal income tax. If the coefficient of the net-of- tax variable is equal to minus one           =-

 I), the net wage is unaffected by the tax, i.e., the specification is equivalent to a regression of the


logarithm of the net-of-tax wage [w (I - NATR) ] on personal and state attributes. Conversely,

if     = 0 the gross wage is unaffected by the tax so that the net wage falls by the fill amount of the


tax.

         Four qualifications and cautions must be noted about this approach to testing the hypothesis

that state and local tax progressivity does not affect real net incomes.

         First, as a practical matter, it is not possible to specify all of the attributes of the state that

might affect individuals' desires to live in that state. We therefore use dummy variables to introduce

a separate constant term for each state, replacing the constant a of equation 2 with a separate a, for

each state. In this fixed effects model, the variables that are constant within eaôh state (Q are

automatically eliminated from the specification. This specification also implies that the estimated

effect of the tax variable (i)) refers to effects of the variation of 1-NATR1 around the mean value

of that variable for the state, i.e., the coefficient of the tax variable measures the effect of tax

progressivity rather than the effect of the overall level of the tax variable.

         There is one caveat that should be noted about this approach to dealing with state

characteristics. The use of state constant terms to eliminate the state characteristics, like the linear

specification of equation 2, assumes that within the state the level of benefits provided to an

individual is not correlated with that individual's level of taxes. If, contrary to this assumption, the

individuals who pay higher taxes in state s also receive relatively higher benefits from state s (e.g.,

a state university system that is attended primarily by the children of high income residents), the tax

variable overstates the true progressivity of the state fiscal system as a whole and the estimate of f3

                                                     8
will be biased toward zero, i.e., toward accepting the view that fiscal variables do not alter gross

wages and therefore that net wages are not independent of the tax structure. Conversely, the

opposite bias would be true if states that choose progressive tax systems in order to favor lower

income households also use the distribution of spending to achieve that goal by giving smaller than

average benefits to higher income individuals vithin the state.

        The second caveat in interpreting regressions based on equation 2 is that the specification

makes no adjustment for possible differences in the local price index faced by each individual,

particularly for the rental prices of property. Although a change in the overall level of property

rents in state s would be captured by the state constant term, interstate differences in tax

progressivity could in principle cause interstate differences in the pattern of property prices. If high

income individuals face relatively lower rents in states with more progressive tax structures,

evidence that greater tax progressivity lowers the net wages of high income individuals would not

imply that their j net incomes were affected by tax progressivity. The formal model presented

in the next section clarifies this role of tax capitalization in property values and rents.

        Third, our analysis interprets the coefficient of the net of tax variable as a measure of the

extent to which potential geographic mobility permits individuals to avoid the extra burden of the

state's tax progressivity. But even in a closed economy with no possibility of migration or trade,

individuals will bear less than the fill statutory burden of the tax if they reduce their labor supply

by working fewer hours, working less intensively, acquiring less education and training, etc.

Implicit in our interpretation therefore is the assumption that the response on the intensity margin

is less than the geographic response. Although we believe that there are substantial labor supply




                                                     9
responses to higher marginal tax rates4, the scope for the geographic response is greater and tends

to an infinitely elastic response as the time to adjustment increases. Even if the potential geographic

mobility is enough to keep real net wages unchanged, a more progressive state tax structure could

cause some additional adverse labor supply response. To the extent that we attribute all observed

tax shifting to potential geographic mobility, we may overstate its importance.

        Finally, our analysis focuses on money income alone and ignores other attributes of jobs.

The specification of equation 2 is incomplete in not recognizing that individuals with given human

capital car choose more fringe benefits and better working conditions instead of higher money

wages. To the extent that they are induced to do so by higher tax rates, the data will show that gross

wages are lower where tax rates are higher and our analysis will understate the extent to which

potential geographic mobility causes tax shifting, i.e., will lead to an underestimate of the value of




2.     A Simple Model of State Tax Proaressivity

       This section presents a simple model of the long-run effect of state tax progressivity on

the local wage distribution. The model explicitly introduces land values and therefore the

possibility that state income taxes are capitalized in property values.5 The analysis shows that



   4See Eissa (1994) and Feldstein (1993) for recent evidence and for references to earlier
studies. Higher marginal tax rates may also induce outmigration because they make the terms on
which individuals can trade their labor for goods less favorable.

    We are not aware of any similar model that deals with the effects of state tax progressivity
on wage differentials, Gyiorko and Tracy (1989) and Wallace (1993) discuss how taxes and
other local attributes can affect local wages but their analyses deal with average tax levels and
not with the issue of progressivity. Wallace's analysis also does not include property values and
therefore explicitly ignores the possibility of capitalization.


                                                 10
the degree of substitutability of land use between high income individuals and low income

individuals can have an important effect on the way that money wages respond to changes in

state tax progressivity even though potential mobility assures that changes in state tax

progressivity do not alter real net incomes,

       Consider an economy with two groups of employees, the high skilled (denoted by

subscript H) and the low skilled (denoted by subscript L). Their gross wages in the state are

and WL and these are subject to proportional state taxes at rates t1 and t1. The local prices faced

by high and low skill workers (p and pJ may differ because of differences in the prices of

housing services faced by the high skilled and low skilled workers.6 With this notation, the

equilibrium condition that the real net wage in the state for each type of employee is the same as

that available to such employees elsewhere (o and o) can be written:




(3)     (1-t1Jw/p =
(4) (l-tw/p =


    6The possibility of different housing prices for high and low sKilled individuals (i.e., high and
low income individuals) depends on the length of the adjustment period and the degree of
homogeneity of the property in the state. At one extreme, if the state can be considered a
featureless plane, there can be no differences in housing prices in the very longest time horizon.
If the housing stock changes more slowly than the labor force and, the two types of housing
cannot be converted from one use to the other, different prices per unit of housing can prevail in
a time period that is long enough for labor market equilibrium to be established. Indeed, if the
property in the state is not homogeneous (e.g., some property has nicer views, more convenient
location or other intrinsic virtues), property price differences can remain even in the longest time
horizon.

                                                  II
       There are two cases of interest. In the first case, the local price indices can vary

independently because properties are not homogeneous in the relevant time horizon.

In this case, a change in the state income tax rates is capitalized in property prices (and

therefore reflected in the associated rents and in the implicit rents of homeowners). The

gross wages do not change at all to keep the real net wages equal to the opportunity cost in

other states. Since gross wages are unchanged, it is not necessary to consider the production

side of the economy.

       This case is important because it shows that an empirical finding that the distribution

of gross money wages is unaffected by the state tax rates (j3 = 0 in equation 2) would not

imply that state taxes can redistribute real incomes within the state. Although a rise in the

tax rate for a particular group of workers would reduce the net money wage of that group,

the net real wage would be unchanged since the local price index would adjust to stabilize the

net real wage. Of course, an estimate of 3=0 would not imply that the tax differences were

capitalized in property values and that state taxes cannot redistribute income, only that that

may be occurring. Thus, an estimate of ft = 0 is ambiguous evidence about the effect of

the state tax structure or real net incomes.

       In the second case, which appears from the data analyzed below to be the more

relevant one in practice, property is sufficiently homogeneous that it is better to represent the

local price indices as equal: PH = PL = p. In this case, a change in state income tax rates

requires a change in gross money wages if household equilibrium is to be maintained:



(5)    (I — t11)   w11 / p =

                                               12
(6)    (l-IÜWL/P =


The level of prices in the state may change but will not if gross money wages adjust enough

to keep net money wages constant; this corresponds to an estimated elasticity of /3 = - 1 in

equation 2.

       To illustrate how equilibrium can require gross money wages to adjust to keep net

money wages unchanged, we expand the model to include a simplified specification of the

finns' demand for labor of the two types. This model of labor demand is simplified by

assuming that firms are homogeneous, that they sell their product in a national market, and

that their technology is Cobb Douglas. Firms can obtain capital at a user cost of r per unit

of capital. For any arbitrary level of output (Q*),7 the firm chooses the input levels of

capital (K), of high skilled labor (H), and of low skilled labor (L) to minimize cost subject to

the requirement that output is equal to the desired level:



(7)    L = rK +      wHH   + wLL -?.     [KuLPH_ Q*]



This implies the firm's four first order conditions that determine K, H, L and X:




(8)     r XaQ*K'


   'With constant returns to scale, no restricted input, and an ability to sell output at a constant
price in the national market, the quantity produced by any firm is indeterminate
                                                  13
(9)     wL=XIQ*L1

(10)    w=X(t—cz—f3)QW'

(11)    KLH= Q..


        Combining these first order conditions for the firm to minimize cost with the two

household equilibrium conditions required for utility maximization (equations S and 6) and

simp1i,ing yields an equation for the wage of the high skilled individuals as a function of the

tax rates:




(12)    [(1-cz)/j3] In w11   In (1-to - In (1-t1) + constant.



Thus




(13)    d In w = [131(1—a)] { d t/ (l-t,) - d tL/ (1-13 }.



Since I - a is the production function coefficient corresponding to the share of labor and J3 is

the corresponding share of low skilled labor, it is clear that [j3/(1—a)] C 1. Thus an increase

in tax progressivity, as measured by the difference between the proportional increases in the

high and low tax rates, causes a less than proportional increase in the gross wage of the high

skilled individual. Similarly, it can be shown that                               -




                                                14
(14) d In WL    = -(l--a—)/(l—a)]    {d tf (l-tH) - d tL/ (l-tL) }.


       The economic reasons for this change can be understood easily by considering the

response to an increase in the tax rate on high skilled individuals. Their real wage must rise

to compensate for the higher tax rate. A portion of that rise must come in the form of a

higher money wage since in this case property is homogeneous. Since that higher money

wage for high skilled employees raises the cost of production to the finn, the firm can only

continue to produce in the state if the wage of low skilled employees falls. Of course, low

skilled employees will only remain in the state if the state price level falls enough (through

the decline in the value of land) to offset the lower money wage. This fall in the state price

level also explains why the wage of the high skilled employees does not have to rise by the

same proportion as the decline in the net of tax share. In equilibrium, the combination of

higher money wage for the high skilled employees, lower money wage for the low skilled

employees, and lower land prices keeps the real net incomes of both types of employees

unchanged and the firms • real cost of production unchanged.

       The effect of a revenue neutral change in tax progressivity can be calculated by

constraining the overall tax revenue, T = tHwHH + tLwLL, to remain unchanged. The first

order change in tax revenue implies:



(15) dT =WFIH dt11+ wLL dtL =



or, using the first order conditions of equations 9 and 10,


                                                15
(16) (1-a—13)XQ*dtH+IXQ*dtLO.


Thus the revenue neutral change in progressivity implies




(17)    dt1   = -[(1- a—j3)/3Jd tH;



an   increase in the tax on high skilled individuals must be balanced by a decrease in the tax

on low skilled individuals in a ratio that reflects their shares in total labor income.

        Combining this revenue neutral requirement with equation 13 implies that a revenue

neutral shift from a proportional tax (t11 =   tJ to a progressive tax (t > t3 causes the wage
of the high skilled taxpayer to increase by the same proportion that the net-of-tax share (1-tn,)

decreases:



(18) dlnw =

Thus this increase in progressivity causes the gross wage to rise by enough so that the net

wage (w11(l - t,1)] remains unchanged. in terms of equation 2, the estimated coefficient of the

net after tax variable would be minus one in this model. It follows also that a revenue

neutral increase in progressivity causes the gross pretax wage of low-skilled workers to lall

by the proportional decrease in the net of tax share, again leaving the net real wage

unchanged:




                                                 16
(19) dlnwL=—[d(l -tj]f(l -t3.

       Returning to equations 4 and 5, it is clear that in this case an increase in progressivity

leaves the households in equilibrium because the resulting change in gross money wages

leaves net money wages unchanged, requiring no change in property prices. Firms also

remain in equilibrium because, although they pay a higher gross wage to high skilled

employees, the decline in the wage paid to low skilled employees is enough to keep total cost

of production unchanged. The shift in relative gross wages causes firms in the state to

reduce the number of high skilled employees and increase the number of low skilled

employees.

       The purpose of the analysis in this section is not to predict how wages will respond to

changes in progressivity but to show that even when tax progressivity cannot change the

distribution of real incomes it can change the distribution of money incomes. The gap

between money wage changes and real wage changes could be offset by differential changes

in property prices. Thus an empirical finding that gross money wages are unaffected by

changes in state tax progressivity (corresponding to fi = 0 in equation 2) would not be

conclusive evidence against the proposition that state tax policies cannot change the

distribution of real incomes. At the opposite extreme, a finding that a change in

progressivity leaves net money wages unchanged (fi - I in equation 2) is of course evidcnce

in favor of the proposition that state tax policies cannot change the distribution of real

incomes. We turn now to the empirical estimates of equation 2, aware of this ambiguity and

of the reasons discussed in section 1 why the structure of wages in the state might not be



                                                17
independent of state income taxes even in the very long run. Despite these possibilities, the

evidence presented below supports the conclusion that gross money wages adjust to state tax

policies in a way that leaves net money wages unaffected by state tax rules and that this

adjustment occurs fast enough so that the observed differences in state tax rates does not

affect current net money wages.



3.     The Data and the Definition of Variables

       Our analysis uses the Current Population Survey (CPS) data for March 1983 and

March 1989 to relate the individual's pretax avenge hourly wage rate8 to the net average tax

rate and to a variety of demographic characteristics as suggested by equation 2 above. State

specific constant terms are used instead of trying to identify and measure all of the amenities

and other state characteristics that would influence local wages. The sample is limited to

individuals who worked between 35 and 70 hours per week. Separate equations are

estimated for men and women.

       To estimate the tax parameters, we use the federal and state tax rules included in the

NBER's TAXSIM model (and other procedures described below) to imptite net average tax




    3The hourly wage variable is constructed by dividing the reported usual weekly wage by the
reported usual weekly hours. Since there are problems with the "usual weekly wage" available
in the March 1983 CPS, we match each person in the March data with his or her wage when he
or she is in the outgoing rotation group in March through June.

                                               18
rates (NATRIS) to each individual.9 In 1983, the data permit us to define the net average tax

rate of individual i as



(20)     NATR1 = FATR1+ [1- itemprobab1 x FMTRJ [SATR1 + PATR+ SLATR,I.



where: FATR is the share of total income of individual i paid in federal income tax;

itemprob is the probability that individual i itemizes deductions in calculating taxable income

for the federal income taxW; FMTR is the marginal federal income tax rate of individual i;

SATR is the share of total income of individual i paid in state income tax; SLATR. is the

share of the total income of individual i paid in state sales tax; and PATR is the share of

total income of individual i paid in property taxes. The method of calculating each of these

variables will now be described.

        The federal income tax share (FATR) is defined as the ratio of the federal income

tax liability to total money income. It is calculated by applying the federal income tax nles

to the income of the taxpayer unit (i.e., the individual or married couple) of which individual

I is a member, using the NBER's TAXSIM Model based on the income and family structure

reported in the CPS data. The federal marginal tax rate (FMTR1) facing individual i is

calculated in the same way.



   9The year 1989 is the most recent year for which the necessary data on state income and
property taxes are available. We study the data for 1983 because that is the most recent year For
which Feenberg and Rosen (1986) have estimated the average sales tax paid by different income
groups in different states.

    '°ltemizing deductions reduces the net cost of taxes paid to state and local governments by a
fraction equal to the federal marginal tax rate. The calculation of itcmprob1 is described below.

                                                 19
       The probability that the individual itemizes federal tax deductions (itemprob1) is

estimated on the basis of the 1983 and 1989 Internal Revenue Service Public Use Samples of

individual federal income tax returns. These IRS data indicate whether the taxpayer

itemizes, the state of residence, and the taxpayer's income and filing status (single, married,

etc.). We rank the states according to the fraction of taxpayers in each state who itemize and

then divide the states into five groups. Within each state group, taxpayers are classified into

one of 10 income level groups. We use the IRS data to estimate an equation that relates

itemization to filing status and to the 50 state-income categories and use this equation to

calculate the probability that each individual in our CPS sample is an itemizer.

       The state income tax share (SATRJ) is defined as the ratio of the state income tax

liability to the total money income of the taxpayer unit. The NBER's TAXSIM model

contains summaries of the tax rules for defining taxable income in each state and of the

state's structure of tax rates.

       The property tax share (PAIR) is the ratio of the property tax that individual i would

pay as a homeowner to total money income. We use the tax that would be paid by

homeowners to estimate the residential property tax liability of all households on the

assumption that renters bear a comparable tax burden through their rent. Our estimate of the

property tax individual i would pay is based on the income of that individual, the national

relationship between income and housing values, and the residential property taxes paid in

the individual's state of residence.

       The starting point for our calculation of the property tax attributable to individual i is

the assumption that a homeowner's house value in state s can be approximated by



                                               20
    = a, h(y1) where v•, is the value of the property of individual i in state s, a, is an

unobservable factor that accounts for differences among states in house prices, and h(y is

the national relation between housing vatue and income class1' It is not necessary to

calculate a, explicitly since we are interested in property tax payments and not in house

values per se. We assume that the property tax paid by a homeowner in state s is

proportional to his or her residential property value with an unobservable state-specific

average tax rate (t,). This implies that the property tax for individual i is t, v4 = t, a, h(y.J.

Estimating the individual's property tax therefore does not require separate estimates of the

average state property tax rate (t,) and the relative property value factor (a1) but only of their

product (t,a,).
       Since the t, and a, variables are assumed to be constant within each state, their

product (t,a1) can be estimated on the basis of the total residential property tax paid in state

s. The total property tax paid in state i is the sum of t, a, h(y1) over all taxpayer units in

state s. Denoting the known distribution of income in state s by f, (y,), it is possible to

calculate S, f, (y1 ) h(y1 ); the value of t, a, can then be estimated as the ratio of total

residential property taxes collected in state s to E, f,, (y ) h(y1 )J2 With that value for t,a,,



  "We estimate this relation for 1983 on the basis of the 1983 Annual Housing Survey (U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development. 1984) and for 1989 on the 1989 Annual
Housing Survey (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 1991)

   '2To implement this calculation for 1983, we use the data on property tax revenue by state in
1983 published in Advisory Committee on Intergovernmental Relations (1985) and data on the
percent of gross assessed value of taxable real property that is residential from
the Census of Governments for 1981 (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1984). A similar
procedure is used for 1989.


                                                 21
the property tax for each individual in the CI'S sample is calculated as t,a,h(y1). The property

tax share in income. PATR is the ratio of t,,a, h(y1 ) to the total money income of the

individual.

       The estimated share of total money income paid in sales tax is based on the study of

Feenberg and Rosen (1986). They used the IRS state sales tax allowance figures for 1983 to

estimate a regression of sales tax payments on income and family size. We use the Feenberg

and Rosen equation to impute a sales tax liability to each taxpayer and therefore to calculate

the corresponding income share, SLATR1.

       The demographic variables included in our specification of equation 2 are marital

status, number of children under age 6, number of children under age 18, race, years of

education (as a series of dummy variables), years of experience and its square, and whether

or not the individual lives in an SMSA.

       The analysis for 1989 is quite similar)' Unfortunately, there are no data for 1989

that are comparable to the Feenberg-Rosen estimated sales taxes by income class in 1983.



4.     The Endo2eneity of the Tax Rate

       Because each individual's tax rate is dependent on the wage that that individual

receives and on how much the individual works at that wage, the stochastic error in the wage

equation will be correlated with the net-of-tax variable. Ordinary least squares estimates will

therefore be biased. More specifically, since a higher wage will generally be negatively




   "The wage regression for 1989 includes a dummy variable for union membership that was
not available for 1983.
                                               22
correlated with the net-of-tax variable,'4 the estimated coefficient of the net of tax variable in

the ordinary least squares estimate of the wage equation will be biased down, i.e., toward a

more negative coefficient.

         An instrumental variable estimator can eliminate this bias in the large samples of data

on which our estimates are based. An appropriate instrumental variable should be

uncorrelated with the disturbance in the wage equation but correlated with the net-of-tax

variable that would apply to the expected value of the individual's wage. To construct such

an instrumental variable, we begin by estimating a regression equation relating each

individual's wage and salary income to several demographic variables: education, year of

experience, the square of the years of experience, marital status, children, race, residence in

an SMSA, union membership (when available) and a set of state dummy variables. We use

this equation to form a predicted wage and salary income for each individual. We then

combine these individual predicted wage and salary incomes for husband and wives in

married taxpayer units and add actual nonlabor income for the taxpayer unit. We use these

predicted incomes to recalculate each of the avenge tax rate variables (FATR, SATR, PATR

and SLATR), the probability of being an itemizer (itemprob) and the marginal federal tax

rate   (FMTR). Finally, we combine these variables according to the specification of equation

20 to calculate a predicted Net Average Tax Rate (NATR) and then use ln(l-NATR) as the

instrumental variable for In (1-NATR).




   "We say "generally' because the net-of-tax variable refers to the taxpayer unit as a whole
while the wage disturbance refers to a single individual within that unit.

                                                23
5.     The Emoirical Results

       Table 1 presents the estimated coefficients of the net of tax variable [In (1-NATR)] of

equation 2; since the coefficients of the demographic variables and the individual constant

terms are not of direct interest, they are not reported but are available from the authors.

The use of separate constant terms for each state is equivalent to measuring each variable

relative to the mean of that variable for the individual's state. This implies that the

coefficient of each variable measures the effect of deviations of the variable from the state

mean. In particular, the coefficient of the net-of-tax variable measures the effect of the

progressivity of the tax structure rather than the level of taxes in the state.

       The first row of Table 1 shows the result for the sample of men in 1983. The

instrumental variable estimate of the elasticity of the gross wage with respect to the net of tax

share ( of equation 2) is -0.62 with a standard error of 0.36. This estimate is not

significantly different from the value of minus one that would imply that tax progressivity

causes no change in net wages.

       The estimated coefficient is not just an indication of the long-run tendency of gross

wages to adjust to the progressivity of the state tax structure but is also a measure of the

extent to which gross wages had adjusted by 1983 to the past changes in tax rates. These

changes in 1-NATR reflect not only the changes in state and local tax rates but also the sharp

changes in federal marginal and average tax rates that were enacted in 1981. The point

estimate implies that 62 percent of the existing differences in tax progressivicy had already

been shifted by 1983 through adjustments in gross wagcs




                                                24
         This evidence on the adjustment of gross wages to tax rates is compatible with three

other types of evidence on the responsiveness of the labor market First, there is substantial

evidence of rapid change in the national distribution of wages in the 1980s in response to a

variety of factors, including changes in technology, trade, and the educational mix of the

labor force (Card, 1992; Freeman, 1994). This experience leaves little doubt about the

general ability of wages to adjust quickly. Second, the evidence on the response of

individual labor supply and, more generally of taxable incomes, to changes in tax rates

shows quite rapid responses (Eissa, 1993; Feldstein, 1994). Finally, the research of

Blanchard and Katz (1992) shows that migration away from high unemployment areas is

rapid enough to return the unemployment rate to normal six years after an adverse demand

shock.

         The fmal column presents the corresponding ordinary least squares estimate. The

value of -3.09 shows the anticipated negative bias that occurs because of the correlation

between the error term in this wage equation and the net-of-tax-share variable. The ordinary

least squares estimates are presented in Table 1 only as an indication of the importance of

using instrumental variable estimation in the current context.

         The estimated net-of-tax-share elasticity for women in 1983, shown in row 2, is -0.92

with a standard error of 0.33. This point estimate implies an even larger degree of effective

shifting of the tax than the coefficient for men, although the difference between the

coefficients is not statistically significant.




                                                 25
                                           Table 1



              The Elasticity of the Gross Hourly Wage to the Net-of-Tax Share



Row Year Men/Women Sample                  Sales Tax     Instrumental         Ordinaty
                              Size                         Variable           Least Squares

1      1983     Men          14070         Included        -0.62                 -3.09
                                                           (0.36)                (0.05)

-2     1983     Women        9494          Included        -0.92                 -2.64
                                                           (0.33)                (0.06)

3      1983     Men          14070         Excluded        -0.74                 -2.97
                                                           (0.32)                (0.05)

4      1983     Women        9494          Excluded        -0.86                 -2.56
                                                           (0.31)                (0.06)

5      1989     Men          5049          Excluded        -2.08                 -3.50
                                                           (0.34)                (0.09)

6      1989     Women        3854          Excluded        -1.12                 -2.44
                                                           (0.26)                (0.09)


Regression coefficients are from a regression of In (wage) on In (1-NA1'R) with controls for
education, experience, marital status, number of children, and race. A separate constant
term for each state controls for the state specific effects.




                                             26
        Because data on the sales tax component of the NATR variable are not available for

1989, we present estimates to show the effect of omitting the sales tax component from the

NATR for 1983. The estimate for men (row 3) of -0.74 differs only slightly From the

estimate of -0.62 (row 1) that is based on the full value of the NATR variable. Similarly,

the estimate for women (row 4) of -0.86 is very close to the full NATR estimate of -0.92

(row 2). Since the difference is -0.12 in the first case and +0.06 in the second case, there is

no evidence of a systematic direction of bias from omiuing the sales tax information.

       The estimated coefficients for 1989 are absolutely larger than the corresponding

coefficients for 1983. For men the estimated coefficient is a surprisingly large -2.08 (with a

standard error of 0.34) while for women it is -1.12 (with a standard error of 0.26.) These

estimates also suggest that the response to changes in progressivity is so rapid that gross

wages have fully adjusted to all pre-1989 tax changes.

       The data also permit an explicit analysis of the speed of adjustment. We augment the

basic specification of equation 2 for 1989 by adding the net-of-tax share variable for 1983 to

the equation as an additional regressor. More specifically, since this is not panel data, we

have calculated what 1-NAfl would have been for individual i (in the 1989 sample) under




                                              27
the tax rules that prevailed in 1983) We also calculate the corresponding instrumental

variable and use the two instrumental variables in the estimation. The estimated coefficients

for the two net-after-tax share variables are:'6



                              In (1-NATR,,)                 In (1-NATR<1)

       Men                            -1.64                         - 0.43

                                      (0.96)                         (0.60)

       Women                          -1.73                          0.43

                                      (0.38)                         (0.38)



       The striking fmding is that the lagged tax variable is not significantly different from

zero for either men or women. This implies that the gross wage in 1989 had adjusted to the

1989 tax structure and was no longer influenced by the tax structure that had prevailed as

recently as 1983. The combination of this result and the evidence of Table 1 implies that the


    ISihis calculation for 1983 excludes the sales taxes because they are not available for 1989.
Although the tax rates and progressivity measures are of course correlated across states between
1983 and 1989, there is enough variation between even these two dates so that the evidence of
complete adjustment implies a significant adjustment to recent changes. More specifically, using
the difference between the net of tax shares at $100,000 and at $25,000 as the measure of
progressivity, the correlation between progressivity in 1983 and progressivity in 1989 is 0.89.
Alternatively, if progressivity is defined as the difference between the net of tax shares at
$100,000 and at $10,000, the correlation between progressivity in 1983 and in 1989 is 0.86.
Either way, less than 80 percent of the interstate variation in progressivity in 1989 can be
explained by the corresponding variation in 1983.

   'These coefficients are from a regression of In (wage) on In (1-NATR) and In (1-
NA'FR83) as well as variables for education, experience, marital status, number of children,
and race. A separate constant term for each state controls for the state specific effects.


                                                28
adjustment of the gross wage is quite rapid as well as virtually complete, causing the net

 wage to remain essentially unaffected by changes in state tax progressivity.



6.      Conclusion

        The evidence presented in this paper supports the basic theoretical presumption that

state and local governments cannot redistribute income. Since individuals can avoid

unfavorable taxes by migrating to jurisdictions that offer more favorable tax conditions, a

relatively unfavorable tax will cause affected individuals to migrate out until the gross wage

is raised to a level at which the resulting net wage is equal to that available elsewhere.

Similarly favorable tax rates attract in-migrants until their gross wage is depressed to the

level at whicn there is no net advantage to locating in the state.

       The current empirical findings go beyond confirming this long-mn tendency and show

that gross wages adjust rapidly to the changing tax environment. Thus, states cannot

redistribute income for a period of even a few years.

       The adjustment of gross wages to tax rates implies that a more progressive tax system

raises the cost to firms of hiring more highly skilled employees and reduces the cost of lower

skilled labor. A more progressive tax thus induces firms to hire fewer high skilled

employees and to hire more low skilled employees.

       Since state taxes cannot alter net wages, there can be no trade-off at the state level

between distribution goats and economic efficiency. Shifts in state tax progressivity, by

attering the structure of employment in the state and distorting the mix of labor inputs used

by firms in the state, create deadweight efficiency losses without achieving any net



                                              29
redistribution of income. This same conclusion applies of course to local governments and to

any other political jurisdictions, including nations, when there is sufficient scope for

migration.




                                                30
                             References

Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, Significant Features of Fiscal

       Federalism, Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1985.

Advisory Commission on Jntergovernmental Relations, Significant Features of Fiscal

       Federalism, Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1991.

Atkinson, Anthony and Joseph E. Stiglitz, Lectures on Public Economics, New York:

       McGraw-Hill, 1980.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz, "Regional Evolutions," Brookings Pars on

       Economic Activity, 1992:1, 1-75.

Card, David, "The Effect of Unions on the Distribution of Wages: Redistribution or

       Relabelling?" NBER Working Pater No. 4195, October 1992.

Bissa, Nada, "Taxation and Labor Supply of Married Women: The Tax Reform Act of 1986

       As A Natural Experiment," mimeo, Harvard University, 1994.

Feenberg, Daniel R. and Harvey S. Rosen, "State Personal Income and Sales Taxes, 1977-

       1983, "NBER Reprint No. 886, 1986.

Feldstein, Martin, "The Effects of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study

       of the 1986 Tax Reform Act," NBER Working Paper No. 4496, October 1993.

Feldstein, Martin, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. "The Effect of Federal Tax Deductibility on State

       and Local Taxes and Spending," Journal of Political Economy, 95 (1987), 7 10-36.

Feldstein, Martin, and Marian Vaillant, "Does Federal Tax Deductibility Explain State Tax

       Progressivity?" (1994) forthcoming.




                                             31
Freeman, Richard B.. and Lawrence Katz, "Rising Wage Inequality: The United States

       versus Other Advanced Countries," in Workin2 Under Different Rules, Richard

       Freeman, ed., New York: The Russell Sage Foundation, 1994, 29-62.

Gordon Roger H., "Taxation of Investment and Savings in a World Economy," American

       Economic Review, 76 (1986) 1086-1102.

Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy, "The Importance of Local Fiscal Conditions in

       Analyzing Local Labor Markets," Journal of Political Economy, 97 (1989), 1208-31

Musgrave, Richard A., and Peggy B. Musgrave, Public Finance in Theory and Practice,

       New York: McGraw-Hill, 1973.

Oates, Wallace, Fiscal Federalism, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., Economics of the Public Sector, New York: W.W. Norton and

       Company, 1988.

Tiebout, C., "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," Journal of Political Economy, 64

       (1956). 416-24.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Annual Housing Survey 1983. Part

       C. Financial Characteristics of the Housing Inventory. Washington, D.C.: U.S.

       Government Printing Office, 1984.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Current Housing Reports H 150/89.

       American Housing Survey for the United States in 1989, Washington, D.C.: U.S.

       Government Printing Oftice, 1984.




                                           32
• U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1982 Census of Governments.

       Volume 2. Taxable Property Values, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing

       Office, 1988.

Wallace, Sally, "The Effects of State Personal Income Tax Differentials on Wages,"

       Regional Science and Urban Economics, 23 (1993). 611-628.




                                           33
                                      Appendix
                                      Table Al
1983 Average State Tax Rates at Incomes of $10,000, $25,000, and $100,000
(Income, Sales, and Property Taxes)


STATE    ATR(lOK)   ATR(25K)    ATR(100K)   ATR(lOOK) ATR(lOOK)
                                            -ATR(XOK) -ATR(25K)
  a
  AK
            .037
            .061.
                       .034
                       .032
                                    .034
                                    .021
                                                 -
                                                 -
                                                     .003
                                                     .040   -
                                                                   0
                                                                .011
  AZ        .057       .054         .054         -.003          .001
  AR        .042       .041         .057             .015       .016
   CA       .053       .043         .071             .018       .029
   CC       .058       .047         .054         -.004          .006
   CT       .082       .048         .032         -.050      -.015
  DE        .042       .050         .081          .040       .031
  DC        .081       .079         .098          .016       .018
   FL       .050       .029         .020         -.030      -.010
  GA        .051       .050         .058          .007       .008
  MI        .072       .069         .080          .009       .011
  ID        .045       .059         .068          .022       .009
  IL        .077       .059         .049         -   .028   -.009
  IN        .071       .056         .048         -.023      -.008
  IA        .044       .056         .064          .020       .007
  KS        .050       .040         .053          .004       .014
  KY        .056       .049         .045         -   .011   -.004
  LA        .025       .023         .027             .002    .004
  ME        .069       .052         .080             .011    .028
  MD        .065       .063         .058         -.007      -.005
  MA        .093       .078         .075         -.018      —.003
  MI        .101       .091         .085         -.016      -.006
  MM        .066       .082         .096             .031       .014
  MS        .045       .036         .045                0       .009
  MO        .045       .042         .043         -.001          .001
  MT        .064       .061         .083          .019          .023
  NB        .048       .046         .061          .013          .015
  NV        .034       .021         .014         -.020      -.007
  NH        .068       .035         .023         -.045      -.012
  NJ        .081       .056         .053         -.028      -.003
  NM        .035       .023         .042          .008       .019
  NY        .070       .065         .091          .021       .027
  NC        .052       .051 .       .062          .009       .011
  ND        .028       .027         .034          .005       .007
  OH        .055       .048         .064          .009       .017
  OK        .031       .027         .049          .018       .022
  OR        .050       .069         .086          .036       .017
  PA        .069       .051         .042         -.027      -.009
  RI        .083       .069         .086          .004       .018
  Sc        .057       .052         .063          .006       .012
  SD        .041       .025         .016         -.026      -   .009
  TN         040       .025         .016         -.024      -.009
  TX        .032       .019         .013         -.019      -.006
  UT        .080       .069         .062         -.019      -.008
  VT        .031       .045         .079          .048       .034
  VA        .061       .057         .061                0    .004
  WA        .063       .038         .025         -.038      -.013
  WV        .051       .040         .062          .011       .022
  WI        .068       .073         .091          .023       .017
  WY        .088       .048         .031         -   .056   -.017


Based on the state average of property taxes levied at the local level.
Does not include local income and sales taxes.
                                   Table A2
1989 Average State Tax Rates at Incomes of $10,000, $25,000, and $100,000
(Income and Property Taxes)

STATE     ATR(1OK)   ATR(25K) ATR(100IC) ATR(100K) ATR(100K)
                                         -ATR(1OK)     -ATR(25K)
   AL        .027       .026      .030          .003       .004
   AK        .067       .037      .025      —.042         -.012
   AZ        .050       .052      .054          .004       .002
   AR        .036       .040      .055          .019       .015
   CA        .034       .027      .063          .029       .035
   CO        .063       .054      .052      -   .010      -   .002
   CT        .059       .033      .026      -   .033      -   .007
   DE        .037       .044      .060          .024          .017
   DC        .077       .075      .099          .011          .014
   FL        .042       .023      .016      -   .026      -.007
   GA        .044       .050      .056          .012       .006
   HI        .025       .043      .068          .044       .025
   ID        .039      .059       .069          .029       .009
   XL        .062      .048       .043      -.019         -.005
   IN -      .059      .049       .045      -   .014      -   .004
   IA        .057      .052       .060          .003          .008
   KS        .035      .040       .035             0      -   .005
   KY        .051       .043      .041      -.010         -   .002
   LA        .025      .027       .032       .008             .005
  ME         .054      .053       .074       .020             .021
  MD         .060      .055       .053      -   .009      -   .002
  MA         .049      .069       .070          .020          0
  MX         .080      .066       .064      -.016         -.002
             .053      .062       .073       .020          .011
  MS         .024      .030       .042       .019          .011
  MO         .024      .035       .038       .014          .004
  MT         .065      .070       .091       .026          .021
   NB        .046      .042       .052       .006          .010
  NV         .021      .012       .009      -   .013      -   .004
   NH        .065      .036       .025      -   .040      -   .011
   NJ        .076      .053       .052      -.023         -.001
  NM         .023      .024       .052       .029          .028
  NY         .049      .056       .077       .029          .020
  NC         .058      .061       .063       .005          .001
   ND        .020      .024       .033       .013          .009
   OH        .043      .043       .058       .014          .015
   OK        .028      .036       .050       .022          .014
   OR        .055      .070       .079       .024          .009
   PA        .055      .040       .034      -.021         -   .006
   RI        .066      .055       .065      -.001          .009
   SC        .033      .051       .061          .028       .010
   SD        .025      .014       .009      -.015         -.004
             .020      .012       .009      -.011         -   .003
  TX         .033      .019       .013      -.021         -   .006
  UT         .047      .061       .062          .014          .001
  VT         .052       051       .065          .013          .015
  VA         .042      .053       .057       .015             .004
  WA         .038      .021       .015      -.024         -   .007
  WV         .041      .043       .061       .020             .018
   WI        .069      .076       .077          .008          .001
  WY         .059      .033       .022      -.036         -.010


Based on the state average of property taxes levied at the local level.
Does not include local income taxes.
