                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            EFFICIENT AND INEFFICIENT
                          SALES OF CORPORATE CONTROL




                                   Lucian Arye Bebchuk




                                  Working Paper No. 4788



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1994



I am greatly indebted to Jesse Fried for his many invaluable suggestions throughout mywork on
this project. For helpful comments and conversations. I am grateful to Victor Brudney, Robert
Gertner, Jacob Glazer, Oliver Hart. Christine Jolls, Marcel Kahan, Louis Kaplow, Arid
Rubinstein. David Scharfstcin, Steve Shavell, Andrei Schleifer. an anonymous referee, and
participants in workshops at Harvard. the NBER, and Tel-Aviv University. For financial support.
I am grateful to the National Science Foundation and to the Harvard Program in Law and
Economics (which is supported by the John M. Olin Foundation). This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Law and Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the Nationai Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                       NBER Working Paper #4788
                                                                                      July 1994


                                EFFICIENT AND INEFFICIENT
                              SALES OF CORPORATE CONTROL


                                            ABSTRACT


       This paper develops a framework for analyzing transactions that transfer a company •s

controlling block from an existing controller to a new controller. This framework is used to

compare the market rule, which is followed in the United States, with the equal opportunity rule,

which prevails in some other countries. The market rule is superior to the equal opportunity rule

in facilitating efficient transfers of control but inferior to it in discouraging inefficient transfers.
Conditions under which one of the two rules is overall superior are identified; for example, the

market rule is superior if existing and new controllers draw theft characteristics from the same

distributions. Finally, the rules' effects on surplus division are analyzed and this examination

reveals a rationale for mandatory rules.




Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
                                           I. INTRODUCTION


       The economic significance of transactions that transfer corporate control is now widely
recognized. This paper focuses on an important set of control-shifting transactions — those in
which a controlling interest in a corporation is sold from one party to another. These sale-of-
control transactions are different from the tender offer acquisitions which have attracted much
attention in the last decade. Tender offers or takeover bids are used when ownership of the
target company is dispersed, with no shareholder holding a controlling interest. However, in
many publicly traded corporations — both in the United States and (even more so) in other
countries — a significant number of shares are concentrated in the hands of a controlling
shareholder.' In such cases, a buyer generally cannot obtain control unless the existing
controller agrees to sell some or all of its shares to the buyer in a sale-of-control transaction.2
        Whether or not a sale-of-control transaction will take place may depend on whether, and
to what extent, the law provides minority shareholders with rights to participate in (or otherwise
benefit from) the transaction. In the United States the general rule has been that minority
shareholders do not have a right to participate in sale-of-control transactions. In some other
countries, however, there are rules that provide minority shareholders with certain rights with
respect to such transactions. The desirability of such rules has been the subjectof long-standing
debate among legal scholars and regulators.5
        In the last fifteen years, economists have devoted much attention to modelling the


    'While the legal rules of the United States seem to discourage the creation of control blocks (see Roe
(1990)), the incidence of such blocks is substantial even in the United States. Barclayand Sheehan
(1988) found that, in a large set of 5,240 publicly traded companies in the United States in 1984,
                                                                                                 and
approximately 13 percent had a shareholder with a majority interest. In another study, Barclay
Holdernas 119891 report  that, in a randomly chosen sample  of 394 publicly traded companies in 1986,
20 percent of the companies had a shareholder with a block exceeding 35 percent of equity. Finally,
while publicly traded companies with a control block tend to be smaller, the NYSE and AMEX (which
 tend to have the larger publicly traded companies) listed 114 companies with a majority interest in 1984
 (approximately 5 percent of the total listed) with average assets value or i.i billion dollars (see Barclay
 and Holderness [1988)).
    'Such transaetions seem to be common for companies with a controlling block. Barclay and Sheehan
 (1988] found that, in a group of 114 NYSE and AICX companies that had a shareholder owning a
 majority interest, there were 21 sale-of.control transactions in the four-year period of 1978-82.

      See, e.g., Andrews (1965), Easterbrook and Fischel (1982], Clark (1986), and Llhauge (1992].

                                                      1
inefficiencies involved in the outcome of tender offers. The free-rider problem may prevent a
takeover from taking place even if it would be efficient (see Grossman and Hart [1980]). And
the pressure-to-tender problem might enable some inefficient takeovers to occur (see, e.g.,
Bagnoli and Lipman [1988]).
        Economists have devoted little attention, however, to modelling the efficiency problems
involved in transactions in which an existing controlling shareholder sells its control block to an
acquirer.1 This feature of the literature might be due in part to the recognition that, in such
transactions, the seller's decision about whether to sell does not involve the free-rider or
pressure-to-tender problems that characterize the tender decisions of dispersed shareholders.
As this paper demonstrates, however, the lack of free-rider and pressure-to-tender problems on
the seller side does not imply that there are no efficiency problems with sale-of-control
transactions. To the contrary, efficiency problems do arise because such transactions may well
have externality effects on minority shareholders. As a result of such externalities, inefficient
transfers of control may occur and efficient transfers of control may be frustrated.
        This paper develops a framework for analyzing sale-of-control transactions. This
framework enables us to identi& the circumstances under which agiven rule may fail to
facilitate all efficient transfers or to discourage all inefficient transfers. Tne paper applies this
framework to analyze and compare the market rule and the equal opportunity rule — the two
rules that have been most used in various countries and debated in policy discussions. The
framework, however, can also be used to analyze alternative arrangements, and the paper
discusses several such arrangements. Bebchuk [1993] uses the framework to develop a full
analysis of alternatives to the market and equal opportunity rules.



     There is an important body of literature that models other aspects of the presence of large
shareholders. Thus, for example, Shleifer and Vishny (1986] present a model in which large
shareholders with significant but non-controlling interests monitor the performance of their company
and occasionally acquire control through tender offers. Holmstrom and Tirole (1993], to take another
example, analyze the optimal size of a controlling block, given the benefits and costs of market
monitoring. Zingales (1993] includes sales of control block as an important element in his model but,
under the assumptions adopted by him, transfers of such blocks cannot create efficiency problems. The
only attempt to model the efficiency problems involved in sales of control blocks is in the recent
independent work by Kahan [1993]. Kahan also models the market rule and the equal opportunity rule
but does not develop the full efficiency comparison of these rules that is provided in this paper.

                                                 2
       The paper is organized as follows. Part II presents the framework of analysis. A central
feature of the model is that controllers might differ from each other in two respects — first, in
their ability to manage and produce value, and second, in their ability to capture privatebenefits
of control. A control transfer from an existing controller to a new controller will be efficient if
and only if the new controller can better manage the company's assets.
       Part III analyzes when control transfers will take place under the market rule (MR).
Under the MR, which has generally been followed in the United States, minority shareholders
enjoy no rights in connection with a sale-of-control transaction. Under this rule, a control block
will be sold by the existing controller to an acquirer whenever the value of the control block
(including the private benefits of control captured by the controller) is greater to the acquirer
than to the existing controller. The analysis shows that the MR enables inefficient transfers to
take place. The reason is that the control block may have a higher value to the new controller
than to the existing controller not because the new controller has greater managerial ability,but
rather because the new controller has a greater ability to extract private benefits of control. The
analysis also shows that the MR fails to facilitate all efficient transfers; in this regard, however,
the MR turns out to perform better than the equal opportunity rule.
        Part IV analyzes the equal opportunity rule (EOR). Under the EOR, minority
shareholders are entitled to participate in the transaction on the same terms as the control
seller. As will be noted, the equal opportunity approach is found in the City Code of the U.K.
and in the rules of some other jurisdictions, is included in a recently proposed EEC directive on
 company law, and has been advocated in the United States by some legal scholars. The analysis
 shows that, compared with the MB, the advantage of the EOR is that it prevents all inefficient
 transfers. Under the EOR, transfers that make minority shareholders worse oft cannot take
 place, and consequently inefficient transfers will never occur. At the same time, however, the
 EOR is inferior to the MR in terms of facilitating efficient transfers: the former prevents awider
 range of such transfers than the latter.
       Thus, neither of the two basic rules analyzed in parts III and IV dominates the other by
 performing better in all cases. The question which naturally arises is whether one of the two
 rules performs better on the whole, that is, on an expected value basis. Part V seeks to shed

                                                  3
 light on this question. In particular, it identifies certain conditions —concerning the distribution
 of managerial ability and private benefits of control among existing and new controllers — under
 which one of the two considered rules is overall superior to the other.

        The analysis ofpartV identifies a certain structural differences between the performance
 of the MR and the EOR that works in favor of the MR. The severity of the efficiency problems
 under the LOR depends on the magnitude of the absolute levels of controllers' private benefits,
whereas the severity of the efficiency problems under the MR depends on the magnitude of the
differences among controllers' levels of private benefits. The analysis also identifies several
conditions under which this factor is sufficient to ensure the superiority of the MR. To start
with, it is shown that the MR is overall superior to the LOR if the differences among controllers
in private benefits of control are sufficiently small. More importantly, a surprisingly strong and
clear result is established under the assumption that the characteristics of existing and new
controllers are drawn from the same distribution: this assumption is sufficient to ensure the
superiority of the MR. Furthermore, even if new controllers are assumed to differ systematically
from existingcontrollers, it is still possible to identil' conditions under which the MR is superior.
        While the analysis of part V reveals a structural factor that works in favor of the MR, it
also identifies conditions, which cannot be ruled out a priori as implausible, under which the
EOR is superior. Thus, completely resolving the question of which rule is superior still requires
empirical evidence concerning the distributions of controllers' characteristics; the results of the
analysis indicate which evidence is needed for such resolution.
        Part VI considers the use of other arrangements— in particular, voting, appraisal rights,
and freezeouts. It examines the extent to which such arrangements can be used to address the
identified efficiency problems.
       'While most of the analysis focusses on the perspective of efficiency (social optimality),
part VII compares the MR and the EOR from the private optimality perspective of the company's
initial shareholders (or,equivalently, those who design the corporate charter). It is shown that,
compared with the MR, the EOR reduces the expected profits captured by outside buyers.
Consequently, superiority of the MR over the LOR from the perspective of private optimality is
a sufficient but not a necessary condition for superiority of the MR from an efficiency perspective.

                                                4
The identified divergence between private and social optimality indicates that mandatory rules
—   that is, regulation by fiat — may be desirable for sale-of-control transactions
         Finally, part VIII remarks on the effects that the identified inefficiency in the control
transfer process has on the ex ante choice of corporate ownership structures with controlling
shareholders. A full analysis of this ex ante question is developed in Bebchuk [1994].

                                   II. FRAMEWORK OF ANALYSIS


         Consider a publicly traded company that, in period 0, has an existing controlling
shareholder, which we shall refer to as F. In period 1,a potential new controller, which we shall
refer to as N, emerges: N may or may not acquire control from F. In period 2, the company
operates under the management of either F or N, whichever one ends up with control in period
1. At the end of period 2, the company is liquidated, and its value is divided among its
shareholders.
         The company has n shares outstanding throughout these periods- The initial controller,
F, owns a block of k shares — which is assumed to give F effective control — with the remaining

(it - k) shares dispersed among public investors. The control block may consist of a majority of
the company's shares (k n12) but also may not; in publicly traded companies a block that falls
short of a majority interest may frequently be sufficient to provide control. We shall refer to the
public shareholders of the company as minority shareholders," even though A may take on
values less than nfl.
       The controller's identity is important because it may influence the value of two
parameters, Wand B. Let W>O denote the per share total value that will flow to the company's
shareholders in period 2 as a result of the company's operations. (Without loss of generality, one
can assume that no value will flow to the shareholders until then.)
          Of the total value that will flow to shareholders, a fraction will flow directly to the
 controller as private benefits of control. Specifically, the value that will flow to the controller as
 private benefits is B per share, and the value that will flow to the shareholders qua shareholders
 is thus W- B per share. The importance of private benefits of control in modelling corporate
 control questions has been emphasized in the literature (see Grossman and Hart [1988] and

                                                   5
 Harris and R.aviv [1988a. 1988b]). Controllers can capture private benefits through using control

 to divert value by, for example, engaging in self-dealing, taking corporate opportunities, or
 obtaining excessive salaries and other benefits. (Although legal rules somewhat constrain such
 diversion, they do not prevent it altogether.) Private benefits of control may also include such
 elements as the psychic benefits resulting from control or the direct benefits that other
 businesses of the controller may get as a result of increased synergies or market power.5
         'lb highlight the generality of the used framework, it should be emphasized that no
 assumption is made as to whether the extraction of private benefits dissipates total value or
 enhances it. That is, if the controller were to choose to forego extracting private benefits of
 control, total value may be higher or lower than W. But taking as given that the controller is
 expected to capture some private benefits, Wand B are assumed to be the parameters that take
 this into account.
         N and E may well differ in either W or B or both. To start with, there are likely to be
 differences among controllers in W; for one thing, controllers are likely to differ in their relative
 abilities to manage (or monitor the management of) the company. Similarly, controllers may
differ in their ability to capture private benefits of control (see Grossman and Hart (19881 and
Harris and Raviv (1988a, 1988bfl. For example, a controller that owns other entities that are
engaged in lines of business complementary to those of the controlled company has a greater
ability to extract value by engaging in self-dealing or the taking of corporate opportunities than
a controller that does not own such entities. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that controllers
may well differ in B, though the analysis will also consider the special case in which controllers
do not differ, or hardly differ, in B.



    5There is empirical evidence that private benefits of control are significant. Barclay and Holderness
[1989] found that the average premium over market price in sales of blocks exceeding 5 percent of equity
was on average 4 percent of the value of the company's equity. The size of the block premium increased,
and at an increasing rate, with the size of traded block. Thus, since many of the traded blocks in this
study were not controlling blocks (the median block size was 1? percent of equity), 4 percent of equity
may well be a substantial underestimate of average private benefits of control in the United States.
        Evidence also exists about the significant size of private benefits of control in other countries.
The avenge premium that voting shares have (relative to shares without votes)was estimated to be 13
percent in England (Megginson 11990]), 20 percent in Switzerland (Horner(1980D, 23 percent in Canada
mctinson and White 119901), 45 percent in Israel (Levy 11982]). and 82 percent in Italy (Zingales [19941).

                                                   6
        Let W and B, denotethe values of W and B respectively if the existing controller E
retains control through period 2. And let W, and B, denote the values of %V and B respectively
if N acquires control. It is assumed that Wa may be higher or lower than Vi,, and similarly that

B, maybe higher or lower than B,. Finally, let AWdenote (W, - W,), and let AS denote W, - B,).
      A transfer of control will be efficient if and only if Wa > W,, that is, if and only if
tsW>O. In other words, the transaction will be efficient if and only if N can produce a greater
total value.6 'While greater managerial ability is just one important factor that influences the
amount of total value that a controller can produce, for simplicity I will refer to a controller that
would create a higher (lower) total value as one that is a better (worse) manager.
       Under all of the prevailing and proposed rules for sale-of-control transactions, a transfer
cannot be forced on E but rather requires E's agreement to transfer some or all of the shares in
E's control block to N. It will be assumed that N and E will agree to a transaction transferring
control if and only if there is a transaction that will make both of them better oft' Whether E

and N will agree to a transaction may thus depend on the rights that the minority shareholders
have in connection with the transaction. In evaluating the effects of a transaction, E and N are

assumed to know the values of W,, W,, B,, and B_.

        The operation of the MR does not depend on the extent to which minority shareholders
(or other third parties) are also informed about W,, W,, B,, and B,. But the operation of the
EOR, and the additional arrangements considered in part VI, may depend on what is known by
others than E and N. The analysis here will focus on the case in which W,, W, B,, and B, are
known to the market, but the consequences of imperfect information will also be considered.




    'We assume that the transfer of control don not impcEe negative externalities or confer positive
externalities on groups other than the minority shareholders. This assumption seems reasonable for an
analysis that focuses on the consequences of certain basic corporate law rules. To the extent that the
transfer of control may impose or confer externalities on other groups (such as debtholders, workers,
competitors, and so forth), such externalities would be better addressed by other legal rules or
contractual arrangements.

    'If W,, SI',, B,, and B, are common knowledge among N and E, then bargaining theory would indeed
suggest that the parties will agree to a transaction if there are gains to be shared between them. lf there
is some informational asymmetry concerning these values, however, the parties may fail to agree to a
mutually beneficial transaction and may fail to capture the potential gains from trade.

                                                    7
                                         Ii!. 'UrE MARKET RULE

           Under the ME, the seller is free to sell its control block at any price that the acquirer is

 willing to pay, and minority shareholders enjoy no rights in connection with the transaction.
 This is the rule that essentially governs sale-of-control transactions in the United States.5

 A. The Outcome Under the Market Rule
           A control block of k shares provides a controller with private benefits worth nfl and value
 qua shareholder of k(W- B.). Adding up, the total value of the k-share block to the controller is
 hW+ (n-k)B: the first term represents the controller's claim on its pro rata fraction of the total
 value that is produced; and the second term represents the extent to which the controller
 receives more — and the minority shareholders receive less — than their proportionate share of

 the value produced. Thus, whereas the per share value of minority shares is (W- B), the control
block has a higher per share value of W+ ((n-k)/kjB.
           Under the ME, there will be a transaction transferring a control block from E to N if and
only if E and N can find a price for the block that will make both of them better off. This will
be the case if and only if the value of the control block to N is higher than the value of this block
to E. Thus we have the following proposition:

PRoposmoN 1. Under the MR, a transfer of control will occur if and only if:

w                                 w'                >w'

B. The Efficiency Costs of the Market Rule

          From proposition 1, it is possible to derive the following two corollaries.

COR0LLASY (inefficient transfers). Under the MR, an inelflcient transfer of control will take
place if and only if:

(2)                 W -W=AWcO and (.f..)(B._Bjs(.2.j!) SB> -LtW;



      'For a good account of the use of the MR in the United State, and the exceptions to it, see Elbauge
119921.

                                                    8
or, equivalenik, item! only if

(3)                                 -!L±'AB<aWcO.
                                        k)
REMARKS. (lEven if N is a worse manager than E, N nevertheless will place a higher value on
the control b&k if N expects to extract enough additional private benefits of control. In the case
of such an inelcient transfer, the value of minority shares will decrease both because the total
value produ will Ml under N and because a higher fraction of this total value wilt flow to N
as private bfits. The inefficient transaction will occur because B and N will not internalize
the negativeaternality imposed by the transaction on minority shareholders.
           (2iTIte Evidence. The evidence does not rule out the possibility that inefficient
transfers dotke place under the prevailing MR. To be sure, studies indicate that, on average,
the market pke of minority shares rises following a transfer of a control block? In many cases,
however, trmfers of control lead to a decline in the market price of minority shares.'° Thus,
it is possiblethat, under the existing state of the law, inefficient transfers do take place in
situations inwhich the acquirer has a greater ability to extract private benefits of control.

COROLLARY 2(efficient transfers). Under the Mit, an efficient transfer of control will not take

place if andmly if:

(4)              Wa_W.tAW>O and
                                             Awc(.j!..)(B._B.3 _(.2j±.)aB;




     See, e.g., lderness and Sheehan (1988] (reporting that in 21 transfers of majority share blocks
not involving anultaneous offers to minority shareholders, there were average announcement-period
abnormal incises in stock prices of 9.41. percent).
      10
     Holdern
by them, 19  jit and Sheehan (1988] report that in the 31 cases of sales of majority blocks examined
                     of the announcement-day and 35 percent of the announcement-period abnormal
returns were rgative. These figures are likely to understate the degree to which sale-of-control
transactions l to a decrease in the value of minority shares. First, the 31 cases include 10 in which
a simultaneotae(l'er was made to minority shareholders. In these 10 cases, abnormal      returns to stock
                                                                                     studied involved the
prices were sigificantly higher than  for the sample  as a whole. Second, the trades
            of skye blocks larger then necessary to  achieve control. The purchase of such blocks is more
acquisition
likely to be mc*wnted by expectations of an increase in the value of the company than by anticipated
private beneftad control.
                                                 9
 or, equivalently, if and only if

 (5)


 Rn.tMus. (1) Even when N is a better manager than E, N will place a lower value on the control
 block if N's private benefits of control are sufficiently smaller. Note that when N has a higher
 W and a lower B, a transfer of control would benefit minority shareholders in two ways — by
 increasing the total value produced and by reducing the traction of total value that flows to the
 controller as private benefits. But E and N will ignore this positive externality, and for this
 reason an efficient transfer may not take place.
        (2) Free-rider Problem. It might be suggested that, even if (5) is satisfied, an efficient
transfer of control will not be blocked because E will first purchase the minority shares for a per
share price slightly above (W• - B,) and then will proceed with the control transfer to N. But if
£ were to make a tender offer for minority shares at a price slightly above (W, - B,), the offer
may fail to attract enough minority shares due to a free-rider problem. Each minority
shareholder may have an incentive to hold out in the hope of ending up with minority shares in
the N-controlled company." Thus, unless controllers have a legal right to effect a freezeout of
minority shares at We - B, (see section VLC), E's ability to try to purchase minority shares cannot
ensure that all efficient transfers occur under the MR.

C0R0LIJsy 3 (efficiency costs). The expected efficiency costs of the MR are (per share)


(6)

                                        k) )
                       Thob(o<Awc-(f±'aB'E Awjo<Aw<-(!.±B                      -




RzMnics. (1) The first term of (6) represents the expected costs resulting from the possibility

of inefficient transfers taking place under the rule. The second term of the equation represents
the expected costs resulting from the MR failing to facilitate all efficient transfers.


   " For models of the free-rider problem in tender offers, see Grossman and I-tart [1980] (atomistic
shareholders) and Bebejiuk (1989) (non-atomistic shareholders).

                                                10
           (2) Both types of efficiency costs under the ?'IR result from the possible differences

among controllers in their B. To see that this is the case, consider the situation in which all
controllers have the same B, that is, Ba always equals B4. In this case, one can see from
proposition 1 that a transfer will take place under the MR if and only if the transfer is efficient

(W_> W,). For if E and N have the same ability to extract private benefits of control, the control
block will be more valuable to N than to Elf and only if N has greater managerial ability. More
generally, holding other things equal, the expected efficiency costs of the MR decrease as the
difference among controllers in B decreases, an issue to which we will return in part V.
           (3) The expected efficiency costs of the MR decrease ask — the number of shares held

by the controller — increases. For the smaller the number of minority shares, thesmaller the
magnitude of the externality (negative or positive) that a transfer may create with respect to the

minority shareholders.

                               IV. ThE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY RuLE

        Under the EOR, minority shareholders are entitled to participate in the sale on the same

tents as the seller. This part will analyze two versions of the EOR. One version — which we
shall refer to as the complete acquisition version — requires the buyer that is buying control to

offer to buy the shares of all minority shareholders at the price paid to the control seller. This
version of the rule can be found in the City Code of the United Kingdom, in the rules of some
other countries (such as Spain and Australia), and in a proposed EEC directive (see Lihauge
 (1993) and LUttmann [1992)). Under this version of the rule, partial acquisitions arenot possible
unless the minority shareholders choose not to tender all of their shares to the buyer.

        A second version of the rule — which is seemingly less edemandinga — will be referred to

 as the proration version. Under this version of the rule, a potential purchaser of control is not
 required to purchase all shares but only to extend an equal offer to all shareholders and to accept

 tendered shares on a pro rata basis. As a result, minority shareholders have the right to sell,
 for the same price, the same percentage of their shares as the control seller. The proration
 version of the EOR was proposed in a classic article by Andrews (1965) and has since become the

 subject of vigorous debate among legal scholars in the United States (see, e.g.,Andrews [1965],

                                                 11
Javares [1965), and Easterbrook and Fischel [1982]). But even though the proration version of
the rule seems less demanding at first glance, the analysis below will show that its consequences
are largely the same as those of the complete acquisition version.

A. The Outcome Under the Complete Acquisition Version

PRoPosrrloN 2. Under the complete acquisition version of the EOR, a transfer of control will
occur if and only if:

(7)                              W*   >W• •(.1.B ,           or

(8)                                     w>
REMARK. This result, which is proved in the Appendix, can be explained intuitively as follows,

The right-hand side of (7) — being the per share value that E has in the absence of a sale —
represents the minimum price at which N's offer must be made in order that the transaction not
impose a loss on EL

        The left-hand side of(8) represents the maximum price at which the offer can be made
for the transaction not to impose a loss on N. Since W will have a value of W,, under N's
management, any price below W4 will leave N with a profit on each share acquired. And any
offer at any price above W0 will impose a loss on N: such an offer will be accepted not only by
B but also by all the minority shareholders, N will end up with all of the shares and will have
paid for them a per share price exceeding their per share value W4.

B. The Outcome Under the Proration Version
       Consider now the situation in which N is permitted to buy a controlling block without
offering to buy all of the minority shares. In particular, suppose that N is allowed to purchase
only q c n shares (q shares are assumed to be sufficient for control), and that N is only required
to extend the same offer to all shareholders and, in the event of oversubscription, to take up
tendered shares on a pro-rata basis. Thus, if N offers to pay a price P for each of the q shares
that it buys, the existingshareholders of the company (Band the minority shareholders) will end


                                               12
up with qP in cash plus (n-q) minority shares worth (W - B) each — that is1 a total value of
qP + (n-q)(W,,-B) in payments and minority shares.

PROPOSITION 3. Under the proration version of the EOR, a transfer of control will occur if and

only if(S) — or, equivalently, (7)— is satisfied,

REMARKS. (1)    The intuition for this result, which is proven in the Appendix, is as follows. As
before, if the transaction is not to impose a loss on E, the minimum per share value that E must
get from it is the per share no-transaction value that E has, which is the right-hand side of(S).
        Also, as before, the maximum per share value that the transaction can give E and still
not impose a loss on N is 1%',, which is the left-hand side of (8). If the transaction is not to
impose a loss on N, the total value with which the existing shareholders will end up following
the transaction cannot exceed ,tW_; for if the existing shareholders will end up with more than
nW — the total value produced following the transaction — some of the existing shareholders'
value will have to come at the expense of N's loss. Given that the proration version gives the
minority shareholders the right to participate on the same terms as E, E will not be able to
capture more than its prorata fraction of the total value obtained by the existing shareholders.
Thus, since this total value cannot exceed rzW_ without the transaction imposing a loss on N,the
per share value that the transaction gives E canpot exceed Wa'2
        (2) Equivalence between Versions. Propositions 2 and 3 indicate that control transfers will
take place in exactly the same circumstances under both versions of the EOR. The reason for
this equivalence is that, under both versions of the rule, the minority shareholders' option to
participate will ensure that the maximum per share value which the transaction can provide E
without imposing a loss on N is the same, W,,.
         (3) liquidity Constraints. The shove analysis has assumed that N has funds to finance
 a complete acquisition of all the company's shares (if such an acquisition would be profitable).
 But would the complete acquisition version impede a transaction if N has funds that are

    "Another way to understand the intuition behind Proposition S is by understanding why Ba does
 not appear in the transfer condition: to the extent that N is expected to extract pnvate benefits of
 control, N must compensate E (and participating minority shareholders as well) by anoffsetting amount.
 Thus, B, does not represent a net source of value to N from owning the control block.
                                                    13
 sufficient to purchase only q <n shares? It may well not. For one thing, in such a case, N would
 be able to buy the company's shares not directly but through a sheli subsidiary. N would form
 a wholly-owned subsidiary and provide it with the funds that N has. The subsidiary woutd offer
 to buy all of the company's shares for a total consideration equal to the funds that the subsidiary
 has and a fraction [fti-q)In] of the shares of the subsidiary. Thus, the company's existing
 shareholders would end up with the funds paid by the subsidiary and a fraction [(n-q)In] of the
 shares of a company (the subsidiary) that has all of the company's assets and is controlled by N.
 In this way, N would convert the complete acquisition version to the proration version.'3

 C. The Efficiency Costs of the Equal Opportunity Rule
         From propositions 2 and 3, it is possible to derive the following two corollaries.

 COROLLARY 4 (inefficient transfers). Under (the two versions of) the EOR, inefficient transfers
 wilt not occur. Thus, in terms of preventing inefficient transfers, the EOR is superior to the MR.

REMARK. Inefficient transactions may take place under the MR because, under this rule, a
transaction may impose a negative externality on the minority shareholders and E and N will
disregard this negative externality when considering a transfer. In contrast, transfers under the
EOR cannot leave minority shareholders worse off. Indeed, under the EOR, if a transaction
takes place, minority shareholders will be always made better off by it: they will end up with
at least the per share value that E will have following the transaction, which in turn is higher
than E's per share value in the absence of a sale, which is in turn higher than the no-sale per
share value of minority shares. Thus, under the EOR, all of the transactions that occur must
make all parties, including minority shareholders, better off. Consequently, all transfers that
take place under this rule must be efficient.

CoRou..Asy 5 (efficient transfers). Under (the two versions of) the EOR, an efficient transfer will


   "Even if the above way were for some reason not possible, N could still purchase all at shares of the
company and then resell (n-q) shares to the market for their per share value of (14',, -.6,). Assuming that
there are no transaction costs involved in reselling minority shares to the market, this combination of
transactions wt,uld leave N in exactly the same position as if it had purchasedq shares at the start.
Thus, even in this case, the perfonnance of the complete acquisition will differ from that of the proration
version only to the extent of the transaction costs involved in reselling shares.

                                                   14
not take place if and only if:

(9)                                  0
                                                 k)
Thus, in terms of facilitating efficient transfers, the EOR is inferior to the MR; the former

prevents more efficient transfers than the latter.

REMARKS. (1) The EOR impedes efficient transfers because it requires E to lorego any advantage
over the minority shareholders in the event of a control transfer even though E has an advantage
over the minority shareholders in the absence of a transfer. In the absence of a transfer, E
enjoys a disproportionately large share of the value produced by the company because of E's
private benefits. In the event of a transfer, however, because N must extend the same otter to
all shareholders, E can capture no more than its proportionate fraction of the total value received
by the existing shareholders. Even if the total value produced by the N-run company is greater
than the total value of the company under E, the value of E's disproportionate share of the lower-
valued company may be greater than E's proportionate share of the higher-valued company.
When this occurs, E cannot be induced to sell the control block to N.
         (2) Free-rider Problem. It might be suggested that, when (9) is satisfied, the efficient
transfer would still take place because E would be able to purchase first all the minority shares
at 04' - B,) and then proceed with the control transfer. But for the reasons explained in the
remarks following corollary 2, such an offer by E to purchase the minority shares would be

impeded by a free-rider problem.

CORoLLARY 6 (efficiency costs). The expected efficiency costs under (either version of) the EOR

are (per share)
(10)                             <                          I 0 < MV <
                      Thvb (o        < (-i-) B.) E [w                    (!j-) B.].
REMARKS.     (1) In contrast to the case under the MB, the efficiency costs of the EOR would not
disappear if controllers were assumed not to differ in their private benefits of control, that is, if
      were assumed to always equal B. Even if controllers had the same B, there would be some
meaningful efficiency costs as long as this uniform level of private benefits was not trivial.


                                                 15
            (2) The expected efficiency costs of the EOR decrease ash —the number of shares held

by the controller — increases. For the smaller the number of minority shares, the smaller the
relative magnitude of the advantage that E has over minority shareholders in the absence of a
sale relative to Es prorata share of the company's total value.

D. The Minority Shareholders' Option Not to Tender
        Under the EOR, minority shareholders have an option — but are not required — to
participate in the transaction. If the minority shareholders exercise their option, they will
emerge from the transaction with the same per share value as E will have. But the minority
shareholders may decline to exercise their option. If the share price negotiated by E and N is
less than (W - B), the minority shareholders will be better off holding to their shares. In this
case, they will end up with a higher per share value than E —and thus with more than their pro
rata fraction of the total value received by the company's existing shareholders.
        By eliminating the option element, the EOR could be modified to create what may be
called the equal sharing" rule. Under such a rule, whenever E and N negotiate a sale, minority
shareholders would be required (rather than given an option) to participate on the same terms
as E.'4 For our purposes, the choice between the EOR and the equal sharing rule is not all that
significant. The analysis contained in the proofs of propositions 2 and 3 implies that both rules
will produce control transfers under the same set of circumstances: the rules will differ only in
the division among the shareholders of the surplus from the transfers that take place.
        Finally, it should be noted that while the possibility that minority shareholders have less
information about (W - B) than E and N is irrelevant to an analysis of the equal sharing rule
(under which minority shareholders do not make any decisions), it is relevant to an analysis of
the EOn.. Under the EOn., minority shareholders have to decide whether to exercise their option.
To be sure, the minority shareholders can, by tendering their shares, always ensure that they

   "If the EOn. were to be adopted in the U.S. without any change in existing merger law, then the
result would in many cases be wholly equivalent to that of an equal sharing nile. For under existing
merger law, a controller with a majority interest can sell the company for a price it negotiates withthe
buyer and then distribute the proceeds to all shareholders on a pro zeta basis. Thus, a controller with
a majority interest would be able to design a sale of its interest in the company in such a way that
minority shareholders get no more than their pro rate fraction of the total value obtained by the existing
shareholders.

                                                   16
get the same per share value as E. But the minority shareholders may choose not to sell their
shares to N if, based on the information available to them, they believe that (W - B,) is higher

than the negotiated share price.

        V. AGGREGATE CoMpARIsoN          OF THE MARKET AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY Rutss


       As was shown in parts III and IV, neither the MR nor the EOR dominates the other:
each will perform worse than the other in some cases. The question thus naturally arises as to

which rule performs better over the aggregate of cases, that is, which rule is characterized by
lower expected efficiency costs. This part seeks to shed some light on this question.
        In examining this question, the analysis below identifies a certain structural difference
between the two rules' performance that works in favor of the MR in an overall comparison. The

severity of the efficiency problems under the MR depends on the distribution of IB,-B.I. In
contrast, the severity of the efficiency problems under the EOR depends on the distribution of
B1. Under various plausible scenarios, the distribution of lB-B.I is closer to zero than that ol
B4. The analysis identifies certain conditions under which this factor is sufficient to ensure the

overall superiority of the MR. It should be emphasized, however, that the analysis also identifies

a condition under which, in spite of the identified factor, the EOR is superior.


A. Similarity in Private Benefits of Control
        Let us begin with the condition that is easiest to identi'. We saw in part III that, as tsB
goes to zero, so do the expected efficiency costs of the MR. And we saw in part IV that, for any
given B4, sending &B to zero will not affect the expected efficiency costs of the EOR. These

observations lead to the following proposition, which is proved in the Appendix.


PRoposmoN 4. The expected efficiency costs of the MR are smaller than those of the EOR if the
maximal difference between controllers in their private benefits of control, ntaxb.Bj, is


    ' Thus, overestimates of (W, . B1) by minority shareholders may lead them to hold out in a case in
 which this will lead to their ending up with a per share value lower than that which E will rt.
 Consequently, it can be shown that shareholders having ls information about (WA- B.) than E and N
 have could lead to (i) occurrence of some inefficient transfers under the EOR and (ii) occurrence of some
 efficient transfers which would otherwise be blocked by the rule.

                                                    17
sufficiently small.

        While this proposition highlights the importance of differences in B, one cannot derive
from it a confident conclusion that the MR is superior to the EOR. Even if one believes that the

range of differences in 13 is not large (or at least not large relative to the range of differences in

Ii"), one cannot be confident that the range is sufficiently small to ensure that the condition in
proposition 4 is satisfied. For the very sources from which B often arises suggest that controllers
may differ significantly in their ability to extract private benefits of control.

B. Symmetry Between Buyers and Existing Controllers

        A natural benchmark case to consider is the one in which Wand FiB are symmetrically

and independently distributed around zero. That is, while new controllers may have higher or
lower values for WorB, new controllers have neither a systematic advantage nor a systematic
disadvantage relative to existing controllers.

        One assumption that would give rise to such a scenario is that, in every case, 1V is
symmetrically distributed around W, and B is symmetrically distributed around B. As a result,
in every case both MV and all will be symmetrically distributed around zero.

        Alternatively, one could assume that tV', and W are drawn from the same distribution,
and similarly that B and B, are drawn from the same distribution. Here, in the aggregate of
cases, both tsW and fiB are symmetrically distributed around zero.

       Surprisingly, in the case of symmetry, it is possible to establish a strong and clear result
about the relative performance of the MR and the EOR.'°


PitoposmoN 5. Assuming that AW and all are both symmetrically and independently
distributed around zero, the MR is characterized by lower expected efficiency costs than the EOR.


REMARKS. (1) The intuition behind this result, which is proved in the Appendix. may be
explained as follows. Under the MR, there may be an efficiency problem both when fiB >0 (an
inefficient transfer will occur if 0 <       < fiB) and when fiB c 0 (an efficient transfer will be



      am grateful to Jesse Fried for the proof of this propcsition.

                                                  18
prevented if 0 .c-AW< -AD). Under the assumed conditions of symmetry, the expected efficiency
costs resulting from a given positive AB are the same as those resulting from a negative LB with
the same absolute value. Consequently, the size of the total expected efficiency costs depends
on the distribution of laB. The further away from zero tAB I is distributed, the greater the
total expected efficiency losses.
         In contrast, under the EOR, the magnitude of the efficiency problem depends on the
distribution of B. The further from zero B is distributed, the greater the expected efficiency
costs of the rule (from efficient transfers blocked when 0 'c LW <B,).
         The assumption that AD is symmetrically distributed around zero implies that the
distribution of Lilt is stochastically dominated by the distribution of B,. This ensures that the
expected efficiency costs of the MR are smaller than those of the EOR.
         (2) Indeed, under the assumed conditions of symmetty, the expected efficiency costs of the
MR may be substantially lower than those of the EOR. Consider the following example, which
assumes that W4 is symmetrically and uniformly distributed around V.7, and that B,, is
symmetrically and uniformly distributed around B,. In this case, assuming that
max (LW)> ((n-k)/k] max (AD), computation indicates that the expected efficiency costs of the
MR are less than 1/3 of the expected efficiency costs of the EaR.

C. Asymmetry Between Buyers and Existing Controllers
         While the symmetric case is a natural benchmark case to consider, it is possible to argue
that potential buyers may systematically differ in their characteristics from existing controllers.
Indeed, one can think of reasons for systematic differences in two opposite directions. On the
one hand, it may be argued that existing controllers are the product of a selection process that
put them in control in the first place, and that, as a result, their Wand B may be systematically
(though not always) higher than those of potential buyers." On the other hand, it may be
argued that existing controllers may have already exhausted some of the modes available to
them in creating or diverting value, and that, as a result, new controllers may have


    '   See Bebchuk and Kahan (1990] for a consideration of a similar argument in the context of proxy
con tasts.

                                                   19
systematically (though not always)higher Wand B. We therefore explore below the implications
of systematic difference in characteristics. The analysis shows that the structural factor working
 in favor of the MR in the symmetric case continues to operate in the asymmetric case. The
analysis also shows, however, that there are distributional assumptions under which the LOR
is nonetheless superior to the MR.
        1.   Asymznety only in B. It turns out that symmetry in W alone is sufficient to ensure
the superiority of the MR, even if buyers have systematically higher B, as long as the increases
in B brought about by new controllers are not too large relative to the existing level of B.

PRoPosrrIoN 6. Assuming that 8W and SB are independently distributed,, and that lsW is
symmetrically distributed around zero, a sufficient condition for the MR to be superior to the
EOR is that (1) B does not exceed 28,, or, more generally, (ii) the distribution of B-B,I is
stochastically dominated by the distribution of B,.

REMARK. The intuition behind the result, which is proved in the Appendix, is as follows. As
noted earlier, when aW is symmetrically distributed around zero, the expected efficiency costs
of the MR depend on how far the distribution of IBcB.l is from zero, whereas the expected costs
of the EOR depend on how far the distribution of B, is from zero. Consequently, when the
distribution of IB-B.I is closer to zero than the distribution of B,, the efficiency costs of the MR
are smaller than those of the EOR.
       2. Same asymmetry in both Wand B. Let us denote Prob(W4 > W.,) by 6 and
Prob(B > B) by O. Our interest now is in examining the case in which both Oh,. — 1/2 and
89—1/2. To explore this case, we make the followingsimplifying assumptions. We assume that,
in every given case, 8W is distributed as follows: conditional on 8W > 0, aW is distributed
uniformly on (O,w), and conditional on 8W < 0, 8W is distributed uniformly on (-w,O). Thus, the
density function of 8W is (1 -0 1J1w on (-w,0) and e/w on (O,w). Similarly, we assume that,
conditional on a.B>0, aD is distributed uniformly on (0,6) and that, conditional on SB <0, 58 is
distributed uniformly on (-6,0). (Given thatB, >0, it follows that 6 must be less than B,.) Thus,
the density function of aD is (1-ed/b on (.6,0) and 03/b on (0,6). Finally, we assume that
B, c rnax(8W) and, as before, that 8W and SB are independently distributed.

                                               20
         For this uniform distribution example, one can establish a surprisingly strong and clear
result, which is proved in the Appendix, concerning how the MR compares with the EOR

PRoposmoN 7. In the uniform distribution case described above, if O, =O (that is, N is equally
likely to have a higher W as it is to have a higher B), then the MR is superior to the EQR.
Furthermore, a sufficient condition for the MR to be superior to the EOR is that ow>
                                                                                           2(1 +88)
RE!.IAJLKS.   (1) From the analysis in the proof of proposition 7, it follows that when O, = O, then

CMR,   the expected efficiency cost of the MR, is less than (2/3)(1-OJ of CWR, the expected
efficiency cost of the EOR. Thus, CMR is always less than 2/3 of CR and, for Os.> (1/2), CMR
is   less than 1/3 of
              2)Proposition 7 implies that °w> (l/2)0 is always a sufficient condition for the MR
to be superior. Furthermore, for 8 .c (1/2), Ow> (1 /6)O is also a sufficient condition for the
MR's superiority.

              Thus, in the considered uniform case, even if potential buyers have a systematic
disadvantage in W relative to the existing controllers, the MR will stilt be superior to the EOR
as long as potential buyers have a similar systematic disadvantage in B. The EOR will be
superior only if the standing of potential buyers (relative to existing controllers) in terms of W
is substantially worse than their relative standing in terms of B.
         3. Conditions under which the Equal Opportunity Rule is Superior. The analysis thus
far has shown that, even when new and existing controllers draw their characteristics from
different distributions, the identified factor continues to work in favor of the MR. Still, while the
analysis has identified certain conditions of asymmetry under which the MR is superior, it
should be emphasized that one cannot draw from them a confident conclusion about the MR's
superiority. The reason is that it is also possible to identify conditions under which the EOR is
superior. Suppose, for example, that new controllers have neither a systematic advantage nor
disadvantage in terms of B, but that they have a systematic disadvantage in terms of W. If this
disadvantage in Wis sufficiently large, the EOR will be superior. Our current knowledge does
not enable us to rule out this scenario concerning the distributions otH and Was an implausible


                                                 21
description of the world.
        To see that the considered scenario may be plausible1 one may suggest the following story.
Before a company goes public, its ownership may move hands until it gets into the hands of the
owner that will sell to the public a minority of the company's shares and become the initial
controlling shareholder. This process will tend to produce initial controllers with a high W. But
because a high B will not make the company more valuable to an owner (a high B will be fully
reflected in the price the public will be willing to pay for shares), the process will not result in
initial controllers with a systematically high B. Consequently, compared with the initial
controllers, emerging potential buyers will have a systematic disadvantage in W but not in B.
        Thus, more empirical evidence on the distributions oIB1, AWand AB than is currently
available is needed to enable us to determine confidently which rule is superior. The analysis
in this part, however1 indicates which evidence is needed and how it could be used to resolve the
considered question.

I). Correlation Between 8W and 8B
        Thus far we have assumed that Wand B are independently distributed. But it could be
suggested that Wand B may have either a positive or a negative correlation. To suggest the
possible presence of positive correlation, it may be argued that, when the total value produced
is larger, the opportunities to extract private benefits increase. Also, it may be argued that in
some instances the extraction of private benefits may be surplus producing— that is, the private
benefits may not come, at least not fully, at the expense of the values flowing to shareholders
qua shareholders.'5 To suggest the possible presence of a negative correlation, one may.argue
that in some cases the extraction of private benefits dissipates value. One reason for this is that
some actions taken to divert value from minority shareholders (e.g., self-dealing) may be
inefficient, that is, they may produce a smaller increase in private benefits than the decrease
they bring about in the value flowing to shareholders.


   "For example, consider a controller that derives peychic benefits from managing the family's long-
standing busins or that owns other businesses that can benefit from the network of relationships to
which the control position gives access; such benefits need not come, at least not fully, at the expense
of values flowing to shareholders.

                                                  22
       Since theory cannot enable us to determine whether a negative or positive correlation is

more likely to occur, the assumption of independeni distributions that has been used thus far

provides a good starting point. But in the hope that future empirical work may identify whether
correlation exists and in which direction, let us consider briefly Ihe implications of correlation
       The presence of correlation between aW and t.B will have no effect on the expected
efficiency costs of the EOR. For these costs do not depend on the distribution of aS but only on

the distribution of B. The presence ol correlation, however, will affect the expected efficiency
costs of the MR.
       Introducing a positive correlation between AW and tsB will decrease the expected costs

of the MR and thus further strengthen the rule's advantage over the EOR. Such correlation
implies that, when AW is positive and a transfer is thus efficient, aS will be more likely to be
positive as well; accordingly, there will be fewer efficient transfers that will be blocked. Such
correlation also implies that, when AW is negative and a transfer is inefficient, AS will be more
likely to be negative as well; thus, the problem of inefficient transfers will also recede in severity.
       In contrast introducing a negative correlation between aW and aS will increase the
expected costs of the MR and thus erode or even eliminate the rule's advantage. A similar
reasoning to the onejust noted indicates that negative correlation will increase both the expected

costs of blocked erncient translers and the expected costs of inefficient transfers taking place.

K Multiple Rounds of Potential New Controllers
       The analysis has assumed just one round in which a potential new controller may emerge.
A more general setup would of course allow for many rounds. In each round, a new potential
controller would emerge; whichever controller ends up in control at the end ofa given round will

face the new controller that emerges in the following round, and so on. While the analysis or
such a general setup is beyond the scope of the present paper, it is possible to identi& in the
many-rounds case a factor that works in favor of the MR: under the MR total value will
converge eventually toward its maximum potential value, whereas under the EOR total value
might get stuck below that level.
       Suppose that there is an infinite number of rounds. Suppose also that the characteristics


                                                 23
of all potential controllers that emerge in those rounds are drawn from the same distribution.
Specifically, suppose that W and B of all potential controllers with positive probability are
distributed in LW.W] and         respectively. In this case, under the MR, there is a sufficiently
large number of rounds after which W will reach a level arbitrarily close to tV with any given
high probability. After such a large number of rounds, a potential controllerwith both W and
B close to W and B will emerge with the required high probability. And when such a controller
emerges, the MR will facilitate a transfer to this controller.
       in contrast, under the EOR, we cannot rely on such a convergence of w to the upper
bound of W .   It is possible that W will get stuck' at a level significantly below W and will not
climb above it regardless of how many rounds follow. To see this, suppose that, after one or
more rounds, the controller is one with B and 1V = W - ((n-k)/k]B. Under the EOR, even if in
later rounds controllers with Ws between Vf and W emerge, a transfer will still not occur.

                               VI. OTHER LEGAL ARRANGEMENTS


       The framework developed in this paper can be used not only to analyze the MR and the
EOR but also other arrangements that are or may be applied to sale-of-control transactions.
Below I discuss three arrangements — voting, appraisal rights, and freezeouts — that one may
consider as possible improvements over the MR and the EOR. A full analysis of the
arrangements considered below (and some additional possible arrangements) can be found in my
earlier discussion paper (Bebehuk [1993)).

A. Voting
        Consider an arrangement that supplements the MR with a voting requirement. Under
the arrangement, a control transfer would require a vote of approval by the company's minority
shareholders. Of course, to obtain the needed approval, E and N may choose to induce the
minority shareholders to approve the transfer by offering them some payments (from E or N) or
opportunities to participate in the transaction in some way.
        Suppose first that minority shareholders know (W - B) and (1V - B,) as E and N are
assumed to do. In this case, the vote requirement would eliminate the problem of inefficient

                                                24
transfers and ensure that no such transfers take place. For the approval requirement will
ensure that no negative externalities are imposed on minority shareholders, and, in the absence
of such externalities, all transfers that take place wilt be efficient ones.
       Note that, while the considered voting arrangement would eliminate the problems of
inefficient transfers, it would not address the problem of blocked efficient transfers. Recall that,

when B exceeds B,      some   efficient transfers may not take place, because E and N will not
internalize the positive externality that the transfer will confer on minority shareholders. To
facilitate all efficient transfers, the voting arrangement would have to be strengthened to allow
the minority shareholders also to approve a concession —that is, the minority shareholders will
be able to approve a transaction in which they end up with less than (W - B,) by, say, approving
a payment from the company to E or to N equal to W - Be). Under this strengthened
arrangement, and assuming that minority shareholders know (W - B) and (W_ - B,) as E and
N are assumed to do, the first-best would be attained.
        Suppose, however, that minority shareholders have less information about (W, - .B) and
(W, - B) than E and N do, either because F and N have some private information or because
voting shareholders may not have much incentive to acquire information. In such a case, the
voting requirement may not prevent all inefficient transfers (for the minority shareholders may
approve an inefficient transfer that would actually hurt them) and also may prevent some
efficient transfers that would otherwise take place (for the minority shareholders may
erroneously block a transfer that would actually benefit them). Furthermore, if the voting
arrangement is strengthened to enable the minority shareholders to approve their getting less
than (W_ - B,), then the shareholders may approve concessions leading to the occurrence ofsome
inefficient transactions that would not take under the MR alone.

B. Appraisal Rights
        Consider an arrangement that would supplement the MR with appraisal rights. State
corporation statutes typically provide shareholders with appraisal rights in connection with
certain 'fundamental" corporate transactions (such as mergers). When a transaction triggers
appraisal rights, shareholders have the option of redeeming their shares for the estimated value

                                                25
that their shares would have in the absence of the transaction (as determined by a court).
Although current law does not offer shareholders appraisal rights in the context of sale-of-control
transactions, one may consider providing such rights in these transactions.
        Let us suppose first that the appraisal process is accurate — that is, that courts know

(W - B) as E and N are assumed to do, and that minority shareholders exercising their appraisal
rights will thus get this value. In this case, and assuming that shareholders will exercise
appraisal rights whenever it is beneficial to do so, adding appraisal rights to the MR would
eliminate the problem of inefficient transfers.        For under these assumptions, minority
shareholders will never be hurt by a transaction. Since no transaction will impose a negative
externality on the minority shareholders, it follows that all occurring transfers will be efficient.
        Indeed, under the considered assumptions, the MR with appraisal rights would not only
dominate the performance of the MR alone but also that of the EOR. Because the appraisal
rights would eliminate all inefficient transfers, they would eliminate the advantage in this
regard that the EOR has over the MR alone. And the addition of appraisal rights would not
erode the MR's advantage over the EOR in terms of facilitating efficient transfers. (Because
accurate appraisal rights would never enable minority shareholders to get more than they would
have In the absence of a sale, adding such rights would not increase the incidence of blocked
efficient transfers under the MR.)
        Suppose, however, that courts have less information about (W.-B) than E and N because
E and N have some private information. In this case, appraisal rights may provide minority
shareholders exercising them with inaccurate compensation for the no-sale value of their shares
(see Bebchulc [1993] for a model of the inaccuracies of the appraisal process). In instances in
which E and N expect the court estimate to lead to under-compensation, the presence of
appraisal rights would not ensure that inefficient transfers will not take place. And in instances
in which E and N expect the court estimate to lead to over-compensation, the appraisal rights
may lead to more efficient transfers being prevented than the MR alone)9

    'Finally, the discussion above assumed that minority shareholders will exercise their appraisal
rights whenever this will be beneficial. Suppose, however, that minority shareholders have less
information about (W - B) than E and N do. In this case, the minority shareholders may not exercise
                                                 26
C. Freezeouts
        In analyzing the problem of blocked efficient transfers under both the MR and the EOR,
it was observed that all efficient transfers would take place if E were always able to purchase
the minority shares for (W. - B.) per share. It was noted, however, that, in the case of some
efficient transfers, an offer to purchase the minority shares for (W - B) may well fail due to a
free-rider problem. Freezeouts maybe considered as a way of addressing this free-rider problem.
When freezeouts are allowed, a controller may impose on minority shareholders a sale of their
shares to the controller for the shares' no-transaction per share value of (W. - B) as estimated
by a court.
        Suppose first that courts know (W - B) as E and N are assumed to do — and thus that
the required freezeout consideration would provide minority shareholders with the precise
no-transaction value of their shares. In this case, allowing controllers to effect a freezeout prior
to a sale of the company would eliminate the problem of blocked efficient transfers under both
the MR and the EOR. With the freezeout option, E and N will always be able to deprive the
minority shareholders from any benefit produced by the transaction. Since no positive
externality will be ever conferred on minority shares, E and N will be always able to benefit from
a transaction that is efficient and could increase total value.
       Thus, under the assumption of accurate freezeout compensation, adding freezeouts to
either the MR or the EOR will be beneficial. Indeed, under this assumption, the EOR with
freezeouts will indeed attain the first-best. Adding the freezeout option will ensure that all
efficient transactions take place even under the EOR. As to inefficient transactions, recall that
the EOR will prevent all such transactions, and note that adding the freezeout option will not
change this. For while this option will enable E to prevent minority shareholders from
beriefatting from a control transaction, it will not enable E to impose a negative externality on
such shareholders.
       Suppose, however, that courts have less information about (W, - B) than E and N and


their appraisal rights even if (1%', - B) is lower than the appraisal consideration. Consequently in this
case, even if the appraisal consideration is accurate, the pretice of appraisal rights may not prevent
all inefficient transfers.

                                                  27
that, consequently, the required freezeout consideration may over- or under-compensate minority
shareholders for the no-transaction value of their shares (see Bebchuk and Fried (1993] for a
model of the inaccuracies of freezeout compensation). In this case, adding the freezeout benefits
may produce smaller benefits or may even be overall costly. When E and N expect the court
estimate to lead to overcompensation, the freezeout option cannot be relied on to ensure that all
efficient transfers take place. And when E and N expect the court estimate to produce an
under-compensation, the freezeout option may lead to inefficient transfers (as well as
unnecessary freezeouts).

                             VII. PRIVATE VS. SOcIAL OPTIMALITY


       Before closing, it is important to consider the difference in our context between the
perspectives of social and private optimality. The analysis has thus far focussed on the
perspective of efliciency, that is, social optimality. From this perspective, a transfer of control
isjudged solely by its effect on the expected total value including whatever fraction of this total
value that is captured by the outside buyer; the division of surplus between the buyer and the
initial shareholders is irrelevant. But it is also possible to examine a control transfer from the
perspective of the company's initial shareholders — or, equivalently1 from the perspective of those
who design the corporate charter (whose interests generally lie in maximizing the expected value
to be obtained by the company's initial shareholders). From this private optimality perspective,
the division of surplus in sale-of-control transactions does count. A control transfer isjudged by
how it affects the expected total value obtained by the company's initial shareholders; value
captured by the outside buyer does not county
         To compare the two considered rules from the perspective of private optimality. we need
to model explicitly the bargaining process between E and N. Suppose that, when there is a
potential gain for E and N from a transaction, the transaction price (and thus the division of
surplus) will be fixed following one round of bargaining. In this round, either E or N will make


      The distinction between corporate arrangements that are socially optimal and those that are
privately optimal was first highlighted by Grossman and Hart (1980) in the takeover context. Bebchuk
and Kahan 119901 examine this distinction in the context of proxy contts.

                                                28
a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the other party. The identity of the side making the offer will be
chosen randomly, with N making the offer with a probability 0 and E making the offer with
probability 1-0. With these fairly weak assumptions, the following sharp result can be
established.

PRoposrnoN 8- The expected value captured by outside buyers is smaller under the EOR than
under the MR.

REMARK. This result, which is proved in the Appendix, can be intuitively explained as follows.

Recall that, under the EOR, there will be transactions — and outside buyers will capture some

profits — in fewer instances than under the MR. Furthermore, it can be shown that, in those
instances in which transactions take place under both rules, the expected profits to outside
buyers will be smaller under the EOR. To see this, consider the situation in which N is the one

making the take-it-or-leave-it offer and can hope to capture some surplus. Under both rules, N

will have to set the transaction price so as to provide E with the per share value that E has in
the absence of a sale. Under the EOR, however, N may also have to provide the minority
shareholders with a greater value than under the MR, thus leaving a smaller fraction of the
surplus for the outside buyer.

       Thus, the MR is better for outside buyers than the EOR. It follows that if the MR is
privately optimal — that is, if it provides a greater expected value for the initial shareholders —

it will also be socially optimal. If the MR is socially optimal, however, it may not be privately
optimal. That is, superiority of the MR over the FOR from a private optimality perspective is
sufficient — but not necessary — for superiority of the MR from an efficiency perspective.

       While exploring fully the normative implications of the identified divergence between
social and private optimality is beyond the scope of this paper, the following should be noted.
First, the identified divergence implies that this is an area in which it may be desirable to adopt

mandatozy rules — that is, to regulate by fiat and disallow opt-out charter provisions. Second,

the identified divergence implies that it may not be possible to make straightforward inferences

concerning the socially optimal arrangement from companies' privately adopted choices.

                                                29
                       VIII. CONCLUDING REMAItKS ON Ex ANTE EFFECTS


       The analysis of this paper has taken as given the existence of corporations that have an

ownership structure with a controlling shareholder. Taking the incidence of controlling
shareholder structures as given, I have focussed on analyzing the inefficiencies involved in the
process by which control may be transferred in such corporations. The identified inefficiencies,

however, have important implications for the ex ante choice of controlling shareholder structures,

and three such implications should be noted.

       First, the analysis has identified a cost that is associated with creating a controlling
shareholder structure. There is a substantial literature on the benefits and costs of a controlling

shareholder structure compared with, say, the complete ownership structure of a closely held

corporation (see e.g., Jensen and Meckling [1976), Holmstrom and Tirole [1993)). To the costs

and benefits already identified in the literature, it is necessary to add the cost of the identified
inefficiencies of the control transfer process. As the analysis has shown, this cost decreases

under both the MR and the EOR when the fraction of the shares held in the control block
increases. In a complete ownership structure (h=n), this cost does not exist.

       Second, the inefficiency costs of the control transfer process are not accurately translated

into private costs for the initial shareholders. With respect to blocked efficient transfers, some

of the expected social costs from this possibility are borne by outside buyers rather than by the
initial shareholders. With respect to inefficient, transfers taking place, the expected private costs

to the initial shareholders from this possibility exceed the social costs (as outside buyers still
make profits from such transfers). Thus, the choices that private agents make between a
controlling shareholder structure and complete ownership may be distorted.

       Third, whether the prevailing rule is the MR or the EOR affects both the privately
optimal and the socially optimal incidence of controlling shareholder structures. From a social
point of view, the choice of rule affects the optimal incidence because it affects the expected
efficiency costs of the control transfer process. From a private point of view, the choice matters

also for an additional reason — that, under the EOR, the expected profits of outside buyers are

smaller. Thus, compared with the MR, the EOR may lead to an increase in the incidence of

                                                30
controlling shareholder structures even if the EOR raises the expected efficiency costs of the
control transfer process.2'


                                                APPENDIX


Proof of Proposition 2. Let us first show that (7) is a sufficient condition for a transfer. 11(7)
Is satisfied, then It is possible to set the offer at a price P that exceeds W + ((n-k)Ik]E and falls

below W. A transaction at this price will make E better off, because the price will exceed the
control block's per share value to E. The transaction will also make N better off because
purchased shares will have a value to N of at least W(Wa if minority shareholders tender, more

than W if minority shareholders choose to keep their shares).
        To show that (7) is also a necessary condition, suppose that (7) is not satisfied, and let
us show that there exists no fransaction price P that will make both E and N better off. If (7)

is not satisfied, then any chosen price cannot be both above W, + ((n-k)/k]B and below W.                 If
P is not above W, + [(n-k)/k]B_ then the transaction will not make E better off. And if P does
not fall below %V,, N will not be made better off.         QED



Proof of Proposition 3. Let us first note that, if N purchases q shares at a per share price P, the
average per share value with which the company's shareholders will end up is

V(P) = (q/n)P + [(n-q) In]    (W - B,,,). For N to be made better off by the transaction, P must be
below the per share value of the q-share block to N, which is Wa + ((n-q)/q),B. Algebraic
rearrangement yields that this condition is equivalent to the condition that V(P)is below W,.
        Let us now show that (7) is a sufficient condition for a transfer to occur. If (7) is satisfied,
it is possible to choose a price P such that V(P) will be just slightly below W_ and above ('Wa. B)

and W, + [(n-k)/k]9. This transaction will make N better off because V(P) c W_. Furthermore,



       There are two additional ax ante issues that may be worthwhile mentioning. First, as noted, the
identified inefficiency costs increase as the size of the control block decreases. Thus, the analysis has
implitions also for the privately optimal choice, and the socially optimal choice, eta control block's size.
Second, the discussion in this section has taken the incidence of companies as given and focussed on the
choice of companies' ownership structure. But, if decisions to set up companies are sensitive to the
entrepreneur's expected returns, then, given that the choice between MR and EaR affects these returns,
the analysis may also have implkations for the incidence of entrepreneurs' setting up companies.

                                                    31
because V(P) > Vt - B,, the minority shareholders will tender, and E will end up with V(P).
Thus, since V(P) exceeds W + [(n-k)/klB,, the transaction will also make N better off.
        Finally, to show that (7) is also necessary for a transfer to occur, suppose that (7) is not
satisfied, and let us show that no transaction price P can make both E and N better oft Recall
that, for N to be made better off, V(P) must be below W,. If (7) is not satisfied, this implies that
V(P) must be also below W, + [(n-q)Iq]B1. Note now that the per share value with which N will
end up will not exceed V(P). Uf the minority shareholders tender, N will get V(P); if minority
shareholders do not tender — which will happen when P c W, - B, and thus P .c V(P) — then N
will end up with a per share value of P.c V(P).) Thus, if V(P) is such that N will be made better
off, E will not benefit from the transaction.     QED


Proofof Proposition 4. Recall from (6) that the efficiency costs of the MR, CMR, are given by
               Frob (-[(n-k)/k]SB c SW c 0) E (-tsWI-((n-k)/k]A.B c tsW c 0] +
               hvb (0 c sW c -[(n-k)/k]AB) E (SW JO c aW c 4(n-k)/k]SB].

        As mar SB I approaches 0 (that is, B, approaches B,), the values of both terms in this
expression — and hence CMR — all approach 0.         QED


Proof of Proposition 5. The proof is in two steps. First, it will be shown that, given the
assumption of symmetry, the efficiency costs from efficient transfers blocked under the Mit are
less than half of the efficiency costs of the EOR.
        Recall from (6) that the efficiency costs from efficient transfers blocked under the MR,
which we denote below by CMR(effl, are given by
               Frob (0 c LW c tt'n-k)IkYB, - B) E (LW JO c LW < [(n-k)Ik](B,-B)].
Recall from (11) that the efficiency costs of the EOR,        are given by
               Prob (0 c LW .c ffn-k)/k)B) E (LWIO c LW c [(n-k)/klB,).
        The assumption of symmetry implies that Prob (B, >. B) = 1/2 and that
Prob (0 s tsW s [g'n-h)Jh](B-B_)) = Prob (B > B) h-oh (0 s fsW s ((n-k)/k](B;B)'rB. > B). From
this It follows that

 (Al)        Prob (osaw<(!L±) (B -B)).! Prob (oaws (23_)(B. -BA) I



                                                32
 Since Prob (0 c (sW c ((n-k)/k)(B.-B)l(fi > B)) <Prob (0 < (sW < ((n-k)/h]B), and
 E (tsWIO   c (sW < ((n-h)/h](B1-B)) <E (AWIO < AWc [(n-k)/k]E,], it follows     from (Al) that

  (A2)                                     CMR(ef/) c    I
         The second step in the proof is to show that the efficiency costs from inefficient transfers
 taking place under the ME., which we denote by CM/ineffl, equal CM/dO. From (6), recall that
 CM/md)      = Prob   (4(n-k)/k]aB cEsWc 0) E [-AWJ-fl'n-k)/k]tsB <aw <0].
         The assumed conditions of symmetry of AS and (sW imply that
J%b (-((n-k)/kJIsB <AW < 0) = Prob (0 'c AW < -[(n-k)Ik)8.B), and that
E [-AWI-[(n-k)/AJaB 'cAW < 0] = E (AWIO < (sWc - [('n-k)/k)lsB]. From this it follows that

  (A3)
             CuJineffltProb(o<1sw< -
                                    ('1 j! )as )E frswiostsw< -(.2j)&B ]=CMR(efA.
         From (A2) and (A3), it follows that CM = C/ef/) +       CMR(ineu/9   <CE. QED
Proofof Proposition 6. Let us use the same notation as in the proof of proposition 5. Given that
AW is distributed symmetrically around zero, we have

                CMR(znefl)    Thvb(0 < -awc (!j!)AS)E(_Awl 0< -awc
 (A4)

                                             k)          )               k)
 (AS)       CMR(dft) +CMR(incffl eFsb (o.caWc
                                                   i(.2j..)&a J)E(Awl o<&w< (.2j)aB i).
         Therefore, assuming that the distribution of lAB I is stochastically dominated by the
distribution oiB, comparing (AS) with CR (as given by (11)) indicates that
C/ef/) + CMR(inejl) .c       C. QED
Proof of Proposition 7. In the uniform distribution case described in the text, using the same
notation as in the proofs of propositions 4 and 5, it can be calculated that

 (A6)                              (4a.)       0                     2

                                    j AW()dAWe()(.ftj!)B.2.

                                                    33
                          L i()(l :
                              a-'
 (Al)
               CMjefl)a
                                                   )dawdts ((l_:)ow)(n.krb2


 (AS)       CMR(inefl).
                                          _6w)(6B)dawdE ((1 _aw)ea)(nk)2b2

Since, by assumption, b cBs, it follows that a sufficient condition for CUR c   C, is that
If = 6 (All) is satisfied. Indeed, if O = D then CUR c (2/3Xl-O&C9R. Q
                     = CMR(eM + CMRG neff) [i 85)ew + (1 - O)O] (nk)2(b2)

 (MO)                           (1 e)O + (1 —9)e8 c SO , or

 (All)                                        _____
                                              2(l+e)

Proof of Proposition 8. From propositions 1, 2, and 3, it follows that the circumstances in which
transfers occur under the EOR constitute a subset of the circumstances in which transfers occur
under the MR. Thus, to prove the proposition, it is sufficient to show that, in those cases in
which transfers occur under both rules, N's expected profit is smaller under the EOR. To
examine this expected profit, we need to focus on N's profit when N is the side making the take-
it-or-leave-it offer (which will happen with probability 9). Under the MB, when N is the one
making the offer, N will offer E slightly above W, + [(n-k)Ik]R, and the minority shareholders
will get a per share value of(W - Be). Thus, under the MB, N's expected profit will be

 (A13)                                                —
                          9E{nW —k(W, + [oi-kvk]B.)       —k)(W, -B_)}.
Under the EOR, when N is the one making the offer, N will set the price so that E will get
slightly above W + [(n-k)fk]B,, and the minority shareholders will be able to choose between
getting the same per share value as E and getting (1V - Bj. Thus, N's expected profit will be




                                              34
               eE{nW.—k(w.+[oi_h)rn]p.)_(n_k)max(w.+[(n_k)m)81 ,w'_nj}.
Given that transactions transferring control to a buyer with characteristics such that
   -    c IV + ((n-k)fk]21 are possible, (AlA) is greater than (A13).   QED




                                              35
                                         REFERENCES


Andrews, William 11, "The Stockholder's Right to Equal Opportunity in the Sale of Shares,'
       Harvard Law Review, LXXVIII (1965), 505-63.

Bagnoli, M., and B. Liprnan, 'Successful Takeovers without Exclusion," The Review of Financial
      Studies, 1(1988), 89-110.
Barclay, Michael J. and Clifford G. Holderness, 'Private Benefits from Control of Public
       Corporations," Journal of Financial Economics, XXV (1989), 371-95.

Barclay, Michael J. and Clifford G- Holderness, 'The Law and Large-Block Trades,' Journal of
       Law & Economics, )OOCV (1992), 265-94.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., "Takeover Bids below the Expected Value of Minority Shares," Journal of
     Financial and Quantitative Analysis, XXIV (1989), 171-184.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., "Efficient and Inefficient Sales of Corporate Control," Discussion Paper
     No. 136, Program in Law and Economics, Harvard Law School (1993).

Bebchuk, Lucian A., •Corporate Structures with Controlling Shareholders: The Divergence
       between Private and Social Optimality,' Working Paper, Harvard University Law School
       (1994).

Bebchuk, Lucian A. and Jesse M. Fried, 'Corporate Appraisals and Freezeouts,' Working Paper,
     Harvard University Law School (1993).

Bebchuk, Lucian A. and Marcel Kahan, "A Framework forAnalyzing Legal Policy Towards Proxy
      Contests,' California Law Review, LXXVIII, No. 5 (1990), 1071-1135.

Berle, Adolf A., "Control in Corporate Law,' Columbia Law Review, LVIII (1958), 1212-25

Clark, Robert C., Corporate Law, XXVIII (1986) 482-96.

Easterbrook, Frank H. and Daniel R. Fischel, "Corporate Control Transactions," Yale Law
       Journal, IX, No. 4 (1982) 698-737.

Elhauge, Einer, "The Triggering Function of Sale of Control Doctrine," The University of Chicago
      Law Review, LIX, No. 4 (1992), 1465-1532.

Elhauge, Einer, "Toward a European Sale of Control Doctrine," forthcoming inA.rn en can Journal
      of Comparative Law (1993).

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, "Takeover Bids, the Free-rider Problem, and        the
       Theory of the Corporation,' Bell Journal of Economics, XI (1980), 42-64.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, 'One Share-One Vote and the Market for Corporate
      Control," Journal of Financial Economics, XX (1988), 175-202.

                                              36
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, "Corporate Governance: Voting Rights and Majority Rules,'
       .Journal of Financial Economics, XX (1988a), 203-35.

Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, "Corporate Control Contests and Capital Structure," Journal
       of Financial Economics, XX (1988b), 55-86.

Holderness, Clifford G. and Dennis P. Sheehan, "The Role of Majority Shareholders in Publicly
      Held Corporations: An ExploratoryAnalysis," Journal of Financial Economics, XX (1988),
      317-46.

Holrnström, Bengt and Jean Tirole, "Market Liquidity and Performance Monitoring," Journal of
       Political Economy, CI, No. 4 (1993), 678-709.

Homer, M., "The Value of the Corporate Voting Right," Journal of Banking and Finance, XII
     (1988), 69-83.

Javares, George B., "Equal Opportunity in the Sale of Controlling Shares: A Reply to Professor
                                                              420-27.
       Andrews," University of Chicago Law Review, X)OUI (1965),

Jensen, Michael C. and William Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
      Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal of Financial Economics, III (1976), 305-60.

Kahan, Marcel, "Sales of Corporate Control," Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, IX
      (1993), 368-379.

Levy, Haim, "Economic Valuation of Voting Power of Common Stock,' Journalof Finance,
       )OOCVIII (1982), 79-93.

LOttmann, Ruth, "Changes of Corporate Control and Mandatory Bids," International Review of
       Law and Economics, Xii (1992), 497-516.

Megginson, W., "Restricted Voting Stock, Acquisition Premiums, and the Market Value of
     Corporate Control," The Financial Review, XXIV (1990), 175-198.

Robinson, C-and A. White, "The Value of a Vote in the Market for Corporate Control," Working
      Paper, York University (1990).

Roe, Mark, 'Political and Legal Restraints on Ownership and Control of Public Companies,"
       Journal of Financial Economics, XXII (1990). 7-41.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert \V. Vishny, "Large Shareholders and Corporate Control," Journal of
       Political Economy, XCIV (1986), 461-88.

Zingales, Luigi, "Insider Ownership and the Decision to Go Public," CRSP Working Paper No.
       367, University of Chicago (1993).

Zingales, Luigi, The Value of the Voting Right: A Study of the Milan Stock Exchange
       Experience," The Review of Financial Studies, XII (1994), 125-148.


                                              37
