                                                           S



                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            'THE FINANCIAL ACCELERATOR
                            AND THE FLIGHT TO QUALITY




                                       Ben Bernanke
                                       Mark Gertler
                                      Simon Gilchrist




                                  Working Paper No. 4789



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1994



We thank Egon Zakrasjek for his tireless work with the QFR data, Gabriele Galati and Peter
Simon for their assistance, and Anil Kashyap for his comments. Financial support fmm the
National Science Foundation and the C.V. Starr Center is acknowledged. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NEER Working Paper #4789
                                                                                   July 1994


                              THE FINANCIAL ACCELERATOR
                              AND THE FLIGHT TO QUALITY


                                          ABSTRACT


         Adverse shocks to the economy may be amplified by worsening credit-market conditions--

the financial "accelerator". Theoretically, we interpret the financial accelerator as resulting (mm

endogenous changes over the business cycle in the agency costs of lending. An implication of

the theory is that, at the onset of a recession. boirowers facing high agency costs should receive

a relatively lower share of credit extended (the flight to quality) and hence should account for

a proportionally greater part of the decline in economic activity. We review the evidence for

these predictions and present new evidence drawn from a panel of large and small manufacturing

finns.




Ben Bernanke                                                        Mark Gertler
Woodrow Wilson School                                               Department of Economics
Princeton University                                                New York University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                                 269 Mercer Street
and NBER                                                            New York, NY 10003
                                                                    and NBER

Simon Oilchrist
Division of Research and Statistics
Mail Stop 61
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington, D.C. 20551
                                                                                1



I.   Introduction

       A longstanding puzzle in business cycle analysis is that large

fluctuations in aggregate economic activity sometimes arise from what appear

to be relatively small impulses. For example, large swings in investment

spending and output have been attributed to changes in monetary policy that

had very modest effects on long-tens real interest rates. Similarly, the oil

price shocks of the l9?Os, supposedly the causes of serious recessions,

actually had relatively small effects on the average firm's production costs

and the typical household's budget.

       The "small shocks, large cycles" puzzle motivates our paper. We

consider one possible solution to the puzzle, which is that changes in credit-

market conditions amplify and propagate the effects of initial real or

monetary shocks. It has been argued, for example, that firms and households

tend to be financially overextended and therefore "vulnerable" at cyclical

peaks (see, e.g., Eckstein and Sinai <1986)). An adverse shock or the natural

end of an economic expansion may therefore worsen financial conditions

significantly, impairing fins' and households' access tâ credit at the same

time   that the need for external funds may   be   rising (for example, to finance
unintended inventory accumulations). The resulting declines in spending or
production exacerbate the economic downturn. We refer to the amplification of
initial   shocks brought about by changes in credit-market conditions as the

financial accelerator.

       Although there are various ways of rationalizing a financial accelerator

 theoretically, one useful framework is the "principal-agent" view of credit

markets, which has been extensively developed in recent years. Section II of

our paper briefly discusses this framework and shows that a financial
                                                                               2



accelerator could be the result of endogenous changes over the business cycle

in the agency costs of lending.

      Section III turns to. the empirical evidence. Testing for the existence

of a financial accelerator raises difficult identification problems. A

promising avenue for circumventing these problems is to examine cross-

sectional implications of the theory. One such implication is that borrowers

who face significant agency costs of borrowing in credit markets-S consumers

and small firms, for example, or firms with weak balance sheets--are likely to

bear the brunt of an economic downturn. In particular, following an adverse

macroeconomic shock, these borrowers should experience reduced access to

credit, relative to other borrowers (the flight to quality); as a result, they

should also reduce their economic activity earlier and more sharply than do

others in the economy. Similarly, these same borrowers should be the first to

respond when the economy begins an upswing. Focusing on firms (owing to data

limitations), we cite diverse evidence for the flight to quality in credit

markets and for the relatively greater effect of downturns on the activity of

borrowers more subject to agency costs.

      Most of the evidence cited in Section III relies on aggregated data or

on studies that consider primarily larger, publicly traded firms. Section IV

discusses empirical work that draws on the Department of Commerce's Quarterly

Financial Report (QFR), which covers a more representative panel of

manufacturing fins and is partially disaggregated (by size class). Using

size as a proxy for access to credit markets, this work has found that small

manufacturing firms experience substantially more procyclical variation in

sales, inventories, and short-term debt thando larger firms, consistent with

the flight-to-quality prediction. This section also presents some new results

obtained from the firm-level data underlying the published QFR figures: Using
                                                                                       3



the firm-level data, we show that previous QFR-based findings are not

substantially changed when we control for industry or split the sample by a

proxy for credit market access other than size. We also perform a back-of-

the-envelope calculation that suggests that roughly one-third of the cyclical

variation in the manufacturing sector can be accounted for by the differences

between firms that are relatively more constrained in credit markets and firms

that are relatively unconstrained.

      Although this paper focuses on the propagation of aggregate

fluctuations, we   note   that   our   work here is part of a much   broader
investigation of the role of credit-market imperfections in macroeconomics.

For surveys and discussions of various aspects of this literature, see Certler

(1988), Bernanlce (1993), Kashyap and Stein (1993), Calomiris (1993), and King

and Levine (1993).



IL Theory: The Financial Accelerator

      In this section we briefly review the theoretical underpinnings of the

financial accelerator, beginning with partial-equilibrium analyses of the

lender-borrower relationship and then turning to general-equilibrium models of

macroeconomic dynamics. We also discuss how the theoretical constructs map

into real credit-market institutions. Our          goal   is to present a few simple

economic ideas and to motivate the empirical sections that follow; no attempt

is made to provide an exhaustive survey.



      A.   Lenders and borrowers

      As we noted in the introduction, a useful framework for thinking about

the financial accelerator is the principal-agent approach to credit markets.

Building on breakthroughs in the economics of imperfect information in the
                                                                                 4


l9lOs, an extensive literature has studied the structure and functioning of

credit markets in situations in which lenders (principals) cannot costlessly

acquire information about the opportunities, characteristics, or actions of

borrowers (agents). This literature has attempted to rationalize many diverse

features of credit markets, including the forms taken by financial contracts

(e.g.. debt and equity), the existence of financial intermediaries, the

institution of bankruptcy, the possibility of credit rationing, and so on.

Partly for this reason, and partly because there is little agreement about

what sorts of informational frictions are most relevant, the various models in

the literature differ widely in their basic ingredients and predictions.

Nevertheless, several robust results emerge that provide the basis for the

financial accelerator:

        First, external finance is more expensive than internal finance, unless

the external finance is fully collateralized. The higher cost of external

finance reflects the agency cost of lending (the inevitable deadweight loss

that arises because of asymmetric information).

        Second, given the total amount   of   finance required, the premium on

external finance varies inversely with the borrower's net worth, which we

define as the sum of his internal funds (liquid assets) and the collateral

value of his illiquid assets.

        Finally,, a fall in the borrower's net worth, by raising the premium on

external finance and increasing the amount of external finance required.

reduces the borrowers spending and production. This last result is the heart

of the financial accelerator: To the extent that negative shocks to the

economy reduce the net worth of borrowers (or positive shocks increase net

worth), the spending and production effects of the initial shock will be

amp1i   fi ed.
                                                                                  S



     The three baste results listed above can be illustrated by a simple

example, based loosely on Kiyotaki and Moore (1993): We suppose there are two

periods. 0 and 1. An entrepreneur operates a technology that takes input in

period 0 to produce output in period 1.     Inputs are of two types: a fixed

factor K (already in place) and a variable input x1. (Think of the fixed

factor as land or a structure--a durable input that has alternative uses.) At

the end of period 1, the entrepreneur can sell the fixed factor at the market

price of q1 per unit. The variable input, which may be thought of as raw

materials, labor, or possibly firm-specific capital, depreciates fully in use.

The price of the variable input is normalized to one.

      Output in period 1 is a1f(x1), where fC)      is   increasing and concave and

a1 is a technology parameter.      The entrepreneur begins period 0 with gross

cash flow from previous production, a0f(x0). and a debt obligation also

inherited from the past, r0b0, where b0 is past borrowing and r0 is the gross

real interest rate on this liability. An accounting identity links the

entrepreneur's purchases of the variable input x1 and new borrowing b1:



          — a0f(x0)   + b1   '
                                 r0b0                                 Cl)




Funds borrowed in period 0 and repaid in period I bear a gross real interest

rate of r1.

      The entrepreneur chooses x1 and b1 in period 0 to maximize period-l

output net of debt repayment. To motivate a role for financial structure.
                                                                            and
 consider the following simple incentive problem: Following Kiyotaki

 Moore's (1993) adaptation of Hart and Moore (1991), suppose that       it is costly

 for the lender to seize the entrepreneur's output in case of default' -as might
                                                                            courts) to
 be true, for example, if it is difficult for third parties (such as
                                                                                   6



observe the borrower's activities. However, suppose that it is not costly to

enforce a contingency that the ownership of the fixed factor be transferred to

the lender if the borrower does not pay his debts; that is, the fixed factor

may serve as collateral. Under these assumptions, it is easy to see that the

funds provided by the lender in period 0 will be limited by the time-

discounted market value of the fixed factor;




      b1       (q1/rK                                              (2)




      Because unsecured lending is not feasible in this environment, there is

a 0collateralinadvance* constraint on spending on the variable input.

Combining equations (I) and (2) yields:



      x1       a0f(x0)   ÷   (q1/r1)K
                                        -
                                            r0b0                   (3)




Spending on the variable input cannot exceed the entrepreneur's net worth,

equal to the sum of gross cash flow a0f(x9) and net discounted assets,

(q1/r1)K -   r0b0.   If the entrepreneur's net worth is less than the

unconstrained optimal value of x1, which satisfies a1f'(x1) —    r1,    then the

constraint (3) binds.

      Although this framework is extremely simple, it illustrates the key

results discussed above. First, when the incentive constraint (3) binds, the

shadow value of an additional unit of internal funds is a1f' (x1), which

exceeds the gross real interest rate prevailing in external capital markets,

r1. Roughly speaking, the marginal value of a dollar outside the fin is less

than that of a dollar inside the fin; the difference in marginal values being

an implicit measure of the agency cost of lending. Second, a fall in net
                                                                              7



worth (arising from either a decline in cash flow or a lower value of the

collateralizable asset) both increases the agency premium, a1f'(x1) -   r,   and

reduces the borrower's spending (for the intermediate input, in this case) and

production. The idea that fluctuations in borrowers' net worth lead to

fluctuations in real activity is what we mean by the financial accelerator.1

      Equation (3) also illustrates several different factors that can

influence net worth and thus the borrower's spending and production levels,

As the equation shows, either a decline in gross cash flows a0f(x0), a fall in

asset prices q1, or a rise in initial debt obligations b0 acts to reduce net

worth and tighten the constraint. If the collateral constraint is not

binding, then an increase in the prospective gross real interest rate

reduces spending through the conventional cost-of-capital effect (that is, an

increase in r1 raises the required marginal productivity of the intermediate

input. a1f'(x1). lowering optical spending on x1). However, if the constraint

is binding, an increase in r1 lowers borrower spending solely by reducing

asset values (q1/r1) and thus the borrowers net worth.2 An increase in the

interest rate on pre-existing debt, r0, also reduces the borrower's spending

(think of a fin with floating-rate or short-ten debt) because it reduces

cash flow net of current interest payments (a0f(x0) -   r0b0).
      The example given here is extreme in that only perfectly secured lending

is feasible and defaults never occur. However, modifying this framework to

permit unsecured lending and the possibility of default- -while retaining the

connection between net worth and spending--is not difficult. Indeed,     these

 features can be found in many models in the literature. For example, in

Townsend's (1979) well-known costly state verification (CSV) framework,      the


 possibility of costly auditing by the lender supplements the use of collateral

 as a means of disciplining borrowers, This additional tool may make unsecured
                                                                              8



lending feasible in equilibrium, implying that defaults occur with some

positive probability. As in our Kiyotaki-Moore example, in Townsend's CS')

model internal funds are more valuable to the borrower than external funds,

because the borrower must compensate lenders for their expected costs of

auditing (interpretable as the expected deadweight costs of bankruptcy).

Further, in the CSV model a rise in the borrower's net worth reduces the cost

of external funds (the unsecured portion of the loan and thus expected default

costs decline), thereby stimulating his investment spending.

      Another well-known model with similar properties is Myers and Majluf's

(1984) analysis of new equity issues (see also Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss

(1984)). In their model, managers' private information about the quality of

investment opportunities adds a lemons premium" (Akerlof (1970)) to the cost

of external finance. If the portion of an investment that can be financed

internally increases, the lemons problem becomes less severe, which reduces

the cost of external finance and increases the likelihood that the investment

will be undertaken.



      B. Macroeconomic dynamics

      Up to this point we have discussed the financial accelerator in the

context of partial-equilibrium models. Logically, the next step is to

incorporate a financial propagation mechanism within a fully articulated model

of the business cycle. Unfortunately, this task is formidable, for several

reasons. First, it is obviously necessary that there be lending and borrowing

in equilibrium, which requires the modeler to step outside the convenient

representative-agent paradigm and to grapple with the complications introduced

by heterogeneity. In particular, in any model with a financial accelerator

the distribution of wealth affects the dynamics of the economy in a nontriviaL
                                                                              9


way, which complicates the calculation of the equilibrium. Second, it is

desirable to motivate the financial structure from first principles.

Financial contracts and institutions are endogenous, so that results that

hinge on arbitrary restrictions on financial structure are suspect. These two

considerations make it difficult to develop theoretical frameworks that are

both tractable and sufficiently rich to match the data. Nevertheless, a

number of articles have presented dynamic general-equilibrium models that

feature a financial accelerator, albeit in a relatively stylized way.

      An example is the 1989 article by Bernanke and Gertler, henceforth B-C.

They consider an economy in which fins are financed by Townsend-style (1979)

optimal debt contracts. As we discussed above, in the Townsend CSV setup a

fall in the borrower's net worth increases the agency premium on external

finance; specifically, a highly indebted borrower is more likely to be unable

to repay, which triggers costly monitoring by the lender (interpretable as

bankruptcy and liquidation). In the B-C economy, an adverse exogenous shock

(such as a decline in productivity) lowers current cash flows, which reduces

the ability of firms to finance investment projects internally and thus raises

the effective cost of investment. The fall in investment spending lowers

economic activity and cash flows in subaequent periods, propagating the

initial shock (the financial accelerator). B-C show that this mechanism can

convert i.i.d. shocks into autoregressive movements in output.3

      There are several implications of the B-C model that motivate the

empirical analysis we present later. First, in their model the dynamics      of

the cycle are intrinsically nonlinear; more specifically, financial

accelerator effects are stronger, the deeper the economy is in recession.

This feature arises from the fact that the agency costs of investment   faced by

 a firm become very small or zero as the share of internal finance becomes
                                                                               10


large (a firm with plentiful internal funds pays only a small premium to

compensate lenders for bankruptcy risk). Thus, in an economy with sufficient

internal finance, i.i.d. fluctuations in current profits have no effect on

investment spending, and the financial propagation wechanism disappears. In

contrast, fluctuations in profits have large effects on spending when internal

finance is already low.

      A second implication is the flight-to-quality" phenomenon to which we

alluded in the introduction. In the B-C model, lenders have access to an

alternative investment technology that pays a safe, fixed return. When

prospective agency costs of lending (in the form of bankruptcy risks)

increase, lenders reduce the amount of credit extended to firms that require

monitoring and invest a greater share ef their savings in the safe

alternative.4 It is straightforward to extend the arguments to motivate a

reallocation of credit in downturns from low-net-worth to highnet-worth

borrowers (see, e.g., Bernanke and Certler (1990) and Calouziris and Hubbard

(1990)).

      For simplicity, B-C use an overlapping-generations framework in which

financial contracts necessarily last only one period. Gertler (1992)

demonstrates that qualitatively similar results emerge when borrowers and

lenders contract for multiple periods. A new finding in Certler (1992) is

that, with multi-period relationships, expected future profits of the borrower

can partially substitute for internal finance in reducing agency costs.

Because an increase in the safe real interest rate reduces the present value

of expected profits, Cercler's result reinforces the point that higher

interest rates worsen the agency problem. Certler's analysis also captures

the idea that if firms are cash-short, they may defer investment for several

periods in order to build up adequate liquidity.
                                                                              11



        Another simplification made by B-C is that employment is fixed (output

changes reflect changes only in productivity and the capital stock). Using a

qualitatively similar approach, Creenwald and Stiglitz (1993) model a

financial accelerator effect on employment. In the Greenwald-Stiglitz

framework, there is a one-period lag between the use of variable inputs and

the production of output. A firm suffering a temporary decline in cash fLows,

therefore, requires additional external funds to finance variable inputs.

Since access to these funds depends on the fin's balance sheet position,

there is a tight connection between the firm's financial strength and

employment demand. Similar arguments extend to the demand for inventories by

fins.
        In all of the models of the financial accelerator discussed so far,

cyclical movements in firms' net worth arise mainly from changes in cash flow.

In the paper that provided the basis for our example earlier in this section,

Kiyotaki and Moore (1993) develop a dynamic equilibrium model in which

endogenous, procyclical fluctuations in asset prices are the principal source

of changes in net worth, credit received, and spending.5 In their model, as

in Hart and Moore (1991). lenders cannot force borrowers to repay debts unless

those debts are secured. Thus borrowers' assets such as land serve both as

factors of production and as collateral for new loans. In this economy a

temporary shock (to productivity for example) lowers the value of existing

collateral, which tightens borrowing constraints and reduces spending. The

fall in spending further lowers the value of existing assets, causing another

round of reduced borrowing and spending (note the resemblance to Fishers

(1933) debt-deflation story). Thus the initial shock is propagated through

time.
                                                                                 12


      There is also an interesting potential link between the idea of the

financial accelerator and the large literature on macroeconomic

complementarities and multiple equilibria (see Cooper and John (1988)). This

link may arise because, in an economy with spillovers, an individual

borrower's net worth depends on strategic interactions among agents. A recent

paper by Lamont (1993) nicely illustrates this idea. Lamont considers a

situation in which firms' debts inherited from a previous period create

possible "overhangTM effects on investment, i.e. •   with   high outstanding debts

firms may be less willing to invest, since the profits they earn are shared

with senior creditors. Using a simplified version of Kiyotaki!s (1988)

framework, Lamont constructs an example in which the existence of debt

overhang leads to the possibility of a low-output expectational equilibrium,

an "extra" equilibrium that does not exist if there are no initial debts. He

interprets this result as supporting the idea that weak balance sheets (high

leverage) make the macroeconomy vulnerable to a recession induced by

collective pessimism.

      Although these theoretical treatments differ on various dimensions, they

share the implication that, in the analysis of macroeconomic dynamics, balance

sheet indicators should be thought of as state variables. That is, financial

conditions, as well as more conventional factors such as tastes and

technology, matter for cyclical behavior.6



      C. The map between theory and   practice
      How well do the stylized models of lender-borrower relationships that

provide the core of the financial accelerator idea conform to real

institutions and financial arrangements? The answer depends somewhat on the

particular set of actors one has in mind. For the case in which the
                                                                             13


prospective   borrower is a snail or medium-sized firm, the fit of reaLity with

theory seems reasonably good. Smaller firms, particularly those that are

owned primarily by their operators or by a small number of shareholders,

correspond well to the typical model's characterization of a borrower as a

single entrepreneur seeking to fund an idiosyncratic project. It is evident

also that credit extension to smaller firms involves overcoming important

problems of asymmetric information; indeed, almost all credit received by

smaller companies is intermediated (e.g., by banks, finance companies, or

private placements), suggesting the need for specialists in overcoming

informational   barriers.
      In the case of small and medium-sized firms, the implications of

information-based theories also fit well with the observed structure of

financial contracts. Bank loans or privately-placed debt, for example,

contain a variety of covenants relating to required levels of collateral,

ratios of working capital to assets, maximum payments of dividends, and so on.

Similarly, lines of credit are contingent on no material change in financial

condition. These features of financial contracts are easily rationalized as

mechanisms for mitigating adverse selection and moral hazard problems that

arise when information is imperfect. Indeed, one can see from these contracts

how the financial accelerator might work in practice: A weakening of a firm's

income statement or balance sheet that brings it in violation of standard

financial ratio requirements, or a fall in asset values that reduces its

ability to post collateral, has a direct effect on the firm's access to credit

and the interest rate it must pay. Note also the potential nonlinearity of

balance sheet effects: Changes in the financial condition of firms that are

well above standard requirements have a smaller effect than changes in the

financial condition of finns closer to the margin.
                                                                              14


        Overall, for small and medium-sized firms, the implications of the

principal-agent approach are close to chose of the popular "pecking-order"

theory of corporate finance (Myers (1984), Farrari, Hubbard, and Petersen

(1988)). According to this theory, firms treat internal funds as the cheapest

form of finance; if forced to use external finance, they prefer debt

(particularly intermediated debt, in some versions) to outside equity. This

description of capital structure decisions is consistent with the financial

accelerator, since recessions are likely to reduce both firms' internal

finance and their "debt capacity", thereby raising the shadow cost of new

investment.

        The mapping of the simple information-based theories to large, publicly-

held firma is less direct. The key question is, Should the retained earnings

of the firm, which are largely owned by "outsiders" (e.g., small

shareholders), be treated as internal or external finance? In practice,

managers and directors typically exercise considerable discretion over the

firm's retained earnings (or, perhaps, retained earnings over and above some

required dividend level), and so it seems most natural to treat these funds as

"internal", at least over the medium-term horizon. This view is consistent

with both the pecking-order description of firm   financing practices and with
the   somewhat different perspective put forth by Jensen (1989), who also argues

that managers control retained earnings.7 If we treat retained earnings as

internal finance, then it appears chat large firms may also fit into the

principal-agent and be potentially subject to financial accelerator effects.

However, presumably it is also true that large fins- -because of their greater

diversification and longer track records, and because of economies of scale in

collecting and processing information about their situation- -have lower agency

costs per dollar of external finance than smaller firms. Thus large,
                                                                               15


publicly-traded firms are likely to do relatively better in downturns and be

less exposed to the financial accelerator than are small firms (we discuss the

evidence on this point below).

       Although our focus in this paper is on borrowing by firms, there are of

course other important classes of private borrowers. Banks and other

intermediaries must borrow most of the funds that they lend or invest8, and

despite the existence of deposit insurance the terms at which a bank can

borrow may be affected by its balance sheet. For example, a drop in bank

capitil may constrain the size of the bank's operations by raising its cost of

uninsured   funds and through regulatory constraints. Bernanke and Gertler
(1987) present a macroeconomic model in which fluctuations in bank capital
have aggregate real effects; and much recent empirical work has investigated
the   link between bank capital and bank lending (Bernanke and Lawn (1991), Peek

and Rosengren (1992)). In related research, Kashyap and Stein (forthcoming)

find that monetary policy differentially affects the balance sheets and

lending   capacities of small and large   banks, presumably   because nail banks
face higher   agency costs of raising uninsured funds.

       Households are the other significant category of borrowers. Household

borrowers seem reasonably well-described by the principal-agent paradigm

(there is a particularly good fit with the •collateral-in-advance model of

Hart and Moore (1991)). and some empirical work has indicated that the state

of household balance sheets may play a role in the cycle (important early

articles are Mishkin (1977. 1978)). Further, some major household purchases.

notably housing, are linked to the condition of household balance sheets by

features such as down payments, up-front transactions costs, and income

requirements. A complete description of the financial accelerator mechanism
                                                                                     16


will likely include significant roles for non-finn borrowers such as banks and

households.



111. Evidence: The Flight to Quality

       What is the empirical relevance of the financial accelerator for

macroeconomic dynamics? Answering this question requires that we come to

grips with some difficult identification problems. In particular, analysis of

the lead-lag relations between aggregate output and aggregate credit, while

perhaps suggestive, is not likely to help us distinguish the financial

accelerator theory from alternative approaches.

        For example, although the Bernanke-Certler (1989) framework discussed in

the   previous section ascribes all, persistence of output to the financial
accelerator, a correctly-done variance decomposition of data from the
Beruanke-Certler   model would imply that 100% of the variance of      output arises
from   productivity shocks (the financial accelerator affects only the shape of

output's   dynamic response).   Also,   because in practice   corporate cash flows

are highly procyclical, there is likely to be a countercyclical demand for

short-term credit to finance unintended inventory buildup and other fixed

obligations; as a result, even if credit plays a role in cyclical dynamics, it

may lag rather than lead the cycle (see Kiyotaki and Moore (1993) for a

formalization of this point). On the other hand, a finding that credit leads

output can be generated by a model in which credit responds passively to

expected production and in which there are no important credit-market

imperfections; see, e.g., King and Plosser (1984). Because theory does not

tie down the timing relationships between aggregate output and credit, "horse

races' that compare credit and other variables as predictors of output are not

likely to be informative about the underlying structure.
                                                                             17


      An alternative identification strategy, which we pursue here, is to look

at the cross-sectional implications of the financial accelerator theory. As

we have seen, the theory predicts a differential effect of an economic

downturn on borrowers who are subject to severe agency problems in credit

markets and borrowers who do not face serious agency problems; the difference

arises because declines in net worth raise the agency costs of lending to the

former but not the latter. Therefore, if the financial accelerator is

operative, at the onsec of a recession we should see a decline in the share of

credit flowing to those borrowers more subject to agency costs (the flight to

quality)9. As a result of their greater cost or difficulty in obtaining

credit, these borrowers should reduce spending and production earlier and more

sharply than do borrowers with greater access to credit markets. Recessions

that follow a tightening of monetary policy are perhaps most likely to involve

a flight to quality, because of the adverse effect of increased interest rates

on balance sheets and because monetary tightening may reduce flows of credit

through the banking system (Bernanke and Blinder (1988), Kashyap and Stein

(1993)), although this effect should appear to some degree in other recessions

as well.

      A related implication of the theory is that financial accelerator

effects should be stronger, the deeper the economy is in recession and the

weaker the balance sheets of borrowers. This nonlinearity follows from the

same theoretical consideration that gives rise to the flight to quality:

namely, that changes in net worth may induce large changes in the agency costs

of lending to low-net-worth borrowers, but should not much affect the costs of

Lending to borrowers with ample internal finance.

      Although cross-sectional tests of the financial accelerator are not

without identification problems of their own, they offer a more promising way
                                                                              18



of distinguishing the financial accelerator from its alternatives than do

tests based On aggregates. As it turns out, the evidence is quite consistent

with the prediction that borrowers who face important agency costs in credit

markets are more adversely affected by economic downturns. In the remainder

of this section we first review the evidence on credit flows, then turn to

differences in real activity between firms more or less subject to agency

costs. New evidence based on a panel of small and large manufacturing firms

is presented in Section IV.



      A. The flight to quality in credit extension

      Disparate pieces of evidence support the hypothesis that, in bad times,

credit flows away from borrowers more subject to agency costs. As we discuss

below, this pattern can be observed both directly (in tens of the shares of

credit received by different classes of borrowers) and indirectly (in tens of

the mix of financial instruments through which credit is extended).

      Commercial paper versus bank loans. The two dominant forms of short-

term finance for corporations are commercial paper and bank loans. In an

important paper, tCashyap. Stein, and Wilcox (1993) examine the behavior of

these two types of credit following a tightening of monetary policy. The

basic data are provided by our Figure 1: The left column of the figure shows

the growth rates (log-differences) of commercial paper outstanding and bank

CM loans following each of the four Romer dates for which the relevant data

are availablej0 As the figure indicates (and as is shown by Kashyap et al.)

following a tightening of monetary policy there is a sharp increase in

commercial paper issuance, while bank loans are flat.

      Kashyap et al, interpret the increased share of commercial paper in

short-term external finance that follows a monetary tightening as support for
                                                                              19



the bank lending channel of monetary policy (Bernanke and Blinder (1988)).

Their suggestion is that monetary tightening limits the supply of bank credit,

which forces borrowers to substitute away from bank loans and into commercial

paper. A slightly different story, proposed by Certler and Cilchrist (1993)

and Oliner and Rudebusch (1993), explains the KSW fact in terms of the impact

of monetary tightening on the quality mix of borrowers: This alternative

story begins with the idea that there is a countercyclical demand for short-

term credit, which results from declines in fins' cash flows relative to

short-ten financing requirements (note the inverse relationship of corporate

cash flows and commercial paper issuance in Figure l).11 However, although

presumably most firms experience some increase in their need for short-term

credit, they differ in their degree of access to credit markets. In

particular, high-grade borrowers with access to the commercial paper market

obtain funds more easily than lower-quality borrowers who rely primarily on

intermediated credit. As a consequence, commercial paper outstanding rises

relative to bank loans subsequent to monetary tightening; this phenomenon

reflects a shift in the quality mix of credit and need not be explained by

borrowers substituting between loans and paper, as in IC$W. However, under

either the substitution or quality mix interpretations, the shift of credit

flows in favor of higher-quality borrowers (those that can issue commercial

paper) is consistent with the flight-to-quality hypothesis.

      Some related evidence is provided in the right column of Figure 1. which

shows the growth rates of real short-term debt for small and large

manufacturing fins following the same four Romer datesj2 Except in 1974,

the short-term debt of large fins (who are more likely to be able to issue

commercial paper) rose sharply following Romer dates, suggesting that those

firms were able to obtain credit to compensate for the decline in internal
                                                                              20


cash flows. In contrast, in none of the episodes did small fins (who rarely

have access to the commercial paper market) obtain significant additional

short-term credit, although presumably they too had increased financing

needs 13

      The composition of bank lending. In their study, Kashyap et al. compare

the behavior of bank and nonbank sources of credit, finding that an important

nonbank source (commercial paper) expands relative to bank lending in

downturns. However, even when attention is restricted to lending by banks,

there is evidence for a flight to quality in recessions or tight-money

periods: For example. Gertler and Gilchrist (1993) and Oliner and Rudebusch

(1993) both find that, following Romer dates and controlling for sales, bank

loans to small manufacturing firms fall relative to bank loans to large fins

(even though, as we have seen, large firms can also satisfy their credit

demands by issuing commercial paper). In a similar vein, Lang and Nakamura

(1992) find that the share of bank loans made above prime (i.e., loans to

riskier or harder-to-monitor borrowers) drops in recessions. Morgan (1993)

shows that, following a tightening of monetary policy, firms without

previously established lines of credit receive a smaller share of bank loans;

he also notes that declines in noncommitment lending are highly correlated

with increases in the share of the membership of the National Federation of

Independent Businesses reporting that credit has become harder to obtain.

      One more indication of a flight to quality in bank lending is the

behavior of secured (collateralized) versus nonsecured credit. Data from the

Federal Reserve's Suz-vey of Terms of Bank Lending indicates that the share of

secured CM lending dropped very sharply during the 1981-82 recession14, and

dropped more modestly prior to the 1990-91 recession, despite likely increases

in macroeconomic risk. As has been confirmed by a number of studies (see,
                                                                                 21



e.g.. Berger and UdeIl (1990)), smaller borrowers are much more likely to be

required to post collateral than larger, more established borrowers, Hence

the behavior of secured bank credit suggests once again that during downturns,

banks deny loans to weaker borrowers in favor of stronger borrowers.15

      Public versus private bond placements. Finally, turning again to

nonbank credit, we can draw an interesting comparison between the rates of

issuance of publicly-offered corporate bonds and private placements. Private

placements are bond issues of smaller, less well-known corporate borrowers;

bonds issued in private placements are closely held and typically involve a

variety of covenants and restrictions on the borrower. Recent research

(Corcoran (1992). Carey et al. (1993)) suggests that here, too, there is a

flight to quality, as private placements fall sharply relative to public bond

issues during recessions and tight-money periods.



      B. The effects of the flight to quality on real activity: panel data

studies

      The financial accelerator implies not only that borrowers more subject

to agency problems have reduced access to credit during economic downturns,

but also that the real economic activity of those firms is differentially

affected. A number of panel data studies have addressed this issue.

      The template for many of these studies is the important 1988 paper by

Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (Ff41').   FHP   use   data for publicly-traded firms

to study the link between investment spending and cash flow. They divide

their sample into groups on the basis of dividend policy, arguing (based on

considerations of internal net worth relative to financing requirements) that

rapidly-growing firms not paying dividends are more likely to face external

finance constraints than mature, dividend-paying firms. They then regress
                                                                             22



finns' investment spending against cash flow measures, including Tobin's Q in

their regressions to control for the quality of investment opportunities.

Consistent with the prediction of the financial accelerator theory, they find

that investment is quite sensitive to cash flow for the firms thought most

likely a priori to be credit-constrained, and not very sensitive to cash flow

for fins that are not expected to be constrained.

      Much subsequent work has almost universal.ly confirmed FliP's qualitative

findings. Some of the dimensions along which the follow-up studies have

varied include the following:

      Data sets. FliP's findings have been supported by studies using several

U.S. panel data sets, including a data set drawn from the 1930s (Calomiris and

Hubbard (1991)). Studies have also been done for countries other than the

United States, including Canada (Chirinko and Schaller (forthcoming), Schaller

(1993)), the United Kingdom (Blundell et aT. (1989), Devereux and

Schiantarelli (1990)) and Japan (Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1991)).

      Sample split criteria. Many articles have followed FlIP in identifying

finns that are likely to be financially constrained by aspects of firm

dividend policy. However, a variety of other criteria have been used to split

the sample into firms subject and fins not subject to significant agency

costs, including firm age, firm size, whether the fin belongs to a

cooperative industrial group (Hoshi et al. (1991), Chirinko and Schaller

(forthcoming)), whether the firm has a bond rating (Whited (1991, 1992)) or is

listed on an exchange (Oliner and Rudebusch (1992)), ownership structure

(Oliner and Rudebusch (1992), Chirinko and Schaller (forthcoming)), and

others. Quite generally, firms that are identified to be financially

constrained are also found to exhibit a greater sensitivity of investment to

cash flow.
                                                                              23



      Model specification. The FlIP regression of investment against cash flow

and Q is not derived from a tightly structured model. Following the well-

known article on liquidity constraints and consumption by Zeldes (1989). a

number of studies have attempted to estimate formally specified models of

investment using the Euler-condition approach, in which explicit allowance is

made for the possibility that a finance constraint may be binding (Bond and

Meghir (1994), Cilchrist (1990), Himmelberg (1990), Hubbard, Kashyap, and

Whited (1991), and Whited (1992)). Analogous to Zeldes's results for

consumers, splits of the sample by financial criteria typically reveal that

fins identified a priori as facing agency problems in credit markets differ

from the neoclassical benchmark in their investment behavior, while other

firms do not. Another interesting result is that the link between firm size

and external financial constraints, found by a number of studies, seems to

disappear when financial indicators (such as whether the firm has a bond

rating) are controlled for (Gilchrist (1990), Whited (1992)); this finding

suggests that financial factors, and not technolegical factors that may be

related to size, explain the observed differences in investment behavior of

smaller and larger firms.

      A potential problem with the FlIP results is that Tobin's Q may not fully

capture the quality of the fin's investment opportunities. If it does not,

then cash flow may be correlated with investment not because of internal

finance reasons, but because changes in cash flow are informative about future

profits. Cilchrist and Himmelberg (1992) allow for this possibility by

including a VAR forecast of future profitability (which includes cash flow as

a regressor) in the investment equation. They find that investment remains

sensitive to cash flow, over and above any sensitivity that might be

attributed to the predictive power of cash flow for profits.
                                                                                 24


        Other measures of economic activity. The theory of the financial
accelerator predicts that, for firms subject to credit-market constraints, not

only capital investment but other types of economic activity should be

differentially affected by an economic downturn.       This   cross-sectional

implication has been studied and confined for employment (Cantor (1990),

Sharpe (forthcoming)), R&D spending (Himmelberg and Petersen (1992)). and

inventory investment (Milne (1991), Sharpe (forthcoming), Kashyap. Lamont, and

Stein (1993). and Carpenter, Fazzari, and Petersen (1993)). The finding that

credit-market constraints are important for inventory investment is of

particular interest for macroeconomics, since it may help explain why

inventories appear particularly sensitive to cyclical and monetary policy

shocks even though there is little evidence of a strong effect of real

interest rates on inventory demand (Blinder and Maccini (1991)).

        Nonlinearity. As we have noted, a related prediction of the theory is

that the effects of a change in internal finance on finns' real economic

activity should be greater when the economy is deeper in recession. This

prediction has been tested and confirmed in panel data studies by Certler and

Hubbard (1988), who look at the behavior of capital investment, and by

Kashyap, L.amont, and Stein (1993), who examine investment in inventories.



IV.     Evidenc, from the Quarterly Financial Report
        Although the studies discussed in Section 1II.B are valuable,      the panel

data on which they are based have some drawbacks. One shorccoming is that,

typically,    the firms in the sample are publicly traded companies and therefore
are not representative of the general population of firms. Another problem is
that,    in most cases, the data are available only at an annual frequency.
                                                                                25


      For these reasons, several studies (Certler and Cilchrist (1993,

forthcoming), Oliner and Rudebusch (1993, 1994)) have employed data drawn from

the Quarterly Financial Report of Manufacturing Firms (QFR). The advantages

of the QFR are that it is comprehensive for the manufacturing sector- -    it
includes both companies that are publicly traded and those that are not- - and

it is available at the quarterly frequency over a long time period, 1958:Ql to

the present. Potentially, therefore, the QFR data could be used to study the

behavior of the smallest as well as the largest manufacturing firms; to

analyze higher-frequency (i.e., quarterly) dynamics; and to assess

quantitatively the aggregate implications of credit constraints and similar

phenomena.

      A disadvantage of the QFR data is that, until very recently, the only

disaggregation of the data available was by size class. Thus the studies

mentioned above were required to use firm size as a proxy for capital market

access and could not directly control for nonfinancial characteristics of

firms that might be associated with size. However, we have now obtained the

disaggregated, firm-level data underlying the QFR aggregates, for the period

l977:Ql to 199l:Q4 (we are hoping to obtain pre-1917 data at some point in the

future). In this section we first summarize some findings from previous QFR

studies. We then report some results obtained from the newly-available firm-

level data.



      A. Findings from previous QFR studies

      In recent work with the incompletely-disaggregated QFR data, Gertler and

Gilchrist (1993) examine how the response of manufacturing firms to aggregate

fluctuations is related to firm size (as measured by firm assets). They

combine the eight size classes reported by the QF'R into two categories,
                                                                                  26


"small" and "large. defined so that small firms account for 30% of aggregate

manufacturing sales on average. The premise of their study is that small

firms are more likely to be subject to agency costs of borrowing, so that

cyclical differences in the behavior of large and small firms may provide some

indication of the importance of credit-market imperfections. Indeed, they

draw their dividing line between size classes so that firms in the "small"

category have characteristics similar to the "constrained" firms in the panel

data studies cited in Section III.B. The fines classified as small by Certler

and Cilchrist rely heavily on intermediated credit1 obtaining virtually all of

their short-term credit from banks, and the largest fins in the small-firm

category have capital stocks that are around the median of "constrained" firms

in the typical panel data study. In contrast, firms classified as "large" use

the commercial paper market to satisfy roughly half their short-term financing

needs, use relatively little bank debt (less than 20%) and, of course, include

the largest firms in the sector.

        An objection to the strategy of using firm size as a proxy for credit-

market access is that size may also be correlated with various nonfinancial

characteristics, obscuring the interpretation of the results. For example.

small   firms and large firms   are   not represented across industries in the same
proportions,   so that greater cyclicality in the demand for certain types of
products may   affect   small and large firms   differentially;   we discuss below how
controlling    for industry membership affects the Certler-Cilchrist results.

More subtly, it may be that, within any given industry, small firms are the

marginal suppliers (either to the public or to other firms) and so are more

vulnerable to declines in industry demand. Still another possibility is that

small firms have systematically different (e.g., more flexible or more risky)

technologies. To hedge against these potential identification problems,
                                                                                27



Certler and Cilchrist Look at the cyclical behavior of several different

variables--including sales, inventories, and short-term debt--and perform a

variety of tests on the data. As we discuss below, their results taken

together seem easier to reconcile with a credit-based story than with

nonfinancial explanations.

      In their analysis Gertler and Gilchrist focus on downturns following

tig2't money (as measured by Router dates or innovations to the Federal funds

rate). A first finding is that small-fin sales drop earlier and more quickly

than those of large firms. Indeed, on average, ten quarters after a Router

date the declines in small-firm sales account for about half of the total drop

in manufacturing sales (recall that their average share of sales is 30%)).6

      The greater sensitivity of small-firm sales to the cycle may reflect

nonfinancial factors, as just discussed. However, there are also important

differences in the behavior of small-firm and large-firm inventories and

short-tern debt conditional on sales that are easier to rationalize in the

credit-based framework than with alternatives. For example, Gertler and

Gilchrist find that, following a tightening of monetary policy, large firms

let their inventory-sales ratio rise for a period as sales decline, while

small firms firms shed inventories earlier and more rapidly--so much so that

small-firm inventory-sales ratios fall significantly, despite their relatively

greater drop in sales. The difference in the cyclical pattern of inventory-

sales ratios across size classes is large and statistically significant. The

behavior of short'term debt (Figure 1), much of which is used for inventory

finance and working capital, is consistent with this pattern. Overall, as

noted earlier, larger firms appear able to borrow to carry inventories as

sales decline, thereby mitigating pressures to reduce production, while small

firms are not. In complementary work, Oliner and Rudebusch (1993) find that
                                                                               28


capital investment by small and large manufacturing firms follows a similar

pattern, with small firms cutting back investment relatively more quickly when

cash flows declinej7

      To provide further evidence on whether differences between small and

large firms arise from financial factors, Certler and Cilchrist apply two

other types of tests.   First, they look for nonlinear effects (which, as we

discussed earlier, are predicted by the theory of the financial accelerator).

They confirm that the effects of monetary policy changes on small-fin

variables are greater when the sector as a whole is growing more slowly.

Nonlinearity is also detected by Oliner and Rudebuach (1993), who find that

cash flow effects on investment are stronger after periods of tight money.

Second, Certler and Gilchrist estimate structural inventory equations and find

that the ratio of cash flow to interest expense (a measure of balance sheet

quality) is positively related to inventory accumulation for small firms, but

not for urge firms.     It is not obvious why either of these results would hold

if the differences in small- and large-fin behavior reflected technological

or other nonfinancial factors.



      B. Results from the firm-level QFR data

      Despite the best efforts of the authors of earlier QPR studies, the

incomplete disaggregation of the data placed inherent limitations on their

ability •to distinguish credit-related factors from other factors, such as

industry membership or technology, that differentially affect small and large

firms. Using the newly available firm-level QFR data18, we are able to reduce

the identification problem by (I) controlling for industry membership and (2)

splitting the sample on criteria other than size. We also use these data to

develop rough measures of the aggregate importance of credit-related effects.
                                                                              29


      To control for industrial composition, we first classify firms in our

sample as small or large. One of the advantages of the firm-level data is

that it is easy to construct these categories based on real asset sizes (the

aggregated data are reported by nominal asset size classifications, which

requires authors using these data to make complicated adjustments), We group

firms into large and small categories based on whether gross assets exceed

$250 million in 1991 dollars, Firms that are "small by this criterion

account for about 30 percent of sales on average, which accords well with the

classification used by Certler and Cilchrist.

      Corresponding to the differences in growth rates between small and large

firms used in previous studies, we construct industry-adjusted differences as

follows: Let Dj be the within-industry difference between small and large

firms in the growth rate of a variable1 wjs the share of the snail-firm

variable in the industry total, and Wj the industry share in the aggregate.

Then the industry-adjusted difference in the growth rate between small and

large fins, D(IA), is given by



                D(IA) —
                          (Sj wj wj Dj) / (Ej Wj wj)


      Figure 2 plots the cumulated ("leveled-up) values of D(IA) for sales,

inventories, and short-term debt (solid lines).19 For comparison, we plot the

cumulative differences between small- and large-firm growth rates not adjusted

for industry differences (dashed lines). Also indicated in the figure are the

dates of cyclical peaks and troughs and the three Romer dates that lie within

our sample period.

      The figure shows that the differences between the industry-adjusted and

unadjusted series are modest in all cases. In particular, using industry'
                                                                             30


adjusted data, we find as did earlier authors that the sales, inventories, and

short-term debt of small firms fall by considerably more at the beginning of a

recession than do those of large firms. Perhaps even more striking is the

differentially strong expansion of small firms during the 1982-1985 recovery.

Cenerally. then, the conclusions of earlier studies using incompletely

disaggregated QIR data do not appear to be artifacts of differences in

industry membership between small and large firms.

          How important are the differences between small and large firms,

relative to aggregate movements? To address this question in a very rough

way, Figure 3 compares the cumulative small-vs. -large-fin differences for

sales, inventories, and the inventory-sales ratio (solid lines) against the

corresponding manufacturing sector aggregates (dashed lines). The figure

indicates that the fluctuations in the aggregate variables and in the small

firm-large firm differences are of a similar order of magnitude. As small

firms make up approximately one-third of the manufacturing sector in terms of

sales, this observation suggests that about one-third of the aggregate

cyclical fluctuations can be accounted for by the difference between small and

large firms.2° Of course, this estimate ignores a variety of general

equilibrium effects and so should not be taken overly seriously.21

Nevertheless, the number is large enough to motivate further study of the

issue -

          Another way that we can use the fin-level data to check the robustness
of earlier results is to split the sample by some proxy for credit market

access other than size. Figures 4 and 5 report results analogous to Figures 2

and 3, except that the sample is split according to whether a firm is "bank-

dependent' instead of by size. We use bank-dependency as a criterion because

firms that face high agency costs of borrowing are likely to be largely
                                                                                   31


reliant on intermediated (as opposed to open-market) forms of credit. We

define a bank-dependent firm to be one that has no commercial paper

outstanding and has at least 50% of its short-term liabilities in the form of

bank loans; these firms account for about 45% of manufacturing sales and

inventories. All other firms are classified as non-bank-dependent, Industry-

adjusted data are showi by the solid lines, unadjusted data by the dashed

lines -


          Comparison of Figure 4 to Figure 2 shows that   classifying   firms by

financial criteria rather than size does not change the qualitative nature of

the results. In particular, although the sales of bank-dependent firms

relative to the rest of the sample are somewhat less procyclical than the

relative sales of small fins, the behavior of bank-dependent firms'

inventories and short-term debt is strongly procyclical. Thus, purely

technological factors related to size do not appear to explain the findings of

earlier studies. (In the future we plan to estimate equations that control

for firm size and financial characteristics simultaneously.) Figure 6 also

shows relatively small effects of the industry adjustments.

          Figure 5, which is analogous to Figure 3, plots the differences between

bank-dependent and non-bank-dependent firm variables against manufacturing

sector aggregates. Again, the variability of the differences between the two

classes of fins is comparable to that of the aggregates, or perhaps a bit

smaller. As the fins that we have classified as bank-dependent make up about

45% of the manufacturing sector in terms of sales, again a rough estimate of

about one-third as the share of aggregate variability "explained" by financial

factors seems appropriate.

      Overall, these first results from the firm-level QIR data set confirm

earlier findings that there are substantial cross-sectional differences
                                                                              32


between borrowers potentially subject to agency costs and those less subject

to agency costs. Furthermore, these cross-sectional differences are large

enough to be potentially significant in aggregate economic dynamics.

       To reinforce this last point, we end this section by noting that- -

although   for data reasons we have focused here on the manufacturing sector- -

the   importance of "small" firms (less than $250 million in assets) is

generally much greater in other sectors. For example, according to U.S. Dept.

of the Treasury (1967), the share of sales by small firms in 1984 was 74.5% in

wholesale and retail trade, 87.6% in services, and 89.8% in construction.

Thus the implications of credit market imperfections for the behavior of the

economy as a whole may be greater than is suggested by data on the

manufacturing sector alone.



L Conclusion

       The theory underlying the financial accelerator suggests that 1)

borrowers facing relatively high agency costs in credit markets will bear the

brunt of economic downturns (the flight to quuality); and that 2) reduced

spending, production, and investment by high-agency-cost borrowers will

exacerbate the effects of recessionary shocks. As our paper has discussed, we

now have fairly strong evidence- -at least for the case of firms- -   that
downturns differentially affect both the access to credit and the real

economic activity of high-agency-cost borrowers. It would be useful to

investigate these cross-sectional implications for other sectors, notably the

household and banking sectors. Quantification of the importance of the

financial accelerator in macroeconomic dynamics is an equally important topic

for future research.
                                                                               33


                                       FOOTNOTES



      'This   example also implies that credit extended to the borrower will

fall when borrower net worth falls. More general examples show that credit

extensions may either rise or tall when borrower net worth falls: Although

the increased premium on external finance tends to reduce the amount of credit

taken, working in the other direction is the fact that when internal liquidity

falls, more external finance is needed to fund the borrower's fixed

obligations such as interest and overhead costs.

      2Farmer (1985) first developed the idea that the presence of agency

costs way serve to magnify the impact of interest rates on spending.

      3Aghion and Bolton (1993) give an extensive analysis of dynamics in a

related model.

      'An analogous result is obtained by Williamson (1967).

      5Kiyotaki and Moore solve the tractability problem by using a version of

the example given earlier in which it is assumed that the production

technology is linear. In this case the collateral constraint always binds,

making spending a linear function of borrowers' net worth. This device

greatly simplifies aggregation.

      6This paper emphasizes the role of credit-market factors in the

propagation of cycles, as opposed to their initiation; but shocks to credit

markets have the potential to initiate cycles as well. Examples of cyclical

impulses arising in credit markets include debt-deflationary shocks (Bernanke

and Certler (1990)) and shocks to financial intermediaries (e.g.. bank runs)

that disrupt the lending process.

      7However, Jensen argues that increased internal finance lowers rather

than increases economic efficiency, since it reduces shareholder control of
                                                                              34



managers and tempts managers to engage in inefficient empire-building.

Although .Jensens views of the link between internal finance and agency costs

are just the opposite of the approach taken here, Jensen's theory is

consistent with the financial accelerator in a positive sense, as it also

implies that reduced internal finance constrains firm spending.

      81n some cases, a reasonable interpretation of the canonical principal-

agent model is that the bank together with its client borrowers constitute the

"borrower" of the model. This interpretation gives primary emphasis to the

agency problems that arise between the bank and its creditors or insurers (see

Diamond (1984)).

      9ThS absolute amount of credit taken by less favored borrowers need not

fall, however; see footnote 1.

      10Data on commercial paper and bank loans (bank loans, not elsewhere

classified) are from the Flow of Funds and are deflated by the GDP deflator.

"Romer dates" are from Romer and Romer (1987) and indicate times at which,

based on a reading of the FUNC minutes, monetary policy is supposed to have

tightened. The 1978:3 Romer date is omitted because it is close to the 1919:4

date shown and because it was not followed by a recession.

          number of papers (Friedman and Kuttner (1993), Gertler and Gilchrist

(1993)) have emphasized that there is a countercyclical demand for short-term

credit and have shown, in fact, that short-term borrowing in the aggregate

tends to rise after monetary tightening. A complementary finding, due to

Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (this issue), is that net funds raised by

the business sector also increase following a monetary tightening; i.e. •    asset

accumulation by firms does not offset the rise in gross short-term borrowing.

      '2The data are from the Quarterly Financial Report, discussed further

below. The dividing line between small and large firms (by assets) is drawn
                                                                                  35


so that   small firms account for about 30% of manufacturing sales on average

over the sample. The largest firms in the small-firm category have assets of

about $250 million in 1992 dollars. See Certler and Cilchrist (forthcoming).

        13certler and Cilchrist (forthcoming) show that differences in the

behavior of small-firm and large-firm debt remain after controlling for

differences in sales. Certler and Gilchrist (1993) confirm that trade credit

flows from large firms to small firms do not offset the relative decline in

small-firm   credit.
        ''The   fraction of CM   loans secured by   collateral fell from about 50% in

1978 to just over 20% in 1982.

        l5 alternative explanation for the behavior of secured credit is that

there   is a change over the cycle in the types of loans wade, from types that
are collateralizable (like inventory loans) to types that are not. However,
the share of loans made above prime that are secured has almost no cyclical

sensitivity at all; the major effect appears to be the switch from above-prime

borrowers, with high collateralization rates, to below-prime borrowers, with

lower collateralization rates.

        16Note that ten quarters is a sufficient period for supply-side factors

to influence the course of sales. Thus, to the extent thAt financing

constraints influence small-firm investment and employment decisions, they may

account for some of the relative decline in sales.

        17certler and Gilchrist emphasized recessions that followed a monetary

tightening. However, similar results apply for output fluctuations not

directly related to monetary actions.

        18The data were made available to us by the Department of Commerce. The

QFR data are based on a compulsory survey and includes all of the largest

firms in each industry and a stratified sample of smaller firms.
                                                                               36


       '9when constructing the tndustry-corrected growth rates for small versus

large firms (and, similarly, for bank-dependent and non-bank-dependent firms

below), we computed weighted averages of growth rates across all two-digit

manufacturing industries except food and oil. These two industries are

omitted because of the difficulty in correcting for price-level changes in

these industries, absent two-digit deflators at the quarterly frequency. All.

other data are deflated by a common deflator. An analysis of two-digit

shipments price deflators at the annual frequency suggests that this procedure

does not introduce serious biases for non-food, non-oil industries.

      In constructing growth rates for short-term debt we adjusted a large

outlier in 1988:3. This outlier, although present in the quarterly published

reports, could not be matched up with the micro data, suggesting the

possibility of a typographical or computational error in data construction.

      20That is, if small firms behaved like large firms,   aggregate

fluctuations would be about one-third smaller. An earlier version of the

paper contained more precise calculations (omitted here to save space) of what

the aggregate series would look like if there were no differences between

small and large firms. The results of these calculations are somewhat

sensitive to the starting date chosen but were generally consistent with an

importance estimate of one-third.

      210ne general equilibrium effect that would weaken the aggregate

importance of small firm-large firm differences is output substitution, i.e.,

It Is possible that when small firms are forced by restricted access to credit

markets to cut production, large firms quickly make up the lost output.

Factors reducing the potential for output substitution include imperfect

substitutability of firms' products, imperfect factor mobility, and the

possibility that markups rise when product market competition is reduced
                                                                             37


(Chevalier and Scharfstein (1994)). Note also that at least half of the

small-large differences in inventory behavior come from differences in

movements in inventory-sales ratios rather than from differences in sales.

General equilibrium effects that might lead us to increase our estimate of the

importance of small fins include aggregate demand spillovers and factor-

market linkages.
                                                                              38




                                      REFERE1CES


        Philippe and Patrick Bolcon, "A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and
Aghion.
Development with Debt Overhang', unpublished, Nuffield College (Oxford) and
LSE, 1993.

Akerlof. George. 'The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism". Quarterly Journal of Economics. LXXXV, August 1970, 488-500.

Berger, Allen. and Gregory Udell, "Collateral, Loan Quality,   and Bank   Risk",
Journal of Monetary Economics, XXV, January 1990, 21-42.
Bernanke,    Ben, "Credit in the Macroeconomy". Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York,      XVIII, spring 1993, 50-70.

Bernanke, Ben and Alan Blinder. "Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand",
American    Economic Review, LXXVIII,   Nay 1988,   435-39.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Certler, "Banking in General
                                                      Equilibrium", in William
Barnett and Kenneth Singleton, eds. • New .4proaches to Monetary Economics.
Cambridge, UK:  Cambridge University  Press. 1987.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Certler, "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations", American Economic Review, LXXIX, March 1989, 14-31.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Certler, "Financial Fragility and Economic
Performance", Quarterly Journal of Economics, CV, February 1990, 87-114.

Bernanke, Ben and Cara Lown, "The Credit Crunch", Broolcings Papers on Economic
Activity,    1992:2,   205-39.

Blinder, Alan and Louis Maccini, Taking Stock: A Critical Assessment of
Recent Research on Inventories", Journal of Economic Perspectives. V, Winter
1991, 13-96.

Blundell, Richard, Stephen Bond, Michael Devereux, and Fabio Schiantarelli,
"Investment and Tobin's Q", unpublished, Institute for Fiscal Studies. 1989.

Bond, Stephen and Costas Meghir, "Dynamic Investment Models and the Firm's
Financial Policy". Review of Economic Studies, LXI, April 1994, 197-272.

Calomiris, Charles, "Financial Factors in the Great Depression". Journal     of
Economic Perspectives, vii, spring 1993, 61-86.
Calomiris, Charles and R. Glenn Hubbard, "Imperfect Information. Multiple     Loan
Markets, and Credit Rationing". Economic Journal, C, January 1990.
Calomiris, Charles and R. Glenn Hubbard, "Tax Policy. Internal Finance, and
Investment: Evidence from the Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936-1937",
unpublished, University of Illinois, September 1991.
                                                                              39


Cantor. Richard, "Effects of Leverage on Corporate Investment and Hiring
Decisions", Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, XV, Summer
1990, 31-41.

Carey, Hark, Stephen Prowse, John Rea, and Gregory Udell, "The Economics of
the Private Placement Market", preliminary staff study, Board of Governors,
March 1993.

Carpenter, Robert, Steven Fazzari, and Bruce Petersen, "Inventory
(Dis)investment, Internal Finance Fluctuations, and the Business Cycle".
unpublished, Emory University. August 1993.

Chevalier, Judith and David Scharfstein, "Capital Market Imperfections and
Countercyclical Markups: Theory and Evidence" • NEER working paper no. 4614,
January 1994.

Chirinko, Robert and Huntley Schaller, "Why Does Liquidity Matter in
Investment Equations?', Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking (forthcoming).

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans, "The Effects of
Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds". Review of Economics
and    Statistics,
                this issue.

Cooper, Russell and Andrew John, "Coordinating Coordination Failures in
Keynesian Models", Quarterly Journal of Economics, CIII, August 1988, 441-64.

Corcoran, Patrick, 'The Credit Slowdown of 1989-1991: The Role of Supply and
Demand', Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Proceedings of the 28th Annual
Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, 1992.

Devereux, Michael and Fabio Schiantarelli, "Investment, Financial Factors, and
Cash Flow: Evidence from U.K. Panel Data", in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed.,
Asynsetric Information, Corporate Finance, and Investment, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1990.

Diamond, Douglas, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring", Review
of Economic Studies, LI, July 1984, 393-414.

Eckstein, Otto and Allen Sinai, "The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in the
Postwar Era", in Robert 3. Cordon, The American Business Cycie: Continuity
and Change, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.

Farmer, Roger, "Implicit Contracts with Asymmetric Information and Bankruptcy:
The Effect of Interest Rates on Layoffs", Review of Economic Studies, LII,
July 1985, 427-42.

Fazzari, Steven, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Petersen, "Financing Constraints
and Corporate Investment", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988:1, 141-
195.

Fisher, Irving, "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions",
Econometrica, I, October 1933, 337-57.
                                                                              40


Friedman. Benjamin and Kenneth Kuttner, "Economic Activity and the Short-term
Credit Markets: An Analysis of Prices and Quantities", Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1993:2, 193-284.

Certler, Mark, "Financial Structure and Aggregate Economic Activity: An
overview", Journal of Money. Credit, and Banking, XX, August 1988 (Part 2),
559-88.

Certler, Mark, "Financial Capacity and Output Fluctuations in an Economy with
Multiperiod Financial Relationships", Review of Economic Studies, LIX, July
1992. 455-72,

Certler, Mark, and Simon Cilchrist, The Role of Credit Market Imperfections
in the Monetary transmission Mechanism: Arguments and Evidence", Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 1993, XCV. 43-64.

Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist, "Monetary Policy. Business Cycles, and the
Behavior of Small Manufacturing Fins", Quarterly Journal of Economics
(forthcoming).

Gertler, Mark and K. Glenn Hubbard, "Financial Factors in Business
Fluctuations" • Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Financial Market
VolatilIty, 1988.
Cilchrist, Simon, "An Empirical Analysis of Corporate Investment and Financing
Hierarchies Using Firm-Level Panel Data", unpublished, Board of Governors,
1990.

Cilchrist, Simon and Charles Himmelberg, "Evidence for the Role of Cash Flow
in Investment", unpublished, Board of Governors, 1992.

Greenwald, Bruce and Joseph Stiglitz, "Financial Market Imperfections and
Business Cycles". CVIII, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1993, 77-
114.

Greenwald, Bruce, Joseph Stiglitz, and Andrew Weiss, "Information
Imperfections in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations". American
Economic Review, hOtly, May 1984, 194-9g.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore, A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of
Human Capital", LSE Financial Market Croup discussion paper no. 129, 1991.

Himmelberg, Charles, "Essays on the Relationship Between Investment and
Internal Finance" • Ph.D. dissertation, Northwestern university. 1990.

Himmelberg, Charles and Bruce Petersen, "R&D and internal Finance: A Panel
Study of Small Firms in High-Tech Industries", unpublished. Washington
University. 1992.

Hoshi, Takeo, Anl Kashyap, and David Scharfstein, "Corporate Structure,
Liquidity, and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Panel Data", CVI, Quarterly
.Journal of Economics, February 1991, 33-60.
                                                                               41


Hubbard, R. Glenn, Anti Kashyap, and Toni Whited, "Internal   Finance and Fin
Investment", unpublished, Columbia University, 1991.

Jensen, Michael, "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and
Takeovers", American Economic Review, LXXIX, May 1989, 323-9.

Kashyap, Anil, and Jeremy Stein, "Monetary Policy and Bank    Lending", NBER
working paper no. 4317, April 1993.

Kashyap, Anil and Jeremy Stein, 'The Impact of Monetary Policy on Bank Balance
Sheets", Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, forthcoming.

Kashyap, Anil, Owen Lamont, and Jeremy Stein, "Credit Conditions and the
Cyclical Behavior of Inventories: A Case Study of the 1981-82 Recession",
working paper WP-93-7, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 1993.

Kashyap, Anil, Jeremy Stein, and David Wilcox, "Monetary Policy and Credit
Conditions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance", American
Economic Review, LXXXIII, March 1993, 78-98.
King, Robert and Ross Levine, "Finance and Growth: Schuapeter Might Be
Right", Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1993, CVIII, 717-38.

King. Robert and Charles Plosser, "Money, Credit, and Prices in a Real
Business Cycle", American Economic Review, June 1984, LXXIV, 363-80.

Ktyotaki, Nobuhiro, "Multiple Expectational Equilibria Under Monopolistic
Competition", Quarterly Journal of Economics, CIII, November 1988, 695-713.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, "Credit Cycles", unpublished, University of
Minnesota, March 1993.

Lamont, Owen, "Corporate Debt Overhang and Macroeconomic Vulnerability",
unpublished, M.I.T., 1993.

Lang, William and Leonard Nakamura, "'Flight to Quality' in Bank Lending and
Economic Activity", unpublished, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 1992.

Mime, Alistair, "Financial Effects on Inventory Investment", unpublished,
London Business School, 1991.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "What Depressed the Consumer? The Household Balance
Sheet and the 1973-75 Recession", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1977:1, 123-64.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression",
Journal of Economic History, XXXVIII, December 1978, 918-37.

Morgan, Donald, "The Lending View of Monetary Policy and Bank Loan
Commitments", Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, unpublished, November 1992;
last revision, July 1993.

Myers, Stewart, "The Capital Structure Puzzle", Journal of Finance, XXXIX,
July 1984, 575-92.
                                                                             42




Myers. Stewart and Nicholas Mjluf, "Corporate Financing and Investment
Decisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have", Journal    of
Financial Economics, XIII, June 1984, 187-221.

Oliner, Stephen and Glenn Rudebusch, "Sources of the Financing Hierarchy for
Business Investment and Agency Costs", Review of Economics and Statistics,
LXXIV, 1992. 643-53.

Oliner, Stephen and Glenn Rudebusch, "Is There a Bank Credit Channel to
Monetary Policy?. unpublished. Board of Covernors, 1993.

Oliner, Stephen and Glenn Rudebusch, "IsThere a Broad Credit Channel to
Monetary Policy?", unpublished. Board of Governors, 1994.

Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren, "The Capital Crunch in New England". Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston. New England Economic Review lEd: no vol. number).
May/June 1992, 21-31.

Romer, Christina and David Romer, "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in
the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz", NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989, 12l
70.

Schaller, Huntley, "Asymmetric Information, Liquidity Constraints, and
Canadian Investment", Canadian Journal of Economics, XXVI, August 1993.

Sharpe, Steven, "Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the
Cyclicality of Employment", American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Townsend, Robert, "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
Verification" • Journal of Economic Theory, XXI, 1979, 265-93.

U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of
Incomet Active Corporation Income Tax Returns, Washington: GPO, 1987.

Whited, Toni, "Investment and Financial Asset Accumulation", Journal of
Financial Intermediation, I, December 1991, 307-34.
Whited, Toni, "Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence
from Panel Data", Journal of Finance, XLVII, September 1992, 1425-60.

Williamson, Stephen, "Costly Monitoring, Optimal Contracts, and Equilibrium
Credit Rationing", Quarterly Journal of Economics, CII, February 1987, 135-46.

leldes, Stephen, "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
Investigation", Journal of Political Economy, XCVII, April 1989, 1196-1216.
   Figure 1: Behavior of Short-Term Debt Aggregates and Corporate Earnings Around
                            Romer Episodes of Tight Money


                 Commercial Paper. C&l Loans,                                                  Short-Term Debt of Manufacturing Firms
                 and Corporate Earnings
                                                                                      1968:4


                                                                                               0-3

  03                            commercial                          A                                          bgernfg
                                                                                               02              firms —) - -•             -

  02                            paper                                                                                                        -




                                                                                               s:T
                                                                                                                        -




         Liioansm                                                                                                  /
                                                                                               0-l
                                                                                                                            snial mig.
  00                                                                                                                         firms


 -a,
             /                          <—corporate
                                          earnings
 —a)
                                                    -—          I)
                                                                I
 —0_I                                                    ---1

        —4        —2        0       2       4   6          I            0        0




                                                                                      1974:2




  0a
                                                                                               0-I
                                                                                 /

                                                                                               •'mfgf
         corporate                      -                                                                              — lge mfg. tirms
  °j     etrnings               commercial
          ——

                                 V..
                                paper                                        /
  02                   \                                                    ——


                       '0       —       —




        —4        —7        0       2       4   6          I            0        Ti                  -4   -2       2          4




Notes: The panels on the left plot the percentage change of non-financial commercial paper, C&l ln.e.c.l
loans, and corporate earnings around two of the five last Rorner episodes of tight money. We exclude
1978:3 since the panel on 1979:4 conveys most of the information. The data are from Flow of Funds and
Cit/base. The panels on the right plot the percentage change in short term debt for large and small
manufacturing firms. The data are constructed from the Quarterly Financial Report. See Gertler and Gilchrist
(1992L All series are detrended and in real terms.
Figure 1 (conti: Behavior of Short—Term Debt Aggregates and Corporate Earnings
                     Around Romer Episodes of Tight Money


          Commercial Paper. C&I Loans,                   Short-Term Debt of Manufacturing Firms
          and Corporate Earnings
                                                1979:4




                                                1988:4



                    commercial per
                                V
02




          ,. earn'.     C&i loans




     —t    —,   0   1       1       6   3   0
      Figure 2: The Difference between Small and Large Firm Cumulative Growth Rates:
                      A Comparison df Industry-Adjusted vs. Unadjusted Data.
                                           SALES


  8

  8



  2

  0

 -2

 -4

 -6

 -8



           T978      1980      ¶982       1984        1986     1988      1980    1982




                                        INVENTORIES

 10




  2
  0
 -2
 -d

 -8

 -8




           1978      1980      1982       1984        1986     1988      ¶980    1981




                                        SHORT DEBT

40

30

20

10

 0

-%0


-20

-30

-40

           1975      1980      1982       ¶984        1988     ¶988      '980    1982
Notes to Figure 2:

      Industry-adjusted data weights the difference in growth rates
between small and large firms by the small-firm share in each industry.
The resulting growth rates are cumulated and a quadratic trend is
removed. Small fins are defined to be those with assets less than $250
million in 1991 dollars.
      R: Romer date1 F: NEER business cycle peak, T: NEER business cycle
trough -
      Figure 3: The Difference between Small and Large Firm Cumulative Growth Rates:
                   A Comparison with the Cumulative Growth Rate of Total Manufacturing.
                                               SALES

10

 a
 6


 2

 0

 -2

 -4

 -6

 -a
•l0
            1978          1980      1982       1984       1988     1988      1980         1Q92




                                             lNvENToRES

10

 a
 6




  0

 -2

 -4

 -6

 -a

-10


            1978          '980      1982       1984       1Q88      1888      1990        1992



                                           NvENTORIES,SALES


  6

  4

  2

  0

 -2


 -4


 -6

            1918          1980      1982       1984       1986      1988      '990        1982
Notes to Figure 3:

      See notes to Figure 2. Differences in growth rates between smaLl
and large firms are industry-adjusted.
  Figure 4: The Difference between Bank-Dependent and Non-Bank-Dependent Firms:
                  A Comparison of Industry-Adjusted vs. Unadjusted Data.
                                       SAIlS
ID

 B


 6

 4



 0

 -2

 -4

 -6




                                                                      I
 -a

-10

        1978      1980      1982      1964        1986     1968              1992




                                    INVENTORIES

 0
 8
 6
 4
  2



 -2

 -4

 -6
 -8

-ID

         1978     1Q80      1992      1964        1966     1988       1990   1962




                                    SHORT DEBT

 so

 40

 30

 20

 10



-ID
-20
-30
40
-50


         1979     1990      1982       1984       1996      1968      1990   1992
Notes to Figure 4:

      The figure is analogous to Figure 2, except that firms are
classified by "bank-dependency rather than asset size. Bank-dependent
firms are defined as fins with a ratio of bank debt to short-term debt
greater than 0.5 and with no commercial paper outstanding.
      Figure 5: The Difference between Bank-Dependent and Non-Bank-Dependent Firms:
                   A Comparison with the Cumulative Growth Rate of Total Manufacturing.
                                                SALES

 10

  a
  6
  4
  2


 -2

 -4

  6

 -a

-10

            1978         1960       *982        *964               1986                   1982




                                             INVENTORIES

 10

  S

  6
  4
  2

  0

 -2
 .4

 -6

 -a
-l 0

            1Q78         1960       *982        1Q84       1Q86    *988      *980         1992



                                           INVENTORIES/SALES


  6




 -2


 -d


 -6

            1976         1960       *982        1964       1986    *986      1980         1992
Notes to Figure 5:

      The figure is analogous to Figure 3. except that fins are
classified by "bank-dependency" rather than asset size (see notes to
Fig. 4 or text). Differences in growth rates between bank-dependent and
non-bank-dependent firms are industry-adjusted.
