                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE EThNIC AND RACIAL
                        CHARACTER OF SELF-EMPLOYMENT




                                    Robert W. Fairlie
                                    Bruce D. Meyer




                                 Working Paper No. 4791




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 1994




We would like to thank Christopher Jencks, Kevin Murphy, Harvey Rosen, Chris Udry, and
seminar participants at the University of Chicago and UCLA for their comments. In addition,
we would like to thank Wayne Atkins for his help with the early stages of this project. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed arethose
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4791
                                                                                   July 1994
                               THE ETHNIC AND RACIAL
                           CHARACTER OF SELF-EMPLOYMENT

                                          ABSTRACT


       Using the 1980 and 1990 Censuses, we show that self-employment rates differ
substantially across ethnic and racial groups in the U.S. These differences exist for both men and

women, within broad combinations of ethnic/racial groups such as Europeans, Asians, Hispanics
and blacks, and after controlling for variables such as age, education, immigrant status and time
in the country. Although there are large differences in self-employment rates across ethnic/racial
groups, the processes determining self-employment within each ethnic/racial group are not
substantially different. We find fairly similar effects of age, education, year of immigration, and
other factors in determining who is self-employed for most groups.
       We examine whether ethnic/racial self-employment rates are associated with group returns

to self-employment. We fmd evidence of a positive association between an ethnic/racial group's
self-employment rate and the difference between average self-employment and wage/salary
earnings for that group. This result suggests that our economic model of the self-employment
decision may be useful in explaining differences in self-employment rates across ethnic/racial
groups. We also find that different ethnic/racial groups locate their businesses in different types
of industries. In addition, we do not find evidence that ethnic/racial groups who immigrate from
countries with high self-employment rates have high self-employment rates in the U.S.



Robert W. Fairlie                                                   Bruce D. Meyer
Department of Economics                                             Department of Economics
University of California                                            Northwestern University
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                                Evanston, IL 60208
                                                                    and NBER
1. Introduction
       Self-employment rates differ substantially across ethnic and racial groups in the
United States. For example, data from the 1990 Census of Population indicate that only 4.4
percent of employed African-American men and 2.0 percent of employed African-American
women work for themselves. In contrast, Korean-American men and women have self-
employment rates of 27.9 percent and 18.9 percent, respectively.' Large differences in self-
employment rates remain even after adjusting for differences in individual characteristics
such as age, education, and number of years living in the U.S. There is much speculation
and anecdotal evidence about the ethnic and racial character of self-employment, and there
are many good studies which focus on individual ethnic or racial groups. However, there is
little evidence from nationally representative surveys in which cross group comparisons are
made with comparable data. Extensive research has documented the features of certain
ethnic and racial groups, but there is much less research determining which features are
common to many groups and which are unique. In this paper, we document the enormous
differences in self-employment rates across a large number of ethnic/racial groups. In
addition, we examine many of the possible explanations for these differences.
       Understanding the ethnic/racial character of self-employment is important for at least
three reasons. First, conflicts between ethnic and racial groups in the U.S. have often been
partly caused by business ownership patterns.2 The racial conflict between Koreans and
African-Americans in many large cities, in large part due to the presence of Korean-owned
businesses in black communities, is just the latest example.3 Second, self-employment has




    These figures are documented in Section 5.

    2Some  interesting evidence is reported in Lieberson and Silverman (1971) who find that African-
American self-employment rates were generally lower for cities in which ghetto riots occurred over
the period from 1913 to 1963 than for comparison non-riot cities.

    'See In-un Yoon (1991b) for a description of the causes and character of the racial tensions
between Koreans and African-Americans in Chicago.
historically been a route of economic advancement for some ethnic groups.4 The success of
Chinese and Japanese immigrants in the U.S. is substantially due to their ownership of small
businesses.5 Self-employment has also been proposed as a route out of poverty and is
currently being promoted by many states and the federal government as a way to leave the
welfare and unemployment insurance rolls.6 Third, small business owners have an
important effect on political decisions in the U.S.7 The underrepresentation of many
ethnic/racial groups in business means that these groups may possess less political power
than is suggested by their proportion of the population.
       In this paper, we explore many aspects of ethnic and racial self-employment. Our
main concerns are documenting the huge variation in self-employment rates across
ethnic/racial groups, determining the causes of these differences, and analyzing the industry
patterns of ethnic/racial groups. This paper consists of 9 sections which are briefly discussed
below. First we review the sociology literature on ethnic and racial entrepreneurship and
discuss its limitations in explaining the differences in self-employment rates across groups.
In the next section, we discuss the economic literature and its limitations. Section 4
describes the data set used in the analysis and the process for creating ethnic/racial group
classifications. Section 5 documents the differences in self-employment rates across groups
for both men and women. In Section 6, the individual-level determinants of self-employment
are analyzed along with their ability to explain the differences across ethnic/racial groups.



    'Glazer and Moynihan (1970, P. 36) argue that "business is in America the most effective form of
social mobility for those who meet prejudice."

   5See Light (1972) for a description of the history of Chinese and Japanese in the U.S. and
Loewen (1971) for a description of Chinese in Mississippi.

    'See Guy et al. (1991) for a description of the program promoting self-employment among AFDC
recipients and Benus cc a!. (1992) for a description of the program promoting self-employment among
unemployment insurance recipients.

    7See Brown et al. (1990).

                                                  2
We also test whether these determinants of self-employment arc similar across groups. In

Section 7, we compare group level self-employment rates to group level differences in self-
employment earnings, wage/salary earnings, and unearned income. We examine if self-

employment rates appear to be determined by comparisons of potential earnings from self-

employment and wage/salary work. Section 8 documents the industry distribution of several
ethnic/racial groups. Section 9 briefly examines whether ethnic/racial group self-employment

rates in the U.S. are related to home country self-employment rates. Section 10 concludes

with a summary.



2. Past Work: The Sociology Literature
       The sociology literature on the ethnic and racial nature of self-employment is
extensive, with numerous studies focusing on a wide range of topics. Due to the large

number of sociological theories of self-employment and the difficulty of classifying these

theories, only some of the prominent theories are presented below.R In addition, we discuss

the empirical evidence that supports or contradicts these theories.

       Several authors argue that self-employment is more common among immigrant groups

that expect to spend a short time in the U.S. Individuals in these groups are called

sojourners.9 It is argued that sojourners select occupations that not only allow them to
accumulate wealth rapidly, but also ones that do not require extended periods of residence.

Therefore, sojourners avoid occupations that require extensive periods of training or levels of

education and choose occupations such as owning a small business in commerce and trade.




     'Aldrich and Waldinger (1990) and Light (1984, 1992) provide comprehensive reviews of both
the theoretical and empirical literature on this subject.

    °See Bonacich (1973) who points out that some ethnic minorities concentrate in occupations such
as trade and commerce and play the role of middleman in many economic relations. She argues that
these middleman groups are sojourners, immigrants who do not plan to settle permanently in the host
country.
                                                 3
       Light (1979) suggests that the Chinese in the 19th century are a good example of
sojourners because they planned their lives in the U.S. around returning    to China. He aiso
identifies a counterexample to the theory in Jews who settled in the U.S. Historically, they
were more highly represented in trade than any of the sojourning white ethnic groups, even
though these Jews had no intention of leaving the U.S. Another ethnic group that does not
fit the theory is Koreans. Mm (1984) discovers that recent Korean immigrants came to the
U.S. permanently, and indicate in personal interviews that they do not consider themselves
                                                                                    is that it
sojourners. Aldrich and Waldinger (1990) argue that a key weakness of the theory
would be more logical for sojourners to choose a less risky wage/salary job over opening a

small business)0 They also refer to several case studies in which sojourners avoid self-

employment or are no more successful in self-employment than those not sojourning.
       A second theory argues that disadvantages such as poverty, unemployment or
discrimination cause certain groups to favor self-employment." By lowering the returns to

wage/salary work, these disadvantages may push minorities and immigrants towards self-
                                                               capital which excludes
employment. Minorities may be disadvantaged by a lack of human
them from obtaining many desirable wage/salary jobs. Immigrants may face disadvantages
such as a difficulty speaking English, and the possession of job skills and education that are

not completely transferrable to the U.S.
       Support for this theory comes from several sources. Light (1972) argues that around

the turn of the century both the Chinese and Japanese were facing severe discrimination in

the labor market, and thus were pushed into self-employment in large numbers. Mm (1984)

analyzes the exceptionally high rate of self-employment among Koreans in the U.S. By




     10The high risk of self-employment is well documented. For example, Evans and Leighton (1989)
find that approximately one-third of the self-employed in their sample of white men exit within the
first 3 years of entry and approximately one-half exit within 7 years of entry.

    "See Light (1972) and economists Sowell (1981) and Moore (1983).

                                                 4
interviewing a large number of Korean businessmen in Atlanta he finds that disadvantages
facing Koreans, such as their language barrier and their perceptions of having disadvantages
in non business occupations, play an important role in pushing these Koreans into self-
employment. The disadvantage theory explains why minority and immigrant ethnic groups in
general are pushed towards self-employment, but it has difficulty explaining the large
variation in self-employment rates across minority and immigrant groups. For example, the
theory alone cannot explain why African-Americans have a lower self-employment rate than
Chinese-Americans even though they are relatively more disadvantaged as a group.
       Light (1984) recognizes these limitations and suggests that differences across groups
in what he calls ethnic and class resources may explain much of the variation. Ethnic
resources include entrepreneurial cultural endowments, skills transmitted by co-ethnics, group
solidarity, and sojourning orientation. Ethnic resources also include ethnic foods that can

only be provided by co-ethnics, cheap labor that is more easily provided by co-ethnics,
formal and informal support networks, and trade organizations. It is argued that these
features of an ethnic group benefit its business owners. Class resources can be either
cultural, such as bourgeois values, attitudes, and knowledge and skills transmitted
intergenerationally, or material, such as property used for production or distribution, human
capital, and financial capital. Light argues that equally disadvantaged ethnic minorities can
have different rates of self-employment because of differences in ethnic and class resources.
He suggests that an ordering can be made for the self-employment rates of disadvantaged
minorities; the highest rates are for groups with substantial levels of both ethnic and class
resources, the middle rates for groups with a high level of either type of resource, and the
lowest rates for groups possessing low levels of both resources.12 Light concludes that




   '2See Yoon (199 Ia) for a discussion of the relative importance of ethnic and class resources for
Korean businesses.

                                                   5
ethnic and immigrant minority groups are overrepresented in self-employment, because they
have access to ethnic resources whereas native workers do not.'3
       Aldrich and Waldinger (1990) and other researchers identify several advantages

possessed by certain ethnic groups that are examples of ethnic resources promoting
entrepreneurship. An ethnic group's ability to transfer information related to running a

business to and from co-ethnics is an important factor in determining the group's success in
entrepreneurship. There is substantial evidence that experience as an employee of a small
business and transfers of information are important.'4 To explain the large variation in self-
employment rates by ethnicity, there must exist different levels of initial business experience

across ethnic groups or different abilities at transferring information across ethnic groups.
Certain ethnic groups may have more experience at creating formal and informal support
networks that benefit small businesses.'5
        The cultural theory of entrepreneurship states that certain ethnic or immigrant groups
are successful in self-employment because of their cultural attributes. Immigrants from
countries with a tradition of buying and selling are more likely to become entrepreneurs than
 immigrants from countries without this tradition. Frazier (1957) argues that a main cause of
 the lack of African-American entrepreneurs is the absence of a tradition in the field of




      "See Light (1984) for a discussion that emphasizes ethnic resources in explaining the high rates of
 self-employment fix Cubans and Koreans. Wong (1987) presents evidence suggesting that ethnic
 resources contribute to the success of Chinese-owned garment factories in New York.

     '4See Portes and Zhou (1991) for evidence on the importance of prior employment at a small
 business for Dominicans and Cubans. Meyer (1990) finds strong effects of prior employment at a
 small business on the probability of starting one's own business.
    '3Wong (1977) argues that the existence of trade associations among Chinese grocery stores is an
 important determinant of their success relative to African-Americans. Differing propensities of ethnic
 groups in creating trade associations may explain part of the differences in self-employment rates.

                                                    6
business enterprise for this group.16 However, Aldrich and Waldinger ([990) report

examples of high self-employment rates among groups with little or no business experience
in the past, including Greeks running restaurants who originated in fishing villages and rural

areas.

         Another advantage possessed by some ethnic groups is that their access to co-ethnics

or family members in a community may provide an edge in hiring low-paid workers. These

workers may have limited job opportunities because they have problems speaking English.'
One should note that the vast majority of the self-employed do not have any employees

(besides themselves), so that this argument cannot explain much of the large differences in
self-employment rates.' In addition, small business owners do not exclusively hire co-

ethnics. Kim and Hurh (1985) estimate that among the Korean-owned stores in South

Chicago which hire at least one employee, 68 percent hire at least one black employee and

33 percent hire at least one Hispanic employee.'9

         An ethnic group's access to rotating credit associations provides another advantage.

These associations may provide ethnic members with substantial levels of start-up capital.

Light (1972) argues that access to these associations is one of the important reasons that



    '6Fratoe (1988) supports this argument by providing evidence that African-American business
owners have less exposure to entrepreneurial role models and training in firms operated by close
relatives than Asian, Hispanic, or nonminority owners. However, this may simply be a consequence
rather than a cause of the low African-American self-employment rate.

    t7Boyd (1990) provides evidence that the differential usage of family members by Asians and
African-Americans explains part of the discrepancy in self-employment rates. Zimmer and Aldrich
(1987) provide evidence that Asian shopkeepers employ family and relatives to a greater extent than
white shopkeepers in Britain. However, they find little difference between the two groups in their use
of immediate family members for labor.

     See U.S. Bureau of the Census (1987) which indicates that about 80 percent of small businesses
 have no employees (besides the owner). However, this argument may explain why some ethnic
 groups are more successful at running larger enterprises that do have employees.

     '°More evidence is provided by Yoon (199 Ia) who finds that 70 percent of the total employees in
 his sample of Korean-owned stores located in black neighborhoods of Chicago are African-American.

                                                   7
Chinese, Japanese, and West Indian blacks are better able to start local businesses than
American born blacks. One should note, though, that it is easy to overstate the role of
rotating credit. It appears that most Korean rotating credit associations generally provide
very short-term capital, and it is hard to distinguish their role in providing loans from their
role as a saving mechanism.2° It may be that their primary role is providing group
encouragement to save.
       A final example of an ethnic resource is preferences for special goods and services
that co-ethnics may have an advantage in providing.2' These products may serve as an
initial niche for ethnic entrepreneurs. Examples of such products include exotic vegetables
that Chinese immigrants sold to each other, Kosher wine and matzos that Jewish
entrepreneurs sold to other Jews, and pasta that Italians sold to their former countrymen. On
the other hand, Aldrich and Waldinger (1990) argue that these ethnic markets can be
limiting. Further success depends on the ability of the entrepreneurs of an ethnic group to
expand outside of these markets. Fortes (1987) provides an example of how Cubans in
Miami started out by serving mainly their own ethnic community and then expanded to
industries such as clothing and construction in which there was a much broader market. The
special demands theory cannot entirely explain the variation in entrepreneurship across ethnic
groups because as Light (1972) argues some groups such as the Chinese and Japanese
historically were successful in catering not only to the exotic tastes of their co-ethnics, but
also to the tastes of the general public.
       The special demands argument is sometimes combined with the argument that
residential concentration of some ethnic groups provides a large market and more



   See Light, Kwuon and Zhong (1990) for an excellent description of Korean rotating credit in
Los Angeles.

   2tThis is an old argument that can be found in Kinzer and Sagarin (1950), Glazer and Moynihan
(1970), and Light (1972).

                                                8
opportunities for co—ethnics to become self-employed. There is also contrary evidence on the

importance of ethnic agglomerations (or enclaves) in Aldrich and Waldinger (1990) who cite
evidence from early in this century on the self-employment rates of Jews. Jewish self-
employment rates were higher in areas outside the main enclave in New York City. Aldrich

and Waldinger argue that competition from co-ethnics can limit business opportunities for

some groups.22 Another example     is provided in Sengstock (1974). She reports that the
high concentration of Iraqi-owned grocery stores in the inner city of Detroit has caused these

owners to expend substantial amounts of money and effort in competing with each other for

custQmers.

       Besides these ethnic resources, class resources (in the terminology of Light) such as

education and assets may also benefit certain ethnic groups. These resources may be due to

selective immigration of certain types of people from their home countries. For example,
both Cubans and Koreans who immigrated to the U.S. on average had more education or

worked in more skilled jobs than those left behind, and many came with substantial financial

resources. Light (1984) refers to several studies providing evidence that most Korean

Immigrants residing in Los Angeles brought large sums ofcapital with them, and Perez
(1986) provides evidence that many Cuban immigrants who fled Castro's policies came with
substantial capital.
        Each of the sociological theories presented above finds some support in at least one

ethnic or racial group, but all of the theories have counterexamples or other weaknesses.

The empirical studies in the literature generally focus on only a few groups, using them to
 identify the strengths and weaknesses of the theories. With such a large number of theories,

 these studies run the risk of devising an ad hoc explanation for each group and provide little

 grounds for generalization. Furthermore, these theories and empirical studies leave



    For example, an individual considering opening a Chinese restaurant may he more likely to
 succeed in an area with very few Chinese restaurants than in a Chinatown o a large city.

                                                 9
unexplained much of the large variation in self-employment rates across ethnic/racial groups
in the U.S.


3. Past Work: The Economics Literature
       Although ethnic self-employment has received much attention in the sociology
literature, it has been almost ignored by economists.23 The economics literature tends to
focus on individual characteristics that would promote self-employment rather than focus on
group characteristics. Nevertheless, mean values of these individual characteristics may
differ across ethnic/racial groups, allowing the economic theories to partly explain group
rates of self-employment.
       There are several theoretical models of self-employment in the economics literature
which emphasize different aspects of an individual's choice between self-employment and
wage/salary work at a point in time.24 Lucas (1978) assumes that there exists a distribution
of managerial talent across individuals in the work force. Those who become entrepreneurs
are the ones with the most managerial ability. Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979) model the
entrepreneurial decision as one in which an individual's aversion to risk plays a prominent
role. The decision to become an entrepreneur is based on a comparison of the risky return
of self-employment to the less risky return of wage/salary work. Evans and Jovanovic
(1989) analyze the effects of liquidity constraints on the decision to be self-employed. Their
model assumes that both entrepreneurial ability and initial wealth positively influence the
decision.




    "See Aronson (1991) for a summary of the scant economic literature on racial and immigrant
self-employment.

    A dynamic model of the entrepreneurial decision is presented in Jovanovic (1982). In this
model those who become entrepreneurs learn about their managerial abilities over time, The more
able entrepreneurs remain and expand output, while the less able fail.

                                                10
       A combination of these models provides what can be considered the economic
approach to self-employment. The decision to become an entrepreneur is based on
comparing the expected utility from self-employment to that from wage/salary work. Both
attributes of an individual's utility function and determinants of the distribution of earnings in
the two sectors enter the expected utilities. Let an individual's net income depend on

entrepreneurial ability, O, and amount of initial wealth or potential start-up capital, A1. The
individual's earnings from wage/salary work depend on his/her potential wage in the labor
market, w. Also, the individual's measure of risk aversion, a,, is important in calculating
the expected utility of each alternative. An individual becomes an entrepreneur if the
expected utility from self-employment, UsE(OI, A,, a1), is greater than the expected utility
from wage/salary work, U(w1, A1, a1). Therefore, the individual's entrepreneurial ability,
initial assets, potential wage in the labor market, degree of risk aversion, and possibly
nonwage attributes of self-employment affect the decision to become an entrepreneur. In
addition, it is important to note that (by making assumptions about the form of the utility
function) the entrepreneurial decision depends on a comparison of the distribution of earnings
from each alternative. An individual who is sufficiently risk averse might decide against
self-employment with high average earnings (possibly due to high ability and initial assets) if
those earnings are highly variable.
        This theoretical model of entrepreneurship can be employed to explain part of the
large variation in self-employment rates across ethnic/racial groups. Ethnic/racial groups
which are comprised of individuals who possess special entrepreneurial skills, who own large
amounts of capital, who have low potential wages, and who are less risk averse potentially
may have high self-employment rates.25 Several of the key determinants of self-
employment in this economic theory are not easily obtained, preventing those variables from


     However, if members of a group insure other members by providing financial support, then an
 individual-level measure of financial assets may not be an important determinant of self-employment.

                                                  11
being examined. Measures of risk aversion are not readily available, Measures of assets are
obtainable, but using them in a cross-section can provide misleading results. This is because
high assets may be a consequence rather than a cause of self-employment.
       We do observe many variables that affect both self-employment and wage/salary
earnings. These variables include education, age, immigrant status and time in the country,
language skills, and other individual characteristics. By altering the difference between self-
employment and wage/salary earnings, these variables may affect the self-employment
decision. An important determinant of differences in self-employment rates could be
differences in these variables across ethnic/racial groups.
       This economic model of self-employment does not provide a complete explanation for
ethnic and racial differences in self—employment. Rather, it moves the question one step
backward to the determination of differences in self-employment earnings across ethnic/rcial
groups. However, the model points out that self-employment rates and earnings are jointly
determined, and understanding both processes is important. Sociological theories emphasize
the distinction between disadvantages that "push" individuals into self-employment and
opportwuties that "pull" individuals into self-employment. Economic theories incorporate
both of these elements in models of comparative advantage, and do not make a distinction
between the two forces.
        Versions of the economic model of choice between self-employment and wage/salary
work have been estimated by several authors. Using British data, Rees and Shah (1986)
estimate a version without assets and assume that everyone has the same degree of risk
aversion. They provide some tests which broadly support their model, but they do not fully
test the approach. Evans and Jovanovic (1989) incorporate assets into the model, but assume
that they are exogenous. Several other papers examine the importance of start-up capital, but
the results are mixed. Meyer (1990) argues that assets play a small role in the decision to
become self-employed. However, Evans and Leighton (1989), Blanchflower and Oswald


                                                12
(1990), and Holtz-Eakin, et al. (1993) in particular, find a greater importance of assets in the
self-employment decision. In addition, Holtz-Eakin, et al. (1994) find a large role of assets
in affecting the degree of success of businesses. These differing results have not been

reconciled yet.
       In the economics literature, two empirical studies of self-employment by race and
ethnicity should be mentioned. The first examines the enclave theory which is more closely
associated with sociology. Borjas (1986) utilizes the 1970 and 1980 Censuses and finds that
self-employment rates are higher for immigrants than for native-born men within six racial
categories. In addition, he discovers that more recent immigrant cohorts and persons
immigrating less recently within a given cohort are more likely to be self-employed. Boi:jas
argues that the reason immigrants have higher self-employment rates is because of their
ability to provide special goods and services to co-ethnics residing in geographic enclaves
He provides evidence supporting this theory for a few Hispanic groups. He includes the
fraction of the SMSA in which each individual resides that is Hispanic in an equation
determining the probability of self-employment. He finds that this coefficient is positive and
significant for certain groups, and concludes that this is evidence supporting the enclave

effect.
        Boijas and Bronars (1989) examine self-employment rates and earnings for blacks,
whites and Asians using the 1980 Census. They find significant differences in self-
employment rates and income by race. Next, they run earnings equations with the standard
selection correction based on a normally distributed error term. Their estimates suggest that
the most able whites enter self-employment, while the least skilled remain in the salaried
sector. Exactly the opposite is true for blacks, Hispanics, and Asians: the less able enter


     The significance of the enclave variables is likely overstated because Borjas does not account for
 any correlation in the behavior of each group within a given SMSA. See Borjas and Sueyoshi (1991)
 for a discussion of the problems associated with including group specific variables in individual level
 equations.
                                                    13
self-employment. They conclude that consumer discrimination creates this difference by
discouraging more able minorities from selecting self-employment. There are very few other

economic studies of the racial, ethnic, or immigrant aspects of self-employment, but a good
review of the economic literature on self-employment can be found in Aronson (1991).27



4. Data
       In this paper, we use the Public Use Microdata 5-Percent Samples from the 1980 and
1990 Censuses of Population. We use these data because they have detailed race and
                                                                                   to examine a large
ethnicity questions and are the only data which include enough individuals
number of ethnic/racial groups.28 We build on the findings of many researchers who have
                                                                  individual responses
extensively examined the Census ancestry and race questions. With
for nearly 12 million individuals, the Census allows us to examine many ethnic/racial groups
that would be impossible with other data sets. Researchers who examine ethnicity and race
with other sources must examine fewer groups or rely on much smaller numbers in each

group.3°
        We analyze the subset of individuals who work in non-agricultural industries and who
are at least 16 years old.   In addition, we include only individuals who worked at least 20


    27Other papers include Fuchs (1982), Evans and Leighton (1989), and Bates (1990) which
empirically analyze the factors determining who is self-employed or who leaves self-employment.
See Bates (1989), Meyer (1990), and Fairlie (1994) for studies that analyze the potential causes of the
low level of black self-employment.

    21For most of the analyses, we use the 1990 Census Public Use Microdata 5-Percent Sample. We
also use the 19805-Percent A Sample, the 1980 1/1000 A Sample, and a 1990 1/1000 sample for
various comparisons and analyses.

    See especially Lieberson and Waters (1988) and Farley (1990). In addition, see McKenney and
 Cresce (1990) and Cresce,   et al. (1992) br discussions of the ethnic and race questions contained in
 the Census.

    See Neidert and Farley (1985) who use the 1979 Current Population Survey, and Borjas (1992)
 who uses the General Social Surveys and the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth.

                                                    14
weeks in 1989 and who usually worked at least 15 hours per week in l989. As in most
previous studies of self-employment, agricultural industries are removed because the process
determining who becomes self-employed there is assumed to be very different from other

industries. We select individuals who arc currently working because we are interested in

analyzing the determinants of choosing self-employment over wage/salary work. We do not

want to confound this "second-stage" choice with the choice of working versus not working
by including individuals who are unemployed or not in the labor force. Self-employed
workers are defined as those individuals who identify themselves as self-employed in their

own not incorporated business or self-employed in their own incorporated business on the
class of worker question.32 Wage/salary workers are defined as those who are not self-

employed, but meet both the weeks worked per year and the usual hours worked per week

criteria given above.
       We create a sample from the entire [990 Census 5-Percent Sample which contains

roughly equal numbers in each ethnic/racial group.33 This smaller sample causes us to lose

some precision for the largest ethnic/racial groups, however, we still obtain fairly precise
estimates for these groups. This sample includes a sufficient number of individuals from

each of 60 ethnic/racial groups to allow comparisons across groups. We identify all
 ethnic/racial groups that have a minimum of approximately 800 observations. We then

 choose sampling probabilities to give approximately 5000 observations
                                                                            for each group if




     3181.9 percent of the men and 67.2 percent of the women in our sample worked at least 40 weeks
 in 1989 and 35 hours per usual week in 1989. We check some
                                                               of the analyses below with a full-
 time, full-year subsample defined in this way.

    2Excluding the incorporated self-employed would exclude many of the more successful business
 owners.

     "We also create a similar sample from the 1980 Census 5-Percent A Sample.

                                                  15
there are that many in the full data set. The resulting sample is utilized extensively

below.



Definitions of Ethnic/Racial Groups
         We identify a large number of ethnic/racial groups by interactrng the ancestry, race,
and Spanish origin variables in the Census." In some cases we combine very specific
ethnic groups, generally by geographical location." The ancestry variable in the Census is

created from a question in which the respondent is asked to report his or her ancestry or
ethnic origin.37 The question is open-ended, which means that the respondents write in
their answers, often with more that one ancestry. This write-in response is then changed to a
numeric code with double-ancestry answers receiving two separate codes. To remove the
complications of assuming a dominant ancestry or analyzing the numerous permutations o
dual ancestries, only individuals with a single ancestry are included in the analysis.38
         Approximately, 15 percent of the sample wrote in a religious group, did not respond,
or gave responses that are not meaningful to the analysis such as American or United
States.39 An additional 30 percent of the observations report multiple ancestries.




    34The individuals from groups that have less than 5000 observations are sampled with probability
of one.

    "See Appendix A for a list and description of the ethnic/racial groups that we identify.

    'For example, the Scandinavian group includes people with Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish
ancestries. The groupings are also partly the result of non-specific responses given by many people.
A large number of individuals indicate an ancestry of Scandinavian without specifying further.

    "See Appendix B for the exact wording of the question and instructions for answering it.

    '1Alternative methods for handling multiple ancestry responses and problems with these methods
are described in Lieberson and Waters (1988).

   'l'he following statistics are from our sample of adults who work in non-agricultural industries
and who work at least 20 weeks per year and IS hours per week.

                                                   16
Therefore, we create our sample from the 3.0 million (54 percent) of the 5.6 million working
adults in the 5-percent Sample who have valid single ancestry responses.
        To create the numerous ethnic/racial classifications analyzed in this paper, we also
utilize the race and Spanish origin questions in the Census. The race variable in the Census
is created from a question in which respondents are asked to identify themselves as belonging
to a specific race. The race categories on the Census questionnaire are White, Black or
Negro, Indian (American), Eskimo, Aleut, Chinese, Filipino, Hawaiian, Korean,
Vietnamese, Japanese, Asian Indian, Samoan, Guamanian, Other Asian or Pacific Islander,
and Other Race. If a person specifies more than one race, the race of the person's mother is

used, or failing this, the first race reported is used. The race of a member of the
individual's household is used if there is no answer for race on the questionnaire. The
Spanish origin question asks whether an individual is of Spanish/Hispanic origin or descent.
The categories for Spanish origin include not of Spanish/Hispanic origin, Mexican, Puerto
Rican, Cuban, and other Spanish/Hispanic.
        We interact the responses to the ancestry, race and Spanish origin questions to create
ethnic/racial groups. For example, we create two separate ethnic/racial groups, White and
Black British, because of the large numbers of both whites and blacks who have British
ancestry. The ethnic groups, South Americans, Central Americans, and individuals from the
Caribbean, include large numbers of people with black or white race and/or Spanish origin.
Three separate ethnic/racial groups are created from each of these original ethnic groups.'°
We combine blacks who have a Spanish origin and who do not have a Spanish origin in these
three ethnic groups for two reasons. First, approximately 90 percent of the Blacks from the
Caribbean and Black South Americans in our sample report not having a Spanish origin.


      The subgroups are created as follows. If the individual's race is black then he/she is classified
 as black. If the individual's race is white or Spanish and he/she reports a Spanish origin then he/she
 is classified as Spanish. If the individual's race is white and he/she reports not of Spanish origin then
 he/she is classified as white.

                                                    17
Second, the Black Central American group would be too small if we separated it by Spanish

origin.
          The ethnic/racial group, African-American, is comprised of those people whose race
is black and ancestry is African-American. They are a separate group from Black Africans
because the latter group's members are more specific about their exact origin. The Census
does not include questions on religion. Therefore, we cannot identify many interesting
religious groups. Although we cannot say anything about most religious groups, following
previous studies using Census data, we can say something about the Jewish population by
using its rough correspondence with the Russian ethnic/racial group.4'
          There are some weaknesses of the Census ancestry question. For example, people
reporting "British Isles" and "British (United Kingdom)" were recorded as English, but may
be Irish, Scottish or Welsh. The ancestry question asks for the group with which a person
identifies, and identification may be influenced by factors other than where one's ancestors
were born. Differences between true ancestry and self-identification may partly explain the
somewhat differing results below for those who report race as white and ancestry as Native
American and those that give both their race and ancestry as Native American.
          There exists another important problem with using the ancestry question in the
Census. Cresce, Ct al. (1992) point out that the number of individuals reporting certain
ancestries is sensitive to the location of the ancestry question on the questionnaire and
whether the group is listed as an example on the questionnaire. The most extreme cases are
probably English and German ancestry. The number of individuals who report English
ancestry decreased from 49.6 million in 1980 to 32.7 million in 1990, whereas the number of


   4'Neidert and Farley (1985) use this approximation in an analysis of U.S. Census data. Lieberson
and Waters (1988) find that there is a strong correspondence between American Jews and those with
Russian ancestry. Using the NORC General Social Survey for the years 1972-85, they find that of
250 people reporting themselves as Russian, 139 were raised as Jews. This result also indicates that a
substantial number of Russians are not Jews. In addition, less than half of those indicating that they
were raised as Jews give their ancestry as Russian (139 out of 400).

                                                  18
individuals reporting German ancestry increased from 49.2 million in 1980 to 58.0 million in
l990. They offer two potential explanations for these changes. First, the number of
individuals reporting English ancestry is high in 1980 partly because the ancestry question is
asked directly after the language question, which most individuals in the U.S. answer as
English. Second, English is listed as the second example on the 1980 questionnaire and is
not included as an example on the 1990 questionnaire. In contrast, German was moved from
the fourth example in 1980 to the first example in 1990. Cresce, et al. (1992) refer to this
as the "example effect" and identify other ancestries that exhibit this effect. However, they
also point out that there are strong consistencies for most ancestry groups for the 1980 and
1990 Censuses.
       Overall, the ancestry question appears to be fairly reliable. It is likely that it is most
reliable for the non-European groups on which we focus much of our attention. The U.S.
Census examined the consistency of responses to a question on ethnic origin found in the
CPS.43 There is a high degree of consistency of responses over time for non-Europeans.
The responses of Europeans tend to differ more often than non-Europeans between surveys.
Lieberson and Waters also argue that there has been a homogenization of European groups.
The smaller differences among European groups that we find in the characteristics of self-
employment analyzed below may be partly due to these two effects.




   42McKenney and Cresce (1990) find that the number of people reporting English ancestry on the
1980 Census is approximately twice the number reporting English on the 1979 CPS. Cresce, et al.
(1992) find that the 1990 Census estimates for the number of Germans is similar to estimates from the
1986 National Content Test.

    43See Lieberson and Waters (1988).

                                                 19
5. Self-Employment by Ethnic/Racial Group
A. Estimates from the 1990 Census
         Table 1 reports estimates of male and female self-employment rates for the 60
ethnic/racial groups that we define. The estimates of male and female self-employment rates
are reported for both the 1980 and 1990 samples. The self-employment rates for each
ethnic/racial group are estimated fairly precisely, mostly with standard errors below one
percentage point. At the bottom of the table we report the male and female self-employment
rates for the entire 1980 and 1990 5-Percent Samples. In 1990, the total U.S. self-
employment rates for men and women are 10.8 and 5.8 percent, respectively.
         Table 1 documents the substantial variation in self-employment rates across
ethnic/racial groups in the U.S. For men, self-employment rates range from 3.2 percent for
Laotians to 28.6 percent for Israelis. These estimates suggest that Israeli men are
approximately nine times as likely to be self-employed as Laotian men. Both African-
American and Black Central American women have a self-employment rate of 2.0 percent.
In comparison, Korean women have a self-employment rate of 18.9 percent. It is evident
that self-employment rates differ enormously for both men and women by ethnic/racial

group.
         Although the differences across ethnic/racial groups are quite striking, there are large
differences within broad ethnic and racial groups. All of the European groups have self-
employment rates near or above the U.S. rates for men and women, however, the range
across these groups is lakge. White French, Portuguese and Belgians have the lowest self-
employment rates among European groups equal to 10.5 percent for men and close to 7.0
percent for women, whereas Russians (24.9 percent formen and 12.3 percent for women)
and Greeks (23.0 and 10.1 percent) have the highest self-employment rates. This implies


    'The estimates of ethnic/racial self-employment rates from our 1980 and 1990 samples are very
similar to estimates from the entire 5-Percent Samples from which they are drawn.

                                                20
that the range across all European groups is 18.1 percentage points for men (1.7 times the
U.S. rate) and 7.5 percentage points for women (1.3 times the U.S. rate). It is evident that
there exist large differences in self-employment rates among European groups which suggests
that categories such as European or White are actually aggregations of fairly dissimilar
groups. As demonstrated more clearly below, such broad groupings hide important
differences in self-employment rates and industry distributions.
       The Middle Eastern group which contains Lebanese, Syrians, Iranians, Iraqis, Saudi
Arabians, and Palestinians has high self-employment rates (23.1 and 10.2 percent). Other
ethnic/racial groups with origins in either the Middle East or neighboring countries, such as
Armenians (24.1 and 9.7 percent), Israelis (28.6 and 10.3 percent), and Turks (18.6 and 8.5
percent), tend to have high self-employment rates.
       Asian self-employment rates differ substantially across ancestry groups. The self-
employment rates of Filipinos (5. 1 and 3.3 percent) and Laotians (3.2 and 2.3 percent) are at
or near the very bottom of the distribution of self-employment rates across all ethnic/racial
groups, whereas the Korean rates (27.9 and 18.9 percent) are at or near the top. Large
Asian groups such as Asian Indians (11.7 and 7.4 percent), Chinese (13.5 and 9.1 percent),
Japanese (11.1 and 6.1 percent), and Vietnamese (8.3 and 8.7 percent) have self-employment
rates that are fairly spread across the distribution. These results demonstrate that combining
Asian ethnic/racial groups into one classification may be a misleading oversimplification.
       There are many studies focussing on the number and success of Koreans in self-
employment.45 Mm (1984) reviews previous studies on Korean entrepreneurship and states
that about one-third of Korean immigrant families in the U.S. are involved in small
businesses. Yu (1982) finds that in 1980, 40 percent of all employed Korean men in Los
Angeles were self-employed. Our estimate of the national rate for Korean men is lower than


     'SLight (1984), Light and Bonacich (1984), and Mm (1984, 1988) are good sources of references
to studies of Korean entrepreneurship.

                                                21
Yu's estimate for Los Angeles, but is still extremely high compared to other ethnic/racial

groups.
       The self-employment rates of men and women in Hispanic ethnic/racial groups are
typically below the average U.S. rates. Mexicans (6.8 and 4.4 percent) and Puerto Ricans
(3.6 and 2.3 percent) have low self-employment rates, while Cubans have moderately high
self-employment rates (15.5 and 5.9 percent). There are many studies that analyze Cuban
self-employment. This interest is in part generated by the success of Cuban-owned
businesses, especially in Miami, Florida. The Cuban self-employment rate for men is
higher than the U.S. rate, however, more striking is that it is substantially higher than the
self-employment rates of other Hispanic groups.
       Overall, black ethnic/racial groups have the lowest self-employment rates of any
broad group. African-Americans, the largest black group, have a self-employment rate of
only 4.4 percent for men and 2.0 percent for women. There is a large body of research
describing the dearth of black-owned businesses in the U.S.41 Blacks from Central America
(5.0 and 2.0 percent) and South America (4.4 and 2.1 percent) also have very low self-
employment rates.
          Black Africans (7.1 and 3.2 percent) and Blacks from the Caribbean (6.8 and 3.0
percent) have low self-employment rates compared to the U.S. rates, but have rates that are
notably higher than the African-American rates. These two groups contain a much higher
percentage of immigrants (56.7 and 88.3 percent, respectively) than African-Americans (0.8
percent). Thomas Sowell argues that because of the different socioeconomic backgrounds of
West Indian blacks and African-Americans, the economic experiences of the two groups in



    "See Light (1984), Portes and Bach (1985), and Aldrich and Waldinger (1990) for references.

   '7Earlier studies include Myrdal (1944), Cayton and Drake (1946), Frazier (1957), Kinzer and
Sagarin (1950), and Glazer and Moynihan (1970). Recent work includes Bates (1989), Borjas and
Bronars (1989), Meyer (1990), and Fairlie (1994).

                                                22
the U.S. are very different. West Indian slaves, in contrast to American slaves, were
allowed to manage their own plots of land and profit from any surplus they might produce.
Therefore, West Indian immigrants were much better off economically in the U.S. As
Kotkin (1986) points out West Indian immigrants were very successful in business. In 1901
they owned 20 percent of the black enterprises in Manhattan while only comprising 10
percent of the black population. Glazer and Moynihan (1970) point out that West Indian
immigrants were more entrepreneurial than native blacks, but over time they have merged
into the African-American group to the point where their children do not perceive themselves
as being any different. Nationally, we find that Blacks from the Caribbean have higher self-
employment rates than African-Americans. However, if we remove all workers who are in
the taxicab service industry, we find that the Black Caribbean rate for men (5.4 percent) is
only slightly higher than the African-American rate (4.4 percent).48 Overall, our estimates
suggest that are important differences in self-employment rates across the black ethnic
groups. However, given the low self-employment rates of all black ethnic groups it appears
as though being black, independent of ethnic origin, is an important factor in determining
who is self-employed.
       We create two separate ethnic/racial groups for Native Americans.49 Both groups
include people who report Native American ancestry, but who differ in their answer to the
question on race. The two groups have significantly different self-employment rates. White
Native Americans have higher self-employment rates (10.1 and 5.7 percent) than people who
also answer Native American for race (7.2 and 4.5 percent). This result may be an example
of self-identification influencing responses to the ancestry question, and a case where self-
identification is associated with other individual characteristics.


   The Black African self-employment rate also decreases sharply after removing the taxicab
industry. This self-employment rate is equal to 5.3 percent.

    '9Native Americans include American Indians. Aleuts, and Eskimos.

                                                 23
       In general, male and female self-employment rates have similar rankings across
ethnic/racial groups. The main difference is that female self-employment rates are typically
around 55 percent of male rates. This is very consistent among ethnic/racial groups. Only 4
out of the 60 groups reported in Table 1 have female/male ratios that lie outside of the range
from 0.35 to 0.75. The Vietnamese are the only ethnic/racial group with a higher estimated
self-employment rate for women than for men.


B. Estimates from the 1980 Census
       Table 1 also reports male and female self-employment rates by ethnic/racial group
from our 1980 sample. In 1980, the U.S. self-employment rate was 10.4 percent for men
and 3.9 percent for women. The most striking change in self-employment rates from 1980
to 1990 is the sharp increase in the female self-employment rate.5° This increase occurred
for virtually every ethnic/racial group included in our study and was especially large for
several groups.
       The results reported in Table 1 demonstrate similar patterns of self-employment in
1980 and 1990. Self-employment rates ranged from a low of 1.9 percent for Laotian men to
a high of 26.3 percent for Russian men. Furthermore, large differences in self-employment
rates within broad ethnic/racial categories also existed in 1980. Overall, the ranking of
ethnic/racial groups by self-employment rates in 1980 is very similar to 1990. A few groups
that experienced a large increase in the self-employment for men from 1980 to 1990 are the
Vietnamese (148 percent), Spanish from the Caribbean (87.6 percent), Slovaks (69.5
percent), and Laotians (66.5 percent). The male self-employment rate decreased from 1980
to 1990 for only a handful of groups.




   °Devine (1991) documents the rise in female self-employment from 1975 to 1988 and analyzes its
causes.

                                              24
       The large increase in the Vietnamese self-employment rate for men also occured for

women. This change in the self-employment rate was predicted by the estimates from our
Probit equations reported in Table 2 and similar equations estimated for 1980. The

coefficient on the most recent period of immigration (capturing the last 5 years) is negative.
In our 1980 sample, 85.2 percent of the Vietnamese immigrated to the U.S. within the last 5

years. However, in our 1990 sample only 9. 1 percent of the Vietnamese immigrated in the
last 5 years. Therefore, as the length of time in the U.S. increased for Vietnamese

immigrants, the self-employment rate for this group increased.5' It appears as though the

additional time spent in the U.S. has had the expected effect on this group's participation in

self-employment.



C. Adjusted Self-Employment Rates
       Part of the group differences reported in the first several columns of Table I are

undoubtedly due to differences in mean characteristics of the individuals in the groups. To

account for this influence, Table 1 also reports self-employment rates that adjust for the

differing individual characteristics of each ethnic/racial group, such as age, levels of

education and year of immigration. There are large differences in these characteristics,

particularly in levels of education and immigrant status. For example, 17 of the 60 groups

are at least 80 percent immigrants, while another 23 are less than 20 percent immigrants (see

Appendix B for means by ethnic/racial group).

        We considered reporting ethnicity/race dummy variable coefficients from Probit
 equations with and without individual control variables. But such coefficients are not easily

 interpreted. Instead, using our sample, we estimate Probit equations which control for
 individual characteristics including dummy variables for each ethnic/racial group (these



    "The self-employment rate for the Vietnamese who immigrated to the U.S. between 1975 and
 1980 is 2.6 percent in 1980 and 10.8 percent in 1990.

                                                25
equations and the full list of control variables are reported in l'able 2). We then calculate
the predicted self-employment rates for each group using the characteristics of a

representative sample of the U.S. working population (a 1/10(X) sample drawn from the

entire 5% Sample) and include the ethnicity/race dummy variable for that group. Since the
Probit function is nonlinear, we calculate and report the mean of the function evaluated at the

distribution of characteristics. The predicted self-employment rate for ethnic/race group j is


                                           = ! 4(xfi+a,)

where     is the vector of coefficients on individual characteristics from the Probit equation

estimated on the ethnicity/race weighted subsample, cr is the coefficient on the dummy
variable for ethnicity/race j, and i = I,... ,N indexes the observations in the representative

sample. We do these calculations separately for men and women using the Probit

coefficients estimated for that sample. These average predicted probabilities of self-
employment for each ethnic/racial group are reported in the last two columns of Table 1.

The adjusted self-employment rates by ethnicity/race provide an estimate of the self-
employment rate each ethnic/racial group would have if its levels of human capital,

 immigration status, regional distribution, and other personal characteristics were
 representative of the total U.S. working population. We calculate standard errors for several
 adjusted self-employment rates and find them to be approximately the same magnitude as the

 standard errors for the unadjusted self-employment rates."




     3?Using the delta method, the standard error of P is the square root ot dP,/d-y' Var(y,) dP/dy1.
 where -y'=fl' ). For ethnic/racial groups with high self-employment rates, the standard errors on
 the actual self-employment rates are generally slightly larger than the adjusted rate standard errors.
 The opposite is true for ethnic/racial groups with low self-employment rates. For example, the actual
 and adjusted self-employment rate standard errors are 0.809 and 0.737 for Russian men, and 0.467
 and 0.481 for Mexican men.

                                                    26
       The range of self-employment rates from lowest to highest is smaller for the adjusted
self-employment rates in Table 1. However, similar to the unadjusted self-employment rates
there still is substantial variation across ethnic/racial groups. For example, the adjusted self-
employment rates for men range from a low of 2.6 percent for Laotians to a high of 23.7
percent for Koreans. Even after controlling for group differences in individual variables
typically used to estimate earnings equations, there are enormous differences in self-
employment rates across ethnic and racial groups in the U.S. This suggests that there is a
strong ethnic/racial component in determining who is self-employed, and that individual
variables such as education, year of immigration, age, sex, family characteristics, and region
of the country can only explain a fairly small part of the variation in self-employment rates

by ethnicity/race.
       Overall, the adjusted self-employment rates are very similar to the actual rates for
each ethnic/racial group. For men, only 6 of the 60 groups experience at least a 20 percent
change in the self-employment rate after adjusting. Among women, only 11 groups have
adjusted self-employment rates that are at least 20 percent more or less than their unadjusted
self-employment rates. In general, groups with above average or slightly below average
unadjusted self-employment rates experience decreases in self-employment rates after
adjusting, and groups with much lower than average rates experience increases. The largest
change from actual to adjusted self-employment rates is for Filipinos (-31.4 percent for men
and -37.1 percent for women). This result implies that the low Filipino self-employment
rates are not due to a lack of measurable characteristics associated with a high self-
employment rate, but are due to something else.




                                                27
6. The Individual Determinants of Self-Employment
A. The Self-Employment Decision
       The economic model in this paper suggests that an individual's entrepreneurial ability,
initial assets, potential wage, and aversion to risk affect the decision to become self-
employed. In this section, we estimate a reduced-form equation for the self-employment
decision. We include variables, such as education and age, in Probit equations to partially
control for some of the effects suggested by the theoretical model. In additon, an
individual's potential wage in the labor market cannot be specifically estimated. Instead, we
include human capital variables typically used to estimate earnings equations in our equation
for the self-employment decision. In some of the specifications we also include dummy
variables for each ethnic/racial group. In the next section, we estimate separate Probit
equations for each ethnic/racial group, but for now we do not allow the slope coefficients to

vary by ethnicity/race.
       Table 2 reports the estimates of Probit equations determining who is self-employed
using our sample. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the person is self-employed and
equal to 0 if the person is a wage/salary worker. The results for male and female samples
with and without ethnic/racial group dummy variables are reported. We also present results
for equations that include dummy variables for several industries. The important
determinants of self-employment are discussed below.
        Empirical studies of self-employment generally find that education is an important
determinant of who is self-employed." To analyze the role that education plays in the self-
employment decision we model the relationship with a specification that allows for different
common levels of education to have different effects on self-employment. These levels



    "See Aronson (1991) for a reference to these studies.

    -'This specification is less restrictive than using completed years of school.

                                                    28
include less than high-school (left out category), high-school graduate only, attended less than
4 years of college, and college graduate. We find that each level of education is increasingly
associated with a higher probability of self-employment. This is true for both men and
women and implies that education plays a positive and significant role in determining who is

self-employed.
       Another important determinant of self-employment is the year in which an individual
immigrated to the U.S. Borjas (1986) finds that immigrants within several racial groups are
more likely to be self-employed than the native born. The results presented in Table 2
support his finding. We include dummy variables for several time periods of immigration in
our equations.53 For each specification reported, most of the coefficients on periods of
immigration are positive and statistically significant, except for the most recent time period,
1985 to 1990. The coefficient for this period is negative and significant for each
specification for men, but is positive and mainly insignificant for women. For men, the
periods of immigration which have the largest coefficients are for the periods from 1970 to
1974 and from 1975 to 1979. For women, most periods of immigration have positive
coefficients that are similar in magnitude, except for immigrating from 1950 to 1959, from
1980 to 1984, and from 1985 to 1990 which have positive coefficients but are smaller in

magnitude. We also analyze the self-employment rates of each ethnicity/race group by year
of immigration and find that this pattern is consistent across most of the ethnic/racial groups
that have substantial numbers of immigrants. These results are consistent with the education
credentials of the foreign born not being highly valued here, resulting in many turning to

self-employment.


    The left out category is native born. We use the time periods given on the Census
questionnaire, and thus could not try a linear specification for year of immigration.

   MUsing the 1980 sample, we find a similar pattern in which the most recent period of immigration
(1975 to 1980) is the only period of immigration that does not increase the probability of being self-
employed.
                                                 29
       Other variables in the equations reported in Table 2 are important in determining who
is self-employed. The probability of self-employment increases with an individual being
older, married, widowed, divorced, separated (compared to never married), having more
children, or having a disability. Individuals who are military veterans have a lower
probability of being self-employed. In addition, most of the variables reported have similar
effects in both the male and female equations.
       Controlling for ethnicity/race is important in determining self-employment. Table 2
reports Probit equations for the male and female populations with dummy variables for each
ethnic/racial group. We report the coefficients for several ethnic/racial groups. These
ethnic/racial coefficients are large in absolute value and are statistically significant for most
of the groups reported. For the male sample, 38 of the 59 (64.4 percent) ethnic/racial
dummy variables are significantly different from the omitted group at the .05 level.
Controlling for ethnicity/race is also important in determining female self-employment. For
the female sample, 27 of the 59 (45.8 percent) ethnic/racial dummy variables are statistically
significant. The omitted group is White British which has self-employment rates of 13.4
percent for men and 7.3 percent for women (the U.S. rates are 10.8 and 5.8 percent). The
ethnic/racial groups with insignificant coefficients generally have self-employment rates that
are very similar to the White British rates. Likelihood ratio tests for the significance of the
entire group of ethnicity/race dummies have extremely large values for both the male and

female samples.
       In columns (3) and (6) of Table 2 we report Probit equations for men and women that
control for industry of employment. We want to determine if differences in the industry
distribution of ethnic/racial groups can explain a large part of the variation in self-
employment rates across ethnic/racial groups." Specifically, we test whether the


    "It is very difficult to separate the choice of industry from the choice of self-employment. We
only identify broad industry groupings to partially avoid this problem.

                                                  30
coefficients on our ethnic/racial dummy variables change Substantially when we control for
industry. It is possible that groups with high self-employment rates locate in industries that
lead to self-employment. After including dummy variables for 13 industry classifications,
the ethnic/racial coefficients change only slightly. While some coefficients become slightly
smaller in absolute value, a substantial number of others become larger. Of the 12
ethnic/racial coefficients reported, 6 coefficients in the male sample and 7 coefficients in the
female sample are smaller in absolute value after controlling for industry while the others are
larger. These results suggest that any tendency of certain ethnic/racial groups to locate in
specific industries which lead to self-employment is not very pronounced.


B. Probit Equations for Single Ethnic/Racial Groups
       In this section we examine if the determinants of self-employment are similar for
different ethnic/racial groups. Our use of a common framework to examine many
ethnic/racial groups is only appropriate if different groups are affected in similar ways by
explanatory variables. Furthermore, a possible explanation for the large variation in self-
employment rates across ethnic/racial groups is differing effects of individual variables rather
than differences in the distribution of the variables themselves. To determine if the processes
generating self-employment are similar across ethnic/racial groups we estimate separate
Probit equations for each individual ethnic/racial group. We only include men in this
analysis because the sample sizes for women are small for a number of ethnic/racial groups.
To estimate similar Probit equations for each ethnic/racial group we simplify our
specification by combining possible values of certain variables and eliminating a few less
important ones. We collapse the year of immigration, marital status, and regional variables
into fewer categories.58



    Since certain groups, such as African and Native Americans. have virtually no immigrants, we
estimate equations without immigration variables for these groups.

                                               31
       The results for several ethnic/racial groups are reported in Table 3. The first thing to
note is that the coefficients on age and age squared usually have the same sign and are
approximately of the same magnitude for most of the ethnic/racial groups reported.
Although not reported in Table 3, the coefficients on ever been married and the number of
children are similar for most of the groups. These estimates are similar to those for the total
sample which are reported at the bottom of the table.
        The effect of education on the probability of being self-employed varies by
ethnic/racial group. One method of analyzing this effect is to compare the coefficients on the
college graduate dummy variable across ethnic/racial groups. Using the entire sample, the
coefficient is positive and statistically significant, suggesting that having a college education
increases the likelihood of being self-employed. Among the ethnic/racial groups reported in
Table 3, 19 groups have positive coefficients (5 are statistically significant), while the
remaining 11 groups have negative coefficients (2 are statistically significant).59 It appears
as though having a college education increases the probability of self-employment for most

ethnic/racial groups.
        As mentioned above, we collapse the year of immigration categories to estimate a
Probit equation for each ethnic/racial group. For the total sample, immigrants from each
time period have a higher probability of being self-employed than the native born. This
result holds for a majority of the ethnic/racial groups reported in Table 3. Of the 27
ethnic/racial groups which consist of a significant number of immigrants, 20 (74 percent)
have positive coefficients for immigrating from 1970 to 1990 and 18 (67 percent) have




     Boyd (1990) finds that education has no effect on predicting self-employment among Asians.
 However, he combines all Asian ethnic groups into one. Table 3 demonstrates that this is a
 misleading finding because for some Asian groups, such as Asian Indians and Filipinos, education is
 an important determinant of self-employment.

                                                 32
positive coefficients for immigrating from 1950 to 1969.60 Of the 23 groups reporting
coefficients for immigrating to 1950, 15 (65 percent) have positive coefficients.61 These
results suggest that within most ethnic/racial groups being an immigrant increases the
probability of self-employment.
        Overall, the simplified equation that we use to analyze the self-employment decision
provides fairly similar estimates across most ethnic/racial groups for many of the included
variables. Both education and immigrant status have an important effect on the probability of
being self-employed for most ethnic/racial groups. However, the sign and magnitude of
these effects are not entirely consistent across ethnic/racial groups. The results from this
section suggest that differences in the processes generating self-employment across
ethnic/racial groups may explain part, but not a substantial amount, of the variation in self-
employment rates.


C. Self-Employment and Wage/Salary Earnings Equations
        The economic model presented in this paper posits that a comparison of the potential
earnings from self-employment and wage/salary work is a fundamental component of the
self-employment decision. Individuals may choose self-employment because it may pay
better than wage/salary work. In this section we analyze the determinants of both self-
employment and wage/salary earnings to identify important differences in the two sectors. In
addition, a comparison of the processes determining earnings for both types of work might
explain part of the variation in self-employment rates across ethnic/racial groups. For
example, it is possible that ethnic/racial groups with high average self-employment earnings


    60For immigrating from 1970 to 1990, 9 of the positive coefficients and 0 of the negative
coefficients are statistically significant. For immigrating from 1950 (0 1969. the counts are 4 and 0,
respectively.

    6tFour of the positive coefficients are statistically significant, whereas none of the negative
coefficients are significant.

                                                    33
relative to average wage/salary earnings (based on a combination of observed and possibly

unobserved characteristics of the ethnic/racial groups) are more likely to have high self-

employment rates.
       Table 4 reports results from our estimation of the log self-employment and
wage/salary earnings equations for men who work full time and full ycar.2 Although there

are some problems with the measure of self-employment earnings found in the Census, we

compare earnings in both sectors. Potential problems are that the measure partly includes a

return to capital, does not include expected capital gains when selling a business, and is

likely to be subject to underreporting.
       Specifications 1 and 2 In Table 4 report earnings equations which are estimated by

ordinary least squares (OLS). The variables included in these regressions are ones typically

used in earnings equations, such as education, year of immigration, marital status, family'
makeup, and regional dummies. Higher levels of education increase earnings for both self-

employed and wage/salary workers, but have a stronger effect on the earnings of the self-

employed. In particular, the return to a college education is much larger for a self-employed

worker than a wage/salary worker. The three most recent periods of immigration have a

negative effect on earnings in both sectors. Age, being married, widowed, divorced or

separated, and the number of children increase earnings in both sectors, whereas having a

problem speaking English or being a veteran decrease earnings. In addition to these

variables, we include dummy variables for each ethnic/racial group. Although the
coefficients are different in the two equations for most groups, the signs are quite similar.

Of the 12 groups reported, all of the coefficients have the same sign in the log self-

employment and wage/salary earnings equations. However, many of the coefficients in the




   62We do not analyze women who work full time and full year because the sample sizes within
some of the ethnic/racial groups are small.

                                               34
log self-employment earnings equations are insignificant due to the small numbers of self-
employed for each group.
       Similar to Rees and Shah (1986) and Borjas and Bronars (1989), we estimate
corrections for possible selection bias occurring in the self-employment and wage/salary
earnings equations. OLS yields inconsistent estimates of the earnings equations for self-
employed and wage/salary workers if, as theorized, these workers select their type of work
by choosing the sector with the highest potential earnings. For example, if workers choose
self-employment because of higher earnings in this sector, perhaps due to an unmeasurable
comparative advantage, then the sample for which we estimate the self-employment earnings
equation is non-random and likely has higher than average self-employment earnings. The
predicted self-employment earnings for an individual who is not currently self-employed
using this equation are potentially misleading. To correct for selection we estimate both the

log self-employment and wage/salary earnings equations by using Heckman's 2-step
estimator. These equations are reported as Specifications 3 and 4 in Table 4. We provide
estimates with and without this adjustment to see if both methods point to similar
conclusions. While selection is likely to be important, we are not completely comfortable
estimating the model assuming normally distributed errors and without exclusion restrictions.
While the assumption of normality could be relaxed, there are no obvious candidates for
exclusion restrictions for our model. The Census does not contain any variables that clearly
affect the self-employment decision, but do not affect earnings in the two sectors.
       The coefficients on most of the variables included in our self-employment earnings
equation are fairly similar after correcting for selection. The coefficients on the education
dummy variables are very similar to the results using OLS. However, the coefficients on the
immigrant status variables are generally larger in magnitude. The coefficients on the
ethnic/racial dummy variables are generally the same sign, but are much larger in absolute
value after correcting for selection. All of the 12 groups reported have larger coefficients in


                                               35
absolute value after controlling for selection. The coefficient on the inverse Mills' ratio
variable is positive, although not statistically significant at the .05 level.
       In the log wage/salary earnings equation correcting for selectivity bias does not
change the estimates for the individual variables substantially for men. However, most of
the coefficients for the ethnic/racial groups become smaller in absolute value with the
selection correction. The coefficient on the selectivity variable is statistically significant and
indicates positive selection into the wage/salary sector.
       There are important similarities and differences between the results for the self-
employed and wage/salary sectors. The substantially larger return to education in
determining log self-employment earnings is an important finding from this analysis. There
is some evidence of positive selection by individuals into wage/salary work, however it is
less clear if there is positive selection into self-employment. Controlling for selectivity
appears to have some important consequences when estimating log earnings in both sectors.


7. Explaining the Ethnic/Racial Group Dummy Variables
       Ethnic/racial dummy variables are included in each of the log self-employment and
wage/salary earnings equations reported in Table 4. The coefficients on these variables
provide an estimate of the effect that belonging to a given ethnic/racial group has on earnings
in the two sectors which is not captured by the included individual level variables. A
comparison of these ethnic/racial group coefficients may offer an explanation for differing
rates of self-employment. After controlling for different levels of education and other
individual characteristics, individuals belonging to ethnic/racial groups that have high average
self-employment earnings relative to wage/salary earnings should be more likely to choose
self-employment. We can test this part of the economic model of self-employment by first
calculating the difference between the ethnic/racial group coefficients from the log self-

employment and wage/salary earnings equations. Next, we analyze the relationship between


                                                 36
these differences and the ethnic/racial dummy coefficients from a Probit equation determining
the probability of self-employment. Figure 1 provides two graphs of this relationship for
men who work full time and full year. The first graph uses coefficients from the log
earnings equations estimated with OLS. The second graph uses coefficients from the
selection corrected regressions. There appears to be a weak positive relationship between the
Probit coefficients and the difference between the log earnings coefficients from OLS and a
strong relationship between the Probit coefficients and the coefficients from the selection

corrected regressions.
       A further test of this relationship is provided in Tables 5A and 5B. We report the
results of several regressions in which the dependent variable is the ethnic/racial coefficient
from a Probit equation for the probability of self-employment. Table 5A examines all 59
ethnic/racial groups, while Table SB uses only the 47 groups that have the most precisely
measured log earnings coefficients." These equations provide a test of the strength of the
relationship between the likelihood of self-employment and the difference between self-
employment earnings and wage/salary earnings across ethnic/racial groups. In addition, we
examine the relationship between the Probit ethnic/racial coefficients and ethnic/racial

coefficients from regressions determining log self-employment earnings, log wage/salary
earnings, and log unearned income.
       Both OLS and weighted least squares (WLS) are used to estimate the relationship
between the Probit ethnic/racial coefficients and the log earnings coefficients.M



    "More precisely, we include only the groups with the lowest standard errors for the difference
between the coefficients from the log self-employment and wage/salary earnings equations. We find
clear break points in the distributions of standard errors, and thus only include the 47 groups with
standard errors below these break points.

    'EWe regress the squared residuals from OLS on a constant and the standard errors squared for
the ethnic/racial dummy coefficients from the Probit equation and use the predicted values from this
regression as weights in weighted least squares. This method puts more weight on coefficients from
ethnic/racial groups that have more precisely estimated self-employment coefficients.

                                                  37
Specifications 1 and 2 in both tables report the results from using OLS to estimate the
ethnic/racial log earnings coefficients, and Specifications 3 and 4 report the results from
using coefficients from the regressions with the selection correction. We find that the
difference in log earnings coefficients is self-employment and wage/salary work from 01_S is
important in determining the ethnic/racial dummy coefficients from the Probit model. The
coefficient on this variable is positive and statistically significant in nearly all of the second
stage regressions which include coefficients from the log earnings equation estimated with
OLS.65

         The comparative advantage model of self-employment implies that positive selection
into self-employment is likely. Given positive selection, the estimated coefficient on the log
earnings difference without the selection correction is biased downward. The equations that
use the log earnings differences estimated with the selection correction indicate a very string
relationship between the difference in earnings coefficients and the Probit coefficients. There
is a positive and statistically significant relationship between the two variables in every
equation that uses estimates from the earnings equations with the selection correction.
         The results in these tables provide evidence supporting the hypothesis that

ethnic/racial groups experiencing high average self-employment earnings relative to
wage/salary earnings have high self-employment rates. Evidence from both our 01_S and
selection corrected log earnings regressions suggests that factors increasing returns to self-
employment relative to wage/salary work for certain ethnic/racial groups have a positive
effect on self-employment rates for these groups. In addition, unmeasured factors which
influence the returns to self-employment relative to wage/salary work for ethnic/racial groups
have important effects on the self-employment decision of members of these ethnic/racial

groups.


   These coefficients are statistically significant at the .05 level, except for the coefficient in
Specification 1 in Table 5A which is nearly significant.

                                                    38
       Tables 5A and 5B report the results of several other bivariate regressions in which the
ethnic/racial coefficients from different equations are the explanatory variable. As before,
the dependent variable is the ethnic/racial coefficient from a Probit equation for the
probability of self-employment. There is a significant and positive relationship between the
ethnic/racial coefficients from log self-employment earnings equations and the Probit
coefficients in all of the equations. The coefficients for the equations which include the log
wage/salary earnings coefficients estimated by OLS as the independent variable are positive
and significant, while those estimated with the selection correction are small and
insignificant. There also appears to be a strong positive relationship between the coefficients
from the log unearned income regressions and the Probit coefficients The results of these
three sets of equations suggest that factors which increase an ethnic/racial group's average
self-employment earnings, wage/salary earnings, and unearned income tend to increase tht
likelihood that members of this group are self-employed.
       The final set of equations reported in both Table 5A and Table 5B include all three
variables in one equation. Generally, the coefficients on the various types of earnings are
statistically insignificant in the equations using estimates from OLS. In the selectivity
corrected equations, we find a positive and significant coefficient for log self-employment
earnings and a negative and significant coefficient for log wage/salary earnings. This result
supports the earlier finding that the difference between the two log earnings coefficients is a
positive and significant determinant of the Probit coefficients. In addition, the coefficient on
unearned income is positive and statistically significant. This last result is consistent with
liquidity constraints and with group assets being an important determinamt of ethnic/racial
self-employment rates. However, we cannot be confident that groups with high average
levels of unearned income are more likely to choose self-employment. The observed




   The log unearned income equation is estimated using only the wage/salary sample.

                                               39
relationship may only represent the fact that groups with high self-employment rates
accumulate more assets.
       Using our sample from the 1980 Census, we estimate Probit equations determining
the probability of self-employment and log earnings equations for each type of work.
Utilizing the ethnic/racial coefficients from these equations we estimate the same second
stage regressions as we do with 1990 data. The estimates from these second stage
regressions are reported in Table 5C.67 The findings from the 1980 sample when we use
coefficients from OLS are notably different. The relationship between the Probit coefficients
and the difference between the self-employment and wage/salary log earnings coefficients is
not as pronounced. The coefficients on the variable measuring the difference in earnings'
coefficients are both positive, but statistically insignificant. Although the difference in the
OL.S estimated earnings' coefficients do not have a strong relationship with the Probit
coefficients, the difference in the selectivity corrected earnings regressions has a strong
positive relationship with the Probit coefficients using the 1980 Census. In both
Specification 3 and 4 the coefficient on the variable measuring the difference in the

selectivity corrected earnings regressions is positive and statistically significant.
       The results from this section demonstrate that the method chosen for estimating log
self-employment and wage/salary earnings equations has an effect on the strength of the
relationship between the difference in the ethnic/racial coefficients from these equations and
the Probit coefficients. Using data from the 1990 Census, our estimates from the selectivity
corrected and OLS log earnings regressions suggest that ethnic/racial groups with high
average self-employment earnings relative to wage/salary earnings have high self-employment


   67For the 1980 analysis, we include fewer ethnic/racial groups because of small sample sizes for
some of the groups included in 1990.

    MAithough not reported, we estimate the same equations using a smaller number of ethnic/racial
groups (N=40) with the most precisely measured values for the independent variable. The same
variable is negative arid statistically insignificant in two comparable specifications.

                                                 40
rates. Differences in relative earnings in each sector explain a substantial part of the
variation in self-employment rates across ethnic/racial groups. Using data from the 1980
Census, our results from using OLS regressions provide (at best) weak evidence for this
explanation, while our results from using selectivity corrected regressions provide strong
evidence for this explanation.


8. Ethnic/Racial Industry Distributions of the Self-Employed
        An analysis of ethnic and racial self-employment is not complete without examining
the industry distribution of the self-employed in each ethnic/racial group. There is
substantial variation in the types of businesses owned by different ethnic/racial groups.

Based on public perceptions we expect to find an overrepresentation of Greeks and Chinese
among restaurant owners, and Koreans among small grocery store owners. The patterns may
indicate that individuals learn about specific industries from co-ethnics.
        We examine the industry distribution for the self-employed in each ethnic/racial group
at the 2-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) level using our sample from the 1990
Census. After analyzing these distributions we choose several industries that provide
substantial variation across ethnic/racial groups and/or represent interesting types of
businesses. Table 6 reports the percent of the self-employed in several 2-digit SIC's for
selected ethnic/racial groups. For the same reasons as stated above, only self-employed
men are included in this table. In addition, Table 6 reports an estimate of the overall
industry distribution of the self-employed in the U.S. from a 1/1000 sample drawn from the
entire 1990 Census 5% Sample.
        European ethnic/racial groups generally have industry distributions similar to those of
the total U.S. population, but Russians, Greeks, Italians, Poles are four exceptions. Russians


     Fhe 2-digit SIC's that we report account for approximately 45 percent of the total number of
self-employed men in the U.S.

                                                 41
are underrepresented in most of the industries examined, especially in general building

construction (5.5 percent compared to 20.3 percent for the U.S.). They are overrepresented
in the professional industries which include health services (17.0 percent compared to 6.1

percent for the U.S.), and legal, engineering and accounting services (22.4 compared to 9.2
percent for the U.S.). Russians appear to concentrate in very profitable industries, which

accounts for the Russian group having the highest average log self-employment earnings of

any ethnic/racial group (see Appendix B). Poles also concentrate in the professional
industries with 14.8 percent in health services and 12.9 percent in legal, engineering and

accounting services. Most European groups own fewer eating and drinking places than the

average for the U.S. A major exception to this finding is that Greeks have the second

highest concentration of any ethnic/racial group in the eating and drinking places industry

(24.6 percent compared to 2.9 percent for the U.S.). Italians are also overrepresented inthis

industry (5.8 percent) and in personal services (8.2 percent compared to 2.7 percent for the

U.S.).7°
       Asian ethnic/racial groups disproportionately locate in food stores, eating and drinking
places, and health services. However, there are important differences in industry

distributions across Asian groups. Koreans are overrepresented in miscellaneous retail stores

(11.1 percent compared to 5.2 percent for the U.S.), food stores (11.9 percent compared to
2.1 percent for the U.S.), and personal services (13.2 percent). These rates are either the
first or second highest concentration in each of these industries for any ethnic/racial group
reported in Table 6. The Chinese (25.7 percent) and the Vietnamese (15.0 percent) have the
first and third highest concentrations in eating and drinking places. The Japanese have the
highest concentration in horticultural services (16.5 percent compared to 3.2 percent for the

U.S.) Asian Indians (31.2 percent), Filipinos (29.4 percent), and Japanese (14.6 percent)



    '°Personal services include laundry services, beauty shops. barber shops, shoe repair shops, and
other personal services.

                                                  42
have three of the highest concentrations in heallit SCIVICCS.       lii addition, Asian Indians are
overreprescnted in local transit (4.5 percent coiitpared to 0.6 percent br the J .S. ) and food

stores (8.9 percent).11 These results demonstrate that Asian ethnic           fl)Li5 OWfl very
different types of businesses not only from the U .S. average, but from other Asian ethnic

groups.
       The self-employed from the Middle East own large numbers of food stores (9.7

percent), miscellaneous retail stores (9.8 percent), and eating and drinking places (7.9
percent). Native Americans have industry distributions similar to the U.S. distribution,

except that they are overrepresented in general building construction (32.4 percent).

          Hispanic ethnic/racial groups are generally underrepresented in legal, engineering and

accounting services and are generally overrepresented in eating and drinking places. Puerto
Ricans have high concentrations in food stores (7.8 percent) and miscellaneous retail stores

(13.5 percent). Mexicans have high concentrations in general building construction (27.3

percent), horticultural services (11.7 percent), and auto repair services (10.7 percent
compared to 3.5 percent for the U.S.). Cubans have an industry distribution that is very

similar to the U.S. total. This supports previous research suggesting that Cuban business

owners have been successful at moving into most niches of the U.S. economy.

          Overall, black ethnic groups are underrepresented in the more profitable professional

industries. This partly explains why black ethnic groups tend to have low average self-
employment earnings. African-Americans have a different industry distribution than Black

Africans and Blacks from the Caribbean. African-Americans have higher concentrations in

eating and drinking places (4.3 percent), personal services (2.9 percent), and auto repair (6.5
percent) than these two groups. Black Africans and Blacks from the Caribbean have two of

the highest concentrations in local and interurban transit (29.0 and 23.8 percent,

respectively), which are substantially higher than for African-Americans (1 .8 percent). As


    71lnterurban transit includes bus, urban transit, and taxicab services.

                                                    43
mentioned in Section 5, the high concentrations of Black Africans and Blacks from the

Caribbean in this industry account for much of their higher self-employment rates than
African-Americans. It is evident, that there are important differences in the industry
distributions of black ethnic groups.
       Analyzing the industry distributions of the self-employed across ethnic/racial groups
provides another example of the importance of ethnicity and race in studying self-
employment in the U.S. Not only is there large variation in self-employment rates across
ethnic/racial groups, but there is large variation in the industries in which each group
concentrates. This is consistent with individuals of the same ethnicity and race clustering in
certain industries because they have learned the skills to run a particular kind of business
from a co-ethnic. In addition, it is important to note that even within broad ethnic groups
there are major differences in the industry distributions of the self-employed.


9. Home Country Self-Employment Rates
       In this section, we explore another possible explanation for the differences in self-
employment rates by ethnic/racial group in the U.S. The large variation in self-employment
rates across ethnic/racial groups may be due to the fact that immigrants from different
countries have different levels of entrepreneurial skills. Immigrants from countries in which
owning a business is more common may possess skills that enable them to more easily start
and run businesses in the U.S. Yuengert (1989) tests this hypothesis by including a variable
which measures the self-employment rate of an individual's home country in a micro-level
equation determining who is self-employed. He finds evidence that an individual's home
country self-employment rate has a positive and statistically significant effect on the
probability of being self-employed. However, the significance of his result is likely




                                               44
overstated because he does not allow for a group level component of the error term in his
individual level equations.'2
       We take a different approach by examining the relationship between an ethnic/racial
group's self-employment rate in the U.S. and the group's home country self-employment
rate. Cross country comparisons of self-employment rates are difficult to make, in part
because self-employment is defined in different ways in each country. With this in mind, we
examine self-employment rates for 41 countries published by the International Labour Office
(ILO) for 1970 or the closest year available. These self-employment rates are for male
nonagricultural workers. We combine some of the countries and link them to the
ethnic/racial groups we define.'3 Our final sample includes self-employment rates in the
U.S. and home country for 32 ethnic/racial groups.'4
       Table 7 reports the results from several regressions in which the self-employment ite
in the U.S. or the ethnicity/race coefficient from the Probit equation in Table 2 is the
dependent variable and the self-employment rate of the home country is the independent
variable.'5 The coefficient on the home country self-employment rate is statistically
insignificant and of a small magnitude in each of the equations. For example, the largest
reported coefficient in which the self-employment rate of the ethnic/racial group in the U.S.

is the dependent variable implies that by increasing the average home country self-
employment rate from 16.0 to 17.0 percent, the average self-employment rate in the U.S.
only increases from 13.2 to 13.4 percent. The largest coefficient in which the ethnic/racial


    '7See Borjas and Sueyoshi (1991).
   "Many ethnic/racial groups are excluded from this analysis either because they are native to the
U.S. or data on self-employment rates are not available for their home countries.

    4We also try a subsample of 25 ethnic/racial groups that excludes Communist countries.

    "The Probit coefficients provide a measure of each ethnic/racial group's self-employment rate
after removing the effects of group differences in individual characteristics, such as level of education
and immigration patterns.
                                                   45
Probit coefficient is the dependent variable implies an elasticity equal to 0.08 percent. These
results suggest that the self-employment rate of an ethnic/racial group's home country is not
a major determinant of the group's self-employment rate in the U.S. Therefore, we do not
find evidence that immigrants from countries with a tradition of small business ownership are

at an advantage in becoming self-employed in the U.S.


10. Conclusions
       In reviewing the sociological and economic literature we find that there is much
speculation and anecdotal evidence about the ethnic and racial character of self-employment.
In addition, there exist many good studies focussing on individual ethnic groups. However,
in this paper we contribute to this area of research by analyzing a large number of
ethnic/racial groups with the same nationally representative data set.
       Utilizing data from the 1980 and 1990 Censuses, we provide evidence that self-
employment rates differ substantially across ethnic/racial groups in the U.S. The variation in
self-employment rates across ethnic/racial groups exists for both men and women. Within
broad combinations of ethnic/racial groups such as Europeans, Asians, blacks, and Hispanics
we find substantial variation in self-employment rates.
       Our estimation of the process determining who is self-employed provides interesting
results. Education and year of immigration are found to be major determinants of self-
employment. Adding ethnic/racial dummy variables to the Probit equation greatly increases
its explanatory power. This result suggests that accounting for ethnicity and race is
important in analyzing self-employment. The adjusted self-employment rates provide further
evidence that ethnicity and race are important determinants of self-employment. Overall,
most adjusted self-employment rates for ethnic/racial groups are similar to the unadjusted
rates. However, we do find a few interesting exceptions.




                                               46
       Although there exist large differences in self-employment rates across ethnic/racial

groups, the processes determining self-employment by ethnic/racial group are very similar.
We find roughly similar effects of education, age, and to a lesser extent, year of immigration
on the likelihood of self-employment for most ethnic/racial groups.
       Overall, ethnic/racial groups differ sharply in the industries in which they congregate.

Europeans tend to concentrate in similar industries, with a few exceptions. We find very
different distributions across industries for Asian, black, and Hispanic ethnic/racial groups.

By aggregating ethnic/racial groups into broad categories, such as Asians, blacks and
Hispanics, researchers are losing important information about the ethnic and racial character
of self-employment.
       We analyze the model of choice of self-employment or wage/salary work based on a
comparison of potential earnings in each sector. Both OLS and Heckman's 2-step estimator
are used to estimate log self-employment and wage/salary earnings equations. Our results
provide evidence of positive selectivity into wage/salary work, and weak evidence of positive
selectivity into self-employment. By using the ethnic/racial group coefficients from both log
earnings equations and the Probit equation, we find that an ethnic/racial group's average self-
employment earnings relative to average wage/salary earnings appear to be important in
determining the self-employment rate of that ethnic/racial group.
       Future research on ethnic and racial entrepreneurship needs to analyze the processes

determining self-employment and wage/salary earnings by ethnicity and race. By analyzing
the factors that allow certain ethnic/racial groups to reap high returns in self-employment
relative to wage/salary work, we can learn something about the factors that affect
ethnic/racial self-employment rates.




                                               47
                                        References

Aldrich, Howard E., and Roger Waldinger (1990): "Ethnicity and Entrepreneurship,"
Annual Review of Sociology, 16, PP. 111-135.

Aronson, Robert L. (1991): Self-Employment: A Labor Market Perspective, Ithaca: ILR
Press.

Bates, Timothy (1989): "The Changing Nature of Minority Business: A Comparative
Analysis of Asian, Nonminority, and Black-Owned Businesses," The Review of Black
Political Economy, pp. 25-42.

Bates, Timothy (1990): "Entrepreneur Human Capital Inputs and Small Business
Longevity," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 4, Pp. 551-559.

Benus, Jacob M., Michelle L. Wood, Christopher J. Napierala, and Terry R. Johnson
(1992): "Massachusetts UI Self-Employment Demonstration," in Self-Employment Programs
for Unemployed Workers, in Unemployment Insurance Occasional Paper 92-2, U.S.
Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration, Unemployment Insurance
Service.

Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew J. Oswald (1990): "What Makes An Entrepreneur,"
Working Paper, Dartmouth College.

Bonacich, Edna (1973): "A Theory of Middleman Minorities," American Sociological
Review, 38, pp. 583-594.

Boijas, George (1986): "The Self-Employment Experience of Immigrants," Journal of
Human Resources, 21, pp. 487-506.

Boijas, George (1992): "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility," Ouarterly Journal
of Economics, 107, pp. 123-150.

Borjas, George, and Stephen Bronars (1989): "Consumer Discrimination and Self-
Employment," Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 581-605.

Borjas, George, and Glen Sueyoshi (1991): "A Two-Stage Estimator for Probit Models with
Structural Group Effects," Working Paper, University of California, San Diego.

Boyd, Robert L. (1990): "Black and Asian Self-Employment in Large Metropolitan Areas:
A Comparative View," Social Problems, 37, Pp. 258-274.

Brown, Charles, James Hamilton, and James Medoff (1990): Employers Large and Small,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

                                            48
Cayton, Horace R. and St. Clair Drake (1946): Black Metropolis. London: Jonathan Cape.

Cresce, Arthur R., Susan J. Lapam, and Stanley J. Rolark (1992): "Preliminary Evaluation
of Data from the Race and Ethnic Origin Questions in the 1990 Census," Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the American Statistical Association.

Devine, Theresa J. (1991): "The Recent Rise in Female Self-Employment, The
Pennsylvania State University, Working Paper.

Evans, David and Linda Leighton (1989): "Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,"
American Economic Review, 79, pp. 519-535.

Evans, David and Boyan Jovanovic (1989): "An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice
Under Liquidity Constraints," Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 808-827.

Fairlie, Robert W. (1994): "The Absence of the African-American Owned Business: An
Analysis of the Dynamics of Self-Employment," Northwestern University, Working Paper.

Fancy, Reynolds (1990): "Blacks, Hispanics, and White Ethnic Groups: Are Blacks
Uniquely Disadvantaged?," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 50, pp.
237-24 1.

Frazier, E. Franklin (1957): The Negro in the United States, 2nd Edition, New York:
McMillan.

Fratoe, Frank (1986): "A Sociological Analysis of Minority Business," The Review of Black
Political Economy, 15, pp. 5-29.
Fratoe, Frank (1988): "Social Capital of Black Business Owners," The Review of Black
Political Economy, 16, pp. 33-50.

Fuchs, Victor R. (1982): "Self-Employment and Labor Force Participation of Older Males,"
Journal of Human Resources, 17, pp. 339-357.

Glazer, Nathan and Daniel P. Moynihan (1970): Beyond the Melting Pot, 2nd Edition,
Cambridge: MiT Press.

Guy, Cynthia, Fred Doolittle, and Barbara Fink (1991): Self-Employment for Welfare
Recipients: Implementation of the SEID Program, New York: Manpower Demonstration
Research Corporation.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey Rosen (1993): "Entrepreneurial
Decisions and Liquidity Constraints," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper No. 4526.

                                            49
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey Rosen (1994): "Sticking It Out:
Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints," Journal of Political Economy,
forthcoming.

Jovanovic, Boyan (1982): "Selection and the Evolution of Industry," Econpmetrica, 50,
pp. 649-670.

Kihistrom, Richard, and Jean-Jacques Laffont (1979): 'A General Equilibrium
Entrepreneurial Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion," Journal of Political
Economy, 87, pp. 7 19-748.

Kim, Kwang Chung and Won Moo Hurh (1985): "Ethnic Resources Utilization of Korean
Immigrant Entrepreneurs in the Chicago Minority Area," International Migration Review,
19,   Pp. 82-111.


Kinzer,   Robert H.,   and Edward   Sagarin   (1950): The   Negro in   American   Business, New
York:    Greenberg.

Kotkin, Joel (1985): "The Reluctant Entrepreneurs," th. 8, 81-89.

Lieberson, Stanley and Arnold R. Silverman (1971): "The Precipitants and Underlying
Conditions of Race Riots," in James A. Geschwender (ed.) The Black Revolts, Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Lieberson, Stanley, and Mary C. Waters (1988): From Many Strands: Ethnic and Racial
Groups in Contemporary America, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Light, Ivan (1972): Ethnic Enterprise in America, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Light, Ivan (1979): "Disadvantaged Minorities in Self Employment," International Journal
of Comparative Sociology, 20, pp. 31-45.
Light, Ivan (1984): "Immigrant and Ethnic Enterprise in North America," Ethic and Racial
Studies, 7, pp. 195-2 16.

Light, Ivan (1992): "The Ethnic Economy," forthcoming in Handbook of Economic
Sociology (1994), edited by Neil Smelser, New York: Russell Sage.

Light, Ivan, and Edna Bonacich (1988): Immigrant Entrepreneurs. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Light, Ivan, Im Jung Kwuon and Deng Zhong (1990): "Korean Rotating Credit Associations
in Lost Angeles," Amerasia, 16.


                                                  50
Loewen, James W. (1971): ThcMississippi Chinese, ('anthridge: Harvard University Press.

Lucas, Robert E. (1978): "On the Size Distribution of Firms."   IhJvU Journal of
Econotnic, 9, pp.   SOX-523.

McKenney, Narnpeo R. and Arthur R. Cresce (1990): "The Identification of Ethnicity in the
United Stales: The Census Bureau Experience," Paper presented at the 199() meeting of the
Population Association of America.

Meyer, Bruce (1990): "Why Are There So Few Black Entrepreneurs?," National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 3537.

Mi Pyong Gap (1984): "From White-Collar Occupations to Small Business: Korean
Immigrant Occupational Adjustment," The Sociological Ouarterly, 25, pp. 333-352.

Mm, Pyong Gap (1988): Ethnic Business Enterprise: Korean Small Business in Atlanta,
New York: Center for Migration Studies.

Moore, Robert L. (1983): "Employer Discrimination: Evidence from Self-Employed
Workers," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 65, Pp. 496-501.

Myrdal, Gunnar (1944): An American Dilemma, New York: Harper and Brothers.

Neidert, Lisa J., and Reynolds Farley (1985): "Assimilation in the United States: An
Analysis of Ethnic and Generation Differences in Status and Achievement," American
Sociological Review, 50, pp. 840-850.

Perez, L. (1986): "Immigrant Economic Adjustment and Family Organization: The Cuban
Success Story Reexamined," International Migration Review, 20. pp. 4-20.

Portes, Alejandro (1987): "The Social Origins of the Cuban Enclave Economy of Miami,"
Sociological Perspectives, 30, pp. 340-372.
Portes, Alejandro, and Robert L. Bach (1985): Latin Journey. Cuban and Mexican
Immigrants in the United States, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Portes, Alejandro, and Mm Zhou (1991): "Gaining the Upper Hand: Old and New
Perspectives in the Study of Ethnic Minorities," Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Rees, H., and A. Shah (1986): "An Empirical Analysis of Self-Employment in the U.K.,"
Journal of Applied Econometrics, I, pp. 95-108.




                                             51
Sengstock, Mary C. (1974): "Iraqi Christians in Detroit: An Analysis of an Ethnic
Occupation," in Barbara C. Aswad (ed.) Arabic Speaking Communities in American Cities.
New York: Center for Migration Studies of New York.

Sowell, Thomas (1981): Markets and Minorities, New York: Basic Books.

Sowell, Thomas (1983): The Economics and Politics of Race: An International Perspective,
New York: William Morrow and Company. Inc.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1987): 1982 Characteristics of Business Owners,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Wong, Bernard (1987): "The Role of Ethnicity in Enclave Enterprises: A Study of the
Chinese Garment Factories in New York City," Human Organization, 46, pp. 120-130.

Wong, Charles Choy (1977): "Black and Chinese Grocery Stores in Los Angeles' Black
Ghetto," Urban Life, 5, pp. 439-464.
Yoon, In-Jin (1991): "The Changing Significance of Ethnic and Class Resources in
Immigrant Business," International Migration Review, 25, Pp. 303-331.

Yoon, In-un (1991): "Immigrant Entrepreneurship: Korean Business in Chicago," Working
Paper, University of Chicago.
Yu, Eui-Young (1982): "Occupation and Work Patterns of Korean Immigrants," in Eui-
Young Yu, Earl H. Phillips, and Eun-Sik Yang (ed.) Koreans in Los Angeles, Los Angeles:
Koryo Research Institute and Center for Korean-American and Korean Studies, California
State University, Los Angeles.

Yuengert, Andrew M. (1989): "Self-Employment and the Earnings of Male Immigrants in
the U.S.," Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper no. 581, Yale University.

Zimmer and Aldrich (1987): "Resource Mobilization through Ethnic Networks: Kinship and
Friendship Ties of Shopkeepers in England," sociological Perspectives, 30, pp. 422-445.




                                            52
                                                   Table 1
                                                                                             and Sex
       Self—Employment Rates and Regression Adjusted Self—Employment Rates by Ethnicity/Race
                                            1980 and 1990 Census
                                                                                              1990 Sample
                                1990 Sample                          1980 sample         Regression Adjusted
                            Self-Employment Rates                Self-Employment Rates Self-Employment Rates
                           Male             Female             Male              Female       Male    Female
                              (S.E.)     (%)    (S.E.)         (%)    (S.E.)    (S)    (S.!.)    (%)    (%)
Ethnicity/Race        (%)

Israeli               28.6    (1.581)    10.3   (1.469)    23.0       (1.865)    9.8   (1.834)   23.5   9.9
                                         18.9              22.9                  9.5   (0.544)   23.7   .4.7
Korean                27.9    (0.891)           (0.772)               (0.791)
                      24.9               12.3   (0.709)    26.3       (0.731)    7.8   (0.545)   21.4   11.3
Russian                       (0.809)
                                          9.7              21.5                  5.3   (0.596)   20.1   8.1
Armenian              24.1    (0.801)           (0.667)               (0.869)
                                         10.2              21.6       (0.637)    7.9   (0.610)   20.3   9.2
Middle Eastern        23.1    (0.727)           (0.749)
                                         10.1              22.2       (0.640)    6.8   (0.517)   20.9   9.7
Greek                 23.0    (0.761)           (0.681)
                                          8.8              21.8                  7.3   (0.743)   16.0   7.2
Rumanian               18.7   (0.820)           (0.738)               (0.901)
                                          8.5                  18.5   (1.559)    5.6   (1.364)   17.0   7.3
Turkish                18.6   (1.359)           (1.439)
                                          8.3                  16.3   (1.257)    4.3   (0.854)   13.7   6.9
Latvian                17.1   (1.412)           (1.208)
                                          9.3                  16.3   (0.645)    7.1   (0.593)   15.2   8.4
SwisS                  17.0   (0.668)           (0.667)
                                          9.2                  12.2   (1.118)    2.9   (0.862)   13.3   7.3
White African          16.1   (0.882)           (1.092)
                                          5.9                  13.1              3.9   (0.363)   12.0   4.5
Cuban                  15.5   (0.679)           (0.502)               (0.544)
                       15.2               5.8   (0.514)        14.1   (0.558)    4.2   (0.404)   14.5   6.3
Italian                       (0.686)
                                          7.0                  11.2              4.0   (0.452)   12.6   6.1
Canadian               14.8   (0.671)           (0.545)               (0.598)
                                          7.4                  14.8              4.5   (0.447)   13.3   7.3
Lithuanian             14.7   (0.655)           (0.581)               (0.616)
                       13.6               7.1                  14.9   (0.656)    6.0   (0.556)   12.3    6.8
Hungarian                     (0.629)           (0.576)
                       13.6               8.8   (1.245)        10.8   (1.159)    5.1   (1.326)   11.1    7.2
Southwest Asian               (0.878)
                                          9.1                  13.2              5.2   (0.429)   10.6    6.8
Chinese                13.5   (0.649)           (0.601)               (0.568)
                       13.4               7.3                  12.2   (0.525)    5.0   (0.438)   12.1    6.6
White British                 (0.634)           (0.579)
                       13.2               6.1                  14.3   (0.650)    5.2   (0.514)   13.2    6.3
Scandinavian                  (0.638)           (0.511)
                                          6.2                  11.8   (0.608)    4.1   (0.475)   12.0    6.2
Ukrainian              13.1   (0.623)           (0.539)
                       12.8               5.9                   9.7   (0.515)    4.2   (0.456)   12.0    5.8
Yugoslavian                   (0.618)           (0.521)
                                          6.0                  11.4              4.3   (0.490)   12.4    6.0
Czechoslovakian        12.4   (0.614)           (0.511)               (0.602)
                                          6.2                  12.6              4.2   (0.461)   12.4    6.0
Dutch                  12.3   (0.615)           (0.529)               (0.596)
                                          8.7                  13.1              4.0   (0.809)    9.7    5.8
Thai                   12.2   (1.096)           (0.826)               (1.693)
                       12.1               8.5                  11.9   (0.555)    4.4   (0.491)   11.2    7.7
Scottish                      (0.575)           (0.659)
                                          8.7                  11.8              8.7   (2.297)   12.6    8.9
White South Pttfl.     11.9   (1.499)           (1.486)               (2.310)
                                          6.1                  11.8   (1.024)    4.0   (0.778)    9.6    4.9
Spaniard               11.9   (0.596)           (0.524)
                                          7.4                   9.9              4.7   (0.927)    9.3    5.8
Asian Indian           11.7   (0.574)           (0.611)               (1.210)
                                          6.9                   9.4              4.4   (0.450)   11.2    6.3
Finnish                11.4   (0.598)           (0.545)               (0.510)
                                          7.4                   8.3              3.0   (0.388)   10.6    6.5
Spanish South Am.      11.3   (0.596)           (0.562)               (0.539)
                       11.2               6.2                  11.7   (0.518)    4.9   (0.438)   12.0    6.6
White German                  (0.583)           (0.528)
                       11.1               6.1                  13.4   (0.589)    5.4   (0.405)   10.1    4.5
Japanese                      (0.622)           (0.487)
                       11.0               5.4                   6.5   (0.461)    2.6   (0.364)   10.6    5.4
Slovak                        (0.588)           (0.497)
                       10.7               4.8   (0.461)         9.9   (0.572)    4.2   (0.469)   10.3    5.1
Polish                        (0.593)

                                                 (Continued)
                                                  Table    1 (Continued)
                                                                                                          1990 Sample
                                   1990 sample                                  1980 Sample          Regression Adjusted
                              Self—Employment Rates                         Self—Employment Rates Self-Employment Rates
                            Male                  Female                   Male             Female       Male    Female
                                            (%)       (S.E.)        (%)       (S.E.)     (%)    (S.E.)     (S)      (%)
Ethnicity/Race        (%)       (S.E.)
                                             5.9                    10.3      (0.499)     2.9   (0.338)    10.5         5.9
Irish                 10.6      (0.594)               (0.506)
                                             6.1                    12.6      (1.777)     6.5   (1.621)     9.5         5.3
Oceania               10.6      (1.438)               (1.317)
                                             7.6                    10.7      (0.592)     4.6   (0.477)    10.8         7.4
White French          10.5      (0.580)               (0.563)
                                                                     7.8                  3.0   (0.336)     9.5         5.7
                      10.5      (0.579)      6.3      (0.514)                 (0.457)
Portuguese                                   7.1                    10.9                  5.7   (0.728)    11.0         7.3
                      10.5      (0.672)               (0.683)                 (0.750)
Belgian                                                              9.4                  4.1   (0.465)    10.9         5.9
White Native Am.      10.1      (0.563)      5.7      (0.491)                 (0.542)
                                             5.2                     9.0      (0.519)     3.0   (0.389)    10.3         5.9
French Canadian       10.1      (0.559)               (0.487)
                                             4.1                     4.8                  1.7   (0.395)     8.7         4.3
                       8.9      (0.549)               (0.413)                 (0.580)
Spanish Caribbean                            8.7                     3.3                  3.3   (0.477)     7.3         6.6
Vietnamese             8.3      (0.505)               (0.629)                 (0.413)
                                             4.5                     6.3                  3.0   (0.372)     8.0         4.1
Native American        7.2      (0.493)               (0.421)                 (0.456)
                                             5.5                     7.9      (0.448)     3.1   (0.340)     7.4         5.2
Spanish                7.2      (0.491)               (0.478)
                                             3.2                     4.9      (0.436)     1.0   (0.249)     6.8         3.3
Black African          7.1      (0.467)               (0.401)
                                             3.0                     4.8      (0.397)     1.1   (0.184)     5.7         3.0
Black Caribbean        6.8      (0.504)               (0.335)                                               6.7         3.9
                        6.8                  4.4      (0.478)        4.7      (0.326)     1.9   (0.272)
Mexican                         (0.467)                                                                     6.2         2.6
                                             2.9                     4.0      (0.414)     1.9   (0.299)
Black British           6.1     (1.166)               (0.822)
                                             4.6                     4.6      (0.624)     3.0   (0.557)     6.2         4.3
Hawaiian                6.1     (0.581)               (0.552)
                                             3.6                     4.7                  0.5   (0.356)     5.0         2.9
Pacific Islander        5.9     (0.644)               (0.580)                 (0.870)
                                             4.8                     5.1                  0.8   (0.803)     4.8         4.3
Other South Asian       5.7     (0.692)               (0.716)                 (1.436)
                                                                     5.8                  2.5   (0.340)     5.9         4.1
                        5.5     (0.425)      4.6      (0.459)                 (0.458)
Spanish Central Am.                                                  3.4                  2.3   (0.645)     3.5         2.1
                        5.1     (0.466)      3.3      (0.346)                 (0.769)
 Filipino                                                            5.6                  0.5   (0.341)     4.5          1.5
 Black Central Am.      5.0     (0.947)      2.0      (0.593)                 (1.131)
                                                                     4.5                  1.9   (0.770)     4.3         2.3
 Black South Am.        4.4     (0.810)      2.1      (0.530)                 (1.232)
                                                                     4.3                  1.3   (0.209)     4.5         2.4
 African—American       4.4     (0.440)      2.0      (0.281)                 (0.363)
                                                                     3.5                  2.0   (0.280)     4.0          3.0
 Puerto Rican           3.6      (0.348)     2.3       (0.317)                (0.284)
                                                                     1.9                  0.0    0.000      2.6          1.9
 Laotian                3.2      (0.494)     2.3       (0.512)                (0.957)
                       10.8                  5.8       (0.015)      10.4      (0.019)     3.9   (0.014)
   U.S. Total                    (0.018)
                                                                 are at least 16 years old and who work 20 or
Notes: (1) The sample consists of non—agricultural workers who
                                    hours per week.  (2) The self—employment rate is the percentage of all
more weeks per year and 15 or more                                   for 1990 are calculated using weights
those working who are self—employed. (3) All self—employment   rates
            the CensuS.       The adjusted self—employment rates control for differences across ethnic/racial
provided by               (4)
                                       listed in Table 2. These rates are estimated using a 1/1000 sample
groups in the values of the variables men and
which has a sample size of 60,238 for          49,207 for women. (5) The standard errors of the adjusted
self-employment rates  tend to be of a similar magnitude to those of the actual self—employment rates (see
the text for more detail).
                                                 Table 2
                                   Probit Equations for Self—Employment
                                               1990 Census
                                                Specification
                                    Men                               Women

Explanatory Variables     (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)

Ethnic/Racial Dummies    No          Yes        Yes          No         Yes        Yes

Industry Dummies         No          No         Yes          No         No         Yes
High School             0.0530      0.0002     0.0219        0.0456   —0.0038     0.0172
Graduate                (0.0143)   (0.0147)   (0.0152)   (0.0195)     (0.0199)   (0.0205)
Some College            0.1015      0.0280     0.0629        0.0862    0.0341     0.0911
                        (0.0142)   (0.0148)   (0.0153)   (0.0198)     (0.0203)   (0.0211)

College                 0.1915      0.0595     0.1178        0.1657    0.0782     0.1902
Graduate                (0.0136)   (0.0146)   (0.0159)   (0.0203)     (0.0213)   (0.0226)

Immigrated              —0.1838    —0.1383    —0.1635        0.0453    0.0710     0.0253
1985 to 1990            (0.0207)   (0.0238)   (0.0244)   (0.0283)     (0.0325)   (0.0332)

Immigrated              —0.0092    0.0744      0.0629        0.0538    0.0796     0.0417
1980 to 1984            (0.0170)   (0.0209)   (0.0214)   (0.0243)     (0.0295)   (0.0304)

Immigrated              0.0869     0.1328      0.1340        0.1359    0.1176     0.0974
1975   to   1979        (0.0176)   (0.0212)   (0.0218)   (0.0236)     (0.0289)   (0.0297)
Immigrated              0.1101      0.1553     0.1587     0.1337       0.1408    0.1261
1970   to   1974        (0.0194)   (0.0225)   (0.0231)   (0.0250)     (0.0298)   (0.0306)
Immigrated              0.0221     0.0886      0.1051        0.0765   0.1327     0.1302
1965   to   1969        (0.0217)   (0.0241)   (0.0248)   (0.0284)     (0.0314)   (0.0324)
Immigrated              -0.0056     0.0584     0.0743        0.0613    0.1176    0.1079
1960   to 1964          (0.0256)   (0.0277)   (0.0284)   (0.0338)     (0.0362)   (0.0372)
Immigrated               0.0080     0.0509     0.0690        0.0410   0.0723     0.0619
1950   to   1959        (0.0244)   (0.0257)   (0.0265)   (0.0341)     (0.0357)   (0.0367)
Immigrated              0.0557      0.1028     0.1087        0.0917   0.1018     0.0980
Before 1950             (0.0355)   (0.0365)   (0.0374)   (0.0518)     (0.0530)   (0.0544)
Problem     Speaking    —0.09O     —0.0750    —0.0746     0.0488       0.0083    0.0169
English                 (0.0194)   (0.0207)   (0.0213)   (0.0250)     (0.0266)   (0.0275)
                                               (Continued)
                                              Table 2 (Continued)

                                                  Specification
                                    Men                                  Women

                          (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)
Explanatory Variablee
Age                     0.0505     0.0504        0.0573      0.0417      0.0418     0.0498
                        (0.0023)   (0.0023)     (0.0024)    (0.0031)     (0.0031)   (0.0032)

                        —0.0337    —0.0353      —0.0422     —0.0318      —0.0323    —0.0402
Age Squared/lOU
                        (0.0024)   (0.0025)     (0.0025)    (0.0034)     (0.0034)   (0.0035)

                        0.1937     0.1661        0.2036         0.2661    0.2172    0.2315
Currently
Married                 (0.0150)   (0.0154)     (0.0158)    (0.0206)     (0.0211)   (0.0217)

Widowed                  0.1576    0.1532        0.1810         0.1298    0.0917    0.0936
                        (0.0467)   (0.0472)      (0.0484)   (0.0358)     (0.0364)   (0.0373)

Divorced                 0.1046     0.0990       0.1032         0.0820    0.0621     0.0662
                        (0.0218)   (0.0222)      (0.0228)   (0.0271)     (0.0276)   (0.0284)

Currently                0.0367     0.0934       0.0949         0.0044    0.0378     0.0160
Separated               (0.0354)   (0.0361)      (0.0372)   (0.0430)     (0.0438)   (0.0451)

Children                 0.0198     0.0392       0.0388         0.0186    0.0428     0.0461
                        (0.0041)   (0.0042)      (0.0044)   (0.0059)     (0.0061)   (0.0063)

                         0.0283     0.0306       0.0220         0.0653    0.0664     0.0532
Lirnitin9
Disabiltty              (0.0204)   (0.0207)      (0.0213)   (0.0309)     (0.0313)   (0.0320)

Veteran of              —0.1975    —0.1733      —0.1409     —0.1317      —0.0922     0.0190
Military                (0.0115)   (0.0117)      (0.0122)   (0.0569)     (0.0576)   (0.0607)

Greek                               0.3690        0.2945                  0.2035     0.1677
                                   (0.0397)      (0.0409)                (0.0578)   (0.0593)

Russian                             0.3868        0.3463                  0.2963     0.2843
                                   (0.0396)      (0.0406)                (0.0550)   (0.0562)

White German                       —0.0144       —0.0156                 —0.0109    —0.0116
                                   (0.0430)      (0.0444)                (0.0604)   (0.0621)

Chinese                            —0.0867       —0.1263                  0.0036     0.0099
                                   (0.0444)      (0.0457)                (0.0589)   (0.0605)

                                   —0.6756       —0.6947                 —0.5592    —0.5611
Filipino
                                   (0.0566)      (0.0582)                (0.0665)   (0.0680)

                                                  (Continued)
                                               Table   2     (Continued)

                                                   Specification
                                      Men                                   Women

Explanatory Variables      (1)        (2)          (3)               (4)      (5)        (6)

Korean                               0.4654       0.3687                    0.4622     0.4069
                                    (0.0428)     (0.0441)                   (0.0546)   (0.0561)
Cuban                               —0.0150      —0.0443                    —0.2104    —0.1771
                                    (0.0442)     (0.0455)                   (0.0636)   (0.0654)
Mexican                             —0.3495      —0.3527                    —0.2714    —0.2601
                                    (0.0486)     (0.0502)                   (0.0681)   (0.0701)
Puerto Rican                        —0.6166      —0.6126                    —0.4031    —0.3596
                                    (0.0548)     (0.0567)                   (0.0722)   (0.0741)
African—American                    —0.5544      —0.5508                    —0.4881    —0.4902
                                    (0.0577)     (0.0599)                   (0.0701)   (0.0733)
Black Caribbean                     —0.4372      —0.4631                    —0.4019    —0.4068
                                    (0.0513)     (0.0526)                   (0.0676)   (0.0694)
Native American                     —0.2554      —0.2504                    —0.2503    —0.2259
                                    (0.0472)     (0.0487)                   (0.0627)   (0.0647)

Region Dummies              Yes        Yes             Yea           Yes       Yes       Yes
Sample S.E. Rate           0.127      0.127        0.127            0.067    0.067      0.067
Sample Size               140835     140835       140835           105189   105189     105189
Log Likelihood            —50906     —49437       —46791           —24864   —24327     —23183

Notes:  (1) The sample consists of non—agricultural workers who are at least 16 years old and who
work 20 or more weeks per year and 15 or more hours per week.  (2) The dependent variable is
equal to 1 if a person's chief job activity is self—employment. (3) Standard errors are in
parentheses below the coefficient estimates. (4) All equations include a constant.   (5) The
omitted categories for education, immigration, and marital status are never graduated from high
school, native born, and never married, respectively.
                                                    Table 3
               Probit Equations for Self—Employment, Estimated for Selected Ethnic/Racial Groups
                                               1990 CensuS — Hen

                                                               Explanatory     Variables
                                                                                                      Age
                              Some      college    Year of Ininigration to u.s.                     Squared              Log
Ethnicity!     High School                                              To 1950                                N      Likelihood
Race            Graduats     College    Graduate   1970—90   1950—69                        Age      / 100

                              0.0685     0.0247    0.2661     —0.0644        0.4879    0.0473       —0.0311    2853     —1059.67
Dutch            0.0418
                (0.0982)     (0.0990)   (0.1024)   (0.2103)   (0.1316)   (0.3141)      (0.0156)     (0.0168)

                             —0.0241     0.0003    0.3567      0.3530        0.2026        0.0749   —0.0638    3051     —1540.26
Greek           —0.0427
                             (0.0833)   (0.0793)   (0.0762)   (0.0709)   (0.1634)      (0.0143)     (0.0153)
                (0.0831)
                              0.0496     0.2151     0.6985     0.1906    —0.1526           0.0477   —0.0312    2693      —870.06
Irish           —0.0329
                             (0.1106)   (0.1089)   (0.3407)   (0.2907)   (0.6187)      (0.0171)     (0.0182)
                (0.1086)

                              0.0435     0.1337     0.3518     0.1801    —0.2619           0.0134   -0.0057    2745      —1143.5
Italian          0.0335
                                        (0.0972)   (0.1767)   (0.1276)   (0.2937)      (0.0149)     (0.0159)
                (0.0929)     (0.0971)
                                                    0.1208     0.1843        0.6007        0.0683   —0.0499    3357     -1723.84
Middle East     —0.0962      —0.0951    —0.1621
                             (0.0898)   (0.0829)   (0.0608)   (0.0853)   (0.2202)      (0.0136)     (0.0148)
                (0.0956)
                                         0.3055    —0.0395     0.2028        0.4286        0.0139   —0.0060    2713       —880.1
Polish          —0.1243       0.0083
                             (0.1164)   (0.1126)   (0.1573)   (0.1636)   (0.2424)      (0.0169)     (0.0178)
                (0.1167)
                                         0.1936    —0.1298    —0.0258        0.0492        0.0690   —0.0543    2859     —1584.11
Russian          0.0021       0.0053
                                        (0.1307)   (0.1189)   (0.2465)   (0.2092)      (0.0135)     (0.0132)
                 (0.1456)    (0.1383)

                              0.0116     0.0727    —0.0858     0.1752    —0.4973           0.0693   —0.0504    2811      —1090.8
Scandinavian    —0.0172
                 (0.1167)    (0.1156)   (0.1152)   (0.3308)   (0.2516)   (0.4032)      (0.0159)     (0.0166)

                                         0.1730     0.5364    —0.0865    —0.1274           0.0345   —0.0189    3211     —1159.13
Scottish        —0.0127       0.0854
                             (0.1298)   (0.1278)   (0.1841)   (0.1704)   (0.3384)      (0.0153)     (0.0160)
                 (0.1341)
                                         0.1044    —0.1679    —0.0573        0.8112        0.0692   —0.0496    2897     —1095.07
White British —0.0227         0.0079
                 (0.1078)    (0.1069)   (0.1022)   (0.2435)   (0.2288)   (0.4447)      (0.0156)     (0.0159)

                                         0.0374     0.2283     0.1012        0.0141        0.0454    0.0260    2800       918.04
White French     —0.0908     —0.1571
                                        (0.1032)   (0.2083)   (0.2113)   (0.3394)      (0.0164)     (0.0178)
                 (0.0915)    (0.0988)
                                         0.0761     0.0545    —0.0228                      0.0287   —0.0098    2927     —1021.59
White German     —0.0261     —0.0197
                             (0.1055)   (0.1069)   (0.4041)   (0.2257)                 (0.0146)     (0.0158)
                 (0.1002)

                                                        (Continued)
                                                 Table 3 (Continued)

                                                             Explanatory Variables
                                                                                               Age
Ethnicity!     High School Some       college    Year of Imigration to U.S.                  Squared              Log
Race            Graduate  college     Graduate   1970—90   1950—69 To 1950          Age       / 100     N      Likelihood

Asian Indian    0.2932     0.2691      0.2235    —0.1913    —0.1410    0.5607     0.0961     —0.0908    3140     -1123.27
                (0.1489)   (0.1378)   (0.1203)   (0.1922)   (0.2078)   (0.5712)   (0.0234)   (0.0266)

Chinese         0.1622     0.0046     —0.0443    0.2355     0.2773     0.4844     0.0528     —0.0425    2764     -1047.51
                (0.1086)   (0.1019)   (0.0870)   (0.0931)   (0.1137)   (0.2088)   (0.0190)   (0.0205)

                0.2839     0.1414      0.4672    —0.2077    —0.1546    —0.0576    0.0599     —0.0481    2235      —405.25
Filipino
                (0.2323)   (0.2237)   (0.2176)   (0.1396)   (0.1643)   (0.3987)   (0.0273)   (0.0298)

                —0.3353    —0.2708    —0.2679     0.1400     0.1447     0.1235     0.0358    —0.0115    2555      —839.86
Japanese
                (0.1423)   (0.1428)   (0.1380)   (0.0983)   (0.1279)   (0.3767)   (0.0185)   (0.0194)

Korean          —0.1358    0.2058     —0.0111     0.4702     0.2611                0.1249    —0.1137    2531     —1377.36
                (0.1128)   (0.1088)   (0.1025)   (0.1684)   (0.1893)              (0.0200)   (0.0226)

vietnamese      -0.0908    —0.0855    —0.1055     0.4470    —0.0215                0.0900    —0.0919    2978      -846.54
                (0.1040)   (0.0882)   (0.0968)   (0.4144)   (0.6104)              (0.0225)   (0.0270)

Cuban            0.0165    —0.0799     0.0272     0.0909     0.2085     0.2547     0.0936    —0.0967    2837     -1165.91
                (0.0830)   (0.0822)   (0.0871)   (0.1223)   (0.1202)   (0.3276)   (0.0163)   (0.0178)

Mexican          0.0016     0.1172     0.4506     0.1072     0.0646     0.6793     0.0114     0.0069    2896      —684.02
                (0.1029)   (0.1048)   (0.1381)   (0.0926)   (0.1231)   (0.2590)   (0.0183)   (0.0213)

Puerto Rican    —0.0671    —0.0362    —0.1144    —0.2136     0.0314    —0.0580     0.0478    —0.0443    2907       —440.9
                (0.1163)   (0.1248)   (0.1637)   (0.1281)   (0.1218)   (0.2103)   (0.0260)   (0.0303)

                 0.0130    —0.0386     Ô.3625     0.1321     0.2677    —0.1517     0.0525    —0.0356    2758      —678.56
Spanish
                (0.1019)   (0.1045)   (0.1095)   (0.0966)   (0.1103)   (0.2971)   (0.0191)   (0.0213)

                            0.1564     0.2419     0.1309     0.3017     0.3232     0.0411    —0.0310    2887      —602.89
Spanish Cntr. —0.0901
  .merican    (0.1155)     (0.0996)   (0.1300)   (0.2215)   (0.2433)   (0.5169)   (0.0227)   (0.0274)

                            0.0125     0.1656     0.2587     0.1994     0.7804     0.0585    —0.0515    2816      —972.33
Spanish South 0.0087
  American    (0.0909)     (0.0917)   (0.0932)   (0.1671)   (0.1784)   (0.5265)   (0.0185)   (0.0214)

                                                      (Continued)
                                                  Table 3 (Continued)

                                                              Explanatory Variables
                                                                                                Age
                                                  Year of Immigration to U.S.                 Squared         Log
Ethnicity/     High School Some       College                                                            N Likelihood
                Graduate  College     Graduate    1970—90   1950—69   To 1950        Age        / 100
Race
                                                                                   0.0522     —0.0424    2177   —364.35
African—       —0.0128     —0.0385     0.1816
                                                                                   (0.0255)   (0.0279)
  American      (0.1335)   (0.1428)   (0.1568)

                                                  0.2161     0.2269                0.0939     —0.0996    3029   —747.07
Black African —0.1239      —0.0085    —0.1652
                                                  (0.0831)   (0.1679)              (0.0253)   (0.0303)
                (0.1369)   (0.1217)   (0.1211)

                                                  0.0582      0.2829    0.2535     0.1266     —0.1399    2485   —581.54
Black            0.0283     0.0252    —0.0048
                                                  (0.1434)   (0.1592)   (0.4027)   (0.0266)   (0.0307)
  Caribbean      0.1068)   (0.1080)   (0.1257)
                                                                                    0.0801    —0.0729    2759   —703.87
Native          —0.0623    —0.1395     0.0674
                                                                                   (0.0207)   (0.0239)
  American      (0.0936)   (0.1009)   (0.1251)
                                                                                    0.0670    —0.0535    2872   —900.37
White Native    —0.0404    —0.0973    —0.0533
                                                                                   (0.0175)   (0.0203)
  American      (0.0791)   (0.0919)   (0.1309)
                                                              0.1425     0.6265     0.0629    —0.0553    2915    —928.3
French          —0.0874    —0.0049    —0.0671      0.4383
                                                             (0.1451)   (0.2406)   (0.0170)   (0.0187)
  Canadian      (0.0965)   (0.0978)   (0.1067)    (0.1880)

                                       0.0662      0.1061     0.1170     0.1177     0.0478    —0.0340 140835 —49684.75
  Total         —0.0117     0.0184
                                                             (0.0168)   (0.0364)   (0.0023)   (0.0024)
    Sample      (0.0145)   (0.0144)    (0.0142)   (0.0153)
                                                                       at least 16 years old and who work 20 or
Notes:   (1)The sample consists of non-agricultural workers who are
                        15 or more hours per week.   (2) The  dependent   variable is equal to I if a person's
more weeks per year and                                       are  in              below the coefficient
chief job activity is self—employment. (3)  Standard  errors          parentheses
                                                          in  the  table,  but are included in the equations: a
estimates. (4) The following variables are not reported                    The omitted education and immigration
constant, marital status, number of children, and  region dummies. (5)
                               from high school and  native  born,  respectively.
categories are never graduated
                                                       Table 4
                   Log Full—Time Earnings Equations for Self—Employment and Wage/Salary Work
                                               1990 Census — Men

                                                   Specification

Explanatory Variables        (1)             (2)                    (3)         (4)

                            No              No                    Yes           Yes
Selection Correction
Sample (Type of Work)    Self—Employed   Wage/Salary         Self—Employed   Wage/Salary
                           0.1965          0.1428                0.1965        0.1418
High School
Graduate                   (0.0429)        (0.0071)              (0.0449)     (0.0078)

Some College               0.3339          0.2699                0.3519        0.2653
                           (0.0425)        (0.0072)              (0.0502)     (0.0079)

                           0.8604          0.6006                0.9037        0.5882
College
Graduate                   (0.0408)        (0.0073)              (0.0702)     (0.0082)

Immigrated                —0.3015         —0.2167             —0.4098         —0.1999
1985 to 1990               (0.0743)        (0.0105)              (0.1590)     (0.0119)

                           —0.2979         —0.1598            —0.2269         —0.1778
Immigrated                                                                    (0.0112)
1980 to 1984               (0.0593)        (0.0099)           (0.1102)
                           —0.1500         —0.0801               —0.0235      —0.1137
Immigrated
1975 to 1979               (0.0569)        (0.0105)              (0.1730)     (0.0124)

                            0.0201         —0.0180                0.1637      —0.0610
Immigrated
1970 to 1974               (0.0597)        (0.0115)              (0.1947)     (0.0131)

                            0.0528          0.0055                0.1379      —0.0201
Immigrated
1965 to 1969               (0.0638)        (0.0121)              (0.1281)     (0.0136)

                            0.0111          0.0732                0.0767       0.0522
Immigrated                                                                    (0.0156)
1960 to 1964               (0.0733)        (0.0140)              (0.1141)

                            0.0636          0.0683                0.1176       0.0505
Immigrated
1950 to 1959               (0.0666)        (0.0136)              (0.0986)     (0.0151)

                            0.0903          0.0995                0.1886       0.0712
Immigrated                                                                    (0.0241)
Before 1950                (0.0984)        (0.0220)              (0.1636)

Problem speaking           —0.1342         —0.1987               —0.2070      —0.1834
                           (0.0598)        (0.0098)              (0.1127)     (0.0111)
English
                                                      (Continued)
                                Table 4 (Continued)

                                 specification

Explanatory
                             0.0693              0.1003      0.0633
                 0.0616
Age                          (0.0012)           (0.0502)     (0.0016)
                 (0.0074)
                             —0.0704            —0.0920      —0.0681
Age squared/bC   —0.0659                                     (0.0016)
                 (0.0076)    (0.0014)           (0.0345)

                              0.2035             0.4862       0.1816
Currently         0.3677                                     (0.0079)
                             (0.0066)            (0.1602)
Married          (0.0491)
                              0.1181             0.4144       0.1005
Widowed           0.2956
                             (0.0283)            (0.2131)    (0.0309)
                 (0.1417)
                              0.0892              0.1777      0.0802
Divorced          0.1087                                     (0.0114)
                 (0.0673)    (0.0102)            (0.1127)

                  0.2560      0.0756              0.3205      0.0680
Currently                                        (0.1425)    (0.0180)
                 (0.1117)    (0.0162)
separated
                              0.0025              0.0789     —0.0072
Children          0.0399
                             (0.0020)            (0.0515)    (0.0026)
                 (0.0119)
                             —0.1733             —0.4373     —0.1766
Limiting         —0.4531                                     (0.0128)
                             (0.0116)            (0.0702)
Disability       (0.0640)
                             —0.0144             —0.1792      0.0201
Veteran of       —0.0377                                      (0.0076)
                 (0.0336)    (0.0055)            (0.1850)
Military
                              0.0027              0.4374     —0.0979
Greek             0.1299                                      (0.0269)
                 (0.1059)     (0.0218)           (0.4097)

                              0.2168              0.6423      0.1068
 Russian           0.3267
                                                 (0.4195)     (0.0278)
                  (0.1046)    (0.0222)
                             —0.0423             —0.0209       0.0399
 White German    —0.0141
                              (0.0209)           (0.1274)     (0.0230)
                  (0.1218)
                              —0.1604            —0.3439      -0.1507
 Chinese         —0.3054
                              (0.0225)            (0.1383)    (0.0247)
                  (0.1233)
                              —0.2192            —0.6209      —0.0929
 Filipino         —0.0126                                     (0.0302)
                  (0.1839)    (0.0229)            (0.8027)

                                         (Continued)
                                           Table 4 (Continued)

                                                Specification
                          (1)             (2)                (3)          (4)
Explanatory Variables
Korean                  —0.0430         —0.2253            0.3698       —0.3850
                                        (0.0248)           (0.5422)     (0.0335)
                        (0.1109)
                        —0.1238         —0.1106           —0.1437       —0.1060
Cuban
                        (0.1227)        (0.0225)           (0.1311)     (0.0247)

Mexican                 —0.0820         —0.1650           —0.4057       —0.0941
                        (0.1517)        (0.0217)           (0.4439)     (0.0257)

Puerto Rican            —0.3799         —0.1654            —0.9550      —0.0637
                        (0.1879)        (0.0212)           (0.7621)     (0.0270)

                        —0.0907         —0.2239            —0.6702      —0.1232
African—American                                                        (0.0284)
                        (0.2166)        (0.0226)           (0.7751)

                        —0.2698         —0.1823            —0.7019      —0.0877
Black Caribbean                                            (0.5795)     (0.0280)
                        (0.1643)        (0.0227)

                        —0.6045         —0.2302            —0.8457      —0.1774
Native American
                        (0.1506)        (0.0218)           (0.3463)      (0.0252)

Selection Variable                                          1.0376      —0.6873
                                                           (1.3300)      (0.0876)

                          Yes             Yes                   Yes       Yes
Region Dummies
                          10.213          10.154            10.213       10.154
Mean Log Earnings
                          14881           100514                14881     100514
Sample Size
                          0.1031          0.2583            0.1031       0.2588
R—Square
Notes:  (1) The sample consists of non—agricultural
                                                    workers who are at least 16 years old
and who work 40 or more weeks per year and 35 or more hours per week.  (2) The dependent
variable is log earnin9s. (3) Standard errors are in parentheses below  the coefficient
                                                                                  for
estimates. (4) Specifications 3 and 4 use Heckman'e 2—Step Estimator to correct
                                                                  less than 1 are recoded
sample selection. (5) Observations with self-employment earnings                (6) All
as 1. Therefore, the minimum value for log self—employment  earnings is zero.
equations include a constant. (7) The  omitted categories for education, immigration, and
marital status are never graduated from high school, native born, and never married,
respectively.
                                                  Table 5A
                                                                               from Probit Equation
                         Explaining Ethnic/Racial Self—Employment Coefficients
                                                                       — Men
Second-Stage Regressions        A].1 Ethnic/Racial Groups, 1990 Census
                                                                 Specification
                                                                     (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                          (1)

                     Kquations:                            No         No        Yea       Yes
First—Sta9e Earning.
  Correction for Sample Selection
Second Stage:                                             OLS        WLS        OLS       WLS
  Estimation Technique
                                                         0.828      0.785      0.717      0.701
  1. Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                                (0.173)    (0.044)    (0.044)
                                                         (0.187)                          0.790
      Self—Employment Earnings Equation                  0.255      0.229      0.826
        R—Squared
                                                                     1.719     0.160      0.092
                                                          1.863
  2. Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                      (0.305)    (0.293)   (0.485)    (0.447)
      Wage/Salary Earnings Equation                       0.396     0.337      0.002      0.001
         R—Squared
                                                          0.326      0.305     0.326      0.305
  3. Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                      (0.057)    (0.057)   (0.057)    (0.057)
      Unearned Income Equation                            0.363      0.318     0.363      0.318
         R—Squared
                                                          0.568      0.602     0.780      0.769
  4. Difference between Ethnic/Racial
                                        Coefficients                                     (0.037)
                                                         (0.314)    (0.288)    (0.036)
       from SE and WS Earnings Equations                  0.055      0.061     0.890      0.865
         R-Squared
   5. Ethnic/Racial Coefficients
                                  from                               0.167     0.723      0.702
                                                          0.079
         Self-Employment Earnings Equation               (0.260)    (0.250)    (0.046)   (0.044)
                                                          1.091      0.981    —1.157     —1.164
        Wage/Salary Earnings Equation                    (0.572)    (0.570)    (0.179)   (0.176)
                                                          0.164      0.134      0.073     0.083
        Unearned Income Equation                         (0.081)    (0.080)    (0.034)   (0.033)
                                                          0.438      0.383      0.901     0.876
        R—Squared
                                               of non—agricultural workers who are at least
 Notes: (1) The first—stage sample consists
                                       weeks                            hours er week.
                              or more         per year and 35 or more
                                                                    as those  li.sted in Table 2.
 16 years old and who work 40       Probit  equation are the  same
 (2) The variables
                   included in the                     and the             variable   (N = 59).
                                   include  a constant          specified
 (3) The second—stage regressions               coefficenta  from the  first—stage   Probit
 (4) The standard
                  errors of the ethnic/racial                                    (5) Standard
                      calculate weights for weighted least squares     (WLS).
 equation are used to                 coefficient  estimates.   (6)  Unearned  income  includes
 errors are in parentheses below theincome.
 interest, dividend and net rental
                                                  Table SB
Second-Stage Regressions Explaining Ethnic/Racial Self—Employment Coefficients from Probit Equation
                      Moat Precisely Estimated Ethnic/Racial Groups, 1990 Census - Men
                                                                 Specification
                                                       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)

First-Stage Earning. Equations:                        No         No       Yes       Yes
 Correction for Sample Selection
Second Stage:
 Estimation Technique                                  OLS       WLS       OLS       WLS

 1.   Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                  0.619     0.616     0.610     0.611
      Self—Employment Earnings Equation              (0.159)   (0.160)   (0.053)   (0.053)
        R—Squared                                     0.253     0.251     0.749     0.752

 2. Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                    1.292     1.326     0.035    —0.085
      Wage/Salary Earnings Equation                  (0.284)   (0.271)   (0.394)   (0.389)
                                                      0.315     0.332     0.000     0.001
        R—Squared
 3. Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                    0.199     0.199     0.199     0.199
      Unearned Income Equation                       (0.058)   (0.058)   (0.058)   (0.058)
        R—Squared                                     0.207     0.206     0.207     0.206

 4. Difference between Ethnic/Racial Coefficients     0.557     0.555     0.694     0.694
    from SE and WS Earnings Equations                (0.262)   (0.263)   (0.044)   (0.044)
        R—Squared                                     0.092     0.091     0.849     0.850

 5. Ethnic/Racial Coefficients from
                                                      0.229     0.201     0.644     0.642
        Self—Employment Earnings Equation
                                                     (0.250)   (0.249)   (0.045)   (0.045)
                                                      0.742     0.820    —1.169    —1.165
        Wage/Salary Earnings Equation
                                                     (0.588)   (0.581)   (0.174)   (0.167)
        Unearned Income Equation                      0.056     0.052     0.090     0.091
                                                     (0.080)   (0.079)   (0.032)   (0.032)
                                                      0.333     0.341     0.878     0.877
        R—Squared
Notes:  (1) The first—stage sample consists of non—agricultural workers who are at least
16 years old and who work 40 or more weeks per year and 35 or more hours er  week.
(2) The variables included in the Probit equation
                                                  are the same as those fisted in Table 2.
(3) The second—stage sample consists of the ethnic/racial groups
                                                                 with the lowest standard
errors for the difference between ethnic/racial coefficients from the SE and WS earnings
                                                                          errors, and
equations. We find a clear break point in both distributions of standardbelow
thus only include the 47 ethnic/racial coefficients with standard errors       both
break points. (4) The second—stage regressions include a constant and the specified
variable(s). (5) The standard errors of the ethnic/racial coefficents from the
                                                  weights for weighted least squares (WLS).
first-stage Probit equation are used to calculatecoefficient
(6) Standard errors are in parentheses below the             est.imates. (7) Unearned
income includes interest, dividend and net rental income.
                                                  Table 5C
                                                  Self—Employment Coefficients from Probit Equation
Second-Stage Regressions Explaining Ethnic/Racial                      — Men
                                All Ethnic/Racial Groups, 1980 Census
                                                                 Specification
                                                         (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)


First—Sta9e Earnings Equations:                           No        No        Yes       Yes
  Correctton for Sampi. Selection
Second Stage:                                            OLS       WLS        OLS       WLS
  Estimation Technique
                                                        0.649     0.796      0.249     0.253
  1. Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                    (0.173)    (0.182)   (0.006)   (0.005)
     Self—Employment Earnings Equation                  0.210     0.315      0.973     1.009
       R—Squared
                                                        1.690      1.684    —0.382    —0.563
  2. Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                    (0.228)    (0.230)   (0.414)   (0.391)
     Wage/Salary Earnings Equation                      0.508      0.504     0.016     0.034
       R—Squared
                                                        0.314      0.311     0.314     0.311
  3. Ethnic/Racial Coefficient from                    (0.042)    (0.042)   (0.042)   (0.042)
     Unearned Income Equation                           0.510      0.501     0.510     0.501
       R—Squared
                                                        0.061      0.194     0.247     0.247
  4. Difference between Ethnic/Racial Coefficients                          (0.005)    (0.002)
                                                       (0.227)    (0.254)
     from SE and WS Earnings Equations                  0.001      0.014     0.977     0.978
        R—Squared
   5. Ethnic/Racial Coefficients from                   0.120      0.146     0.239     0.240
        Self-Employment Earnings Equation               (0.158)   (0.165)   (0.010)    (0.006)
                                                        0.839      0.805    —0.261    -0.305
        Wage/Salary Earnings Equation                   (0.446)   (0.450)   (0.085)    (0.052)
                                                        0.161      0.159     0.019      0.011
        Unearned Income Equation                                  (0.081)   (0.018)    (0.010)
                                                        (0.082)                         0.965
                                                         0.552     0.542     0.978
        R—Squared
                                                                   workers who are at least
 Notes: (1) The first—stage sample consists of non—agricultural
                                                      and 35  or more  hours er week.
 16 years old and who work 40 or more  weeks per year                                 Table 2.
 (2) The variables included  in the Probit equation are the same as those li.ated in
                                                                          variable      55).
                                   include a constant and the  specified           (N
 (3) The second—stage regressions
                             the               coefficents from the first—stage Probit
 (4) The standard errors of      ethnic/racial                                (5) Standard
                                 weights for weighted least squares   (WLS).
 equation are used to calculate
                            below the coefficient estimates.   (6) Unearned income includes
 errors are in parentheses          income.
 interest, dividend and net rental
                                                    Table 6
                   Industry Distribution of the Self—Employed, Selected Ethnic/Racial Groups
                                               1990 Censzs — Men

                                                                       Industry
                        —   —

                                                      Eating/                                   Legal,
                 Hort.   General Local         Food Drinking Misc. Personal Auto    Health Engin. &       All
                 Services Ruild. Transit      Stores Places Retail Services Repair Services Acct.        Other     SE
Ethnicity/Race      7            15    41       54     58     59      72      75      80    81, 87               Count

Dutch              2.7          26.3   1.1     2.2      1.0     3.2      2.1      4.2     5.3     6.5    45.4      373
Greek              0.6          14.0   1.3      2.9    24.6     6.0      3.2      1.3     6.3     8.8    31.0      715
Irish              2.8          18.9   0.0      1.5     1.2     4.2      3.8      3.9     7.4     8.5    47.8      293
Italian            3.6          18.7   0.9      2.6     5.8     5.2      8.2      3.4     5.5     5.6    40.5      418
Middle Eastern     0.4           6.3   1.6      9.7     7.9     9.8      3.5      2.3     9.8     5.6    43.3      797
Polish             2.7          16.5   1.9      2.0     3.1     3.3      2.1      2.6    14.8    12.9    38.2      290
Russian            0.5           5.5   0.9      1.0     0.8     4.4       1.4     0.7    17.0    22.4    45.5      753
Scandinavian        1.6         20.8   0.0      1.8     3.1     4.0      2.3       3.6    7.0     9.2    46.7      401
Scottish            1.6         18.2   0.3      0.9     1.4     3.1      1.5       3.2    7.7    12.6    49.6      399
White British       3.0         17.2   0.0      1.2     1.1     7.1      2.8       3.7    7.1    11.2    45.6      399
White French        1.7         23.8   0.0      2.1     1.2     8.7      3.4      2.8     4.4     5.4    46.6      308
White German       2.6          20.8   0.5      1.5     1.1     6.6      2.8       3.0    4.8     5.0    51.3      345
Asian Indian       0.6           3.8   4.5      8.9     3.5      7.9     3.0       1.4   31.2     6.8    28.5      394
Chinese            0.9           4.3   1.3      2.8    25.7     8.5       4.7      1.8   11.2     5.3    33.6      387
Filipino            2.7          5.3   1.5      0.0     5.9      4.4      1.0     4.2    29.4     6.8    38.9      111
Japanese           16.5          5.2   0.4      3.6     6.0      3.7      2.5      2.8   14.6     5.8    39.0      306
Korean             0.8           6.5   1.3     11.9     8.1     11.1     13.2      1.8    7.1     2.7    35.5      741
Vietnamese          6.2          5.6   1.0      4.5    15.0      6.9      9.2      4.2    2.7     2.5    42.1      258
Cuban               3.9         21.3   1.3      4.3     3.0      6.4     2.8       3.1    6.9     5.4    41.7      446
Mexican            11.7         27.3   0.5      2.5     5.8      3.4      1.4     10.7    2.7     2.6    31.3      197
Puerto Rican        2.1         19.3   3.0      7.8     4.2     13.5     4.4      0.8     2.3     6.0    36.7      107
Spanish             4.4         15.9   0.9      3.3     6.9      6.3     2.3       4.7    8.7     6.4    40.2      209
Spanish C.A.        9.1         21.1    1.7     3.5     7.9      3.8     2.7       6.0    5.3     1.3    37.8      165
                    3.3         18.5   4.8      1.4     3.1      3.7     4.2       5.7    8.1     4.2    43.2      329
Spanish S.A.
African—American    4.6         22.1    1.8     1.7     4.3      2.2     2.9       6.5    3.0     5.6    45.3       92
Black African       0.9          8.6   29.0     2.0     1.5      3.2      1.8      3.0    5.2     9.9    35.1      213
Black Caribbean     3.2         23.9   23.8     2.3     1.1      2.7      1.8      4.2    4.3     4.5    28.3      167
Native American     3.8         32.4    1.2     1.2     1.3      2.7      4.3      5.5    0.9     6.3    40.4      209
White Native Am.    2.3         32.7   0.5      4.2     1.2      3.1      3.0     12.8    1.1     1.2    38.1      295
French Canadian     3.0         28.0   0.0      2.1     3.8      5.1      4.1      2.6    4.4     6.0    41.0      301
  United States     3.2         20.3   0.6      2.1     2.9      5.2      2.7      3.5    6.1     9.2    44.2     6613


                                                      (Continued)
                                                Table 6 (Continued)
                                                                                                        and
                                                                  workers who are at least 16 years old
Notes: (1) The sample consists of non—agricultural self—employed                distributions are calculated
who work 20 or more weeks per year and 15 or more hour. per week. (2) Industry
                          the census.  (3) Industries are reported as 2—digit SICa. Complete descriptions
using weights provided by
of each SIC are:

 7 —     Horticultural   Services
15   -   General Building Construction
41   -   Local and Interurban Transit: bus service, urban  transit, and taxicab service
     —                                 retail bakeries, and dairy product stores
54       Food Stores: grocery stores,
58   —   Eating and Drinking Places
     -                                                        book, jewelry and
59       Miscellaneous Retails drug, liquor, sporting goods,
                                                  vendingmachine operators, direct selling
         sewing goods stores, mail order houses,and retail florists
                                      dealers,
         establishments, fuel and iceservices,
72 -     Personal Services: laundry             cleaning service., beauty shops, barber
                                               shoe repair shops, and dressmaking shops
         shops, funeral service, crematories,
75 -     Automotive Repair, Services and Parking
80 —     Health Services: offices of physicians,   dentists, chiropractors, optometrists
         and health practitioners, hospitals,  and nursing facilities
81 -     Legal Services                                     and Related Services
87 -     Engineering, Architectural, Accounting, Research,
                                        Table 7
          Ethnic/Racial Group
              Self—Employment
                                Self—Employment Rate Regressions including
                                Rate in Home Country — 1990 Census Men
                                                          Spec if   icat ion
                                                        (1)               (2>

Estimation Technique                                    OLS              WLS

1.    Dependent Variable: Ethnic/Racial Group
      Self-Employment Rate in U.S.

     A. Self—Employment Rate in Home Country           0.060             0.052
        All 32 Countries                              (0.096)           (0.095)
                                                       0.013             0.002
          R—Squared
     B. Self—Employment Rate in Home Country           0.173             0.137
        Excludes Communist Countries (N25)             (0.167)          (0.155)
                                                       0.045            0.008
          R—Squared

2. Dependent Variable: Ethnic/Racial Group
   Coefficient from First—Stage Probit Equation
     A. Self—Employment Rate in Home Country          —0.094             0.009
        All 32 Countries                               (0.445)          (0.430)
                                                       0.002             0.000
          R—Squared
     B. Self—Employment Rate in Home Country            0.112            0.251
        Excludes Conunist Countries (N—25)             (0.795)          (0.774)
                                                        0.001            0.004
          R—Squared
Notes:  (1) The self—employment rate is the percentage of all those working
who are self—employed. (2) The first—stage sample consists of
non—agricultural workers who are least 16 years old and who work 20 or more
weeks per year and 15 or more hours per week. (3) The variables included
in the Probit equation are the same     as those listed in Table 2.
                                                                  (4) Home
country self—employment rates are obtained from the International Labour
Office and are generally for 1970. (5) The standard errors of the
ethnic/racial self—employment rates and coefficients from the first-stage
Probit equation are used to calculate weights for weighted least
squares (WLS). (6) Standard Errors are
                                         in parentheses below the coefficient
estimates.   (7) All equations include a constant.  (8) The average
self—employment rates for the included groups are 13.2 percent in the U.S.
and 16.0 percent in their home countries.
                                         Figure 1
Relationship betwet.n Ethnic/Racial Coefficients from the Probit Equation and the Difference
    between the Coefficients from the Log Self-Employment and Wage/Salary Earnings
                                 Equations - 1990 Census

                            Log Earnings Equations estimated with OLS

                                               --
                          v.a

                          0.4                                                 •
                    0.2                                                   •           —



                    0       °      _________- •I—                                 —


                    U
                          -0.2
                                   -
                    -06
                    C-                               :          :
                          -0.8


                                -0.4    —0.3         —0.2     —0.1    —0.0      O.t       0.2       0.3
                                                    SE Enings — WS orninçs CQ.If3C1.n




                Log Earnings Equations estimated with Selection Correction

                                                                                                    a
                                                                                          a
                           0.4                                                            a,
                                                                                      a
                     £ 0.2
                     C)
                                                                           • aa
                                                                           — a—

                    U



                    L
                    1-0.2                      —

                                                    • :—.
                                                      a
                     C-
                                          a
                                            • S•
                          —0.8



                                 —1.0           —0.6    -.0.4 —0.2 —0.0 0.2        0.4        0.6   0.8
                                                    S Enings — WS crninga Co.llici.nt




Note: (1) The Probit equation and the log earnings equations are estimated with a sample of
male non-agricultural workers who are at least 16 years old and who work 40 or more weeks
per year and 35 or more hours per week.
                                     Appenthx A
                             Definitions of Ethnic Groups

Alsatian: Alsatian
Belgian: Belgian
British (Black and White): British, Cornish, English, Manx, Welsh
Cypriot: Cypriot, Greek Cypriote, Turkish Cypriote
Dutch: Dutch, Frisian
Finnish: Finnish, Finno Ugrian
French (Black and White): French, French Basque, Corsican, Breton, Occitan, Acadian
German (Black and White): German, Austrian, Tirol, Bavarian, Prussian, Saxon,
        Liechtensteiner, Luxemburger, German from Russia, Windish, Pennsylvania German
Greek: Greek
Irish: Irish, Northern Irelander, Celtic
Italian: Italian, Friulian, Sicilian
Portugal: Portuguese, Azorean
Scottish: Scottish
Swiss: Swiss
Scandinavian: Scandinavian, Danish, Faeroe Islander, Icelander, Lapp, Norwegian,
       Swedish, Greenlander
South European: Andorran, Basque, Maltese, Monegasque
Albanian: Albanian
Bulgarian: Bulgarian, Macedonian, Bucovina
Czechoslovakian: Czechoslovakian, Czech, Silesian
Estonian: Estonian
Gypsy: Rom
Hungarian: Hungarian
Latvian: Latvian
Lithuanian: Lithuanian
Polish: Polish
Rumanian: Romanian
Russian: Russian, Azerbaijani, Cossack, Soviet Turkic, Tatar, Turkestani
Slovak: Slovak
Soviet: Soviet Union N.E.C., Belourussian, Carpatho Rusyn, Rusyn, Ruthenian, Gruziia,
       Kalmyk, North Caucasian
 Ukrainian: Ukrainian
 Yugoslavian: Yugoslavian, Croatian, Montenegrin, Serbian, Slovene, Slavic
 Spaniard: Spaniard, Spanish Basque, Galician, Catalonian
 Mexican: Mexican
 Central American (Black, Spanish and White): Central American, Costa Rican, Guatemalan,
        Honduran, Nicaraguan, Panamanian, Salvadoran, Canal Zone, Equadorian, Latin
       American
 South American (Black, Spanish and White): South American, Argentinean, Bolivian,
        Chilean, Colombian, Paraguayan, Peruvian, Uruguayan, Venezuelan, Criollo,
        Brazilian, San Andres, Guyanese, Surinam
 Puerto Rican: Puerto Rican
Cuban: Cuban
Cambean (Black and Spanish): Domincan, Bahamian, Barbadian, Belizean, Bermudan,
      Cayman Islander, Jamaican, Dutch West Indies, Trinidadian Tobagonian, US Virgin
      Islander, British Virgin Islander, British West Indies, French West Indies, West
       Indian, Haitian
Spanish: Spanish, Hispanic
Africa (Black and White): Algerian, Egyptian, Libyan, Moroccan, Tunisian, North African,
       Aihucemas, Berber, Rio de Oro, Angolan, Benin, Botswana, Burundian,
       Cameroonian, Cape Verdean, Central African Republic, Chadian, Congolese,
       Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopian, Gabonese, Gambian, Ghanian, Guinean,
       Guinea Bissau, Ivory Coast, Kenyan, Lesotho, Liberian, Madagascan, Malawian,
       Malian, Mauritanian, Mozambican, Namibian, Niger, Nigerian, Rwandan,
       Senegalese, Sierra Leonean, Somalian, Swaziland, South African, Zulu, Sudanese,
       Tanzanian, Togo, Ugandan, Upper Voltan, Zairian, Zambian, Zimbabwean, African
       Islands, Central African
Middle Eastern: Mideast, Bahraini, Iranian, Iraqi, Jordanian, Kuwaiti, Lebanese, Saudi
       Arabian, Syrian, Yemeni, Omani, Kurdish, Palestinian, South Yemen, United Arab
       Emirates, Assyrian, Arab
Israeli: Israeli
Armenian: Armenian
Turkish: Turkish
South West Asian: Afghanistan, Bhutanese, Nepali, Pakistan, Sri Lankan, Maldivian
Asian Indian: Asian Indian, Bangladeshi
Other South Asian: Burmese, Cambodian, Indonesian, Malaysian, North Borneo,
       Singaporean, Formosan
Chinese: Chinese, Mongolian, Tibetan, Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwanese
Filipino: Filipino
Japanese: Japanese, Ryukyu Islander, Okinawan
Korean: Korean
Laotian: Laotian, Hmong
Vietnamese: Vietnamese, Montagnard
Oceania: Australian, New Zealander, Fijian, New Guinean
Pacific Islander: Pacific Islander, Polynesian, Samoan, Tongan, Tokelauan, Cook Islander,
       Tahitian, Niuean, Micronesian, Guamanian, Saipanese, Palauan, Marshallese,
       Kosraean, Ponapean, Chuukese, Yapese, Carolinian, Kiribatese, Nauruan, Tarawa
       Islander, Tinian Islander, Melanesian Islander, Solomon Islander, New Caledonian
       Islander, Vanuatuan
African American: Afro American
Native American (Native American and White): American Indian, Central American Indian,
       South American Indian, Aleut, Eskimo, Inuit
Canadian: Canadian
French Canadian: French Canadian
 Note: A few ethnic/racial groups defined above are not utilized in our analysis because of
 small sample sizes. See Appendix I in the 1990 Census of Population and HousingTechnical
 Documentation for a complete description of the possible responses for each group.
                                      Appendv B
                         Ancestry Question on the 1990 Census



      13.   What is this person's ancestry or ethnic origin?
            (See instruction guide for further information.)



             (For example: German, Italian, Afro-Amer., Croatian,
             Cape Verdean, Dominican, Ecuadoran, Haitian, Cajun,
             French Canadian, Jamaican, Korean, Lebanese, Mexican,
             Nigerian, Irish, Polish, Slovak, Taiwanese, Thai,
             Ukrainian, etc.)




                               Instructions to Respondents



13.   Print the ancestry group. Ancestry refers to the person's ethnic origin or
      descent, wroots,I or heritage. Ancestry also may refer to the country of birth
      of the person or the person's parents or ancestors before their arrival in the
      United States. All persons, regardless of citizenship status, should answer
      this question.

      Persons who have more than one origin and cannot identify with a single
      ancestry group may report two ancestry groups (for example, German-Irish).

      Be specific. For example, print whether West Indian, Asian Indian, or
      American Indian. West Indian includes persons whose ancestors come from
      Jamaica1 Trinidad, Haiti, etc. Distinguish Cape Verdean from Portuguese;
      French Canadian from Canadian; and Dominican Republic from
      Dominica Island.

      A religious group should not be reported as a person's ancestry.
                                             Appendix C
                         Means of Selected Variables by Ethnic/Racial Group
                                             1990 Census

                                Self—       Average    Average     Average    Percent
                                            Ln (SE     Ln (WS   Ln (Unearned  college      Percent
                     Sample   Employment                                     Graduates
                      Size       Rate      Earnings)   Earnings)   Income)               Iniiiigrants
Ethnicity/Race
                                  3.2%       9.17       9.52        0.51       14.7%         0.8%
African—American      4709
                                 18.5%       9.99        9.91       2.58       36.3%        46.8%
Armenian              4822
                      4968       10.7%      10.17        9.88       2.46       60.5%        96.0%
Asian Indian                                                                                 14.7%
                      3481       10.0%       9.72        9.84       2.40       26.0%
Belgian                                                  9.65       0.68       35.2%        56.7%
Black African         4971        5.6%       9.36
                       836        4.4%       9.41        9.41       0.42        9.2%        27.3%
Black British                                                       0.73       15.8%        88.3%
Black Caribbean       5049        4.9%       9.39        9.65
                      1100        3.2%       9.09        9.68       0.54       13.9%         88.0%
Black Central Am.                                                              16.3%         96.0%
Black South Am.       1380        3.6%       9.55        9.71       0.80
                      4983       11.2%       9.84        9.86       2.08       25.3%         43.6%
Canadian                                                                       45.8%         80.6%
                      5058       11.7%       9.69        9.73       2.93
Chinese                                                                                      84.4%
Cuban                 5044       11.5%       9.65        9.64       1.16       18.3%
                                 10.6%       9.55        9.80       2.50       27.4%          6.1%
Czechoslovakian       5049
                      4929       10.2%       9.60        9.74       1.92       21.4%          8.0%
Dutch                                                               1.32       40.8%         85.0%
                      4891        4.0%      10.01        9.80
Filipino                                                 9.77       1.96       25.1%          6.5%
Finnish               4975        9.5%       9.62
                      4988        8.4%       9.74        9.79       1.90       17.3%          8.7%
French Canadian                                                                31.6%         32.3%
                      5013       18.2%       9.97        9.83       2.27
Greek                                                                                         2.6%
                      3141        5.6%       9.52        9.65       1.03       11.3%
Hawaiian                                                                       30.9%         18.2%
                      4963       11.4%       9.96        9.94       2.55
Hungarian                                    9.66        9.78        1.76      24.9%          1.8%
 Irish                4870        8.7%
                                 22.6%      10.16        9.96        2.35      43.7%         77.3%
 Israeli              1244
                      4815       11.3%       9.97        9.86        2.14      22.4%          7.9%
 Italian                                                                                     32.1%
                      4950        9.1%      10.03        9.93        2.78      38.0%
 Japanese                                    9.87        9.38        1.28      34.9%         94.2%
 Korean               5107       24.0%
                                  2.6%       9.26        9.37        0.57       5.3%         99.3%
 Laotian              2152
                      1232       13.6%       9.96       10.08        3.60      53.7%         46.4%
 Latvian                                                                       38.1%          9.0%
                      4958       12.0%      10.04        9.98        3.04
 Lithuanian                                                                                  46.1%
                      4740        5.9%       9.36        9.42        0.54       6.2%
 Mexican                                                             2.09      44.4%         64.6%
 Middle Eastern       4991       19.4%      10.01        9.84
                                  6.0%       9.04        9.42        0.93      10.0%          3.3%
 Native American      5192
                       789        8.6%       9.94        9.87        1.69      30.4%         64.8%
 Oceania                                                             0.99      20.3%         97.0%
 Other South Asian    2023        5.4%       9.46        9.48
                                  4.7%       9.12        9.55        0.53       8.6%         74.5%
 pacific Islander     2364
                                  8.2%       9.84        9.86        2.35      24.6%         10.1%
 polish               4854
                                  8.7%       9.58        9.74        1.63      11.4%         42.4%
Portuguese            5031

                                               (Continued)
                                             Appendix C (Continued)
                                    Self—       Average  Average     Average    Percent
                                                Ln (SE   Ln (WS   Ln (Unearned  College    Percent
                       Sample    Employment                                    Graduates Immigrants
                        Size        Rate       Earnings) Earnthge)   income)
Ethnicity/Race
                                     3.2%         9.28     9.61        0.63      12.4%      55.3%
Puerto Rican             5163                                                    39.3%      41.0%
                         3737       15.3%         9.97     9.95        2.68
Rumanian                                                  10.16        3.74      57.6%        8.7%
Russian                  5007       20.6%       10.33
                                                  9.68     9.78        2.17      28.0%        3.1%
Scandinavian             4988       11.1%                                                     6.8%
                                    11.1%         9.88     9.93        2.28      35.2%
Scottish                 4998                                                    27.7%        3.7%
                                     8.8%         9.83     9.87        2.61
Slovak                   4905                                                    49.0%      97.0%
                         2041       12.5%       10.05      9.70        1.51
Southwest Asian                                            9.73         1.49     20.2%      52.1%
                         5026        9.7%         9.80                                      34.3%
Spaniard                 5015        6.7%         9.55     9.51        0.73      11.7%
Spanish                                           9.49     9.43        0.41        9.4%     90.7%
                         5034        6.5%                                                   94.7%
Spanish Caribbean                                 9.34     9.35        0.42        8.4%
                         4979        5.3%                                                   92.9%
Spanish Central Am.                  9.8%         9.74      9.57       0.83       19.5%
                         4997                                                                12.6%
Spanish South Am.                   14.6%         9.71      9.88        2.86      35.2%
Swiss                    5065                                                               96.1%
                                     9.9%         9.71      9.53        1.42      30.4%
Thai                     2054                                           2.20      44.5%      71.3%
                         1197       16.3%        10.18      9.89
Turkish                                                     9.95        2.89      36.3%      20.6%
                         4930       10.8%         9.98
Ukrainian                                         9.25      9.56        1.15      20.7%      98.6%
                         4982         8.7%
Vietnamese                                       10.10      9.95        2.10      54.2%     86.6%
White African            2439        14.8%
                                                   9.67     9.82        2.29      30.2%       4.4%
White British            4913        11.3%                                                     5.2%
                                      9.5%         9.51     9.70        1.50      17.4%
White French             5003                                                                 3.3%
                                      9.6%         9.70     9.73        2.01      21.2%
 White German            5006                                                      7.2%       0.9%
                                      8.2%         9.21     9.52        0.81
 White Native Am.        5087                                                     27.3%      72.6%
                          827        10.3%         9.68     9.61        1.04
 White South Pun.                                  9.89     9.83        2.14      24.8%      18.7%
                         4969        10.4%
 Yugoslavian                                       9.79     9.73        1.77      26.4%      40.2%
                       246024        10.1%
   Total Sample
                                                                 are at least 16 years old and
Notes:   (1)The sample consists of non—agricultural workers who                                include
                                    and 15 or more hours per week.   (2) All numbers reported
who work 20 or more weeks per year                    the              of all those working who are
                                              rate is     percentage
both men and women.   (3) The self—employment                           the
                                SE and WS earnings are calculated  for      respective samples.
self—employed. (4) Average Ln                   less than 1 are recoded as 1. Therefore, the
(5) Observations with self—employment earnings
                                                          (6) Unearned income includes interest,
minimum value for log self-employment earnings is zero.
dividend, and net  rental income.
