                               NUER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              IS CONSUMPTION GROWTH
                           CONSISTENT WITH INThRTEMPORAL
                          OPTIMIZATION? EVIDENCE FROM THE
                           CONSUMER EXPENDITURE SURVEY




                                      Orazio P. Attanasio
                                       Guglielmo Weber




                                   Working Paper No. 4795



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 1994


An early and very different version of this paper was circulated at the end of 1992 and presented
at the NEER Economic fluctuations Conference in Cambridge, October 1992. We are grateful
to John Cochrane, who discussed the paper, for very insightful comments. Several participants
also gave us very good suggestions. This paper was completed while the first author was a
National Fellow at the Hoover Institution. Attanasio's research was partially fmancially
supported by NSF grant SES-9057511. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4795
                                                                                           July 1994

                              IS CONSUMPTION GROWTH
                          CONSISTENT WITH INTERTEMPORAL
                          OPTIMIZATION? EVIDENCE FROM THE
                           CONSUMER EXPENDITURE SURVEY

                                           ABSTRACt'
       In this paper we show that some of the predictions of models of consumer intertemporal
optimization are not inconsistent with the patterns of non-durable expenditure observed in US
household-level data, Our results and our approach are new in several respects.
       First, we use the only US micro data set which has direct and complete information on
household consumption. The microeconomic data sets used in most of the consumption literature
so far contained either very limited information on consumption (like the PSID) or none at all,
in which case consumption had to be obtained indirectly from income and changes in assets.
       Second, we propose a flexible and novel specification of preferences which is easily
estimable and allows a general treatment of multiple commodities. We show that a proper
utatment of aggregation over commodities can be important, both theoretically and in practice.
       Third, we present empirical results that show that it is possible to find a reasonably simple
specification of preferences, which controls for the effects of changes in demographics and labor
supply behavior over the life cycle and which is not rejected by the available data. On our
preferred specification, we obtain sharp estimates of key behavioral parameters (including the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution) and no rejections of theoretical restrictions.
       Our results contrast sharply with most of the previous evidence, which has typically been
interpreted as rejection of the theory. We show that previous rejections can be explained by the
simplifying assumptions made to derive empirically tractable equations. We also show that
results obtained using food consumption or aggregate data can be extremely misleading.


Orazio P. Attanasio                                  Guglielmo Weber
Department of Economics                              Dipartimento di Scienzc Economiche
Stanford University                                  UniversitA di Venezia
Stanford, CA 94305                                   Ca' Foscari
and NBER                                             Venezia, ITALY
      1. Introduction
      In this paper we show that some of the predictions of models of consumer interteinporal
optimization are not inconsistent with the patterns of non-durable expenditure observed in US
household-level data. Our results   and our approach are new in several respects.
      First, we use the only  micro data set which has direct and complete information on
                               US

household consumption. The microeconomic data sets used in most of the consumption literature
so   far contained either very limited information on consumption (like the PSlD) or cone at all, in
which case consumption had to be obtained indirectly from income and changes in assets.
      Second, we propose a flexible and novel specification of preferences which is easily estimable
and allows a general treatment of multiple commodities. We show that a proper treatment of
aggregation over commodities can be important, both theoretically and in practice.
      Third, we present empirical results that show that it is possible to find a reasonably simple
specification of preferences, which controls for the effects of changes in demographics and labor
supply behavior over the life cycle and which is not rejected by the available data.
      Our results contrast sharply with most of the previous evidence, which has typically been
interpreted as rejection of the theory. Several papers in the last 15 years have used microeconomic
data to establish the plausibility of the intertemporal optimization model. Hall and Mishkin
(1982), for instance, found that consumption is excessively sensitive to lagged labor income. Zeldes
(1989) finds excess sensitivity for low wealth households and suggest that liquidity constraints arc
important for these individuals.      Results based on aggregate time series data, such as those in
Flavin (1981) and Campbell and Mankiw (1989), suggest even stronger rejections.
      In this paper we interpret previous rejections as evidence against some simplifying assumptions
made to derive empirically tractable equations. In particular, we show that:
      a) aggregate data are particularly unsuitable to test the theory. Incorrect aggregation can
lead to spurious rejections of the theory. Even in the simple case of isoelastic utility aggregation
can be troublesome, as the theory requires knowledge of the logarithm of consumption. We use
our household-level data to assess the consequences of neglecting the non-linearities implied by the
model - and find that theory restrictions can be rejected just because of an incorrect aggregation
procedure;

      See also Carroll and Summers (1991) who observe that consumption tracks income over the
life cycle. The papers by Runkle (1991), and Kane and Runkle (1992) are exceptions. Altonja and
Siow (1987) appeal to measurement error to explain the rejections reported in some of the papers
cited above.

                                                  I
      b) food consumption, which is often taken as a 'proxy' for total non-durable consumption in
 studies using micro-data, 2 is unsuitable because preferences are non-separable between food and
 other non-durables, and food is a necessity. Furthermore, during the sample period the relative
 price of food is far from constant. We show that the consequences of using food consumption rather
 than total non-durable consumption are non-negligible: theory restrictions are rejected, and the
 elasticity of intertemporal substitution is poorly determined when food is used.
       We use a time series of cross-sections (the Consumer Expenditure Survey, 1980-90) to construct
 consistently aggregated cohort-level data - a synthetic panel- where households are grouped by
 year-of-birth and education. As discussed below, the availability of a relatively long time period
 is crucial in the estimation of Euler equations. Furthermore, thanks to the detailed information
 in the data set, we can construct different consumption measures, which include food and other
 non-durable commodities.
       The use of a micro economic data set which contains comprehensive information on consump-
 tion, income, leisure and household composition, allows us to address several questions directly. Our
parametrization of preferences takes into account explicitly the possibility of non-homotheticity.
The scheme we propose involves the estimation of a demand system, which allows us to construct
the household-specific price indices that characterize the intertemporal allocation ofconsumption
expenditure. In addition, we allow for the effects of demographic changes and leisure on intertem-
poral allocation of expenditure. Finally, we can test theory restrictions in various ways, including
the popular excess-sensitivity tests.                                    -
      We show   that a proper consideration of aggregation across commodities can be important for
the estimation of key behavioral parameters. We also show that several simplifying assumptions
commonly used in the literature, such as homotheticity and separability between consumption
and leisure are strongly rejected by the data. On our preferred specification, we obtain sharp
estimates of key behavioral parameters (including the elasticity ofintertempora] substitution) and
no rejections of theoretical restrictions.
      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data: it shows that income and
consumption age profiles track each other. This could be due to myopic behavior (as pointed
out by Carroll and Summers, 1991), but could also be explained bychanges in demographics and
leistire over the life cycle. In Section 2, we also show that both the relativeprice of food and its
share in non-durable expenditure have varied considerably over the 1980s. Section 3 illustrates
  2   An exception is in a paper by Lusardi (1992).

                                                 2
same of the effects of incorrect aggregation across consumers and of using expenditure on food to
describe intertemporal allocation of consumption. Section 4 describes in detail our specification
of preferences which allows for non-homotheticity and non-separability between goods and leisure.
Section 5 discusses econometric issues, with particular reference to problems which arise when the
data are averages over relatively small sub-samples of the population. Section 6 presents estimation
results: section 6.1 describes parameter estimates of a small demand system, which confirm the
importance of non-homotheticity, and section 6.2 presents our estimates of the Euler equation.
Section 7 concludes the paper.


2. Consumption behavior: data and descriptive analysis
     Until recently, no micro dataset contained complete information on US household consump-
tion. As stressed above1 most of the empirical work on the life-cycle model used the PSID, which
contains only a measure of food consumption. Since 1980 the Bureau of Labor Statistics has been
running the Consumer Expenditure (CEX) Survey on a continuous basis. The Survey is now
available for 11 consecutive years which include two recessions and a long expansion, two major
tax changes and witnessed substantial movements in relative wages and prices. The CEX is not a
full panel (households are interviewed over four consecutive quarters, and then replaced); however,
because it is available over a relatively long time period and it contains considerable demographic
information, the use of synthetic cohort analysis allows the study of the evolution of consumption
over the life cycle.
     Therefore the CEX gives, for the first time, the possibility of analyzing individual consumption
behavior over the life cycle and over the business cycle. In the next section we present a structural
model for non-durable consumption which is not rejected by the data and allows us to estimate
some key behavioral parameters. Before doing so, however, we describe the main features of the
data used in estimation.

2.1 The GEl Survey

     The data we use cover the period from 1980 to 1990. In this subsection we describe the data
and the main selection criteria used. The CEX is based on a comprehensive survey run by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, which interviews about 4,800 households every quarter; 80 % of these

      The unit of reference is what the BLS defines 'consumer unit' which consists of 'all members
of a particular housing unit or other type of living quarters who are related by blood, marriage,

                                                 3
are then re-interviewed the following quarter, while the remaining 20 % are replaced by a new,
random group. Therefore, each household is interviewed at moat four times over a period of a
year. During the interviews, a number of questions are asked concerning household characteristics
(demographics, work status, education, race, etc.) and detailed expenditures over the three months
prior to the interview. The sample i5 representative of the US population.
     We exclude from our sample non-urban households, households residing in student housing,
households with incomplete income responses. Furthermore, as discussed below, we consider only
households headed by individuals born alter 1904 and before 1965 and that are at least 19 and no
more than 75 years old. These exclusion restrictions leave us with a sample of 146219 interviews.
From each interview we consider, in addition to the demographic and labor supply variables die-
cussed below, the expenditure figures for the month preceding the interview. The first two months
of the quarter preceding the interview are excluded to avoid the fairly complicated error structure
that the timing of the interviews would imply on quarterly data.
     In what follows we consider various components of non-durable expenditure. In particular,
for reasons to be discussed below, we look at food (defined as the sum of food at home, food away
from home, alcohol and tobacco) and expenditure on other non-durable goods and services, such
as services, heating fuel, public and private transport (including gasoline) and personal care, and
semi-durables, defined as clothing and footwear. The major exclusions from total consumption
expenditure are consumer durables, housing, health and education expenditure.
     In the sequel we use two income variables: total after tax family income and total before tax
'labor' income. • Labor' income is defined as total family income minus capital income. Unfortu-
nately it is not possible to reconstruct the alter tax labor income.
     In this paper we stress the importance of controlling for changes in the demographic structure
of the household for a proper modelling of consumption behavior. We also stress the possibility that
consumption and leisure might not be separable in the utility function. Therefore, even though it
Is Dot   necessary to model labor supply explicitly, it is necessary to control for it. Fortunately, the
adoption, or some other legal arrangement, such as foster children. Consumer unit determination
for unrelated persons is based on financial independence. To be considered financially independent,
at least two of the three major expense categories (food, housing, and other living expenses) have
to be provided by the respondent'.
      Such a complication would arise because there are households interviewed in each month and
therefore their quarterly consumption would refer to overlapping periods.
     Income data are collected at the first and last interview, and refer to the previous 12 months.
Labor Income is also computed at second or third interview if a member of the household reports
changing her employment.

                                                   4
CEX contains a wealth of information on household characteristics and labor supply behavior. The
demographic variables we examined in the empirical analysis are family size, number of children
by age groups, number of adult members, number of persona older than 64, gender of household
head, the educational attainment of the reference person, and the marital status of the household
head.
     The labor supply variables we have considered are various employment dummies, the number
of earners, the number of hours worked by the wife and the dummies for part time and full time
female employment.
     The demand system in section 6 is estimated for different groups, formed on the basis of the
educational attainment of the household head. The first group is that of high school dropouts, the
second that of high school graduates, the third that of households with some college education and
the fourth that of college graduates. Considering all years together the four groups account for
22.7, 29, 22 and 26.3 per cent of the total sample.
     We devote a considerable amount of attention to the construction of appropriate price indices.
Besides the parameters of the demand system discussed below, to construct such indices we need
the price of the commodities we model (food and other non-durables). These are constructed from
the components of the CPI published monthly by the Bureau for Labor Statistics. These prices
are region-specific. The price indices for the composite commodities (food, other non-d urables)
that form our demand system are then constructed as expenditure-share weighted averages of the
elementary price indices. These prices are, therefore, household-specific.
    To describe the intertemporal allocation of consumption we need also a nominal interest rate.
We choose the return on Municipal Bonds as it is tax exempt, therefore avoiding us the difficulty
of measuring individual marginal tax rates. We have also experimented with the 3-month treasury
bill. Both interest rate series are taken from the Economic Report of (lie President.

2.2 Life cycle and time series variation

    In this subsection we describe the main features of the variables that are relevant for the more
formal analysis of section 6. In particular, we characterize the life-cycle profile of non-durable
consumption, household income, family composition and female labor supply. In addition, we
examine the time series variability of prices and average consumption over the sample period
under study. This analysis is useful not only as a descriptive tool, but also as an indirect check on
the quality of the data set, which is relatively new.

                                                 S
     The main problem with using the CEX Survey for the analysis of a dynamic model such as
 the life cycle one, is that each household is not observed over a long period of time. However,
 the continuity of the Survey allow us to follow the average consumption behavior of homogeneous
 groups over time, as they age. This is the main idea behind the synthetic cohort analysis which is
 used both in this section and in the more structural analysis in section 6.6
     We divide the households in the sample in cohorts, defined on the basis of the year of birth of
the household head.
     We then average the variables of interest over all the households belonging to a given cohort
observed in a given year. If there are N cohorts observed for T years, this procedure gives use NT
observations. In table 1 we report the cohort definition, their age in 1980 and the average cell size.
The same cohort definitions are used in the section 5 to construct quarterly times series.
    The advantage of grouping by the year of birth rather than by age in studying life cycle
behavior is obvious. One follows over time a group of individuals born in the same period and
therefore coming of age at the same time. Estimating age profiles by pooling together several cross
sections and grouping by age is potentially very misleading in the presence of cohort effects.
     In Figure 1 we plot average cohort log income and log non-durable consumption against age.
Each connecting segment represents mean log income or consumption of a given cohort. Because
cohorts are defined by a 5 year interval and the sample covers eleven years, each cohort overlaps
with an adjacent cohort at 6 ages.
     Both income and consumption are hump-shaped peaking before, retirement. Furthermore,
consumption is considerably less variable than income: the standard deviation of the residuals
obtained regressing first log consumption and then log income on a polynomial in age and cohort
dummies is 0.04 and 0.06 respectively. This dJffereiice could be explained by smoothing behavior
or by greater measurement error in income than in consumption.
     The fact that b0th consumption and income present a pronounced hump (and the fact that
differences in the shape of income profiles among occupation groups were reflected by similar
differences in consumption profiles), is interpreted by Carroll and Summers (1991) as evidence
against the life cycle model. Carroll and Summers, however, ignore family composition: in Figure
2, we plot the age profile of family size. As can be seen, the age profile for family size is also hump

  • Details are given in section 5.
    The household head is defined as the person who owns or signs the rental contract of the
home where the consumer unit lives. For married couples, however,we define the husband as the
household head and therefore use his age to establish to which cohort the household belongs to.

                                                  6
                                 Table 1
                          Cohort definition

cohort   Year of birth   Age in 1980          Average cell size   Used in estimation

         1964-1960       16-20                -                   no
2        1959-1955       21-25                461                 yes
3        1954-1950       26-30                460                 yea
4        1949-1945       31-35                426                 yea
5        1944-1940       36-40                321                 yea
6        1939-1935       41-45                258                 yes
7        1934-1930       46-50                241                 yea
8        1929-1925       51-55                255                 yes
9        1924-1920       56-60                272                 yes
10       1919-1915       61-65                -                   no
11       1914-1910       66-70                -                   no
12       1909-1905       71-75                -                   no
                       Lfl 01 SW4W ra rta a@a
    Ii-
    U-
I   LA-


    L2-

     'I-
              lb                                          th
                                                               /       a


    'OS-                     log o   stir In XuJisld li


     to —

C

0

    S.,   -
                   /
     9—                                                        /
                        40
                                       Figure 1                    e
                            Lcç o ft1y tte
          1.2 —




     S
     M




     a
             —




           .4 —
                  2b                                   th
                               Figure 2


         1500 —             FsoI. arviual hiMs of ct




         1000 —

I.
£

         500 —




           0—                   --
                  20
                       I
                       40
                                                            601
                               Figure 3
shaped. '
     In figure 3, we plot the life-cycle profile for female average annual hours of work. The average
is conditional on the presence of the wife, but not on positive hours. Several features are worth
noticing. First, female labor supply exhibits a substantial amount of variability both at life cycle
and business cycle frequencies. Strong cohort effects are also apparent. Second, there i5 no apparent
dip in female hours corresponding to fertility ages. This feature differentiates this profile from
similar ones for other countries (like the UK) or other time periods.
    Several influences affect consumption and are partly detectable in Figure 1. We can think of
life cycle effects, cohort effects and business cycle effects. In figure 4 we try to remove life cycle and
cohort effects to isolate time effects. Of course this decomposition is somewhat artificial as the three
kinds of effects are not identifiable. By regressing average cohort consumption on cohort dummies
and a 5th degree age polynomial and considering the residuals of such a regression as time effects,
we interpret all trends in consumption as deriving from a combination of cohort and age effects. In
figure 4 these residuals are plotted together with de-trended aggregate non-durable consumption.
Two features are noticeable. First, there is a substantial amount of synchronization across cohorts.
The 1981-1982 recession is particularly visible. After that the average residuals seem to rise fairly
steadily until the end of the sample. Second, average residuals follow reasonably well aggregate
consumption. The correlation coefficient between the average residuals and aggregate de-trended
consumption is around 0.4.

2.3 Movements in consumption      shares   and relative prices

    In what follows, we give considerable emphasis to non-homotheticity and aggregation across
comjnodities As Gorman (1959) has shown, the conditions under which one can aggregate across
commodities and consider a single price index to characterize the allocation of consumption over
time, are very stringent. If some goods are necessities and other goods are luxuries1 and their
relative prices change, then at least two price indexes are needed to deflate nominal expenditure.
Failing to model the features of preferences which prevent the consideration of a single price index
introduces an omitted variable problem which can induce serious biases.

  • There are also remarkable differences in the shape of family size acroes education and oc-
cupation groups It is therefore possible that differences in consumption across education groups
could be explained by differences in demographics. See the discussion in Attanaaio et al. (1994).
  o The presence of measurement error and of definitional differences between CEX and national
accounts consumption should also be kept in mind.

                                                    7
   Figure 4
   cohort data




                         p.r


Business cycle effects
                 Figure 5
 'Ii

 .09



 .07



 .05


 .03


 .01



—.01



                                year
       relative price of food
                    Figure 6
.51 -




.49 -




.47 -




.45 -
             I       I         I     I

        81   83     85         87   89          91
                                         year
             share of food
    In figure 5 we plot the relative price of food and other non-durables over the 1980s. As can
be seen there   is a substantial amount of variability. In particular, around 1986 the relative price of
food and other non-durablee exhibits a substantial shock. This is due to the decline in oil products
prices which are included in non-durablee.
    Corresponding to these changes in relative prices one can observe changes in consumption
shares. In Figure 6 we plot the average share of food in non-durable expenditure over the 1980s.
The graphs exhibit a substantial drop in 1982 followed by a more gentle decline up until 1985,
when the share of food starts to increase again. Part of the dramatic drop of 1982 is probably
explained by data problems. '° For this reason, in what follows, we report results for both the
whole sample and a subsample which excludes the first two years.
    In the first part of section 6 we modet the relationship between relative prices and food share
when   we estimate a simple demand system. This is the first block of our empirical strategy to
model non-durable consumption expenditure. The necessity of such a step is evident in Figure 5.


3. What can we learn from aggregate data and from food consumption?

    As stressed in the introduction, most of the empirical work on the life cycle model of con-
sumption has used either aggregate data or micro data which contained only limited information
on consumption, namely expenditure on food. The use of the CES puts us in a vantage position, in
that we can replicate the results of other researchers and address the issues of aggregation across
consumers and commodities.


£1 Aggregation across consumers

    Nobody would doubt that actual consumers are heterogenous. The issue, however, is to estab-
lish to what extent heterogeneity affects inferences on the intertemporal optimization model based
on aggregate data. Attanasio and Weber (1993), using a long time series of UK cross-sections, have
shown that aggregation bias can explain the rejection of the overidentifying restrictions implied by

  ° The BLS runs a separate sample, based on diaries, rather than interviews, to collect infor-
mation on expenditure on food and other frequently purchased items. In 1980 and 1981 (but not
in later years) average food consumption was substantially higher in the interview survey than in
the more reliable diary survey. A direct comparison with the share of food which can be computed
from NIPA figures is not feasible because of definitional differences in some of the items included
in non-durable consumption. The aggregate food share shows a constant and gentle decline which
slows down around 1985.

                                                    8
 the model. The Euler equation derived from isoelastic preferences implies a non-linear
                                                                                      relationship
 between consumption and the interest rate at the individual level. It iseasy to show that the use
 of aggregate data to estimate and test such a relationship is equivalent to taking the log of the
 mean rather than the mean of the log. The difference between these two quantities is an index
 of inequality which, as shown by Attanasio and Weber (1993), has strong cyclical properties and
 therefore might cause the rejection of overidentifying restrictions." A similar exercise can be per-
formed using the CEX data. One of the advantages of working with a time series of cross-sections
is that one can control the aggregation process directly: we can aggregate any known non-linear
function of the individual data.
       A tipical Euler equation derived from intertemporally separable and isoleastic preferences is
the following:



(1)                         Aiog(c',)= constanL+olog(l+rtti)+ct+i
where ê is individual consumption, r is the real interest rate, a is the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution and q is a residual uncorrelated with all the information available as of time t-l.
     Equation (I) can be aggregated across consumers to obtain a similar equation for aggregated
data.

(1')
                     jL09(4+z)=c0stant+o1og(1+rt+i)+ fE41
In the absence of individual data researchers have estimated

(1")                    tsiog, E(c'+i) = conatant + clog(1 + r+1) + v÷1
In table 2 we present estimates of equations (1') and (1"). We did not search for a satisfactory
specification: the exercise is only meant to show the effects of incorrect aggregation.
       The left-hand side column in table 2 reports estimates for the correctly aggregated non-durable
consumption measure. The right-hand side column reports estimates for the incorrectly aggregated
 "     The use of a representative consumer can be justified, theoretically, assuming the existence of
perfect insurance markets. Attanasio and Davis (1994) show overwhelming evidence against this
hypothesis. Furthermore, even in the presence of complete markets, the non-linearity issue would
still be relevant, unless we impose special preferences on the individual agents. In a recent paper,
Mace (1991) reports results obtained using the CEX which could be interpreted in favor of the
perfect insurance hypothesis. However, it is very easy to show that they could be caused by the
presence of measurement error.

                                                  9
                                              Table 2
                      Estimates based on aggregate CEX data (weighted)

                                geometric                        arithmetic
                                mean                             mean

Aiog(favnsize)                  0.942                            0.668
                                (0.168)                          (0.207)

                                0.565                            0.244
                                (0.230)                          (0.303)


Sargan Criterion                 11.40 (11)                       12.39 (11)

Breusch-Godfrey
Criterion                       6.64 (4)                         27.34 (4)

     Notes: MA (1).consistent stint dard errors in parenthes. Instruments used are second, third
and fourth lags of consumption growth, income growth, inflation and the real nominal interest
rate, plus the following exogenous explanatory veriaôles: S1.S4 and Eslog(famaize). The Sargan
criterion is a x2 test of the overidentifying restriction (in this ease with 11 degrees of freedom)
the Breush.Godfrey criterion is a j1 test for serial correlation of order 2 to .5 (with 4 degrees of
freedom).
 model (where we have taken the logarithm of the arithmetic mean, as is normally done on aggregate
 time series data). 12 Four seasonal dummies (51-54) are introduced to take into account seasonality
 in preferences. Changes in family size are also used as an explanatory variable. The real interest
 rate ii the final explanatory variable, and is treated as endogenous in estimation. We allow for an
 MA(1) error term reflecting measurement error and/or time aggregation1 by correcting all standard
 errors and choosing instruments lagged 2 or more quarters. 13
     Two differences between the two columns are noticeable. First, the point estimates of the
 parameters are different. In particular, the coefficient on the interest rate, which is usually in-
 terpreted as the elasticity of intertemporai substitution, is less than half in size when estimated
using incorrectly aggregated data. Second1 and more importantly, even though the Sargan test of
overidentifying restrictions does not signal any violation for either equation, the Breusch- Godfrey
test for correlation of second to fourth order strongly rejects the null for the equation estimated
on incorrectly aggregated data. '
     Higher order serial correlation is inconsistent with theory predictions, and would - given a
parsimonious instrument list - lead to the type of rejections of the overidentifying restrictions often
reported in studies using aggregate data (e.g.: Hansen and Singleton, 1982).
     As we argue in the following section, there are reasons to believe that equation (1') is mis-
specified. The differences obtained estimating the two equations, however, are an indication of the
importance of aggregation effects.

3.2 Food consumption

     Most of the US literature on the life cycle model based on micro data has used the PSID,
which contains only information on food consumption." This is a very serious limitation. The
assumption necessary to justify the use of food to study the intertemporal allocation of consump-
tion is that utility is separable between food and other consumption goods. All available studies
of demand systems strongly reject such hypothesis. Furthermore, if the aim of the exercise is to
estimate behavioral parameters, such as the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, it is ques-

 12 We have used CEX-provided population weights to enhance comparability with published
National Accounts data, but similar results obtain when unweighted averages are taken instead.
 13 The GMM estimator used to obtain the estimates in table 2 is the same as that used for the
subsequent tables and is discussed in section & and in the appendix.
 14 These results are similar to those reported for UK micro data in Attanasio and Weber (1993).
Excess sensitivity tests fail to find a significant coefficient on income growth in either specification.
     A notable exception is Lusardi (1992) who used the CEX.

                                                   10
tionable whether those obtained using food consumption are indicative of the substitutability over
time of total consumption. Finally, the isoelastic specification often assumed in empirical studies
is particularly ill-suited for food, which is a necessity.
     In Table 3, we report the results obtained estimating equation (1) with consumption defined as
expenditure on load. While the econometric technique used is slightly different," thespecification
of the equation is similar to that estimated by several authors, such as Zeldes (1989), Runkle (1991)
and Keane and Runkle (1992). In column (1) the rate of growth in food consumption at the cohort
level is related to the real interest rate (obtained subtracting the rate of growth in food prices from
th nominal rate), and to other control variables such as seasonal dummies and the log of family
size. Instruments used include second to the fourth lags of interest and inflation rates, second to
the fourth lags of income, food and other non-durable consumption growth as well as a polynomial
in age and lagged demographics. The results are not greatly affected by the introduction of other
demographic variables or by a change in the instruments.
     The estimate of the coefficient on the interest rate is negative and statistically different from
zero. The Sargan criterion does Dot indicate a rejection of the overidentifying restrictions.
     In the second column we add to the specification the rate of growth in labor income. The
coefficient of this variable is estimated at 0.18 with a standard error of 0.07. Its introduction does
not affect considerably the remaining coefficients or the test of overidentifying restrictions.
     In the third column, we add to the specification in the second column the rate of growth
of consumption of other non-durable commodities. The coefficient on this additional variable is
estimated at 0.17 with a s.c. of 0.10, which makes it marginally different from zero. The point
estimate of the coefficient on income is greatly reduced and it is no longer statistically different
from zero. The coefficient on the interest rate is still negative and (marginAlly) different from zero.
     In the final column we remove the rate of growth of income. The coefficient on other non-
durables is now strongly significant. The coefficient on the interest rate, however, is still negative,
but not statistically different from zero.
    We interpret the evidence in Table 3 as indicating that the non-separability between food and
other non-durables is a potentially important problem.

      The techniques used to obtain the results in table (3) are analogous to those used for the
subsequent tables and are discussed in detail in section 5 and in the appendix.
     As we pointed above, the food figures for 1980 and 1981 might be of particularly low quality.
Because of this we re-estimated th columns in Table 3 over th, period 1982:3 to 1990:4. The
results, available upon request, are very similar to those in Table 3.

                                                   11
                                                Table 3
                               Estimates based on food consumption

                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)


Alog                 0.459              0.271                0.292               0.383
fam. size            (0.142)            (0.165)              (0.158)             (0.160)

r                    -0.733             -0.862               -0.551              -0.369
                     (0.253)             (0.277)             (0.363)             (0.323)


tslog
                     -                  0.177                0.101
labor income         -                   (0.067)             (0.089)             -


                     -                  -                    0.170               0.189
other   non — durab. -                  -                    (0.104)             (0.088)

Sargan Crit.         12.1                11.6                10.2                10.2
p-value              (0.88)              (0.86)              (0.89)              (0.95)

Number of            288                288                  288                 288
observations

    Notes: MA (1)-consistent standard errors in parent/its. Instruments used are second, third and
fourth lags of food and other durable consumption growth, income growth, inflation and the nominal
interest rate, the second lug of family size growth pit,. the following exogenous variables: 51-54 age
and age squared. The Sargan criterion is a        test of the overidentifying restriction.
     The estimates of the elasticity of food consumption growth to the real interest rate presented
here differ from those available in the literature. " These differences could be due to a variety of
factors including, for instance, the use of a different survey in which the timing of food expenditure
is better determined. An important difference is in the econometric methodology. The use of
synthetic panels (rather than a short panel at the individual level) affords important gains in the
time dimension of the sample. Given that the error term has an expectational component, this is
a matter of great importance (consistency issues are further discussed in section 5).


4. The allocation of consumer expenditure over time with multiple commodities
     Food is a necessity and it is unlikely, as we have shown in the previous section, to be separable
from other non-durables. Therefore food expenditure is inadequate to study the intertemporal
allocation of consumption. On the other hand, even when data on total non-durable expenditure
are available, it is not obvious that its intertemporal allocation could be described, in the presence
of large changes in relative prices, by a single price index. It might be necessary to model the
intratemporal and the intertemporal allocation of consumption simultaneously.
     In this respect several modelling strategies are available. One could formulate within period
utility as a function of several commodities and consider the Euler equation for each of them. The
main problem here is to find a flexible direct utility function which nests the isoelastic case (and
for which integrability conditions can be imposed by setting data independent restrictions on the
parameter space). Alternatively, one could consider flexible specifications for marginal utilities and
estimate the Euler equations from those. In this case, however, quasi- concavity of the implied
utility function might be hard to impose. Finally, one can choose to work with an indirect utility
function which captures both non-homotheticity and non-separability.
     We adopt this last strategy. While most of the theoretical results used in the analysis are well
known at least since Gorrnan (1959), the specification of preferences we present is relatively new.
We introduce an empirically tractable way to consider the intertemporal allocation problem when
within period utility depends on several commodities. Our specification relaxes the assumption
of homotheticity and therefore does not allow the characterization of intertemporal allocation by
means of a single price index. The homothetic case, however, is nested as a special case and can
be obtained with simple restrictions on the parameters we estimate.
     Our specification of preferences is similar to that used by Blundell, Browning and Meghir
 "   See,   for instance, Zeldes (1989), Runkle (1991), Keane and Runkle (1992).

                                                 12
 (1994) in a recent paper, but presents the key advantage of pkoducing an Euler equation for
 consumption which nests equation (I) when preferences are homothetic.
        We proceed in two steps. We first estimate a flexible demand system which satisfies integra-
 bility conditions. The results obtained in this first step are then used to construct the, price indexes
necessary to characterize intertemporal allocation. The parameters that enter the Euler equation
can then be estimated.

       4.1 Multiple Commodities and the Euler Equation

       Let us first consider the representative agent problem as formulated in most macro economic
papers:



(2a)                                  Max



(2b)                           suhjcct to A÷1 = (1 + r.1)A + v —pc4

where A are the assets at the beginning of period 1, c is expenditure on an homogeneous and
non-durable consumption good, y is income in period t, and r,.1 is the nominal interest rate
between periods t and t + 1.
       Equations (2a) and (2b) give rise to the standard Euler equation for consumption. In the
literature, the instantaneous utility function is often parametrized as the following CRRA utility
function which gives constant elasticity of intertemporal substitution equal to a.



(2c)                                       U(c)=

       Equation (1) in the previous section can be obtained log-linearizing the first order condition for
the maximization problem (2a)-(2c).'° When one considers several commodities, one can think of
  as total expenditure deflated by an appropriate price index. However, as Gorman (1959) proved,
 "     The constant of equation (1) includes the log of the discount rate ftand various terms reflecting
second and higher moments of the conditional distribution of c1.,. If 's+i is conditionally log-
normal, the constant will include only the variances of consumption growth and the interest rate
as well as their covariance. An implicit assumption which is usually made is that changes in these
conditional moments are uncorrelated with the instruments used.

                                                    13
only under very stringent conditions the intertemporal optimization problem can be determined
on the basis of a single price index.
      One can interpret (2a) as the utility index of a consumer who breaks her optimization problems
in two steps: in the first step, she decides how much total expenditure X to allocate to each time
period. In the second step, she allocates X to different goods (q1 , ... ,qN), according to their relative
prices and to X itself (some goods will be luxuries, some necessities). Suppose the second step
produces demand equations of the Almost Ideal type (see Deaton and Mueilbauer (1980)):



(3)                                 a +y,1n(p,s) +fl1[in(X,) — Ina(pg)]

where   the p's are individual prices (and p is the corresponding price vector), and a, i and fl's are
preference parameters (which will be functions of demographic characteristics, employment, etc.,
as in Blundell, Pashardes and Weber (1993)). If all the fl's are zero, preferences are homothetic,
and the indirect utility function for period-t consumption is:

(4)                                      V=             = F[c]

where Ff4 is a monotonic transformation (which cannot be identified from the demand sys-
tem alone and determines the intertemporal allocation), and tn(a(pg)) = a + Eadn(pi,) +
.5 1 • %,tn(p1jln(p11).       Equation (4) implicitly defines c as nominal expenditure Kg deflated
bya(p,).
      On the other hand, if the fl's are non-zero, violating homotheticity, the indirect utility function
becomes:



(5)                                      V=
                                               F[(-9i*t
where b(p,) = fl,p , i.e a zero-degree homogeneous price index (adding-up implies Eflj = 0). This
second price index takes into account the different impact price changes have on utility according
to the type of good they refer to (ft, > 0 for luxury goods, fl cO for necessities).
      Neglecting the existence of this second price index may lead to spurious inferences. Equation
(1) will suffer from omitted variable bias, because no account is taken of changes in h(p,) over
time. This problem is particularly severe if, over the sample period analyzed there are large

                                                   14
chnges in relative prices across luxuries and necessities (for instance, if luxuries become relatively
more expensive in booms, and cheaper during recessions).
       If we substitute equation (2a) with the following,



(6)                               U=>j-_r[(fj)r ]'-t(i+5)-'
the Euler equation (1) becomes:


                       + c(b(pi) —
(7)                                              = ' + e[r.1 — aJn(b(p,1)J +

       This expression looks daunting, but neatly simplifies to equation (1) when all the fl's are zero
(in which case b(p) = 1).    20

       When the fl's are not zero, the second price index is subtracted from the standard definition
of the real interest rate, and it affects the coefficient on consumption growth. The equation is easy
to estimate, particularly if the fl's are known in advance: this is the case if we estimate Engel
curves separately in each year. However, a is no longer the elasticity of intertemporal substitution:
its multi-good definition is (Browning, (1987)) MS = (—) fr— where an x subscript denotes the
partial derivative with respect to X. This implies:


                                        MS —
                                           — —         ab(p)
                                                 l+o(b(p)—i)
       We can rewrite equation (7) as



(7')             In(c,+1) = '+ ofr.,. — &n(6(p,,1) — A(In(c,+s) — in(ct+z)
                    b(p11)
  3° Blundell, Browning and Meghir (1994) estimate an Euler equation similar to (7), but with
further non-linearities. Their analysis is different in two respects. On the one hand, their demand
system is more general than ours as it is consistent with a wider pattern of Engel curves (and nests
the Almost Ideal case from which we start). On the other hand, their monotonic transformation
in V takes as argument a non-linear function in X. This second feature implies that even in the
homothetic case their Euler equation does not simplify to equation (1). In the Almost Ideal case, for
instance, their Euler equation involves taking the logarithm of log(consumption) - a particularly
unappealing data transformation, which rules out very low, but theory-consistent consumption
levels.

                                                  15
 which is the specification we use in our empirical work. Herç- the dependent variable is the first
 difference in the log real consumption divided by b(p) (a number close to 1). On the right-hand
 side, the real interest rate (obtained subtracting from the nominal rate the rate of inflation in
 a(p)) is further deflated by the growth rate of the second price index, b(p), and by a correction
 term, which is the difference between consumption growth as normally defined and the dependent
 variable.


     4.2 Thning up the model

     Before even trying to fit the model described above to• the data, a number of simple mod-
ifications are necessary. These allow the model to explain some obvious, and yet quantitatively
important, features of the data.
     (1) Household consumption exhibits large seasonal fluctuations which are clearly inconsistent
with a simple minded version of the life-cycle model. A simple way of introducing seasonal fluc-
tuations is to have the utility function depending on seasonal shifts, so that a given amount of
expenditure gives different levels of utility in different quarters. This framework has been used
(among others) by Miron (1986) on aggregate data and by Attanasio and Weber (1993) on micro
data. In the log-linearized Euler equation used in this paper1 this specification implies the use of
seasonal intercepts in a regression of the rate of growth of consumption on the interest rate.
     (ii) The utility derived from a given amount of expenditure obviously depends, among other
things, on family composition. In general, it is quite difficult to model properly intra-household
decisions. Fertility choices are probably endogenous and should be modeled simultaneously with
consumption and labor supply behavior. However, it is quite easy to introduce some simple cor-
rections to make the model more realistic. We assume that utility is shifted by a number of
demographic variables such as the number of children of various ages, the number of adults, etc.
Such a framework allows for fairly flexible adult equivalent schemes. The instantaneous utility
function for a generic household It that will be used in the empirical application below is the
following:

                                          = U(C')qS(Z11',9)

where C is total family expenditure and        , 9)   is a function of various demographic variables.
If the function 0 is given by O(Zt,9) = ezp(9'Z), the term 9SZ1' will enter the Euler equation
for consumption. Changes in are equivalent to a time-varying discount 6. For this reason we

                                               16
shalt refer to 4' as 'the discount factor'.
     Demographic variables are also likely to affect the demand system. As a consequence they
will, also have an indirect effect on the Euler equation through the price indexes a(p) and b(p).
     (iii) An implicit and potentially controversial assumption often used in papers that estimate
Euler equations for consumption is that of separability of the utility function between consumption
and leisure. While in this paper we do not model explicitly labor supply behavior, we argue that
non-separability between consumption and leisure can be taken into account in a very simple way.
Common sense tells us that the level of utility obtained from a given amount of expenditure depends
on labor force participation variables: when a member of the household works, he or she will have
to bear a number of job-related expenses that will be reflected in total consumption expenditure.
These job-related expenses will affect both the intertemporal allocation of expenditure (normally
increasing expenditure when leisure is low) and the intratemporal allocation (by making leisure-
intensive commodities relatively more expensive). For this reason, we allow for leisure effects in
the demand system - thus producing price deflators that depend on leisure, but also capture direct
intertemporal leisure effects by introducing leisure-related variables in the Euler equation.
     In practice, we introduced as determinants of the marginal utility of consumption a number
of labor supply variables, reflecting both employment status and hours. This strategy allows us
to avoid the formal modeling of labor supply, with the complications arising from corner solutions
and institutional constraints. This obviously only identifies conditional preferences (see Browning
and Meghir (1991)).


5. Econometric Issues
     As we said in Section 2, the CEX survey is a rotating panel. Rather than employing the
(short) panel dimension of the survey, which is probably dominated by seasonal factors, we decided
to construct synthetic panels. We define cohort by the year of birth of the household head. Our
technique is equivalent to using the interaction of time and group dummies as instruments. We
impose an age limit (23-60) and a cell size limit (150) on the cohorts we consider, so that our




(.
synthetic panel is not balanced. 22

 21 An analogous parametrization applies to the non-homothetic case, where C is defined as
 '(Ri)
    See Deaton (1985), Browning, Deaton and Irish (1985) and Moffitt (1993). We also experi-
mented with groups formed by year of birth and educational attainment. The education groups
were the same as those used in the estimation of the demand system. The reason we only report

                                                17
     There are several advantages in the use of synthetic panel techniques to estimate an Euler
equation. First, averaging over individuals belonging to a group should eliminate additive idiosyn-
cratic measurement error.
     Second, it is known that if the panel dimension is short, the introduction of household specific
fixed effects gives inconsistent estimates, unless the instrument used are strictly exogenous (see
Runkle (1991)). Taking cohort averages over long time periods can get round this problem: because
we observe groups for the whole sample period (at least potentially), the relevant dimension is the
total length of the period covered by the survey, not how long each household stays in it. A
similar argument can be made about the presence of aggregate shocks. If we think our sample is
long enough so that expectations! errors are averaged out, the use of more or less standard IV
techniques gives us consistent estimates. This solves the small T problem discussed by Chamberlain
(1984) and Hayashi (1987).
     Third; we do not need to worry about attrition as much as we should if we were using a long
panel. In this respect, as stressed by Moffitt(1993), the use of a time series of cross section has
some advantages relative to the use of panel data.
     Fourth, even though we work with aggregate data, in that we sum over the individuals be-
longing to a certain group, we can control the aggregation process directly. In this respect, as we
saw in section 3, we can perform interesting exercises to evaluate the extent of aggregation biases.
     The use of synthetic panels, however, does not by itself solve some important econometric
problems. First, it does not help deal with non-additive measurement error. We should stress that
any form of non-additive measurement error in the variables of which we take averages, induces
inconsistent estimates. Second, it does not eliminate concerns about non-random attrition. In
particular, we have to rely on the assumption that the population from which the sample is drawn
is homogeneous over time. This assumption might be violated if, for instance, there is a relationship
between mortality and wealth. If this is the case each cohort would become progressively 'richer'
as it ages and therefore we would overestimate the rate of growth of consumption for older cohorts.
     Averaging over cells of relatively small size induces measurement error in the levels, which

results based on birth year cohorts is that by crossing cohorts and education groups we are left
 "
with very small cells giving rise to extremely noisy data. The results were extremely imprecise.
     Of course this argument impinges on the assumption that our sample is large enough so that
expectational errors are averaged out. While 44 quarterly observations might not be a very large
number, it should be stressed that our sample period includes two recessions and a long period of
moderate growth.                                                                                 -


                                                18
in turn implies an MA(1) structure in the first differences. 24 The reason for this is obvious.
if the sample for a given quarter t includes a very rich household, this will induce a positive
measurement error in the consumption growth at tune t followed by a negative measurement error
a time t + 1. The error of equation (1) is therefore going to be made of two components. A white
noise component which reflects expectational errors and an MA(l) component with a coefficient
of -1. The sum of a white noise and an MA(1) is an MA(l). The size of the coefficient of this
MA(l) depends on the relative magnitude of the variances of the expectational error and of the
measurement error.
      if the only error to equation (1) and its extensions was an expectational one, instruments
dated t — I and earlier would be valid ones. Our data, however, do indicate negative first order
autocorrelation, thus suggesting that measurement error is an important issue. Because of this,
the instruments dated t — I are invalid, but instruments lagged 2 and more periods yield consistent
estimates.
      The panel dimension of the CEX implies that temporally adjacent cells do not include com-
pletely different households. For instance, households at their first interview in time period t,
appear  also at time + 1, t + 2 and t + 3. On the other hand those at the 4th and last interview
at time t, also appear at time t — 1, — 2 and t — 3. If we ignore the rotating nature of the panel
and use all the households in the construction of the relevant variables and of the instruments, we
get inconsistent estimates in the presence of household specific fixed effects. On the other hand,
using only one interview per household involves the loss of a substantial amount of information.
      To get around this problem we use all observations in the construction of the variables that
enter our regression and select subsamples on the basis of the interview number in the construction
of instruments. Namely, we use only households at the fourth interview in the construction of lag
2 instruments, households at the fourth and third interview for lag 3 instruments and we exclude
households at the first interview for lag 4 instruments. This scheme guarantees that there is no
overlap between the households used in the construction of the instruments and those used in the
construction of the variables that enter the estimated equation.
 24  The presence of measurement error induced by small cell size is relevant for all the household-
specific variables considered in the equation, even for those, such as family composition, that could
be conceivably be considered as exogenous. The only exception is age, that we define as median
cohort age, and is therefore unaffected by sampling variability.
      Hall (1988) suggests that if the planning horizon is shorter than the frequency of the observed
data, the Euler equation has MA(l) errors. The sum of two independent MA(1) processes is again
an MA(1) process.

                                                 19
    The presence of MA( 1) residuals for each cohort is not the only problem with the error struc-
ture of equation (1). Because we estimate it for N cohorts simultaneously, the expectational errors
for a given time period for different cohorts are likely to be correlated. We allow for contempo-
raneous correlation among the residuals of different cohorts. We also allow for the presence of
arbitrary heteroscedasticity which is likely to arise because of differences in cell sizes.
    The complicated error structure of equation (1) estimated for several cohorts simultaneously
has to be taken into account in the construction of an efficient estimator and in the estimation of
its standard errors. 26 Details are provided in the appendix, where we describe in detail the GMM
estimator we use.
    A final issue is the way we treat instruments. In principle, we could 'stack' the instruments for
each cohort (effectively imposing the same reduced form for all cohorts), or we could have different
first stage regressions for each cohort. Given the limited number of obsenations, we decided to
'stack' the instruments.37


6. Results.
    This section describes the results obtained estimating our preferred specification. First, we
present the estimation of a simple demand system. This shows that the we need at least two
price indexes to describe intertemporal allocation over time. This follows from the fact that food
consumption is a necessity and from the fact that over the sample period the relative price of food
and other non-durable changed dramatically.
    The estimation of the demand system allows us to construct the price indexes which are
necessary to determine intertemporal allocation. We show the time series behavior of these price
indexes and discuss the implications of their omission.
    Second, we present the results obtained estimating equation (7') and contrast them to those
obtained estimating equation (1).

5.1 Demand system
 26 A GLS type transformation can generate inconsistent estimates if involves filtering the system
backward (see }layashi and Suns (1983)). Deaton (1955) shows that the cross sectional second
moments can be used to improve the efficiency of the standard Instrumental Variable estimator,
by giving less weight to the instruments more affected by sectional variability. Unfortunately,
as noted by Fuller (1987), there is no guarantee that the resuJting projection matrix be positive
definite in finite samples. We do not make use of these corrections because of their finite sample
unreliability.
     For a discussion of these Sues, see Attanasio and Browning (1991a).

                                                  20
      We split total non-durable expenditure on food and all other non-durable goods and services.
  This split, while arbitrary, has the advantage of grouping (potential) necessities separately from
  (potentiai) luxuries, and of defining commodities for which zero expenditures are notreported.
      The two-commodity demand system we estimate is of the Almost Ideal type (see equation
 (3) above): the dependent variables are the budget shares of food and of other non-durables, the
 explanatory variables are their prices and total non-durable expenditure (the budget), deflated by
 a linearly homogenous price index, a(p). Because the budget shares add up to one an equation is
 redundant and we estimate and report just the food equation without loss ofgenerality.
      In principle, all preference parameters (a, and fl's) could vary across households. We restrict
 their variation in the following ways: we assume 7's and ft's to be constant within educational
 groups, and the a's to depend on a few demographic and labor market variables. We therefore
 estimate separate budget share equations for food for each of four groups formed on the basis
 of the education attainment of the household head: high school dropouts,high school graduates,
 college dropouts and college graduates. For each educational group the a parameter (which affects
 both the intercept and the a(p) index deflating nominal expenditure) is allowed to depend on
 some deterministic variables (seasonal dummies and a zero-one indicator for the 1980-1 wave of
 interviews), some demographic indicators (age of the head, single adult dummy, total number of
family members, number of children) and a few zero-one labour market variables (head unemployed,
second adults works full time, second adult works part time, log of female leisure). Al! of these
variables affect significantly the budget share of food for at least one educational group, but none
of the non-deterministic variables plays a key role in determining the ft parameter, i.e. the degree
on non-homotheticity.
     In order to avoid the measurement error problems (discussed in Blundell, Pashardes and
Weber, 1993) which plague household- level data, we have estimated consistently aggregated budget
share equations at the cohort level. This i5 equivalent to treating all explanatory variables as
endogenous, and using year-quarter-cohort dummies as instruments. We concentrated on 10year-
of-birth cohorts and therefore have 430 observations for each equation. In estimationwe impose
all theory restrictions (homogeneity is never rejected; symmetry is marginally rejected in two of
the four equations).

    In Table 4, we report parameter estimates for ft and descriptive statistics of some key elas-
ticities by educational group. Two things are worth noticing. Fiat, the estimatesconfirm, not
surprisingly, that food is a necessity. Second, the budget elasticities of food expenditure decline

                                                21
                                           Table 4

                      Elasticities derived from the daniad syBtem

                                               budget elasticity        uncoinpensated price
                       (s.e)                   at the mean              elast. at the mean

High School dropouts -.064                     0.877                    -.577
                       (.016)                  (0.03)                    (0.06)

High School Graduates -.074                    0.841                    -.513
                       (.016)                  (0.035)                  (0.06)

College Dropouts       -.099                   0.781                    -.580
                       (.011)                  (0.025)                  (0.06)

College Graduates      -.166                   0.616                    -.438
                       (.011)                  (0.027)                  (0.08)


    Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The standard errors of the elasticities at the mean are
computed using the delta method.
 inonotonically with educational attainment, ranging from 0.88 for high school dropouts to 0.61 for
 college graduates. Price elasticity is lowest for college graduates and (in absolute value) consider-
 ably less than unity.

 6.2 Euler equations


     In Table 5, we report the results obtained estimating the Euler equation (7). They incorporate
 the estimates of the demand system discussed above through the price indexes andare obtained
 by the 0MM techniques discussed in section 5 applied to average cohort data. 25
     In the first 3, columns we present estimates of three different specifications for the entire
sample period and 8 cohorts. Because, as stressed above, the 1980 and 1981 survey might be of
lower quality we re-estimate the three specihcations on a shorter sample period. Wereport these
results in columns 4 to 6.
     To the basic specification (7'), we add several variables which are meant to capture the effects
of changing family composition and labor supply on the discount factor #0. After trying several
specifications we settled on the one reported. The main conclusions we draw are robust to the
inclusion of additional demographic variables or to the exclusion of some of the less significant
ones.

     In the specification reported the discount factor #(.) is assumed to depend on seasonal durn-
mies, on the log of family size, on the number of children between the ages of 0 and 15, on a dummy
which equals unity if the wife works full time, on the log of annual hours of leisure enjoyed by the
wife (computed as 5000 minus the number of hours of work) and a dummy for single individuals.
Other variables that were considered during the specification search include the number of chil-
dren of various ages, a dummy for part time working wife, and the number of earners. 29 We also
considered variables such as the number of vehicles and dummies for home-ownership.
    All variables in the equation, with the exception of seasonals, are instrumented. There sic
two reasons to use this procedure. First, some of the variables considered are choice variables
determined simultaneously with consumption. Second, all of them are subject, given the size
of our sample1 to measurement error. As argued above the presence of measurement error and
therefore of MA(l) residuals makes lag-one instrument invalid. The instruments used were second,

  25 No attempt is made to correct the standard errors for the use of generated regressors.
      The cohort average of a dummy variable (such as that for working wifes) measure the propor-
tion of households, within a particular quarter- cohort cell, which satisfy a particular condition.

                                                22
                                                 Table 5
                           Euler equation for total consumption expenditure
                                   Using resultS from the demand system

                  (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)


                  0.559          0.421        0.271       0.668           0.589       0.424
0.43              (0.224)        (0.250)      (0.189)     (0.189)         (0.201)     (0.156)

Alfmsz            1.351          1.213       -             1.619          1.563       -
0.17              (0.357)        (0.375)
                                             -
                                                           (0.340)        (0.356)     -

achildren         -0.498         -0.451      -            -0.487          -0.431      -
0.18              (0.156)        (0.167)
                                             -
                                                           (0.155)        (0.163)     -

Aww               -0.816         -0.857      -            -1.469          -0.924      -
0.12              (0.442)        (0.435)
                                             -
                                                           (0.967)        (0.462)
                                                                                      -


&nwl              -1.437         -1.222      -            -0.696          -1.314      -
0.09              (0.835)        (0.797)
                                             -
                                                           (0.751)        (0.902)     -

Ssingle           -1.214         -1.038      -            -1.211          -1.712      -
0.12              (0.712)        (0.683)     -             (0.828)        (0.773)     -

Alt,              -              0.121       0.306        0.107           0.090       0.247
0.25              .              (0.090)     (0.068)      (0.155)         (0.068)     (0.048)


Sargan crit. 17.18               18.29       25.70        18.40           19.31       30.29
(p-value)         (0.64)         (0.50)      (0.36)       (0.56)          (0.44)      (0.18)

Eat, period       81:3-90:4      81:3-90:4   81:8-90:4    82:3-90:4       82:3-90:4   82:3-90:4
Cohorts           1-8            1-8         1-8          1-8             1-8         1-8
Ol,s.             288            288         288          256             256         256

        Notes:   Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. All specification. include a constant a
three seasonal dummies. The instruments set is the same across columns and includes the second
to fourth lag of consumption growth, inflation, nominal interest rates and labor income growth,
the second an third lag of all the other variables in column (1), the second and third lag of the
number of earners, three seasonal dummies, age, age squared and a constant. The numbers under
the variable names are W of the first step regression on the 81:3-90:4 sample.
     Legend: r = real interest rate, If rnsz= log of family size, tow = dummy for wife working full
time, lnwl = log of wife's annual hours of leisure, single= dummy for single consumers, ly = log
of labor income, children = household members between 0 and .15.
  third and fourth lag of interest rates, consumption and income
                                                                  growth and inflation, the second and
  third lag of all the variables considered in the discount factor, nad of the number of earners,
                                                                                                  age,
  age squared1 a constant and three seasonal dummies. The reasons behind this choice ofinstruments
  are discussed below.
     In the column with the variable names we report the R21s of the first step regression of
 each of the variables on the instruments (for the longer
                                                          sample). In colwnns (1) and (4) we
 report our favourite specification. The coefficient on the interest rate is relatedto the elasticity of
 intertemporal substitution (cia) as evident from equation 7'. When preferences are homothetic so
 that 6(p) = 1, such a coefficient is actually equal to the cia. In practice, the
                                                                                    estimated parameters of
 our demand system and the behavior of relative prices, imply a
                                                                very small variability of b(p) which,
 in the sample, ranges from 0.99 to 1.01. Therefore, for allpractica] purposes, we can consider the
 estimated coefficients on the real interest rate as an estimate of the cia. This coefficient is estimated
 at 0.56 (s.e.= 0.22) for the whole sample and at 0.67 (s.e. = 0.19) for the shorter period. This
 relatively high estimate of the cia is consistent with the result reported for the UK in Attanaaio
 and Weber (1993).
     As is evident from the estimates, some of the demographic variables are quite important.
 Attanasio et al. (1994) plot the life cycle profiles for the discount factors implied by a specification
similar to the present one and estimated on the same data set. They show that, when used to
solve and simulate a life cycle model, these estimated discountfactors are able to generate not only
the hump shaped profile which characterizes life cycle consumption, but also the differences across
education groups, SO
     In columns (2) and (5), we add to the specification in columns
                                                                    (1) and (4), the rate of growth
in labor income (including transfers). ' The finding of a non-zero coefficient on this variable
has been interpreted in the literature as evidence of excess sensitivity of consumption to labor
income. The coefficient we estimate is relatively small and is not significantly different from zero.
This result cannot be explained with the fact that the instruments used are unable to capture the
variability in income growth: the R' of the first step regression for incomegrowth is approximately
0.25, which is higher than the R2 for all the demographic and labor supply variables. Indeed, the
main motivation for the inclusion of so many instruments and in particular of the lagged values
 ° Even though the taste parameters are assumed to be the same
                                                                       across education groups, the
discount factors (and therefore the implied consumption profiles) will differ because the forcing
variables - demographics and labor supply- will differ across education
                                                                         groups.
     We also tried the rate of growth in total after tax
                                                         family income obtaining comparable results.
                                                  23
                                           Table 6
                     Euler equaflon for total consumption expenditure
                Using Stone price index to deflate total non-durable expenditure

            (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)

            0.341          0.149        0.221         0.480        0.331           0.442
            (0.276)        (0.347)      (0.263)       (0.282)      (0.316)         (0.218)

Alfmsz      1.172          0.948        -             1.539         1.413          -
            (0.399)        (0.479)      -             (0.383)       (0.417)        -

Achildren   -0.539         -0.453       -             -0.617       -0.558          -
            (0.169)        (0.200)      -             (0.186)      (0.192)         -

ww          -1.551         -1.560       -             -1.808       -1.826          -
            (0.666)        (0.639)      -             (0.665)      (0.649)         -

AInwl       -2.578         -2.486       -             -3.207       -3.011          -
             (0.835)       (1.046)      -             (1.185)      (1.144)         -

4.81n91C    -2.239         -2.157       -             -2.744       -2.567          -
            (0.912)        (0.906)      -             (0.828)      (0.987)         -
            -              0.100        0.268         -             0.094          0.223
            -              (0.103)      (0.067)       -             (0.089)        (0.053)


Sargan crit. 11.66          12.34       23.32         12.11         13.06          25.99
(p-value)    (0.92)         (0.87)      (0.50)        (0.91)        (0.84)         (0.35)

Eat. period 81:3-90:4       81:3-90:4   81:3-90:4     82:3-90:4     82:3-90:4      82:3-90:4
Cohorts      1-8            1-8          1-8          1-8           1-8            1-8
Ohs.         288            288         288           256           256            256
 of the number of earners, is the attempt to capture a substantial part of income variability. All
 results in Table 5 are unaffected by a reduction in the number of instruments (even though a few
 coefficients are estimated with less precision).
      In columns (3) and (6) we exclude all demographic and labor supply variables. The coefficient
 on income is now estimated as almost three times as large as in columns 2 and 5 and it is significantly
 different from zero. This result confirms that the lack of excess sensitivity in the other columns is
 not due to the inability of our instrument set to capture income growth variability.
     In none of the equations reported the Sargan test of overidentifying restrictions rejects the
 null. However, given the large number of instruments used, the power of such a test can be low.
     We interpret the results in Table 5 as indicating that a flexible specification of the life cycle
 model which allows for the effect of demographic and labor supply variables and models in a
coherent way the aggregation across commodities is not inconsistent with the available evidence
on microeconomjc behavior.

     Raving gone through the exercise of estimating a small demand system, a legitimate question
to ask is: was it worth the effort? To answer this question, in Table 6 we report the results
obtained when the specifications in Table 5 are estimated under the restriction that b(p) = 1. This
is equivalent to deflate consumption and income growth and the nominalprice rate by the inflation
in a Stone price index of the different commodities considered. The evidence indicates that the
use of the appropriate price index can, indeed, make a difference, especially as far as the estimate
of the coefficient on the interest rate is concerned. In particular, we obtain point estimates of the
coefficient that determines the elasticity of intertemporal substitution consistently smaller than
those reported in Table 5. Furthermore, these estimate are much less precise. The absence of
excess sensitivity to income and the failure to reject the overidentifying restrictions, instead, are
robust to the use of the more conventional price index used in Table 6.
    Overall, a comparison of Thbles 5 and 6 indicates that the explicit consideration of aggregation
over commodities is important especially to evaluate the magnitude of the curvature of the within
period utility function and therefore the degree of substitutability.


7. ConclusIons
    In this paper, we have shown that the intertemporal model of optimizing behavior for con-
sumption is not inconsistent with US micro data. It is crucial, however, that preferences are
modeled so as to take into account changes in family composition and laborsupply behavior over

                                                 24
the life cycle. As we recognize in the empirical analysis, such factors are not necessarily exogenous.
Modelling fertility and labour supply is beyond the scope of this paper, and our analysis is therefore
limited to the estimation of conditional preferences.
     The introduction of demographic and labor supply variables as determinants of the discount
factor may be open to criticism. It could be argued that the large number of parameters we
estimate reduces the power of standard tests of overidentifying restrictions or of tests of excess
sensitivity of consumption to income, If income is affected by severe measurement error then
demographic and labor supply variables may capture the correlation between expected consumption
and expected income which would imply a. rejection of the model. Furthermore, the sign and size
of the coefficients on the demographic and labor supply variables might be difficult to interpret.
     The answer to these criticisms requires a further step, which we do not take in this paper.
To establish whether the coefficients on demographics (and labor supply) are sensible, one should
derive the consumption patterns implied by the estimated parameters, given 'reasonable' demo-
graphic profiles as well as income and interest rate patterns. In a recent paper, Attanasio et al.
(1994) show that a life-cycle model similar to that presented here is not only able to generate the
hump-shaped life-cycle consumption that we observe in reality, but alèo to explain the differences
in the shapes of life-cycle profiles across education groups. This sort of evidence goes some way
towards proving that the preference specifications we estimate are reasonable.
     We have devoted considerable attention to the issue of aggregation over different commodities.
We have shown that ignoring it can affect considerably the estimates of some key behavioral
parameters and in particular of the elasticity of intertempora.l substitution. This is to be expected
if we consider that preferences might not be homothetic (as shown in the analysis of the demand
system) and that there have been large changes in relative prices over the 1980s. On the other
hand, ignoring the aggregation over commodities does not lead to a rejection of the model.
    The results we have obtained contrast sharply with most of the existing literature either in
terms of tests of the model (Hall and Mishlcin (1982), Zeldes (1989)) or in terms of estimates of
behavioral parameters (Runkle (1991), Keane and Runkle (1992)). The contrast is even sharper
with papers that use aggregate time series data (Hall (1988), Campbell and Mankiw (1989)). We
have shown that these differences can be expl&ined either by the use of a very poor proxy for total
consumption or by aggregation problems.
    The answer to the question posed in the title of this paper is a qualified yes. We have
shown that some of implications of an intertemporal optimization model cannot be easily rejected.

                                                 25
However, we are aware of the limitations of our methodology. As Deaton (1993) has pointed out,
tests of the life cycle model based on consumption growth might fail to detect the presence of
operative liquidity constraints as they affect the Euler equation only when they are binding. More
generally, the Euler equation approach, while enabling us to estimate key behavioral parameters,
does not provide much information on the level of consumption and, therefore, on saving.
    There are several directions in which the present research could and should be developed. We
believe more work is necessary to model the relationship between consumption and labor supply.
In this paper, we have estimated only conditional preferences. It is important and useful, however,
to model household labor supply choices in a rigorous fashion. Furthermore, several aspects of the
consumer optimization problem, which were considered only marginally or ignored in this paper,
are clearly crucial for a complete understanding of saving and consumption behavior both at the
macro and micro levels. An obvious example is expenditure on durables, which is the most volatile
component of consumption expenditure over the business cycle. Other important issues are the
behavior of the elderly, expenditure on housing, health, education and so on.
    Given all these qualifications, however, we claim that the intertemporal optimization model
of consumer behavior cannot be easily dismissed and constitutes a useful starting point for the
understanding of individual and aggregate consumption expenditure.




                                               26
  Appendix: Estimation and inference
      As stated in the text, the construction of an efficient IV estimator hasto take into account the
  presence of MA(1) residuals for each group used in estimation and the contemporaneous correlation
  among the residuals of the different groups.
      A further difficulty arises because the variance of the measurement error component of the
 residuals is a function of cell size. Variable cell size, therefore, may induce a eubstantiai amount
 of heteroecedasticity. We do not specify a model far heteroscedasticity, but allow for it in the
 construct ion of the estimator and in the estimation of its standard errors.
      Finally, given the age limitations we impose on our sample, the syntheticpanel we use in
 estimation is unbalanced, in that some cohorts satisfy the age restrictions only after or before a
 given year. This does not induce selectivity bias (age is exogenous) but requires extra care in
 computing contemporaneous correlations across cohorts.
      We write the estixnatable equation as:

                                              y = Xfl + es
 where X denotes the matrix of Ic explanatory variables, and u is the error term, which contains
 both an expectational component, and an MA(1) measurement error component. Given this error
 structure, valid instruments are the exogenous variables in X (seasonal dummies), other deter-
 ministic contemporaneous variables (such as age), and second and further lags of the remaining
 variables. We denote the instruments matrix by 2, and assume its columns are mLlc.
      The GMM estimator used in the paper is given by the following expression.

                                      I = PX1Z(ZIz)1z1y
 where P, = X'Z(Z'OZ)—'Z'X Its asymptotic variance covariance matrix is given by:


      where Il is an NT by NT block matrix. Each block on the main diagonal is a T by T matrix
 which represents the variance covariance matrix of the residuals of one cohort. These matrices
 have the diagonal and the band surrounding the diagonal different from zero. This reflects the
 MA( 1) structure of the residuals of each cohort induced by measurement error. Both parameters
 of these matrices are estimated from the residuals of each cohort and are allowed to be different
 across cohorts. The off- diagonal blocks of (2 represent the correlation of the residuals of different
 cohorts. We assume that only contemporaneous correlation is possible, so that these matrices are
diagonal. Furthermore we assume that this correlation is constant over time.
      For this estimator to be feasible we need an estimate of (2. This obtained from a first
round of consistent estimates computed using the formula above with theisidentity      matrix instead
of (I. Rather than estimating Owe use the first round residuals to construct an estimate of Z'OZ
robust to the presence of heteroscedasticity of unkwnown form. This estimate is obtained using
the following expressions:


where

                                  =    1    11        2
                                      ' Ei1S' ZjrZj u1,,
                                                 I'
                                                        S
                                                                  and

                                                  21
                        =                                     + Za.s_zZtsa.tUI.g_jj.
                                  NN         Di,
                            = 4EEETELztzLt.Lua.. +zi,gz;1Is,,ttti,,).
                                  j1 i=1     (=2

T1   is the number of periods over which group j is observed, Tq is the number of periods over which
groups i and j are both observed, N i5 the number of groups. a and 03 are ad-hoc weights used
to guarantee that the estimated variance covariance matrix is positive definite in small samples.
This procedure (suggested, for Stance, by Fuller (1987); see also Newey and West (1987) for a
case where a can be chosen optimally), is arbitrary, but does not affect points estimates in a
substantial way.
     No correction to the variance covariance matrix is made for the (act that some of the regressors
we use are generated from estimated parameters (the demand system).
    The Sargan (Hansen) test of overidenti(ying restrictions is given by:

                                           ii'Z(z'FiI) '-1 z' a
      which is distributed as a     with m — Ic degrees of freedom




                                                   28
                                            References
Altonji, J. and A. Slow (1981): "'1sting the Response of Consumption to Income with (Noisy)
  Panel Data', Quarterly Journal of Economics , 102, 293-328
Aitug, S. and EtA. Miller (1990): 'Househod Choices in Equilibrium" Econometrics , 543-70.
Attanasio, O.P. (1993) : 'A Cohort Analysis of Saving Behavior by Us Households', NBER
  W.P. No. 4454.
Attanasio, O.P. and M. Browning (1991a): Consumption over the Life Cycle and over the
  Business Cycle", NBER W.P. No. 4453.
Attajiasio, O.P. and M. Browning (1991b): 'Testing the Life Cycle Model of Consumption:
  What Can We Learn From Micro and Macro Data?', Stanford University, Mimeo.
Attanasio, O.P., Banks, 3., Meghir, C. and 0. Weber, (1994): 'Dynamic Consumption and
  Saving Decisions in the US and in the UK", Mimeo.
Attanasio, O.P. and 5.3. Davis (1994): "Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of
  Consumption", Mimeo.
Attanasio, OP., and Weber, 0. (1993): 'Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate and Aggre-
  gation", Review of Economic Studies , 60, 631-649.
Blinder, A. and A, Deaton (1985): "The Time Series Consumption Function Revisited',
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 465-521.
Blundell, R.,Browning, M. and C. Meghir, (1994): 'A Microeconometric Model of Intertern-
  poral Substitution and Consumer Demand" Review of Economic Studies, 61, 57-80.
Blundell, R., Pashardes, P. and C. Weber (1993): 'What Do We Learn About Consumer
  Demand Patterba from Micro Data? " American Economic Review , 83, 570-97.
Breusch, T.S., and L.G. Godfrey (1981) "A Review of Recent Work on Testing for Autocorre-
  lation in Dynamic Simultaneous Models", in Macroeconomic Analysis, ed. D. Curtis, AR. Nobay
  and D. Peel, 63-105. London: Croom Helm.
Browning, M. (1987) "Which Demand Elasticities Do We Know and Which Do We Need to
  Know for Policy Analysis?', McMaster, mizneo.
Browning, M., Deaton, A. and M. Irish (1985): "A Profitable Approach to Labor Supply and
  Commodity Demands over the Life Cycle", Econometrics , 53, pp.503-44.
Browning, M., and C. Meghir (1991): "Testing for Separability of Commodity Demands from
  Male and Female Labour Supply', Econometrics , 59925-952.
Campbell, .J.Y., and Mankiw, N.G. (1989): 'Permanent Income, Current Income, and Con-
  sumption", fiBER Macroeconomic Annual, Cambridge.
Carroll, C.D. and L.H. Summers (1991): 'Consumption Growth Parallels Income Growth:
  Some New Evidence ", in: B.D. Bernheim and J.B. Shoven (eds.) : National Savings and Economic
  Performance, Chicago.
Chamberlain, 0. (1984) : "Panel Data', in: Handbook of Econometrics • North Holland.
Cochrane, J. (1991) : 'A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance", Journal of Political Econ-
  omy ,99, 957-81.
Deaton, A., (1985) :" Panel Data from Time Series of Cross Sections", Journal of Econometrics
   30, 109-26.
Deaton, A., (1993): Understanding Consumption, Oxford Economic Press.
Deaton, A. and 3. Muellbauer (1980): 'An Almost Ideal Demand System", American Eco-
  nomic Review , 70, 312-36.
Flavin, M. (1981): "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations about Future
  Income' Journal of Political Economy , 89, 974-1009.
Fuller, W. A. (1987) : Measurement Error Model. , New York: John Wiley.
Corman, W.T. (1959) : "Separable Utility and Aggregation", Econometrics ,27, 469-481.

                                                 29
HlI, RE., (1988) : ' Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption", Journal 0/Political Econ-
    omy , 96, 339-57.
 Hall, R.E. and F. Mislikin, (1982) : "The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income:
    Estimates from Panel Data on Households", Econometrics , 50, 481-82.
 Hansen, L.P. and Ki. Singleton, (1982) : 'Generalized Instrumental Variable Estimation of
    Non-Linear Rational Expectations Models', Econometrics , 50, 1269-86.
Hayashi, F. (1985): "The Effects of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A Cross Section
   Analysis", Quarterly Journal of Economics ,C, 183-206.
Hayashi, F. (1987) : "Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey and Some New
   Results", in T.F. Bewley (ed.) Advance. in Econometric,: Fifth World Congress, vol. 2,01-120.
Hayashi, F. and C. Sims (1983): "Nearly Efficient Estimation of Time Series Models with
   Preditermined but not Exogenous Instruments" , Econometrics , 51, 783-92.
Keane, M.P. and D.E. Runkle, (1991) : 'On the Estimation of Panel Data Models With Serial
   Correlation When Instruments Are Not Strictly Exogenous' • Minneaopolis, Mimeo.
Lusardi, A.M. (1992) : 'Permanent Income, Consumption and Precautionary Saving: An
   Empirical Investigation" , Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University.
Mace, B. (1991) : 'Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty ', Journal of
   Political Economy , 99, 928-56.
Meghir, C. and G. Weber, (1991) : "lntertemporal Non-Separability or Borrowing Restric-
   tions?', Institute for Fiscal Studies, Mimeo.
Miron, LA. (1986): "Seasonal Fluctuations and the Life Cycle - Permanent Income Model of
   Consumption", Journal of Political Economy , 94, 1258-79.
Moffitt, R. (1993) : "Identification and Estimation of Dynamic Models with a Time Series of
  Repeated Cross-Sections", Journal o/ Econometrics ,59, 99-124.
Newey, W.K., and K.D. West (1987): 'A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity
  and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix", Econometrics ,55, 703-8.
Runkle, D.E. (1991): "Liquidity Constraints and the Permanent Income Hypothesis: Evidence
  from Panel Data", Journal 0/Monetary Economics ,27, 73-98.
Zeldes, S. (1989): "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation",
  Journal o/ Political Economy , 97, 305-46.




                                               30
