                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WHY IS CAPiTAL SO IMMOBILE
                            INTERNATIONALLY?: POSSIBLE
                          EXPLANATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
                           FOR CAPITAL INCOME TAXATION




                                      Roger H. Gordon
                                     A. Lans Bovenberg




                                  Working Paper No. 4796



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 1994



We would much like to thank participants at seminars at Tilburg University, Harvard University,
NBER, Pennsylvania State University, the University of Michigan, and the University of
Wisconsin, and especially Sylvester Eijffinger, for comments and help. This paper is pan of
NBER's research programs in International Finance and Macroeconomics, International Trade and
Investment, and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                        NBER Working Paper #4796
                                                                                       July 1994
                              WHY IS CAPITAL SO IMMOBILE
                              INTERNATIONALLY?: POSSIBLE
                            EXPLANATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
                             FOR CAPITAL iNCOME TAXATION

                                            ABSTRACT

        The evidence on international capital immobility is extensive, ranging from the

correlations between domestic savings and investment pointed out by Feldstein-Horioka (1980).

to real interest differentials across countries, to the lack of international portfolio diversification.

To what degree does capital immobility modify past results forecasting that small open
economies should not tax savings or investment? The answer depends on the cause of this

immobility. We argue that asymmetric information between countries provides the most plausible

explanation for the above observations. When we examine optimal tax policy in an open

economy allowing for asymmetric information, rather than simply finding that savings and
investment should not be taxed, we now forecast government subsidies to foreign acquisitions

of domestic fums. Some omitted factors that would argue against subsidizing foreign

acquisitions are explored briefly.



Roger H. Gordon                                       A. Lans Bovenberg
Department of Economics                               CentER for Economic Research
University of Michigan                                Tilburg University
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                   P.O. Box 90153
and NBER                                              5000 LE Tilburg
                                                      THE NETHERLANDS
                   Why is Capital so Immobile Internationally?:
         Possible Explanations and Implications for Capital Income Taxation
                              Roger H. Gordon and A. Lans Bovenberg


     Feldstein—Horioka (1980), in a highly influential paper, report empirical evidence sug-
 gesting that capital is quite immobile internationally. Many other papers since then demon-
 strate the robustness of this result.1 In general, these papers find that additional savings
 in a country lead almost dollar for dollar to extra investment in the country. If an economy
were small and open, these funds should instead have been invested throughout the world,
leading to only minor changes in domestic investment. In addition, there is strong evidence
of real interest rate differentials across countries,2 again suggesting important barriers to
capital mobility.
    In a related body of literature, Adler—Dumas (1983) and French—Poterba (1991), among
others, have provided convincing documentation that individual portfolios are heavily spe-
cialized in domestic securities, in spite of the forecast from the theory that there are large
gains from international diversification. Tax effects only deepen this puzzle. Investors
should be able, with only moderate effort, to evade domestic taxes on the income they
earn from portfolio investments abroad, while they should find it relatively difficult to
evade taxes on income from domestic investments. Hence, tax considerations reenforce the
gains from international diversification.
    In spite of this strong empirical evidence on the propensity of savers to invest at home,
most theoretical papers studying capital income taxation in an open economy3 have as-
sumed that capital is fully mobile internationally. These studies conclude that we should
not expect to observe any taxation of income from either investment or savings in a small

     We would much like to thank participants at seminars at Tilburg University, Harvard University,
NBER, Pennsylvania State University, the University of Michigan, and the University of Wisconsm, and
especially Sylvester Eijffinger, for comments and help.
   See, for example, Penati—Dooley (1984), Dooley, Frankel, and Mathieson (1987), and Bayoumi (1990).

 2 See, for example, Mishkin (1984), Cumby—Obstfeld (1984), and Cumby—Mishkin (1986).

   Among other references would be Gordon (1986) and Razin and Sadka (1991).


                                                 1
open economy. The arguments go as follows. If capital is fully mobile internationally, any
tax on income from investment in the domestic economy cannot lower the return earned by
capital owners, since they can simply move their funds abroad. For production to remain
competitive in the country, in spite of the capital income tax, the cost of other factors (e.g.
labor and land) must drop by enough to compensate. Since the tax is thus borne by these
immobile factors anyway, it would dominate to tax these factors directly and thereby avoid
discouraging investment in the country. A government might still want to tax the income
from savings accruing to domestic residents. However, if individuals can easily evade these
taxes on their holdings of foreign securities,4 no tax on income from savings is feasible —
such a   tax would simply induce individuals to shift all their savings abroad. Accordingly,
no such tax should be observed.
    In spite of these forecasts, corporate income taxes and personal income taxes on port-
folio income do exist, and tax rates are often quite high. Is the explanation simply that
capital is immobile internationally, thereby weakening the pressures described by the the-
ory to cut rates?
    The answer undoubtedly depends on the underlying reasons why capital is so immo-
bile. In section 1, we discuss a variety of possible explanations for the immobility of capital
that have appeared in the literature, and discuss their consistency with the empirical evi-
dence. The explanation that we find most convincing, and one that has been inadequately
explored to date, is asymmetric information between investors in different countries. In
particular, foreign investors are at a handicap relative to domestic investors due to their
poorer knowledge of domestic markets. As a result, they are likely to be less successful
when setting up new firms, and they are vulnerable to being overcharged if they acquire
existing domestic firms. In section 2, we lay out the particular form of asymmetric infor-
mation we assume and describe the resulting equilibrium pattern of capital allocation and
ownership. Section 3 argues that the empirical observations can readily be rationalized if
    Enforcement of income taxes occurs mainly through forcing domestic firms and financial intermediaries
to report to the government the income earned by each domestic resident. But if individuals use foreign
financial intermediaries when investing abroad, then the domestic government has no means to obtain
independent information about this income, and so cannot easily enforce the tax. In principle, individuals
can buy even domestic securities through a foreign intermediary, and so escape monitoring by the domestic
government.


                                                   2
 asymmetric information is important by comparing the forecasts of our model with the
 observed evidence on savings—investment correlations, real interest rate differentials, and
 the observed specialization of portfolios.
    Section 4 considers the optimal taxation of savings and investment in the presence of
asymmetric information. Perhaps the most surprising result is that a capital—importing
country should subsidize foreign acquisitions by enough so that the domestic rate of return
to capital is driven down to the rate prevailing on the world market. Intuitively, domestic
owners of firms are able to overcharge when they sell existing firms to foreigners. As a
result, if a country is small relative to the world capital market, it gains from marginal
foreign acquisitions. Hence, it should subsidize these acquisitions until it is indifferent to
any further marginal acquisitions. While our model forecasts that domestic savings should
be taxed, the net rate of return on domestic savings should still equal the marginal product
of domestic capital. Hence, by standard criteria, savings decisions are not distorted. The
tax simply removes the excess incentive to save, due to the ability to overcharge foreigners
for the firms they acquire. In capital—exporting countries, the model continues to forecast
no taxes on investment or savings, in spite of asymmetric information.
   Rather than explaining the continuing presence of corporate income taxes, the model
instead deepens the puzzle by prescribing subsidies to foreign acquisitions in capital—
importing countries. Yet, it seers hard to come up with examples of subsidies to for-
eign acquisitions, at least in developed economies. If anything, political pressures seem
to restrict foreign acquisitions. In section 5, we discuss some costs of foreign acquisitions
not considered in the model. In particular, foreign purchasers may acquire proprietary
technological information when they purchase a firm. Any future investment based on this
information will occur mainly abroad, where the new owner possesses better knowledge
about investment opportunities. If the acquisition had not taken place, future investment
based on this information would instead have occurred primarily in the domestic economy,
where the domestic owner is better informed. The implicit sale of this information to
foreigners therefore can reduce the country's competitive advantage in world markets, an
advantage tied in part to the proprietary knowledge it has. In future work, we hope to
model more carefully these costs of foreign acquisitions.

                                              3
1. Possible Explanations for Observed Capital Immobility

   What factors might explain the immobility of capital, and how successful are they at
explaining the empirical evidence? A variety of possible explanations have been discussed
in the literature.
   One possible response to the Feldstein—Horioka observations, seen for example in Finn
(1990) and Tesar (1988), is simply to argue that capital is in fact fully mobile, but that pro-
ductivity or other shocks in a country affect both desired savings and desired investment in
the country in the same way, leading to a positive correlation between the two series in the
data. Productivity shocks would not, however, explain the observed lack of diversification
in individual portfolios, nor the real interest rate differentials across countries, suggesting
some different underlying cause.
   A second hypothesis is that the countries being studied are large relative to the world
capital market. As Murphy (1984) argues, if savings increase in a large country then a
nontrivial fraction of these savings will end up in the home country, leading to a positive
correlation between savings and investment. When countries are large, they would also
no longer be price takers in the world capital market. Capital exporters would face an
incentive to restrict their capital exports, and capital importers their capital imports, in
each case so as to induce a favorable movement in the world interest rate. A number
of writers (e.g. Caprio—Howard (1984), Summers (1988), and Bayourni (1990)), report
empirical evidence that countries do appear to change their overall budget deficit over
time in order to decrease their net current account deficit or surplus, presumably in order
to avoid adverse changes in market interest rates. The observed correlation between savings
and investment does in fact seem to be higher for large countries than for small countries,
as seen in Obstfeld (1986). However, the correlation remains high even among countries
that should have very little market power in world capital markets, suggesting that the
main explanation for capital immobility is elsewhere. In addition, if market power were
important, we should expect to see countries manipulating their tax policy to reduce net
capital flows. Capital importing countries should tax investment and subsidize savings
to reduce capital imports, while capital exporting countries should subsidize investment

                                              4
and tax savings. Such a pattern of tax rates is not apparent in either cross—section or
time—series data, further undermining this explanation.
    Reasons have also been proposed why countries may want to limit gross rather than
net outflows of capital. Savings invested abroad, for example, are more likely to escape
domestic taxation. A number of OECD countries, e.g. France and Italy until 1986, had
capital controls discouraging such evasion by preventing domestic residents from shifting
their savings abroad. Even when overall controls do not exist, regulations often require
financial institutions to invest only in domestic assets — this was true, for example, of
Japanese pension funds until 1987. These restrictions were always partial, however. For-
eign direct investment by multinationals remained unrestricted. Hence, if there were profit
opportunities available that individual investors or pension funds could not take advan-
tage of, firms could have done so instead. In any case, the correlation between savings
and investment has been high as well in countries such as the U.S. that have very limited
regulatory restrictions, and has not declined much over time as a number of countries have
eliminated such restrictions.
    A fourth hypothesis argues that investors face high transactions costs when purchasing
foreign securities, discouraging investments abroad. French and Poterba (1991) explored
this hypothesis and concluded that the size of transactions costs needed to rationalize ob-
served portfolios would be far too large to be plausible. In addition, Tesar and Werner
(1994) report that turnover rates on domestic holdings of foreign securities are if any-
thing higher than on holdings of domestic securities, undermining any argument for high
transactions costs on purchases of foreign securities.
   Capital flows to certain countries may have been limited because of the fear that these
countries may at some point expropriate the holdings of foreign owners. Whereas fear of
expropriation may explain the lack of capital flows to some developing countries, most of
the data on capital immobility deals with OECD countries where expropriations have been
rare.
   Exchange rate risk is often cited as an important factor discouraging international cap-
ital flows. Bhandari—Mayer (1990), for example, note that savings—investment correlations
have been moderately lower within the EMS countries, where exchange rate movements

                                            5
are not an issue. In principle, however, investors can hedge at least against short—term
exchange rate movements in the currency market, allowing them to take advantage of
differences in real rates of return on equity without being exposed to exchange rate risk.
In any case, the evidence in Adler—Dumas (1983) and French—Poterba (1991) does take
exchange rate movements into account, and argues that in spite of these movements the
theory forecasts far more international diversification in equity than we in fact observe.
    The explanation for the observed capital immobility that we £nd most plausible, and
whose implications we explore in this paper, is asymmetric information across countries.
Investors, by living and working in a particular country, know much more about the
economic prospects of that country than they do about those in other countries.5 If they
consider setting up a new ftrm abroad, they would be at a distinct handicap relative to
local owners. Only gradually, for example, would they learn how to deal with local banks,
the local distribution system, or the local supply network. They will inevitably have to
learn many idiosyncratic aspects of the domestic contract law, the local tax system, and
local customs regarding labor/management relations. In principle, foreigners can hire local
experts to help them through these hurdles. However, how are they to judge which experts
to trust? Local experts would have many opportunities to take advantage of the ignorance
of the foreign principal, e.g. colluding with local dealers in the sale of overpriced goods
and securities to the foreigner. The substantial asymmetric information between the agent
and the principal would make it difficult for the principal to give too much authority to
such an agent.
    Foreigners will also be at an informational disadvantage when buying shares abroad
rather than in their own country. if they are buying securities in their own country, they
have easier access not only to firm—specific information but also to better forecasts about
future government policies affecting the firm. As a result, when buying securities abroad in

    Ben--Porath (1980) argues that when individuals enjoy long—term relationships their repeated in-
terchange encourages the development of cooperative behavior and trust between them. For example,
merchants may deal very differently with local customers than with other customers. This cooperation
mphcttly provides some pooling of information. Domestic investors have considerable opportunities to
develop long—term relationships with each other, perhaps only in part dealing with securities transactions.
Foreign investors, in contrast, would find it much more difficult to establish such cooperative relationships
with domestic investors, putting them at an informational disadvantage. We would like to thank Peter
Diamond for pointing out this article to us.


                                                     6
 existing firms, they can easily end up being overcharged by more knowledgeable domestic
 owners, and end up buying only the "lemons."
     In fact, Grubert, Goodspeed, and Swenson (1993) find that foreign subsidiaries in the
 U.S. report dramatically lower rates of return than do domestic U.S. firms, even after
controlling for industry, age, and other such factors. While transfer pricing might explain
an unusually low reported rate of return for subsidiaries owned by parent firms based in
countries with low tax rates, Grubert ci al find virtually the same low reported rate of
return regardless of the parent's home country.
     The Grubert ci al data includes both greenfield investments in the U.S. as well as for-
eign acquisitions, and these acquisitions include takeovers of both closely held and publicly
traded firms. It would be plausible that foreign firms would face much less of an infor-
mational disadvantage when taking over publicly traded firms. As argued by Grossman
(1976), the share price of these firms should under certain assumptions reveal the infor-
mation available to domestic investors. However, a growing body of literature argues that
observed share prices are at best only a very noisy measure of the true values of firms. This
is commonly explained by the assumption that an unobserved number of investors enter
and leave the market for reasons unrelated to news events affecting the true value of a
firm. Given this noise in market prices, foreign investors will remain imperfectly informed
about the value even of publicly traded firms. In fact, Harris and Ravenscraft (1991) find
that foreign acquirers of publicly traded firms pay a much higher premium for firms than
do domestic acquirers, even after controlling for industry, year, and the extent of com-
petition among acquirers, supporting our presumption that they are at an informational
disadvantage.
     Another way that foreign investors might be able to avoid the efficiency losses arising
from asymmetric information about the value of individual firms would be to invest in a
diversified portfolio of publicly—traded domestic firms.6 One problem with doing this is
that the set of firms that list their shares on the public exchanges may not be representative
of all domestic firms — everything else equal, the "lemons" would be more likely to list
 6
    Including shares in a representative sample of closely—held firms in such a portfolio would not likely
be feasible.


                                                    7
their shares in the hope that the market will overvalue them. In most countries, only a
small fraction of domestic equity is traded on the public exchanges, so that this selection
bias can be important. In addition, there can still be asymmetric information between
domestic and foreign investors regarding the value of a diversified portfolio of publicly—
traded shares, information not fully conveyed through market prices due to the noise in
these prices. In the face of this asymmetric information, it may well be advantageous for
foreign investors to rely on the information their firms have available about the value of
specific target firms when investing abroad.
     These problems faced by foreign investors due to asymmetric information when buying
a diversified portfolio may seem minor when investing in a country such as the U.S. where
most firms are publicly traded and where mutual funds are readily available. Even for
investments in U.S. equity, however, a relatively small fraction of purchases by foreigners
appear to consist of such diversified investments in publicly traded firms. For example,
during the 1980's virtually 80% of the holdings by Japanese investors of equity in U.S.
based firms consisted of direct investment;7 the equivalent figure for holdings by English
investors is 50%. Of the remaining holdings, an unknown fraction consists of investments
in equal—weighted portfolios.8 Whether the above explanations for this dominant role of
direct investment are correct or not, since most foreign investments in domestic equity
take the form of direct investment, the model we develop focuses on foreign purchases of
individual firms rather than of diversified portfolios.
     Given foreigners' informational disadvantage when buying domestic equity, one might
expect that capital flows instead take the form of purchases of domestic government bonds.
Asymmetric information about future interest rates, inflation rates, and tax policy would
still put foreign investors at somewhat of a disadvantage but perhaps less so than with
domestic equity. However, portfolio models without asymmetric information, such as in
 '  To be classified as direct investment, each investor must hold at least 10% of the shares in any given
firm. For equivalent figures for a few other countries, see Gordon—Jun (1993). Figures on the composition
of U.S. holdings abroad are quite similar.

  8 In spite of its relatively small share of world GNP, the U.K. is the largest source of portfolio investment
in the U.S., and the most important location for U.S. portfolio investment abroad. This suggests the
Importance of asymmetric information between countries.


                                                      8
 Adler—Dumas (1983), forecast that foreigners should hold negative amounts of domestic
 bonds, to hedge against exchange rate movements when buying domestic equity. The
relative penalty on equity due to asymmetric information would need to be severe to
reverse this forecast of negative holdings of domestic bonds. We thus focus on the equity
market.


2. Set—Up of the Model

     Our model focuses on a small open economy that consists of one representative indi-
vidual who survives for two periods. In the first period, this individual starts with real
assets of A, which can either be invested or used for first—period consumption.
   Savings -can be invested at home or abroad. If they are invested abroad, they earn
some real return rt; we assume the economy is small relative to world capital markets, so
take r    as
          given. If savings are invested at home, they earn a rate of return denoted by r,
which in equilibrium will be a function of r. For purposes of discussion, assume for now
that r   exceeds r*.    If this condition is satisfied, all domestic savings would be invested at
home; our focus will therefore be on the extent and form of capital imports.
     There are a fixed number of domestic finns, which we denote by N, all initially owned
by the representative domestic individual.9 Ex ante all domestic firms are identical. If
firm z raises K from its shareholder and invests these funds in real capital, output in the
second period will be f(K1)(1 + 4,b0 where f(K1) is a positive concave function, with
f(O) = 0, and where , is independent across firms and identically distributed. To avoid
issues of bankruptcy, we assume that 1 + , > 0. At the time investment decisions are
made, i, is not known; ex ante, its expectation is zero, and we assume for simplicity that
its probability distribution has no mass points. Also, N is large so that by the law of large

     This assumption of a fixed number of firms is the device we use to limit the scale of investment in
the economy. In an earlier version of the model, production required two factors, labor and capital, where
labor supply was elastic but individuals were immobile across countries. In this two—factor model, the wage
rate could adjust to limit the amount invested. Since the analysis of the two—factor model was significantly
messier, yet the conclusions were basically the same as in the one—factor model presented here, we focus
on the simpler case.
10
     The capital itself fully depreciates during production.



                                                      9
numbers there is effectively no aggregate uncertainty, given that i, is independent across
firms.
   If the economy were closed, investment would occur until f'(K1) = 1 + r for each firm,
where f'(K1) = Of(K1)/OK. During the first period, the individual's consumption, C1,
would simply equal his residual assets, A — ,      K,. His consumption in the second period,
denoted by C2, would then equal

                                      C2 = >   f(K,)(1 + i,).                                (1)

   How does this story change if foreigners can also invest in the country? This invest-
ment can take the form either of acquisitions of existing domestic firms or of greenfield
investments. The sequence of possible investments is as follows. First, foreign investors
can offer to buy ownership of some of the N domestic firms before any investment has
occurred in them, paying some amount E per firm. Since there has not yet been any
domestic investment in these firms, these purchases will be called greenfield investments.
Assume that the first J firms are purchased by foreigners in this manner.
   Foreign owners are assumed to be at a handicap relative to domestic owners in setting
up and operating such a firm, due to their lack of knowledge about the domestic economy.
As a result, we assume that if they invest K in firm j, the resulting income in the second
period will equal f(K3)(1 — ), where 7 captures the costs they face due to asymmetric
information. If foreigners do choose to set up a new firm, investment in the firm would
continue until f'(l — y) = 1 + r*.
   Once these greenfield investments have occurred, domestic investors can invest in the
N — J remaining domestic firms. After these investment decisions have been made, the

values of the ,   are   revealed to domestic but not to foreign investors. At this point, foreign
investors can bid for shares in the firms set up by domestic investors, knowing only the
amount of capital, K, invested in each firm.1' Domestic owners decide which shares to
sell, given the amount bid by the foreign investors. Denote by I the amount the foreign

   Since K is chosen before e, is known, its value reveals no information about c.


                                                  10
investors spend acquiring shares in firms set up by domestic investors. The representative
domestic individual then consumes12

                                  C1=A—>K1+I+JEA-S                                           (2)

in the first period. For later use, we denote net domestic savings by S. In the second
period, foreign investors receive the output produced by the firms they purchased through
both greeuficld investments and acquisitions. Domestic residents receive the income from
the reinailung firms
      Iii order to characterize the equilibrium amount and pattern of foreign investment in
the ecoiioiny, we start by analyzing the acquisitions process. We then work backwards to
discuss the choice of the K,. Given the resulting value to domestic owners of setting UI)
a firm themselves, which they either keep or sell to foreigners, we can then analyze the
decision by the domestic shareholder whether to sell a firm to foreigners before it has been
set up. Finally, we discuss how r is determined in general equilibrium.
     How unuiy firms will foreigners succeed in acquiring? If foreign investors had full infor-
niation when bidding for shares, the value of the i'th firm's shares from their perspective
would equal f(K,)(1 + ,)/(1 + r), given that the rate of return available on the world
market equals r. But since they do not know the value of ,, all they can do is bid some
amount v,f(K1)/(1 + is) for shares in the i'th firm, where their choice variable is v.
     What value for v, will they choose? To answer this question, consider the response of
the domestic owner to any given value of v. If he keeps the shares, he receives an amount
ill present value equal to f(K1)(1 + )/(1 + r), given that the opportunity cost of funds
he faces is r. If instead he sells the shares to foreign bidders, he receives vf(K)/(1 + r).
Hence, he gains by selling if and only if
                                       v,f(K1) > f(K1)(1 +
                                                                                            (3)
                                        1+r               1+r
In eqlulil)riunl, shares will be sold as long as , is less than or equal to some value &, where
     is defined implicitly by 1 +           v,(1 + r)/(1 + r). The fraction of firms acquired by
foreigners tquals            where   (.)   is the cumulative distribution function for .
12
     Recall that wvestn,ent in greenfield firms is paid for by the foreign owner.


                                                     11
   Foreign bidders therefore systematically overpay for the firms they acquire from the
perspective of the domestic owner. But since the foreign bidders face a lower opportunity
cost of funds than the domestic shareholder does, foreign bidders may still gain from the
acquisitions. In particular, the expected value to the foreign bidders of the shares they
acquire equals f(K1)(1 + e)/(1 + r*), where e       E(Ii1      ?). Since the country is
small relative to the world capital market, foreigners will bid for shares until they just
break even on the shares they acquire. They break even if
                                       f(K,)(1 + e) — vf(K1)                                          ()
                                            1+r               1+r*'
or   if v   = 1 + e.   Note that v;    < 1 since foreigners acquire the "lemons" among domestic
firms. Given the definition of e, we         find that in equilibrium


                                            _____     —
                                                      —
                                                          1+r
                                             1+e          l+r                                         (

     Since e    is a function of only e, the left—hand side of equation (5) depends only on
As a function of , its value must lie in the range [1,oo). In particular, since , > —I, as
e decreases, the left—hand side must eventually approach one; in contrast as                   increases
without bound, so does the value of the left—hand side. In general, though, the value of
the left—hand side need not be a monotoriic function of . For example, if the distribution
of ,     had a mass point, then the value of the left—hand side would drop discretely at this
mass point. For purposes of discussion, we will assume that the distribution function for
e, is such that the left—hand side of equation (5) is a monotonicafly increasing function of
&1,13 implying that as r increases the fraction of firms acquired by foreigners increases.14
Where results       depend on this assumption of a monotonic           relationship, we will make note
of it.
     In equilibrium, the size of foreign acquisitions, I, equals

                =   (*) (>>f(K)(1
                              1+r + *)S.J = (e) (E1>f(K1)(1
                                                      1+r
                                                            + e)'
                                                               J
                                                                                                      (6)

13
     A sufficient condition for this to be true is that , has a uniform distribution.

    As asymmetric information becomes less important, so that the distribution oft, becomes less disperse,
the fract ton of firms acquired by foreigners becomes more responsive to changes in r.


                                                     12
 Second period consumption by the representative individual equals

                                  C2    = (1 —           f(K)(i + +),                                     (7)
                                                         1> J

where       =   E(j > c). Given that (1 — (*))(1 + e) +                         )(1 + e) = 1, equations
(6) and (7) imply that
                                        C2   >f(Kj)_(1+r)I.                                             (7a)
                                             i>J
Since the country is small relative to the world capital market, foreigners break even on
their investments, so receive only 1(1 + r*) in the second period on their initial investment
of I.
     We next show that 1 + r > f' > 1 + r    capital imports occur — the marginal product
                                                   if


of capital is not driven down to the cost of funds on the world market, and the return to
savings exceeds f' since investors can overcharge foreigners for the "lemons". To derive
the first inequality, note that the return to savings, 1+r, equals —(0C2/c9K1)/(ÔC1/ÔK,).
By using equation (6) to substitute for I in equations (2) and (7a), we can calculate this
ratio and, using equation (5) to eliminate r, find that

                                 1+r     = f'[l + (f)(ft — e)] > f.                                      (8)

To derive the second inequality, note first, using equations (5) and (6), that equation (8)
can be reexpressed •15
                                          — '
                                    1   +r—         +                                                   (8a)

It immediately follows that

                        F —(1 + r) = (r —          r) (i — f(K)) > 0,                                   (8b)

where the inequality follows because of the concavity of the production function and the
fact that I < K.
15
    The intuition behind this expression is as follows: Given the difference in the interest rates prevailing
at home vs. abroad, there are potential gains from trade. Since the country is small, foreigners earn the
rate of return, r, prevailing on the world market, so that all the gains from trade go to the domestic
shareholder. By investing more, the individual has more capital to sell to foreigners. Given asymmetnc
information, the fraction of his assets that he does sell to foreigners is '/Yl>., 1(K,).


                                                        13
     We now derive the equilibrium amount of greenfleld investment. There are only N
possible domestic firms, all initially owned by the representative domestic shareholder. If
this individual sets up a firm himself, selling some shares later to foreign acquirers, then
the present value of the income produced by this investment, net of the initial capital
expenditures, equals
                      f(K1)[1 + (*)(f* — e)1         K   —   f(K,) — K;f'(K;)            (9
                                 1+r                             f'(K1)
where the equality follows from equation (8). This value simply equals the rents arising
from the concavity of the production function. If a foreign investor purchases the firm and
sets it up himself as a greenfield investment, the present value of the resulting income to
the foreign owner is

                           f(K)(1—7)    —   K— f(K,)—K,f'(K,) —
                                                              —E'                        9
                             (1 +r)                      f'(K)
where    the first equality follows from the fact that the foreign owner would set K, so that
f'(l —   -y)   = 1 + r*.   Again the value simply equals the rents arising from the concavity
of the production function. Since the country is small, foreigners would bid up the price,
E, until they are just indifferent to buying these firms. Sales take place if and only
if E is greater than the value to domestic owners of keeping the firms, as expressed in
equation (9). Given that 1(K,) is a concave function of K, the value in equation (9a)
is larger than that in equation (9) if and only if K, > K;. The value of K, depends,
however, on the amount of greenfield investment — additional greenfleld investment leaves
the representative domestic resident with fewer firms to invest in when trying to save to
finance second period consumption, leading to a rise in K in each of the remaining firms.
If the optimal value of K, would be smaller than K even when all firms are owned by
the domestic resident, then no foreign greenfield investment will in fact occur. Otherwise,
there will be at least some greenfield investment. In equilibrium, greenfleld investment
continues until K has risen by enough so that K, = K, implicitly determining the size of
J.
     Finally, we characterize the equilibrium value of r. Without capital imports, the equi-
librium investment condition f'(K1) = 1 + r implies a negative relation between r and K,

                                                14
whereas the equilibrium savings relation (J2/U, = 1+ r would be presumed to imply a pos-
itive relation between r and total savings, S = NK,. Together these conditions determine
r and K,. When foreign acquisitions are allowed for, each of these relationships between r
and K changes. The investment condition is now equation (8), which for any given value
of r implies a larger value of K- than in the closed economy.'6 Similarly, for any given r,
the sum of domestic savings and foreign acquisitions implies a larger supply of capital than
in a closed economy. Together these relationships again determine the equilibrium values
of K1 and r — due to foreign acquisitions, the equilibrium K, must be larger than in a
closed economy.'7 If the resulting equilibrium value of K, is less than K,, then greenfield
investment will occur until the equilibrium value of K, is driven up to K.

3. Consistency of These Forecasts with the Stylized Facts

     Feldstein and Horioka (1980) argue that the close observed link between savings and
investment in a country is dramatically inconsistent with a model that assumes costless
international capital mobility; the inequality of real interest rates across countries provides
further support for this conclusion. Similarly, French and Poterba (1991) maintain that
the observed specialization of individual portfolios violates standard models of optimal
portfolio choice, which assume that the joint distribution of returns on securities is common
knowledge.
     To what degree does the incorporation of asymmetric information into the model help
resolve these inconsistencies between theory and evidence? To begin with, as seen from
equation (5), the model implies that real interest rates must differ across countries in
equilibrium if there are international capital flows. In particular, interest rates should be
higher in capital importing countries, a forecast broadly consistent with past experience.
In fact, the greater the degree of asymmetric information the higher r must be for any
16
     Equation (5) can be used to specify   as a function of r.

     The equilibrium may not be unique, however. In particular, equation (8) no longer necessarily implies
a uniformly negative relationship between K, and r once the effects of r on are taken into account. Sim-
ilarly, when the relationship between ' and r is not monotonic, domestic savings plus foreign acquisitions
together need not be a uniformly increasing function of r.


                                                   15
given size of capital imports.'8
     In addition, the model forecasts an extreme form of portfolio specialization. If a country
is a capital importer, as is the case in the country we focus on, any domestic shareholder will
not want to invest abroad, where the available return r is less than the return available
in the domestic market. Similarly, a capital exporting country will not import capital
— if residents in this country are indifferent between investing at home vs. abroad, in

spite of their superior knowledge about domestic investment opportunities, then foreign
investors would not invest there. Therefore, residents in a capital—exporting country would
in equilibrium own the entire domestic capital stock and invest any further savings abroad,
while residents of capital—importing countries would rather invest all their savings at home
and import any further capital from abroad. While observed portfolio diversification is
much less than would be forecast ignoring asymmetric information, these forecasts suggest
far more specialization than in fact occurs. Note, however, that our model has no market
risk, so no incentive for portfolio diversification. If we added market risk, the model would
forecast only a limited amount of portfolio diversification. Expected rates of return would
continue to differ between domestic and foreign securities due to asymmetric information
— investors would diversify to the extent that gains from diversification outweigh these

differences in rates of return.
     Vyliat about the conclusion in Feldstein—Horioka (1980) that increases in domestic
savings lead almost dollar for dollar to increases in domestic investment? To examine
the implications of the model for this relationship, assume first that there is no greenfield
investment, so that domestic savings, 5, is given by K — I. Note that we can implicitly
define aggregate output as a function of the aggregate capital stock, K , K1 — since
all firms are identical ex ante, K = K/N. We can then rewrite equation (6) as

                              K—       = ) (Nf'
                                             1+r
                                                 +
                                                                         )                           (6a)

18
    To see this, consider a proportional expansion in the distribution of e,, so that each value of e is
replaced by ae for a > 1. Holding e fixed, as a grows the value of r satisfying equation (5) increases,
while the value of I satisfying equation (6) shrinks. Since I is an increasing function of r, to achieve the
same size of I as before r must therefore increase further.


                                                    16
Differentiating this equation with respect to S, solving for OK/OS, and using equation (6),
we find that
           OK- (
           OS
                       Nf(K1)
                  Nf(I()-If')         1+   (Nf(K1)" (5[(f*)(1 + c)]\
                                             i+r )             Or         )
                                                                              (
In interpreting this equation, assume first that r remains unchanged, i.e. that e does not
                                                                                           10



change as K rises. Then, we find that OK/OS> 1! Not only does domestic savings lead to
additional domestic investment, even though the economy is small and open, but domestic
investment goes up by more than dollar for dollar as savings rises. The intuition behind
this surprising result is straightforward. As more domestic savings occurs, each finn is
larger. If r does not change, however, then the same fraction of firms will be purchased by
foreign investors as before, implying that capital imports expand as well. Since the rise in
S leads to a rise in I, 5K/OS> 1.
     In general, of course, the value of r will change, and this change can easily rationalize
the less dramatic values of OK/OS reported by Feldstein—Horioka (1980). In particular,
the rise in K will cause f' to decline due to the diminishing returns to capital, and by
equation (8) r would normally fall as well. The drop in r would normally lead to a fall
in €,   by equation (5), reducing the fraction of firms acquired by foreigners. This drop
in      can well be large enough that on net capital imports decrease due to the rise in 5,
resulting in a value of OK/OS < 1 as found in the empirical work.
     If greenfield investment occurs, however, conclusions change dramatically. Given that
there is greenfield investment, we know that K, = K,, which defines the equilibrium value
of r. As domestic savings go up, given r, foreign acquisitions go up proportionately, since
the fraction of firms acquired by foreigners remains unchanged. But if K and K, are
both to remain constant, this process can occur only by having the extra domestic savings
and foreign acquisitions together crowd out foreign greenfield investments. Therefore, the
extra domestic savings lead to a growth in foreign acquisitions, a fall in foreign greenfield
investments, and no change in the domestic capital stock. If there is green.field investment,
theiefore, the theory does not help rationalize the Feldstein—Horioka observations, but it
does have strong testable implications.
     The above model is therefore consistent with the empirical results on the observed im-
mobility of capital only if there is no greenfield investment in equilibrium. How important

                                              17
in fact is greenfield investment relative to foreign acquisitions? According to the data re-
ported in Auerbach-Hassett (1993), greenfleld investments have been under 10% of capital
imports to the U.S. in recent years. Some certainly did occur, however. But our model
ignores any of the synergy gains from common operations emphasized as explanations for
foreign investment by Dunning (1985). If differences in available rates of return among
countries are not sufficient in themselves to explain the observed greenfleld investments,
ignoring the synergy gains, then our model would forecast that K should respond to ad-
ditional savings, as described by equation (10). In that case, the model is in principle
consistent with the Feldstein—Horioka observations.


4. Optimal Domestic Tax Policy

   Past models of taxation of income from investment in small open economies, which
ignored asymmetric information, concluded that domestic investment should not be taxed
even if the government has revenue needs — direct taxes on immobile factors dominate.
In addition, taxes on savings by domestic residents would be infeasible if earnings abroad
cannot be monitored, an assumption we continue to adopt here. How do these conclusions
change once we introduce asymmetric information into the model?
   Rather than introducing explicit tax instruments from the beginning, we start by as-
suming that the government has direct control over the number of firms J sold initially
to foreigners, the amount of foreign acquisitions I, and the individual's net savings, S.
Given the differences between the resulting optimal allocation and the market equilibrium,
we then discuss what types of tax interventions would produce the optimal allocation.
To begin with, we ignore any revenue needs of the government, and simply assume that
policy is set so as to maximize the individual's utility, U(C1, C2), where (from equation
(2)) Ci = A — S and (from equation (7a))

                       C2 =(N_J)f (5N' JE) -(1+r)I.
Given these expressions for C1 and C2, what do the first—order conditions for optimal
policy imply?

                                             18
    Differentiating utility with respect to J, we find that firms should be sold if and only if

                                     E>—   f—K1f'(K8)
                                             f'(K1)
As seen in equation (9), this is just what happens in the market equilibrium     firms should
be sold only if the price foreigners pay exceeds the rents earned from keeping them.
   The amount of foreign acquisitions that occurs in the market equilibrium is not optimal,
however. Since the funds provided by the foreign investor earn an expected return of f'
but cost only 1 + r', capital imports should continue until

                                         fI=l+r*                                         (11)

as can be seen by differentiating utility with respect to I. In the market equilibrium, in
contrast, f' > 1 + r* (see equation (Sb)). As in Akerlof (1970), too little trade occurs from
an efficiency point of view in the market equilibrium as a result of asymmetric information.
Denote the size of K in this optimal allocation by K.
   In combination, these results imply that no greenfield investment occurs under the
optimal allocation. Under the optimal policies, f(K1) = 1 + r, whereas the equilibrium
condition for K, is f'(K,)(1—7) = 1+r. As a result K) <K,, so no greenfield investment
occurs. Capital in greenfield firms is invested inefficiently since y > 0, whereas capital in
firms that end up being sold to foreigners is invested efficiently, at least ex ante. Since
foreign investors in either case simply earn the world rate of return, 1 + r, the domestic
resident prefers attracting funds in the form of foreign acquisitions rather than greenfield
investments.
   If we differentiate utility with respect to S, we find a condition characterizing optimal
savings:
                                                                                         (12)

Since f' 1 +r under the optimal policies and U1/U2 1+r given decentralized savings
decisions, we conclude that the rate of return to savings, 1 + r, should equal the rate of
return available on the world market, 1 + r. If investments can be financed with foreign
funds at a cost of 1 + r*, there is no point in financing them instead with domestic savings
that cost 1 + r if r > r*.

                                             19
     These first—order conditions are the same as would prevail in a small open economy that
did not face any problems with asymmetric information. The role of policy is therefore to
overcome the misallocations that result from the presence of asymmetric information.
     What types of tax policies can the government use so that equations (11) and (12)
hold in the market equilibrium? One possible approach would be to impose an income
tax at rate r on all firms, but add a subsidy at rate a on firms acquired by foreigners.
With these policies, the representative shareholder would receive second—period income
of f(K)(l + )( r) if he keeps firm i, whereas a foreign owner would instead receive
                    1 —



f(K1)(l - .)(1 — r)(1 + a). We assume that the net tax revenue will be returned to the
individual in a lump—sum form in the second—period.19
     What tax rates would be needed to sustain the optimal allocation? To begin with, the
subsidy rate has to be large enough to increase K to K. According to the tax—inclusive
version of equation (6), since r = r* this implies that            must satisfy

                          K —S =      (*) (Nf(K/NX11+r+ ')(1 — r)'J                                   (6b)

Deriving equation (5) in the presence of taxes, we find that a must be set so that 1 + =
(1   + a)(1 + e) at this required value of e. When taxes are incorporated into equation
(S), we find that the after—tax rate of return to savings now satisfies

                               1   + r = [(1 — T)[1 + )(e — e)].                                      (8c)

For any giveim value of i-, the increase in         needed to bring K up to K* results in a rise
in r —- since foreigners continue to earn 1 + r on their savings, the subsidy used to raise
   simply accrues to the domestic resident in the form of an increased rate of return to
savings. If tax rates are to be set so that r = r', then r must be set so that

                                   (1 — r)[1   + (et)( — e)] = 1.                                    (13)

     How would these results change if the government has revenue needs? Individuals are
receiving pure profits in this model, due to the concavity of the production function. Hence
19
    In fact, net tax revenue will be zero under the optimal policies, since each group of investors is paid
the average gross return generated on their investments.


                                                   20
the government could collect revenue without distorting any decisions by taxing these pui'e
profits. Would it choose to deviate in any other ways from the above policies, which were
chosen ignoring any revenue needs?
      To judge this, consider the government's choice of the rate of return to individual
savings, r, and the amount of capital imports, I. It can control these allocations indirectly
through taxes on savings and subsidies to capital imports, and for simplicity we treat the
allocations rather than the taxes as the instruments. Given the presence of pure profits
taxes, the government's objective is to maximize


                                         U(C1,C2)+ AR

with respect to r and I, where A measures the value of additional government revenue,
C1 = A —    S,   C2 = 5(1 + r) since pure profits have been taxed away, and


                           R=Nf(IS) _(1+r*)I_(1+r)S.
In setting r, the government must take into account the constraint that r                    —   if r
were to drop below r*, all domestic savings would shift abroad. If the government were to
raise r and simultaneously adjust I so as to leave K constant, then the resulting change
in social welfare equals
                                                           *   as
                                  —(A—U2)S--A(r--r             ).-.                              (14)

As long as savings is an increasing function of the interest rate, this expression negative
for all values of r      r* ,20 implying that r will be set at its minimum feasible value of
r •21  If we differentiate the government's objective function with respect to I, we find that
     = 1+r. As a result, the optimal allocation is identical to the one chosen without revenue

20
    When we assume that the government has revenue needs we are assuming that government revenue
is more valued that private consumption, so that A> U2.
21 If
      a tax on foreign—source earnings could be enforced, then equation (14) implies that the optimal
value of r will be below r.


                                                 21
needs. Again, the iuai'ginal pro(lUct of capital, and the return to individual savings, are
both set equal to the rate of return, r, prevailing on the world market.22
    These results prescribing a subsidy to foreign acquisitions and a tax on domestic savings
are in sharp contrast to the forecasted tax policy in a large open economy. As noted above,
a large capital importer will want to discourage capital imports in order to reduce the rate
of return required by foreign investors. Similarly, Gordon and Varian (1989) show that
when the distribution of returns on a country's equity has idiosyncratic components, the
country has market        over access to this distribution of returns. Hence, it will want to
discourage foreign purchases of domestic equity in order to drive up the price of its equity.
In contrast, when asymmetric information explains the lack of capital mobility, a capital
importer will want to explicitly encourage foreign acquisitions of domestic equity.
    So far we have exainijicd optimal tax policy in a small capital—importing country. What
about policy iii a capital—exporting country? In such a country, investors are indifferent
at the margin between investing at home or abroad. The government cannot reduce the
net—of -tax return to domestic investment, since investors can always go elsewhere. The
analysis of this case in fact would be identical to the previous analysis in Gordon (1986) and
Razimi—Sadka (1991). In particular, it would continue to show that source—based capital
income taxes are dominated by direct taxes on immobile factors, and that residence—based
capital income taxes are infeasible.

5. Discussion
    This model could be complicated in a variety of directions. For example, we assumed
that existing firms had no way to signal information about their actual value of                        to
potential foreign investors, yet would want to signal if they could. The firm's initial capital
stock, J, can not serve as a signal, since it is chosen before €j is known. One signal that

22 These conclusions depend on the availability of explicit taxes on the immobile factor bearing the
uictdence of this tax. If the goverzirneilt could not impose a 100% profits tax, for example, then the
optimal policies would change. Whereas the rate of return to savings would be kept equal to r, the
ubsidics to foreign acquisitions would fall in order to save on revenue resulting n a fall in K from the
value scen above. Similarly, iii our original model with two factors, capital and labor, optimal tax policy
would set f' = 1 + r and r = r only so long as the government has available a tax on labor income.
Note that f' = 1 + r = 1 + r would remain optimal even though labor supply is elastic.


                                                    22
can be effective, however, is an offer to retain some of the shares in the firm in exchange
for a somewhat higher price for the remaining shares. Only firms that are doing relatively
well would find this option more attractive than selling all of the shares at a somewhat
lower price.
   To what degree does the equilibrium change when such a signal is used? Such a
signalling equilibrium can lead to more firms having foreign owners. In spite of this,
however, capital imports need not be larger since fewer shares are sold by each firm. To
see this, consider the special case in which , is distributed uniformly on the interval [—a, a],
and consider the particular signalling equilibrium in which a firm can seLl either all or the
fraction p of its shares to the foreign investors. For simplicity we ignore the possibility
of greenfield investments. The options open to foreign investors are now to offer to pay
some amount vf(K;)/(1 + r*) for firms that sell all their shares, and another amount
pvf(K1)/(1 + r) for the fraction p of the shares of firms that choose to sell only this
amount. What characterizes the equilibrium values of v and Va?
   For any given values of v and v, there will be some value of ,, denoted by            , such
that a domestic firm with this , would be just indifferent to selling all its shares or the
fraction p of its shares. Being indifferent implies that

                        vf(K1) = v5f(K1) + (1 —
                                                )f(KI)(1
                                                                 +)                        (15)
                        1+r       l+r                1+r
Any   firm with €, < would strictly prefer to sell all of its shares, and conversely.
   Similarly, there will be some other value of , >   7, denoted by , such that a domestic
firm with this , would be just indifferent to selling the fraction p or selling none of its
shares, implying that
                                         — f(K1)(1 +
                                  v5f(K) —                 )
                                   1+r5            l+r                                    (15a)

Any firm with ,> would strictly prefer not to sell any of its shares, and conversely.
   Given this behavior, foreigners break even on their purchases of firms selling all of their
shares if v = 1 +    < ) = 1 + .5( — a); they break even on their joint ventures if
VS = 1 + E(f1    <e4 ) = 1+ .5( + e). Substituting these equilibrium conditions into
equations (15) and (15a) gives two conditions which together determine the values of
and . If p > 1 — .5(1 + r)/(1 +r), then the only feasible solution to these equations sets
                                              23
   = —a and               where     is the solution fouiid in the previous model. As a result,
no firms are sold entirely and the same fraction of firms as before have foreign owners.
But since only the fraction p of the shares of these firms are now being sold, total capital
imports are now reduced by the fraction 1 — p.
    If p < 1 —   .5(1   + r)/(1 + r*) < .5, then there will be a separating equilibrium with
   > —a and        > . Now more firms than before will be selling at least some of their
shares to foreigners. But do capital imports go up as a result? Previously, capital imports
satisfied equation (6). Now they instead satisfy

     P ())                 [(€fl(1 + .5(f - a))   + j() -       (1 + .5( + )J.           (6c)

Since P   is continuous in p, it is clear that for p not much below 1_.5(1lr)/(1+r*), 1* will
still be smaller than the I satisfying equation (6). A more careful algebraic comparison
reveals that P is smaller than I for all possible values of p. Therefore, this particular
signalling equilibrium always leads to smaller capital imports, so would imply lower utility
for the domestic resident than the equilibrium without signalling, if we allowed additional
heterogeneity in the possible fractions sold, leading to greater separation among domestic
firms, it may be that an equilibria can be found that will involve increased capital imports.
But the basic conclusion would remain that capital imports are limited in spite of the
interest rate differentials.
   One other more detailed issue that we feel could well be important is that foreigners may
be able to observe some forms of capital more easily than others, e.g. tangible assets such
as machines may be readily observable, but intangible assets such as goodwill, durability
of the capital stock, the quality of market information, etc. may not be. We could capture
this by assuming that there are two possible forms of capital: intangible capital, K", and
tangible capital, K. Ex post output might then equal f(K,Kt)(1 + i,), but foreigners
observe only I. Private incentives to invest in K" are reduced because of the possibility of
sales to foreigners, who do not observe K" so do not compensate the firm for any additional
investment in I. If K and K" are complements in production, then foreign investors
would treat a higher observed Kt in part as a signal that K" is higher as well, adding to the
firm's incentive to invest in K. Since foreigners recognize that this manipulation is going

                                               24
on, they will adjust their bid for shares so as to assure that ex post they earn the going
rate of return, r*. The result of this manipulation is an efficiency loss from the country's
perspective. Policy should as a result be designed to shift the firm's composition of inputs
to the values that would be chosen with common knowledge, leading to a different form of
government intervention.
   Such complications do not change the basic conclusions. Adding asymmetric infor-
mation to models of international capital allocation does contribute to explaining past
empirical observations on capital immobility. However, it fails to explain the important
role of corporate income taxes in developed countries. Not only doe8 the model con-
tinue to forecast no taxes on savings or investment in capital—exporting countries, but it
also forecasts no distortions to savings incentives23 and subsidies to foreign acquisitions
in capital-importing countries. This latter conclusion is particularly puzzling, given the
seemingly strong domestic political opposition to takeovers by foreign firms. What factors
might explain the lack of subsidies to foreign acquisitions?
   One simple story is that the presence of such a subsidy may induce domestic investors
to assume the guise of a foreign investor when buying shares, in order to qualify for
the subsidy. If the tax authorities cannot successfully monitor the true residence of the
owner of each share, the optimal tax policy certainly changes. However, it would still
involve subsidies to domestic investment and taxes on domestic savings, so still seem
counterfactual.
   One consideration omitted from our model, however, is the possibility that foreign
acquisitions can lead to an exchange of information between the new foreign owners and
the existing labor force in the firm. Information flows can go in both directions. In
the context of developing countries or Eastern European countries during the transition,
economists often argue that foreign acquisitions in the country allow domestic residents to
see how firms from other countries conduct business, enabling them to learn from these
operations how better to run other local businesses. To the extent that this domestic
learning spills over to individuals other than those who sold the firm to the foreigners,
23 While the return to savings would be taxed, the net rate of return would equal the marginal product
of domestic capital, implying no distortions to incentives.


                                                 25
there is in principle an additional ground for government intervention to subsidize foreign
acquisitions, so as to internalize this spillover, reinforcing the prior results.
    Information can flow in the opposite direction as well, however. The domestic firm
may own patents, have nonpatented expertise in particular technologies, employ workers
skilled at developing new technologies, or simply know better how to organize the internal
operations of a firm. When a foreigner acquires ownership of the firm, it will be in a position
to acquire this intangible capital, as well as the physical assets of the firm. In making use
of this intangible capital, however, it will be constrained by its relatively limited knowledge
about the host economy. As a result, future investments based on this intangible capital
would occur primarily in the foreign firm's home country. If the domestic firm had not
been acquired, however, the domestic owner would have made use of his intangible assets
primarily in the domestic economy, where he knows better how to operate. The acquisition
therefore not only affects the ownership of capital currently, but also has implications for
future investment patterns.
   Trying to deal explicitly with future investments, made based on firm—specific intangible
capital, would raise a variety of complications that are well beyond the scope of this paper.
What directions would such a model likely take? If we were to extend the model to three
periods, to allow foreign acquisitions to affect investment patterns in the second period, we
would face a situation where firms differed ex ante at the beginning of the second period
in their technologies, a complication not faced in the current model. To deal with this,
we could allow for takeovers among domestic firms before investment occurs in the second
period. As a result, those with more profitable technologies could expand by buying up
other domestic firms, so as to spread the use of their superior technology more broadly,
leading if there are no other complications to only the most profitable technology being
used in the domestic economy. Whether the domestic owner expands further by investing
abroad would depend on whether the gain from using a superior technology outweighs the
loss from operating at an informational disadvantage abroad. If the intangible capital were
developed in a capital importing country, then likely all use of the capital would occur in
the domestic economy if the firm remains owned by the domestic resident.
   If the firm were acquired by a foreign owner during the first period, however, then the
new owner would be able to expand use of this technology throughout his home economy

                                              26
during the second period, bidding more for firms there than others would who have access
to worse technology. Whether the foreign owner expands further in the host country would
depend on whether greenfield investments pay off there, given that the foreigner is at an
informational disadvantage.24
    The result is that the market value of firms in the capital—importing country in the
second period would be affected by whether domestic intangible assets were acquired by
foreigners during the first period.25 If a particular foreign investor can expand production
to a larger pool of firms in the second period than can other investors, then he would
find intangible assets relatively more valuable in the first period, introducing an additional
consideration into the acquisition process in the first period. As a result, we would expect
to find that investors based in larger countries have an advantage when bidding for firms
with intangible assets in the first period.
    A country's government, in setting policy, would need to take into account that foreign
acquisitions in the first period result in a drop in the value of domestic firms in the second
period (or a drop in wage rates, if labor were added as a factor). This drop in value would
not be taken into account by the owner selling out to the foreign acquirer. As a result,
the government would face an additional consideration, in itself creating an incentive to
discourage sales of firms to foreigners. In effect, a country's comparative advantage depends
on the quality of the technology available to firms owned by domestic residents.
   While we believe that asymmetric information between countries provides a promising
direction for exp'aining the empirical evidence on the international immobility of capital,
there seem to be many more fruitful directions to pursue before we can feel confident we
understand the full implications of asymmetric information for tax policy.




24 That foreign acquisitions were profitable in the first period does not imply that greenfield investments
would be profitable in the second period.

25 If we introduced labor as a second factor into the model, then we would conclude that the equilibrium
wage in the second period would be affected by foreign acquisitions in the first period.


                                                   27
                                   REFERENCES

   Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas. "International Portfolio Choice and Corporation
Finance: A Synthesis," Journal of Finance, June 1983, 38(3), pp. 925-84.
   Akerlof, George A. "The Market for 'Lemons:' Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism," Q-uarterl!/ Journal of Economics, 1970, 84, pp. 488—500.
   Auerbach, Alan J. and Kevin Hassett. "Taxation and Foreign Direct Investment in
the U.S.: A Reconsideration of the Evidence," in Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn Hubbard,
and Joel Slemrod, eds., Studies in International Taxation. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1993, pp. 119-44.
   Bayoumi, Tamim. "Saving—Investment Correlations: Immobile Capital, Government
Policy or Endogenous Behavior?" IMF Staff Papers 1990, 37, pp. 360—87.
   Ben—Porath, Yoram. "The F—Connection: Families, Friends, and Firms and the Orga-
nization of Exchange," Population and Development Review, 1980, 6, pp. 1—30.
   Bhandari, Jagdeep S. and Thomas H. Mayer. "A Note on Saving—Investment Correla-
tions in the EMS," IMP Working Paper No. 97, 1990.
   Caprio, Gerard and David Howard. "Domestic Saving, Current Accounts, and Interna-
tional Capital Mobility," International Finance Discussion Paper 244 (Washington: Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System), 1984.
   Cumby, Robert E. and Maurice Obstfeld. "International Interest—Rate and Price—Level
Linkages Under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of Recent Evidence," in 3. Bilson and
R. Marston, eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Practice. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 19S4.
   Cumby, Robert E. and Frederic S. Mishkin. "The International Linkage of Real Interest
Rates: The European—U.S. Connection," Journal of International Money and Finance,
1986, 5, pp. 5—24.
   Dooley, Michael, Jeffrey Frankel, and Donald J. Mathieson. "International Capital
Mobility: What Do the Saving—Investment Correlations Tell Us?" IMF Staff Papers,
1987, 34, pp. 503—30.
   Dunning, John H., ed. Multinational Enterprises, Economic Structure and Interna-
tional Competitiveness. Clichester: Wiley, 1985.

                                           28
   Feldstein, Martin S. and Charles Horioka. "Domestic Savings and International Capital
Flows," The Economic Journal, 1980, 90, pp. 314-29.
   Finn, Mary G. "On Savings and Investment Dynamics in a Small Open Economy,"
Journal of Iniernaiional Economics, 1990, 29, pp. 1—21.
   French, Kenneth R. and James M. Poterba. "Investor Diversification and International
Equity Markets," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 3609, 1991.
   Gordon, Roger H. "Taxation of Investment and Savings in a World Economy," Ameri-
can Economic Review, December 1986, 76(5), pp. 1086-1102.
   Gordon, Roger H. and Joosung Jun. "Taxes and the Form of Ownership of Foreign
Corporate Equity," in Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod, eds.,
Siudzc3 Zn International Taxajion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 13-44.
   Gordon, Roger H. and Hal Varian. "Taxation of Asset Income in the Presence of a
World Securities Market," Journal of International Economics, 1989, 26, pp. 205-26.
   Grossman, Sanford. "On the Efficiency of Competitive Stock Markets Where Traders
Have Diverse Information," Journal of Finance, 1976, 31, pp. 573—85.
   Grubert, Harry, Timothy Goodspeed, and Deborah Swenson. "Explaining the Low
Taxable Income of Foreign-Controlled Companies in the United States," in Alberto Gio-
vannini, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod, eds., Studies in International Taxation.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 237-270.
   Harris, Robert S., and David Ravenscraft. "The Role of Acquisitions in Foreign Direct
Investment: Evidence from the U.S. Stock Market," Journal of Finance, July 1991, 46(3),
pp. 825—844.
   Kyle, Albert. "Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading," Econometrica, November
1985, 53(6), pp. 1315—35.
   Mishkin, Frederic S. "Are Real Interest Rates Equal Across Countries? An Empirical
Investigation of International Parity Conditions," Journal of Finance, December 1984,
39(5), pp. 1345—57.
   Murphy, Robert C. "Capital Mobility and the Relationship between Saving and Invest-
ment Rates in OECD Countries," Journal of International Money and Finance, 1984, 3,
pp. 327—42.

                                          29
   Obstfeld, Maurice. "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and Measure-
ment," Carnegie—Rochester Series on Public Policy 1986, 24, pp. 55—104.
   Penati, Alessandro and Michael Dooley. "Current Account Imbalances and Capital
Formation in Industrial Countries, 1949—81," IMF Staff Papers, 1984, 31, pp. 1—24.
   Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka. "International Tax Competition and Gains from Tax
Harmonization, Economic Letters, 1991, 37, pp. 69—76.
   Summers, Lawrence. "Tax Policy and International Competitiveness," in Jacob Frenkel,
ed., International Aspects of Fiscal Policies. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1988.
   Tesar, Linda L. "Savings, Investment, and International Capital Flows," University of
Rochester Working Paper 154, 1988.
   Tesar, Linda L. and Ingrid M. Werner. "International Equity Transactions and U.S.
Portfolio Choice," N.BE.R. Working Paper No. 4611, 1994.




                                            30
</ref_section>
