NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EDUCATION, INCOME
DISTRIBUTION, AND GROWnJ:
THE LOCAL CONNECTION

Roland B6nabou

Working Paper No. 4798

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachuse Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1994

I am grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Patrick Bolton, Peter Diamond, Dick Eckaus, Jonathan
Gruber, Michael Kremer, Glenn Loury, Julio Rotembcrg, Richard Startz and Jean Tirole for
useful comments. Financial support from the NSF is gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4798
July 1994
EDUCATION, INCOME
DISTRIBUTION, AND GROWTH:
THE LOCAL CONNECrION

ABSTRACT

This paper develops a simple model of human capital accumulation and community
formation by heterogeneous families, which provides an integrated framework for analyzing the

local determinants of inequality and growth. Five main conclusions emerge. First, minor
differences in education technologies, preferences, or wealth can lead to a high degree of
stratification. Imperfect capital markets are not necessary, but willcompound these other sources.

Second, stratification makes inequality in education and income more persistent across
generations. Whether or not the same is true of inequality in total wealth depends on the ability

of the rich to appropriate the rents created by their secession. Third, the polarization of urban
areas resulting from individual residential decisions can be quite inefficient, both from the point

of view of aggregate growth and in the Pareto sense, especially in the long run. Fourth, when

state-wide equalization of school expenditures is insufficient to reduce stratification, it may

improve educational achievement in poor communities much less than it lowers it in richer
communities; thus average academic performance and income growth both fall. Yet itmay still

be possible for education policy to improve both equity and efficiency. Fifth, because of the
cumulative nature of the stratification process, it is likely to be much harder to reverse once it
has run its course than to arrest it at an early stage.

Roland Bnabou
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

Introduction
The accumulation of human capital underlies the evolution of both income inequality and productivity

growth. As demonstrated most vividly by the physical blight and social pathology of inner-city schools,

certain fundamental inputs in this process are of a local nature. They are determined neither at the
level of individual families nor that of the whole economy, but at the intermediate level ofcommunities,

neighborhoods, firms or social networks. Not only is this the case with school resources when funding

is decentralized, but also with many forms of "social capital": peer effects, role models, job contacts,
norms of behavior, crime, and so on. Through these fiscal and sociological spillovers, a child's education is

determined in large part by the set of adults to which she is "connected". Therefore, the next generations
distribution of skills and incomes is directly shaped by the manner in which today's population organizes
itself into differentiated clusters,

The aim of this paper is twofold. First, to provide a unified analysis of the forces that tie together
socioeconomic segregation, income distribution, and productivity growth. We develop a simple model
where heterogeneous families form communities, choose local public expenditures, and accumulate human
capital. It, allows us to elucidate the roles played by endowments, preferences, the technology of education,

capital markets, school funding, neighborhood effects, and discrimination. Its synthetic quality also enables

us to incorporate some of the main insights from the previous literature, while obtaining several new ones

The second objective of this paper is to further our understanding of two important questions. One is the
effect of stratification on the transmission of inequality across generations; it bears directly on the problem

of inner-city poverty, and on social mobility in general. The other central issue concerns education finance

policy: we examine some of the distributional and aggregate implications of the growing trend towards
court-mandated, state-wide equalization of school expenditures.

The literature to which the paper belongs has its sources in the classic works of Tiebout (1956) on
local public goods and Schelling (1978) on segregation and externalities. More recent prominent influences

include the work of Loury (1977), (1987) on racial inequality and of sociologists such as Coleman (1988),

Wilson (1987) and Jeneks and Mayer (1990) on group interactions. Another important motivation is tln
current debate over local disparities in school funding perhaps best publicized by Kozol (1991). The model

developed here builds on De Bartolome (1990), Bnabou (1993) (1992) and Durlauf (1992). But thepaper

1

is also closely related to Borjas (1992a), (1992b), Durlauf (1993) Tamura (1993) and Lundberg and Startz

(1993), through the link between community composition and the persistence of inequality; and to Glomm

and Ravikumar (1992), Fernandez and Rogerson (1992), (1993b) and Cooper (1992), through the issue of
education finance reform.

We now outline the structure of the paper and its main results. The model is presented in Section 1.
In Section 2, we identify the forces which promote or hinder segregation and explain their interactions. We

show how even very small differences in education technologies, preferenc or wealth lead to a high degree

of stratification. Capital market imperfections are not necessary, but even minor ones will compound the
other factors. The rest of the paper studies the potentially large effects of these small causes. Focusing first

on productivity, we examine in Section 3 how the total surplus generated by a metropolitan area reflects

its organization into local communities. In particular, we explain why the typical pattern of city-suburb
polarization can be very inefficient.

We then take up the

issue

of whether socio—economic segregation makes inequality more persistent.

We demonstrate in Section 4 how income convergence is slowed down, how ghettos arise, and how in

the long run this may reduce income growth for all families. We present in particular a very simple
prototype of the "local poverty trap" and "self-defeating secession" phenomena, which makes apparent the

general principles at work in more complex models (e.g., Bénabou (1993), Durlauf (1992), (1993)) But
because our framework allows for financial bequests as well as human capital, we are also able to point
out an important qualification which the previous literature has generally overlooked. While stratification

exacerbates inequality in education and income, the same need not be true for inequality in total wealth.
The determinant factor is the cost paid by the rich to separate themselves from the poor, or conversely the

extent to which they are able to appropriate the rents generated in the process of segregation. We discuss
various collective practices and institutions by which this may come about, showing in particular how de

jure racial segregation turns into de facto (economic) segregation once legal barriers to mobility are lifted.
The other main issue studied in the paper is education finance. We show in Section 5 that the decen-

tralization of school funding and control constitutes an additional segregating force, and that in general

it need not improve efficiency. In Section 6 we then examine the implications of policies, adopted by a
growing number of states, aimed at reducing disparities in education expenditures between rich and poor

2

communities. flnabou (1992) and Fernandez and Rogerson (1993b) predict very significant gains to moving from a system where school funding is based on local resources to a national or state-wide scheme. In
addition to reducing inequality, this would raise the economy's long-term output, or even growth rate; given

a low enough intergenerational discount rate, it would be Pareto-improving. In this paper we temper this

optimistic scenario by downplaying capital market imperfections, and emphasize instead the interaction
between purchased inputs and social spillovers in education, Indeed, several pieces of evidence seem to

cast doubt on the effectiveness of redistributive funding in raising the performance of poor schools, hence
in reducing earnings inequality and augmenting aggregate surplus. We show how a simple version of our

model can help explain some of these puzzles. We determine when equalization works and when it is
counterproductive, and, in the tatter case, identify alternative policies which may still improve both .'qwtv
and efficiency. Because these policies work through changes in community composition, however

they may

be constrained by a form of irreversibility which we show to b inherent in the stratification process
We conclude this preamble with some suggestive evidence on metropolitan stratification and growth.
While the effects of neighborhood and school composition on individual outcomes have been extensively
documented, there is as yet no empirical study of their aggregate implications. Rusk (I 993) presents some

provocative data which bears on the Issue; since it is very incomplete, we include it as general motivation

for the paper rather than supporting evidence for specific results. Table I examines fourteen nietropolilari
areas, selected by Rusk; the data is also plotted in Figure 1. It shows a strong positive relationship heiween

the lack of economtc segregation measured by the ratio of central city to suburhan mean incomes, and the
area's growth in both per capita income (1969-1989) and total employment (1973-I 9t8). TIme correlations
are respectively .74 and 91, or .60 and .45, depending on whether we measure income dis1,arities in 1989,

as Rusk does, or in 1970, which may be more appropriate.' This striking stylized fact is no substitute for
a systematic econometric analysis, and does not allow any inference about causality. But it does suggest

that city-suburb stratification and metropolitan economic performance are interdependent processes, and
that the underlying mechanisms deserve careful theoretical and empirical investigation.
Il am grateful to Ed Glasser for kindly providing the 1970 figures, from the Census Bureau's County snd City
Data Book,. The above result seems opposite to that of Claeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer (1993), who find that
racial segregation in a city affects population growth positively. Note, however, that the focus is here on citv.suhurb
economic dichotomy, rather than on racial segregation and population growth within city limits.

3

Metro Area

City/Suburb per capita Metro ptr capita income
income ratio (%)
growth (%)
1970

1989

Metro employmen

1969-1989

growth (%)
1973-1988

Cleveland, Ohio

69

53

23

Detroit, Mich.

80

53

26

11

Columbus, Ohio

83

81

34

40

Milwaukee, Wis.

84

62

25

22

Harrisburg, Pa.

87

72

33

29

Louisville, Ky.

91

79

30

21

Richmond, Va.

91

83

45

46

Nashville, Tenn.

92

98

49

55

Syracuse, N.Y.

98

77

29

27

Mison, Wis.

104

95

34

5I

Houston, Tex.

107

89

36

67

Indianapolis, md.

108

90

32

34

Raleigh, NC.

119

103

62

81

Albuquerque, N. Mex.

148

118

41

75

Table 1: City-Suburb Inequality and Metropolitan Area Performance.

Source: see Rusk (1993), and footnote I

P1. lb

P3u,.
3

N
4-

S
0
S

3

S

0
S

U
a z

U

YLA?1I

TIJ. ?IDI

?tgu,, k

Pt Id

a.!

a
4-

4-

S
0S

S
0S

0
a

U

5.3

YRATTOIO

TL&ttO'?O

Figure 1: City-Suburb Inequality and Metropolitan Area Performance
YRATIOz relative city/suburb mean income; YGROWTH=snnual growth rate of metropolitan Income
per capita; NGR.OWTH= annual growth rate of metropolitan employment All values are percentages

1 The model
1.1 Agents and communities
There is a continuum of families, with Unit measure. Parents are of two types, A and B (rich and poor.
White and Black, etc.), with human capital endowments hA > h8. The proportions of the two types are
n and 1 — n. The average level of human capital is denoted = n h. + (1 — n) hB. These agents live in a

city composed of two towns or communities, j = 1,2, each holding the same number 1/2 of single-family
homes. The inelasticity of land supply and population density simplifies the analysis but is not essential.

Al! land belongs to absentee landowners; departures from this neutral allocation are considered later on.
The proportion of rich, or type A agents in each community is denoted as x and community 1 is defined

as the richer one: x 2n —

= r2 In the American context the two locations would be referred to as

"the suburbs" and "the urban center"; in Europe it would be the reverse.
A model with two types and two communities is the minimal framework in which to study how agents
associate in the provision of formal and informal education. It can also be viewed as a representative slice"

of a city with many types and communities, where we focus on any pair of contiguous towns and their
populations; almost all results extend to such a model. Thus we shall occasionally make the convenient

assumption that h/) (h — h2)/7

is small.

1.2 Preferences and technologies
There are two periods. A parent with type hE {hA,hB} initially chooses a community C, j =

1,2. so as

to maximize the resulting utility U' (h):

U'(h)

maxaU(c,c',h'), subject to

c+pJ+ti(h) = w(h)+d
c'+P(h,d)

= y(h)

(1)

= F(hLi,Ei)
In the first period, she consumes c and pays rent p' plus taxes tJ(h) out of her initial resources
augmented by her chosen level of debt d. The interest rate r(h d) may depend on her type as well as the
amount borrowed or saved. In the second period, the resources c' available for consumption or bequest
4

(both interpretations are possible) equal second period income y(h), minus debt repayments P(h, d) E
d(1

+ r(h,d)). Finally, the child's human capital h' is determined by that of the parent (through at-home

education), by the quality Li of social interactions in the chosen community, and by the resources devoted

to its schools, measured by the per student budget E.2

1.3

Neighborhood effects

The local spillover I) captures the non-fiscal channels through which a child's acquisition of skills is
affected by the social mix of neighboring families. These sources of "social capital" (Loury (1977), Coleman

(1988)) include: peer effects between students from different backgrounds, both in and out of the classroom

(Banerjee and Besley (l99l)) the fact that neighboring adults enforce norms of behavior and provide role
models, as well as networking contacts, for the young (Wilson (1987), Streufert (1991), Montgomery (1991))

and crime or other activities which disrupt education (Sah (1991)). Without loss of generality, we assume

that 1) = L(r'; hA, hB) is homogeneous of degree one in the distribution of human capital, and that if all
adults in GJ share the same level Is, then U = Is. We also require U to increase with any improvement
(in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance) in the local distribution: L'(x) > 0. and L rises 'ith /54
and Is8. One can thus think of Li as an average of local residents' levels of human capital; its value for a
representative sample of population will be denoted 7;

L(n; hA, h2).

Another key feature of the spillover is its response to a mean-preserving spread in the distribution. How

costly, or how beneficial is heterogeneity within a school or neighborhood? Put in another way do stronger

individuals tend to "pull up" the average to their level, or do weaker ones tend to "drag it down" to theirs?

Clearly, it is important to allow both cases.4 A convenient specification which we shall sometimes use is

the CES index L(x) = (r h + (1 z)h')T. When lie > 0 individual levels of human capital are
complements, L is convex in x, and heterogeneity is a source of loss: U < X. When 1/c < 0, individual
2More generally, F(h, L, E) should be understood as the child's earnings potential net of her optimally chosen
studying effort (measured in the nunieraire good). Incorporating private purchases of education is also straightforward: c and E are replaced in (1) by c + e and E + e, and parents maximize over both e and d.
3)encks and Mayer (1990) provide an extensive survey of the empirical evidence on neighborhood effects, and
Ma,nski (1993) a discussion of methodology. Recent studies include Datcher (1982), Dynarski et al. (1989), Corcoran
et al. (1990), Crane (1991), Borjas (1992a), (1992b), Case and Katz (1991), and Brooks—Cunn et al. (1993).
4flynarski, Schwab and Zampefli (1989) find that average student performance in a school district rises, ceteris

paribus, with dispersion among family incomes. Hamilton and Macauley (1991), on the other hand, find that
income dispersion raises the unit cost of education. Brooks-Gunn et al. (1993) find that it is primarily the upper
tail of a neighborhood's income distribution which affects the development of children and adolescents raised there.
5

levels are substitutes, L is concave in x, and heterogeney is a source

of gains L >

h.

The Leontieff

(minimum) and "best-shot" (maximum) cases are obtained in the limit as 1/c goes to +oo or —. More
generally, the concavity of L(x) will be an important determinant of the efficiency of equilibrium.5

1.4

Local school funding

The other local input into education is decentralized school expenditures.5 Given the distribution (z', 1—ri)
of rich and poor agents in the community —hence, given social capital Li and rents p.'— their preferenc
over school budgets and taxation are aggregated by some local poIiica1 mechanism into funding decisions

= E(ri) and tax schedules ii(h, p) = (h, p,

subject to the budget constraint z-' t(hA , p.', r') + (1

—

x')t(hB,p',xi) = E(xJ). We thus allow taxes to depend on individual income and property values. The
political mechanism in question could be majority voting, the outcome of lobbying, or delegation to an
efficient local planner. For the moment we shall leave it unspecified, so as to identify the general features
of mechanisms which promote or hinder segregation.

1.5

Equilibrium

Let us rewrite the utility of an adult of type h, living in a community with percentage z of rich households
and paying p in land rent, as:

V(h, p, r)

max{(J(L(h) + d — p — t(h, p r), y(h)

—

P(h, d), F(h, L(r), E(r)))

(2)

Equilibrium in the land market will result in stratification if the rich (in human capital) are willing or able

to bid more than the poor for land in a richer cormnunity. Formally, this simple soringcondthon in the
space of community quality and price means that a rich family's iso-utility curve, or bid-rent, is steeper

5For a more detailed discussion, see Bénabou (199). Similar functional forms are used by Comes (1993) in
studying the provision of public goods with non-additive individual contributions.
Aa (or social composition, the link between expenditures and students' achievement or future earnings is the
subject of much empirical debate. See Hanushek (1986) and Card and Krueger (1992) (or opposing views.
'Note that the £' and L'(h,p) chosen by C' residents may depend on the equi1sbrum rent p.' (as opposed to an
individual's bid p), through its effects on their wealth and on potential revenues from alternative forms of taxation.
To keep the notation simple, this dependence on j is subsumed in the dependence on r'.

6

than a poor one's:

R(h,p,x)

X

j

= V(hpz)

dp'

— Pt

V(h,p'r')V(h,p.)

,,

increases with h

(3)

In that case, the slightest divergence from the symmetric allocation z1 = r2 = n (which is always an
equilibrium) in favor of community 1 will set in motion a cumulative process: rich agents outbid poor ones
for land in CL, thereby further raising x1,p1 and lowering x2,p2. This leads to more displacements of the
poor by the rich mG' and more concentration of poverty in C2, until at least one community is completely
homogeneous. The three possible configurations are indicated on Figure 1, together with the equilibrium
conditions on p' and p2.8

Proposition 1 1. If Rhr(h,p,x) > 0 for all p, r, the unique stable equilibrium is stratified. If n < 1/2,
the rich all live in community 1 (x' = 2n, x2 = 0); f n 2 1/2, the poor all live in community 2 (r =
1,

r2 = 2n — 1). The symmetric equilibrium x1 =

= n is unstable.

. If Ra,.,(h p z) < 0 for all p x, the unique equilibrium is completely integrated (i.e. symmetric), and

ii is stable.

The proof is given in appendix. Examining the marginal rate of substitution between first-period
consumption and child education thus brings to light the economic forces wbich lead to stratification or
integration. Using the Euler equation for the optimal level of borrowing, we have;

R(h,p,z)=

(::

FL.L'('E'(z)

-

t(h,Px))(1+t(hPZ))

(4)

Equation (4) incorporates the contributions of technology, preferences, capital markets and local public
goods. The corresponding components will be discussed in turn.

8As in much of the literature on community composition (e.g., Dc Bartolome (1990), Wheaton (1993)) we only
determine the rent differential which ensures that no agent wants to switch communities. The base level of these
rents could be pinned down by relaxing one of the simplifying assumptions of inelastic land supply and fixed number
of agents of each type, but this would needlessly complicate the model.
7

1/2

B

V(h8,pI,xI) V(h81p2,x2)

Case n <

::::::

6

h8 ,pI,
x1)

h,

,x2) 0

FIGURE 2

V( hA,p',x')_V(hA,p21x2)O

V(

Casen= 1/2

B

V(

n>I/2

A

hA,p,x)VthA,p,x)

Case

A

B

2 The determinants of stratification
2.1 Local complementarities
The simplest version of the model is that where: (a) the only local input into education is community

quality, F = F(h, L), so that no collective decisions are involved;9 (b) capital markets are perfect, P(h,d) =
d(1 +

r); (c) utility is linear, U(c, c', h') = c +(c' + h') / (1 + r), or more generally c' and h' enter additively,

so that. U3/U2 is constant. This last assumption seems especially appropriate when c' is a bequest. The
bid-rent slope now simplifies to:

R5(h,p

Stratification occurs
those

r)= FL(h,L)
1+r L'(x)

(5)

if families with higher human capital are more sensitive to neighborhood quality than

with lower human wealth. In the words of Baumol (1967):
"The individual's remedy intensifies the community's problems and each feeds upon the other.

Those who leave the city are usually the very persons who care and can afford

to care—the ones

who maintain the houses, who do not commit crimes, and who are most capable of providing
the taxes needed to arrest

the process of urban decay. Their exodus therefore leads to further

deterioration in urban conditions and so induces yet another wave of emigration, and so on."

Proposition

2 A

small amount of complementarily between family
human capiial and community quality

(FL > 0) is sufficient to cause stratification.

The

distribution of financial wealth is u-relevant.

This simplest specification of preferences and technologies will be referred to as the "basic model". In
contrast to most of the literature on inequality, it shows that there might be very little role for redtstn6uttve

policies to affect either the distribution of educational attainment or the efficiency of equilibrium.

9This model also admits two interesting alternative interpretations. One is that agents care about community
quality L for reasons other than its impact on their child's education; crime is a good example, with richer agents
caring most about it. The second is that F = F(h, E) and communities finance schools by taxing income at a fixed
rate (such is then case when preferences are logarithmic; Glomm and Ra.vikuma.r (1992)). Then E(z) = r
where L(r) z(hA) + (1 — z)w(h5) is simply average income in period 1,
8

2.2 Capital market imperfections
In reality, it may not be easy for a poor family who values education highly to borrow enough to move into a
rich, well-educated community. We now show that differences in "ability" to pay for community quality tend

to complement, or even replace, differences in "willingness" to pay in generating economic segregation'°

We abstract from inter-family differences in tastes or returns to education, U3/U2 = 1, F

= 1(L),

and

allow instead frictions in credit markets: R(h, d) = F'(L) L'(z) / Pd(h, d).

Proposition 3 Small imperfections in capital markets, resulling in a higher opporlunity cost of funds for
poor families (Phd + d'(h) Pda < 0) are sufficient to cause stratification,
The result arises most simply when each family faces a constant opportunity cost of funds, with r, <

r

in (5). This could reflect different monitoring technologies, or a tax subsidy to home ownership relative to
renting (interest deductions), when only A families can afford a downpayrnent.

A better way is to endogenize this differential. Let everyone face the same interest schedule 1(d) =
d( 1

+ r(d)), with increasing marginal cost of borrowing (or decreasing marginal return on savings) P" > 0,

due to standard asymmetric information problems. Let agents work only in their first period of life, earning

(h), with /(h) > 0; during retirement, y(h) = 0. In order to live in the same community less wealthy
families must then borrow more than rich ones: d decreases with h for any given p hence the result.
The simplest case is that of a wedge between borrowing and lending rates, as in Galor and Zeira (1993);
conditions on endowments which ensure that A agents are always lenders and B agents always borrowers

are easily found. Alternatively, the imperfection could take the form of a borrowing constraint, d <d.
When resources are such that it binds for the B's but not for the A's, the Euler condition is an inequality

for the former but an equality for the latter, implying again R(hA,p,x) > Rr(hB,p,Z). But it bears
repeating that, absent offsetting forces, segregation will occur no matter how small wealth differences and
credit market imperfections.

iOThe empirical literature yields contradictory estimates of the sign of F,L; see .Jencks and Mayer (1990). The
most recent study (Brooks.Gunn Ct al. (1993)) finds FP.L > 0.
9

2.3 Wealth effects
We now focus on the term (Ua/U2)(c, c', h') in (4), which captures

preferences

for education relative to

old age consumption or financial bequest. To isolate wealth effects, let F = F(L) and capital markets be
perfect. Finally, let parental utility be additively separable: U(c, c', h') = u(c) + v(c') + w(h'). Then:

R(hpx) =

w'(F(L)) F'(L) I! =

'((h)) F'(L) L'

where (z) rnax{u(z — s) + v(s(1 + r))} and z(h) w(h) + y(h)/(l + r) is lifetime wealth.
Proposition 4

Small differences in lifetime resources (i."(h) + V(h)/(1 +

r)

> 0) are sufficient to cause

stratification.

When F = F(h, L), the marginal rate of substitution is U3
U2/ = w'(F(h, L)) / i'(z(h) — p). Stratification occurs if the reduction in the marginal utility of education due to better parental background h s
less than the reduction in the marginal utility of consumption which results from higher financial wealth
z(h). This is the sense in which community composition L must be a normal good. Similar wealth effects

underlie models where sorting occurs not through land rents —supply is infinitely elastic— but through
different levels or rates of taxation across communities (e.g., Fernandez-R.ogerson (1992)). Ceteris paribus,

rich agents vote for high taxes to finance public goods, such as education whereas poor ones prefer lower

levels. This leads, through a Tiebout (1956) -like mechanism, to as much segregation by wealth as the
number of communities will allow. Instead of rents or taxes, wages can also play the role of compensating
differentials. Such is the case in Fershtman and Weiss's (1992) analysis of social status, where agents derive

utility from being in a profession with a high proportion of well educated members. Wealthier agents are

more willing to accept a lower remuneration of human capital, in exchange for higher status. Therefore
more of them become highly educated, and the labor market stratifies. We show in appendix how variations
of our model yield simple versions of Fernandea-Rogerson (1992) and Fershtman and Weiss (1992).

We have until now assumed that all land rents accrue to absentee landowners. This is a "neutrality"

assumption with respect to the allocation of the capital gains and losses created by stratification in C1
and C2. It also simplifies the problem, by making agents' initial wealth exogenous: (h) = (h) We now
examine how relaxing this assumption affects the results. Let each A agent initially own v units of land
10

in C' and '7A units in C2; the corresponding endowments for a B agent are i'D = (1/2 — n VA)/(1 — n) and
= (1/2—nl?A)/(1—n). TotalwealthIevelsarew(h) =(h,)+v, p' +'7ip2, i = A,B.

Jfi-'A

= 'IA = 1/2,

both classes share equally in capital gains and losses; this is another neutral case where the results remain

unchanged. The converse, perhaps more realistic case, IS VA = 1/2n, 174 = 0. More generally, consider any

initial allocation where i'4 > 'IA, hence

Vfi

< ,. As communities become more concentrated, the wealth

of the A' s rises while that of the B's declines. Propositions 3 and 4 show that this in itself creates a
segregating force, which can sustain stratification even when all others are absent,

2.4 Local public goods, political mechanisms, and discrimination
We defer until Section 5 specifying a particular mechanism through which communities choose taxes and

school expenditures. But inspection of the corresponding terms in (4) already indicates a natural" tendency toward stratification, with a presumption of efficiency gains, ala Tiebout (1956).

Proposition 5 Political mechanisms whose outcome is such that expenditures E(x) increase with z when
ESE > 0 (respectively, decrease when FhE < 0) tend to produce strafzfication, So do mechanisms such that

income tax rates fall with the propothon of rich agents in the community (fh(h, p r) < 0) or with land

values (t(h,p,x) < 0).
To the extent that a higher proportion of rich agents is reflected in taxation and expenditure decisions
which are closer to their preferred choices, stratification will occur as agents "vote with their feet". Although

not all public choice mechanisms are such that the rich become more powerful as they become mote
numerous (e.g., majority voting), this requirement seems both fairly weak and realistic.
An alternative interpretation of t,(h, p, x) < 0 or thp(h, p, z)
relative to the rich,

< 0 is that the poor incur higher costs.

of joining a rich community. These costs, which are particularly

relevant when the

A's and B's correspond to different ethnic groups, can be pecuniary, due to discrimination by owners or
intermediaries in the housing market, or non-pecuniary, such as harassment." We come back to them
when discussing inequality.

Hof course, this component of does not enter into budget constraints. Yet another interpretation is that of
agents who have pure 'tastes" for the ethnic mix of their community, as in Schelling (1978) or Miyao (1978).
11

3 Stratification and efficiency: a simple case
We now examine whether it is efficient for different classes of agents to segregate in education. The criterion

we use is that of aggregate productivity or surplus: are the output gains of rich communities greater or
smaller than the losses of poor ones? Distributionsi issues are taken up in Section 412 To simplify the

exposition, we abstract from schoot funding and taxes; they are incorporated in Section 5. The surplus
generated by a community with a fraction x of rich households is thus S(x)/2, where:

S(x)

L(x)) + (1 — x)F(hB, L(z))

(6)

A planner choosing population allocations so as to maximize the productivity of the whole metropolitan
area would therefore maximize 5(z) + S(2n — x) over 0 < z < min{2n, 1). If S is convex, the optimal

solution is at a corner, and coincides with the stratified market equilibrium. On the other hand if S IS
concave,there are decreasing social returns to the concentration of human capital, and the optimum is

interior and symmetric: S'(z) = S'(2n — z), so z = n) The underlying intuition is apparent when
comparing the gains S(z') — 5(n) from stratification in the rich community with the losses S(n) — S(r2)
in the poor one. To assess the efficiency of equilibrium, we therefore evaluate S".

S' =

F(h, L) — F(h8, L) + (r F'L(hA, L) + (1— z) FL(hB, L)) L'

5" = 2(F(h,, L) — FL(h L)) L' + (ZFLL(hA, L) + (1 — X)FLL(IIB L)) (L' )2
+(ZFL(hA, L) + (1 — z)Fi.(h8, L)) L"
where L

=

L(z) etc. The first term in (7) represents the answer to the question: who benefits most from

an increase in community quality? If FhL > 0, it is the better educated family, hence an efficiency gain
from stratification. The second term measures whether an increase in L is more valuable to the average
resident, when starting from a low or from a high level; if FLL < 0, the marginal product vity of community

quality is decreasing, implying an efficiency loss from stratification. The last term in (7) represents the
12There, we also explain how economy-wide complementarities can translate aggregate rults into Pareto comparisons, and how welfare might differ between the short and long run.
Naturalty, ifS changes curvature, the optimum may involve partial segregation.

12

answer to the question: where does a marginal well-educated agent, or family, contribute most to raising
the quality of its community? If L" < 0, such a family is much less valuable in the rich commumty which
it joins than in the poor one which it leaves behind, leading to another loss from stratification.

In the basic model, agents allocate themselves solely on the basis of the first term in (7), no matter
how small the private gains which it represents.'4 More generally, wealth constraints and capital market
imperfections also shape the residential equilibrium.

Proposition 6 Agents

segregate

or ntegraie depending on F1L O, no matter how small, and on other

factors unrelated to the productivity of education. The equilibrium can be very inefficient, if the "conceniration effects" FLL or L" are large in absolute value and have the opposite sign of FhL, or more generally

of the incentive to segregate Rh.
We shall generally be more interested in the case where the city stratifies, and the resulting concentration of human wealth on one side and poverty on the other is potentially inefficient —as Table I would
tend to suggest. But Proposition 6 also makes clear when inefficient mixing will occur.

4 Stratification and inequality
Does families' tendency to segregate into homogeneous communities make inequality more persistent?
The simple answer is positive, as stratification compounds disparities in educational inputs atthe family
and community levels. The result is greater income inequality than would have occurred if families had
remained integrated. Assuming perfect segregation (n = 1/2), we have:

h'A/h'B = F(hA,hA)/F(ha,hB)> F(hA,1)/F(hB7),

(8)

in the simple case where purchased inputs play no role. When they do, the inequality is reinforced if

E'(x) > 0, which is the empirically relevant case. In Section 4.2 we make the model truly dynamic and
show how segregation slows down convergence among different groups, and can even generate poverty
'4HaJf of the gains 2 (Ft(hA,L) — F(h9, L)) L' represents the private gains from trade accruing to a pair of A
and B agents who exchange places. The other half is external: a marginal rise in L is more valuable, ceteris panbus,
in the community with more L—iensitive agents; see the expression for S. Interestingly, the results of Brooks-Gunn
St al. (1993) suggest that Fhj. > 0 but FLL, L" < 0.
13

traps. But first we point out that this story is subject to an important qualification, which tends to be
overlooked. More specifically, we discuss what are usually implicit assumptions about the appropriate
measure of inequality and the cost at which the rich are able to exclude the poor.

4.1 A caveat: inequality in what, and at what price?
The usual approach, in both the theoretical and empirical literatures, is to track across families the earnings,

education levels or professional status of successive generations, as we did in (8). But it is not obvious
that this is the appropriate measure of inequality. Better community quality and better schools come at a

cost, namely a higher rent p > p2 and/or tax bill (if t > 0). Taking into account not only the payoff but
also the costs of educational investments leads one to compare children's total wealth (human capital plus
bequest), or more generally the utility levels of parents. This may lead to a very different answer.

Proposition 7

Consider the general model of Section 1, and assume Vh5

20, V,,,, 0, ensuring

1. Equilibrium stratifi cation need not increase inequality between rich and poor fammles' utilty levels.

If ii < 1/2, then U'(hA) — U2(h5) > TJ(h.) — t7(h8), where the left and right hand sides correspond
respectively to the stratified and integrated equilibrium. But if n > 1/2, the inequality is reversed, and if
ii = 1/2, the ranking is ambiguous.

2. The same is true of inequality in children's total wealth c' + h', when utility is linear.
This simple result is proved in the appendix. It raises the old question of whether child mnequahty or

family inequality is the relevant concept (Stiglitz (1973)), but also some new and more practical ones.'6
What is the cost to the rich of seceding from the poor? Who owns the assets, property rights or legal rights

which allow stratification to occur and earn the rents which it may create? In our model, answering this
question means identifying the recipients of the capital gains and losses which stratification generates on

land in communities 1 and 2 respectively. Proposition 7 is derived under the "neutral" assumption that
they are distributed evenly: all housing initially belongs to absentee landowners, or alternatively to the
'We use this stronger condition for simplicity. The same result can be shown in a model with a continuum of
types and communities (as in Wheaton (1993)) using only (3).
'6lnterestingly, a similar indeterminacy can be demonstrated in a model where agents self-select through a tradeoff between school quality and tax rates, rather than land rents (e.g., Fernandez- Rogerson (1992)). Even though
there is no "leakage" of community resources to outsiders, stratification need not increase inequality in utilities.

14

city's residents but with no correlation between an agent's type and the location of her property (
1/2, I = A,B). A more realistic assumption might be that A agents own alt the land: A =
V8

==

= l/2n,

= '18 = 0. Yet even then, stratification need not increase inequality in total wealth: capital gains in C1

may or may not offset capital losses in C2. What is required is that the rich capture a larger share of the
rents which their exodus creates, and/or that the poor be left holding a larger share of the corresponding
losses: VA > VA, '18 > 'Li

What this points to is the role played in the generation and persistence of inequality by various collective

practices and institutions which allow the rich to capture the benefits of their secession, by raising -even
temporarily- the relative cost to the poor ofjoining or remaining in a community which is appreciating (see

Section 2.4). Prime among these is racial discrimination, whether enforced by law or custom. As long as
Blacks are simply not allowed to bid for land in the suburbs to which White families move, the latter can
regroup without dissipating too much of the resulting rents on higher land values. When, later on, Blacks

are allowed in, those who do come must pay the full value of the community's social capital. Although

the education gap between their children and those of their white neighbors will close, the gap in total

wealth will not. In fact, the inequality in wealth which occurs the moment de jure segregation is lifted
and property values adjust can in itself be sufficient to sustain de facto economic segregation. Consider
the specification of Section 2.3, with ii = 1/2. Suppose White and Blacks have the same amount of total

non-land wealth, and each own their houses in C' and C2 respectively. Proposition 4 implies that the two
groups will remain separated even once free mobility is allowed, though a rent differential p1 —p2 such

that ü(z + p' — p2) — ti(z) < w(F(hA)) — w(F(h8)) < ü(z) — ü(z + p2

—

p1). In recent years, the main

device used to 'keep out the poor" has been the right given to a community's residents to impose zoning
regulations, which essentially operate as minimum income requirements (Durlauf (1992),Wheatori (1993),

Fernandez and R.ogerson (1993a)).'

The empirical imp1icason of these observations is that studies which attempt to measure the role of
peer effects, neighborhood spillovers or school quality in the intergenerational persistence of inequality,
should try to take into account not only labor earnings but also financial wealth: how much of the human
'TEquivalently, Durlauf (1993) assumes that a neighborhood's land price adjusts to the (equilibrium) value which
keeps out the marginally poorer family, only once all richer families have moved in and bought the land at cost. In
all these models, it stilt remains that some of the higher human capital passed on to children in rich communities
reflecta the higher taxes paid by their parents.

15

wealth afforded to a child by a better educational environment is reflected in a reduction of the bequest
she receives?

Answering this question might also help determine whether the peer effects found by Borjas

(1992a) among members of the same ethnic group truly represent "ethnic capital",or whether they really
operate through local spillovers in ethnically segregated neighborhoods —as Borjas (1992b) would seem to

indicate. While the former are inherited "for free" through birth, the latter are subject to choice and carry

a price in the form of rent or tax differentials.
Bearing in mind this section's caveat about the links between stratification and different measures of
inequality, we now extend the analysis to a dynamic setting. We demonstrate how stratification gives rise

to ghettos or poverty traps, and how those can in turn adversely affect overall growth.

4.2

Overlapping generations

Let the two periods considered until now represent any two overlapping generations. To keep things simple,

the distribution of human wealth must be the only relevant state variable, determining both residential

equilibrium and the appropriate measure of inequality. The first condition holds if utility is linear and
capital markets are perfect (see Section 2,1 more generally), or alternatively if there are no financial
is consumed in old age.
bequests: u.'(h), y(h) represent labor income in the two periods of life, and all of c'

The second condition requires that either inequality in children's earnings be the criterion of interest, or
that the first generation of A's who secede capture the whole (present) value of rents created in community
1, leaving the B's holding the less valuable land in community 2. Thus all housing is owner-occupied, and

human capital inequality translates directly into inequality of total wealth or utility.
For simplicity we abstract from purchased local public goods, so that W

= F(h, L). Finally, let n = 1/2,

thus whether integrated or segregated, the two groups always remain homogeneous. Also, in either case,

if hA,i > h,1 the same is true for the next generation. Therefore if (3) is satisfied for all (h,p,z), all
generations of rich and poor segregate. The resulting impact on the persistence of inequality is most

when P(h, L) =

9hL, with n
=

+ /3

clear

< 1 < 9. In the integrated equilibrium, the level of inequality

converges to zero at the rate 1 — . In the stratified equilibrium,

log(hA,i+i/hB,il) = ( + /3) xi; initial conditions vanish at a slower rate, or even not at all if

16

cx +/3= 1.18

Inequality can be even more persistent if F(h, L) has decreasing returns in h alone, but increasing
returns in (h, L) jointly over some range. Such local increasing returns, realized only through segregation,

are what underlies ghettos or local poverty traps (Bénabou (1993), Durlauf (1992), (1993), Lundberg and
Startz (1993)). Suppose for instance that local spillovers involve a threshold effect:

F(h, L) = 0 h max{L — f,

O}'

(9)

where f > 0 and L(z) = (hA)a(hB)I is defined as the geometric average. Here all human capital
magnitudes h, L, F, etc., are measured as deviations from some fixed, basic level h> 0; thus h' = 0 is not
to be taken literally. When the two classes are segregated, we have h,1+,
they remain mixed, we have

F(h,,, h1), i = A, B. When

= F(h,,1, Lt); given (9), this implies L+j = F(L1, L) since L1 is the

geometric average. Hence the following result, which is illustrated in Figure 2.

Proposition 8 Let human capital accumulation 6e given by h-,1+, = F(h,, Li), as defined in (9). and let

f < h0 < h

f/(1 — 9—11(1_a)) <

i.

Under integration, inequality converges to zero, and both h81

and hAl grow asymptotically at the rate 9 —

1

> 0. Under segregation, the human capital poor families

converges to h in finite time, while that of rich families grows asymptotically at the rate 0 —1.

In equilibrium, stratification occurs (due to FhL > 0 or the other factors discussed earlier) confining
poorer families to a steady state of low productivity and income, which cohabitation with better educated

dynasties would have allowed them to escape.'9 Two recent papers provide supporting evidence for the
kind of non-convexity which underlies the ghetto phenomenon. Crane (1991) finds threshold effects in the
way a neighborhood's professional mix influences local rates of high-school dropout and teenage pregnancy.

Using a methodology specifically suited to detect non-linearities in income dynamics, Cooper, Durlauf and

Johnson (1993) find that very low levels of mean county income generate poverty traps.

'1Estimzting such a log-linear relationship for the descendants of immigrants to the United States, Borja.s (1992a)
both equal about .25 and
(1992b) finds that human capital spillovers slow down convergence markedly: a and
are ,tatistical]y significant.
iTamura (199lb) and Gajor and Tsjddon (1992) present models which combine increasing returns at the individual (country or family) level with an economy-wide technological externality, through which the poor eventually

catch up with the rich. The implicit assumption is that the rich do not segregate (i.e., limit interactions to their
own group), as they do when given the opportunity in our model.
17

h t+

f

h

h*

Figure 3a Stratificatioa:

h1= F(h,h)

ht
F(h,Lt)
F(h,L1)
F(h,L&

f

h*

Figure 3b Integration: ht+i= F(hI,L), Lt= (h) (h)

Stratification may even hurt the productivity and income of richer dynasties, when in addition to
local interactions in education, the different classes interact at the global, or economy-wide level. The
simplest way in which city and suburban residents can be bound together is as complementary factors in
the production of goods or knowledge. Let for instance the more educated A agents be managers, and the

-'-

less

educated B agents workers. A representative firm's output is y = (NM + Hw')

where

HM = n hA is managerial human capital and Hw = (1 — n) hB worker human capital. The resulting
incomes, yA =

(Y / n), yp =

(Y / (1 — n)) are clearly interdependent. Task assignments are

exogenous, but a model with occupational choice and competitive labor markets would have very similar
implications (Hénabou (1993)).20 Instead of production complementarities, agents could be linked through

economy-wide knowledge spillovers (Lucas (1988), Romer (1986), Tamura (1991b)) or nationally funded

public goods. These ties can all be captured by writing individual productivity as:

y(h) = hA Ht_A

(10)

where H is some economy-wide index of human capital. All variables are still measured as deviations from

,

which represents a basic level of skills and earnings. Like that of the local index L. the sensitivity of H

to heterogeneity is a key determinant of the costs and benefits of stratification. When H is a CES index.
this sensitivity reflects the degree of complementarity among agents' skill levels; see Bénabou (1992). Here

we shall simply assume that H, like L, is a geometric average: H = (hA)"(hB)'.

Proposition 9 Assume the same conditions as in Proposition 8, and the production technology (10).
Under integration, inequality converges to zero, and all earnings grow asymptotically at the rate C

Under segregation, human capital inequality keeps rising, but all earnings converge to

—

1.

in finite time.

In this economy, productivity growth slows down and eventually peters out because the secession
of "managerial" dynasties prevents "worker" dynasties from acquiring the skills necessary to keep up.21
20Alternatively, Tamura (1991a) and Bnabou (1992) present models where increasing returns cause agents to
specialize in imperfectly substitutable intermediate inputs. The induced mapping from human capita] to income is
essentiafly the same as the one below.
The results of Glaeser, Scheinkinan and Shleifer (1993) confirm the importance of a well educated genera] labor
force, in contrast to a high concentration of human capital on a small elite. In explaining a city's growth, they find
the proportion of residents with 12 to 15 years of education (high school graduates and some coLlege) to be both
more important and statistically more significant than the proportion with higher education.
18

Making those skills essential to production (by defining H as the geometric average, or Y as a CobbDouglas) is only a convenient shortcut. When education uses real resources (schools, R&D), as in the

general model h' = F(h, L, E), reductions in productivity feed back into each family's human capital
accumulation. Thus even when the elasticity of substitution o' between hA and hB in H is greater than
one, and even in the absence of threshold effects, stratification can lower the steady-state path of human
capital and income to which rich families converge. Whether or not the secession of the rich is ultimately

self-defeating depends in particular on the relative costs of local and aggregate heterogeneity, measured
respectively by the degrees of complementarity 1/c and 1/c in local and global interactions.

As shown by Proposition 9, society may be faced with an inlertemporal tradeoff. In the short run,

stratification benefits the rich more than it hurts the poor, so that overall growth increases (S" > 0 in
Section 3). But over the long run, excessive heterogeneity acts as a drag on growth, affecting all lineages.

There is then an incentive for the rich, provided their intergenerational discount rate is low enough, to
subsidize the education of the poor. They could for instance agree to inter-community transfers (Cooper
(1992)) or support switching to a system of national funding (Bénabou (1992)). But as shown by the fact
that purchased inputs play no role in Proposition 9, these maybe poor substitutes for the actual integration
of schools, neighborhoods, networks, and so on. We return to this issue when discussing policy later on.

5 School financing
We now explicitly incorporate local school expenditures and taxes into the analysis. We show how they

represent an additional segregating force, then examine the consequences for efficiency and inequality.
These results will also form the basis for the policy evaluation conducted in the next section.

5.1 The choice of education expenditures
We start with the most simple case, where agents are risk-neutral, capital markets frictionless, and local
schools financed by lump-sum or property taxes (with inelastic lot size, these are equivalent). This implies

that each family's tax bill equals per-student expenditures E, and that a community's educational investment is not constrained by its tax base. Section 5.4 considers income tax financing, and Section 5.5 shows
how a simple adaptation of the model can incorporate wealth constraints. We assume that in a community
19

with composition (z, 1 — x) and spillover quality L, education expenditures are determined as:

E(z,L)argmax{xF(hA,L,E)+(I—z)F(hfi,L,E)—(1+r)E).

(11)

We choose this decision rule for two reasons. First, unlike majority voting, it reflects in a simple, con-

tinuous manner both the proportions and the preferences of local residents. It can in fact be interpreted
as the outcome of unrestricted vote-trading.22 Second, it yields the efficient outcome, conditional on com-

munity composition; this allows us to highlight the issue of inter- rather than infra-community efficiency.
Equation (11) implies:

8E,L) =
8E(rL)
SL

—
—

—rF5—(1—)F

...Es

.

_____________ —

—rF—(1—)F

where F,E, I = A,B stands for FhE(h,,L,E(L,x)), etc. The approximations hold when h/h is small,
with all derivatives evaluated at (h, L(n), E(n)). Although this condition is not required for any of the
results, it simplifies notation and makes intuitions more transparent. The school budget E(z) = E(r, L(r))
varies with community composition as:

______________________

FE

Ah+

—FEE

FEL
—FEE

(12)

When E and L are complements, rich communities may thus spend more on their students than poor
ones, even though, were they placed in the same environment, students from poor backgrounds would have

a higher marginal product of education expenditures than those from richer families (FhE < 0).

5.2 Stratification
Having determined E(x) and t(h, p, z) = E(x), we now replace them in the bid-rent differential Rh(h, p, z),

or equivalently in SEG (1 + r)(R(hA,p,z) — Rr(h8,p,z)) = (FE

—

F) V + (F — F)E'.

This

expression defines the net private gains, in terms of children's human capital, to a marginal pair of A and
B families who switch places during the stratification process:
22A political process resulting in a weighted average of each group's preferred level, E(z,L) =(z)EA(L) +
(z)) E5(L), $'(z) > 0, would have implications very similar to those of (II). Note that we assume FEE < 0
throughout. Also, the case of most interest is when the equilibrium involves a high degree of strs.tica.tion;
stressed by Tiebout (1956), there is then near-unanimity in each community.
(I —

20

SEG = (Ft — F!
((FhL +

+ (F —

F)

Is

(

) . ) L' +

.

)

h.

)L' +

(13)

The term in brackets represents the corn plementarily, both direct. and indirect through E, between parental

education and community quality. The last term, always positive, captures the greater incentive of each
type of agent to Join a community where individuals with similarpreferences, being more numerous, have
greater weight in the setting of policy. The first implication of (13) 18 that stratification always occurs in

the absence of local externalities (FL = 0). The second one is that local funding of education may induce
stratification

which would otherwise not have occurred (FhL < 0 < SEG)." This is probably an important

piece of the explanation for the difference in the extent of stratification between the United States and
most other industrialized countries.

5.3 Efficiency
Recall that E(x) is chosen optimally, given r. The efficient (surplus-maximizing) residential allocation is
thus again determined by the concavity of net community output, now defined as:

S(x)
From

z F(hA, L(r), E(z))

+ (1

z) F(hB, L(x), E(r))

—

(11) and the envelope theorem, S = FA — FB

+ x FE + (1 —

—(1

+ r) E(x)

(14)

z) F!. Then, using (12) yields:

= 2(Fe—Fp)L'+(ZFEL+(1—Z)F!L)(L')2+(ZFE+(l--Z)F!)L"

—(zF.E+(1 — z)FIE)

(15)

(E')2

The first three terms are due to local spillovers, whicb affect education both directly and through their

interaction with E.

Their

interpretation is the same as in (7). The last term, always positive, arises from

the optimal adjustment of expenditures to community composition r and quality L. Absent local spillovers

(and imperfections, say, in capital markets), the tendency to segregate in response to differing preferenc
over education promotes efficiency (Tiebout (1956)). In general, however, it may have the opposite effect:
2De Bartolome (1990) considers the case where FhL <0 = FEL < F, and where these two opposing effects result
in an asymmetric but incompletely stratified equilibrium. Although his political mechanism is different, this can be

understood as interior solution n < z' < nun{2n, 1} to the equation f.', SEG(r) dx
F(h. L(z2), E(z)) — [F(h9, L(zi), E(z')) — F(h3, L(z2), E(x2))] = 0.
21

F(hA, L(z), E(x1)) —

Proposition 11) The decent jl32ation of ichool funding can trigger stratification which is inefficient: it
u/Jjcrs that

<

()

< SEC and S" < 0.

Indeed we can rewrite:

5" =

SEC +

(F Ff)L' + (x L4L + (1 — z)F!L)(L')3 +(x F +(1 — x)F) L"
+(rFEE+(1—x)F!) L'E'

(16)

The term SEG represents the net private gains from stratification; the elements which determine its sign

were discussed in (13). All others terms constitute wedges between social and privat.e values. The first
three of those involve only the local spillover, and were discussed in Section 3. The last one involves the
interaction of E and L. As agents congregate into more homogeneous groups, they ignore they own effect
on community quality L, including the resulting impact on the productivity of E. Assuming, realistically,

that E'(x) > 0, the effect is favorable if L and E are complements: a planner would also like,

ceteris

paribus, for L. to be high iii the community where E is high. It is detrimental if they are substitutes.24

5.4 Income taxes
We now consider income taxes: t(h, r) = r(x) h. We continue to assume that in each community, school

expenditures E(x) are chosen efficiently with respect to local surplus, that is, according to (11). The
income tax rate is then simply determined by the balanced budget constraint: r(r) = E(x) /A(z), where
-1(z) = z hA + (1 — z) hj is average community income. This leads to the following result, proved in the
p pe odi x.

Proposition ii Let the local spiliover L be any CES index, and assume that h/h is smalL If the
education production function

F(h, L, E) is homogeneous of degree no greater than one, or more generally

if the return to marginal expenditures decreases with the scale of educational inputs (FE(.A

F,(h, L, E) for ) > I), the

h, )L, .\E) <

school budget rises less than one for one with average community income.

'lherefore the inco,ne tax rate r(z) decreases with x, promoting stratification.

"Equation (16) readily yields 0e Baztolome'a (1990) result that an incompletely stratified equilibeium is metlicient, given his sssunlptions F,,L < 0, F.1. < 0 and L" = F5. = 0. As seen in the previous footnote, suck an
equilibrium is defined
optirnality.

SEG(z) dx = 0; thi5 implies 5'(z') — S'(2n —

22

xi) = f', S"(i)dx < 0, violating

5.5 Wealth effects and borrowing constraints
When agents have concave utility or face imperfect capital markets, their preferenc over education spending reflect not only its contribution to their child's

human capital, but also their different opportunity costs

of funds. The effect of equilibrium land rents on wealth makes this case more complicated, but it can still
be dealt with, a.s in De Bartolome (1990). There is, however, a simpler way to incorporate its essential im-

plication, namely that communities with poorer residents have a lower ability to invest, due to their lower
tax base. Following Becker (1975), let rich and poor agents have different but constant opportunity costs of

funds, r(hA) < r(h8).25 Then, simply replace F(h, L, E) by P(h, L, E) F(h, L, E) (1 +

r) / (1 + r(h))

in

the derivations of E'(r) and SEG(x); r'(h) < 0 then implies that poorer communities invest less than rich
ones, other things equal It also tends to make FhL > 0, promoting stratification, as shown earlier. In the
efficiency analysis the actual products F(h, L, E) should be used (hence another wedge between SEG(r)

and S"(x)), unless the planner cannot provide loans more efficiently than the market, or seeks t.o maximize
the sum of agents utilities rather than net output. In such cases she should internalize agents' different

costs of funds and the resulting gains from stratification, and use (h,L, E) to compute social surplus.

6

Policy implications

6.1 Background
In the United States, an increasing number of states are being forced by court decisions to close the wide
gaps which exist between the school budgets of different communities. The underlying view is that these
disparities, stemming from the lower property tax base of poorer towns, do not give equal starting chances

to their young. Equalizing transfers, or state control of education funding, are then needed (.0 reduce
inequality as well as possible inefficiencies.26

There is also a contrarian view, of which a recent article on Kansas City in The Economist (1993) is
representative. Under a 1986 court order to remedy racial segregation in its schools, the city 'scrapped its
existing school system. . . and replaced it with the best.., money could buy," at the cost of an extra $1.3
25More specifically, let r(h) be a decreasing function of initial resources i.'(h), so that wealth redistributions do
affect educational choices.
6The most recent example is Michigan, where voters recently approved a proposal to replace local property taxes
by an increase in the state sales tax, as the primary source of funding for schools.

23

billion, or $36,111 per student over the normal school budget. Three quarters of the cost were born by the

state, resulting in severe cutbacks in other districts.

"So far, however, all this lavish expenditure has produced few of the desired results.. .The
racial balance in the schools is the same today as it. was when the order was issued. The past

six years have seen no improvement whatsoever in children', scores in standardized tests of

reading and math.. Pupils in elementary schools which have not been turned into magnet
schools regularly outperform pupils in generously funded magnet schools. . . The drop-out rate

has risen every year, without fail, since the decree was handed down, and now stands at a
disgraceful 60%."

Not surprisingly, Kansas City school officials vigorously dispute this bleak assessment. But other pieces

of evidence appear consistent with the view that lack of financial resources is not the main impediment
faced by mediocre or failing schools. Expenditures per student are higher in some urban school districts

than in neighboring suburban or rural ones, thanks to a larger industrial tax base or to state subsidies.
The latter nonetheless achieve better test scores and dropout rates. Reviewing the empirical literature
on education production functions, Hanushek (1986) observes that most studies fail to demonstrate any

link between school expenditures and student achievement. Perhaps most importantly the increased
centralization of education funding experienced by many states (starting with the 1971 California Supreme

Court "Serrano" decision) appears to have significantly reduced spending inequalities, but not achievernen
inequalities, as measured from SAT scores (Downes (1992)). Moreover, it seems to have been accompanied

by a concomitant decline in those states' average test scores (Pelzman (1992)).
Opponents of the "lack of resources" hypothesis often point instead to culprits such as teachers' unions,

the education bureaucracy, or the disincentive effects of the welfare system. We shall advance a very
different explanation of the evidence, based in particular on complementarities between purchased and
social inputs in education. We identify in particular a case where equalizing school expenditures fails to
reduce segregation and leads to a decline in overall academic performance, hurting the rich more than it
helps the poor. Yet a better designed policy may still improve bosh equity and efficiency.

24

6.2 Equalizing school budgets
We model equilibrium prior to state intervention using the simple specification of education expenditures

introduced in Section 5.1: E =

E(x', L(xJ)), where z1 is the fraction of high human capital families

in community j. We thus deliberately abstract from financing constraints at the individual or community
level. This is not because we consider the credit market imperfections and wealth effects discussed earlier

5.5 unimportant; they played a central role in our previous analysis of local and centralized school funding

(Bénabou (1992)), as well as that of Fernandez and Rogerson (1993b).21 What we seek to do here is to

highlight the limiLs of redistributive policies, and explore whether there remains a role for the state even
absent such constraints
We first mention some ways in which attempts to equalize school budgets might be defeated at the local

level. Clearly, outright redistributions of wealth leave E' and E2 unaffected; only consumption adjusts.
Mandating that E1 be reduced and E2 increased may induce creative accounting. A rich town might shift,
say, athletic facilities or a library from the school budget to some other line item. A poor one might claim
as education-related some expenditures which have mostly consumption value (nicer buildings, teacher

and administrator salaries). Finally, taxing E' and rebating the proceeds to schools in community 2 as a
block grant does reduce spending in C', but changes nothing in C2, where residents simply reduce their

contribution to education by the amount of the transfer. As a result, total expendituresfall (as observed
by Downes (1992) for California following Serrano), and so do test scores.

8ut let us now take as given that the state is successful in enforcing equalization of school expenditures,
either through matching grants (Feldstein (1975)) or simply by centralizing funding.25 We start from a
stable equilibrium where the population is stratified (SEC > 0 in (13)) and the richer town spends more

on education (E'(z) > 0 in (12)). After state intervention, E' is reduced, and E2 increased, to a common
value 29 There are two cases to consider.

27Credit constraints were also at the center of earlier models where education was privately purchased, such as
Loury (1977) or Glomm and Ravikuma.r (1992).
'Between 1960 and 1983, the combined State and Federal share in elementary and secondary school spending
rose from 35% to 50%, with a corresponding decline in reliance on local and private resourc (Hanuzheck (1986)).
25E could be either the mid-point (E' + E2)/2, or the optimal value E(n) — E(n, L(n)) which would be chosen
by integrated communities, or the optimal value given the stratified configuration.

25

F(hA,hA,E)

—h1 {

F(h8,h8,E)

h2 {

E1

E

E

Figure 4a stratification persists

F(hA ,hA,E)

F(hAL,E)

F(h,L,E)

FB)
E

E2
Figure 4b integration occurs
E1

E

Case 1. Segregation persists
If FhL > 0, the composition of each community remains unchanged. This could also be due to the other

stratifying forces discussed earlier, particularly some group's preference for racial separation. Conditional

on each x1 expenditures were previously set optimally, so state intervention necessarily reduces surplus.
VVhat is

interesting is the way in which this occurs, as illustrated by Figure 3a for the case of perfect

stratification (n = 1/2). in Ct, students' human capital is reduced by -n.h' =

x (F(h4,L',E') —

F(hA,Ll,L))+(1_zt)(F(hB,L1,E1)_F(hB,L1,))>(1+r)(Ei_),duetotheconcavityofthe
maximization problem (11). In C2, the corresponding increase is h3 = x2 (F(1ZA, L', Z)F(hA, L2, E2))+
(1—

)(F(h8,L2,)— F(h8, L2, E2)) <(1 + r)(r— £2), by the same argument.

Proposition 12 Wheu FhL > 0, equalizing sc/tool budgets lcave community composition unchanged but
reduces total surplus. Student achievement and subsequent earnings decline more in rich communities than

they improve in poor ones (per dollar of cutback or subsidy). If state-wide expenditures are kept constant,

= (E' + E2)/2, average student performance declines.
So while income inequality I, reduced, it is less by lifting up the poor than bringing down the rich.
The intuition is that school expenditures are more productive in a human capital-rich community, due to
complementarity either between i'i and E, or more interestingly, between E and L; see (i2).a0 Top-notch

teachers, computers and other educational resources may not do much in a school plagued by discipline
problems, the lack of motivation from role models in the community, peer pressure not to study, gangs,
etc. Redistributing expenditures without simultaneously 'redistributing" social capital is ineffective.

Case .

Segregation is undone

If F'hL < 0 (and the other stratifying factors are not too strong), equalizing expenditures removes the
incentive to segregate. The stable equilibrium then shifts from the stratified to the integrated configuration.

8oth purchased and non-purchased inputs E and L into education are equalized across students, achieving
a greater reduction in inequality than in the previous case. There remains the question of whether academic
30Downes and Pogue (1993) provide evidence that communities with a higher fraction of student., from disadvantaged backgrounds have higher per-student costs, for a given level of educational achievement. While one must be
careful about identifying average and marginal costs, thi., suggests that school expenditures in these communities
have a lower marginal product.

26

achievement, income and the surplus from education rise more or less for poor students than they fall for

rich ones. The answer is easily obtained in the natural case where

is set at the optimal level for an

integrated community, = E (n, L(n)). The net change in surplus is then S(n) — (S(x') + S(2n — x' ))/2,
where S is given by equation (15); hence the following results, proved in the appendix.

Proposition 13 When FhL < 0, equalizing school budgets leads to integration. If state-wide expenditures

are chosen optimally = E(n, L(n)), total surplus increases providedS is concave. If, moreover,
is small and L is a CES index surplus increases even when state-wide expenditures remain fired,

=

(E' + E2)/2. in that case average student achievement also rises.
The conditions under which S is concave, so that integration improves both efficiency and equality,

were analyzed earlier. This case is illustrated in Figure 3b: the equalization of L induced by the new
policy shifts up the returns to educational expenditure on type B agents, much more than it shifts down
the returns to expenditure on type A agents. The vertical difference between the average of the two solid

curves and the two dashed ones is measured (to a second-order approximation) by the sum of the first
three terms in (15). The distortions from constraining expenditures to be the same across communities
and individuals are captured by the remaining term.

6.3 Reversing segregation
Consider now the case where equalizing expenditures is not sufficient to prevent segregation. This could
be due to any of the stratifying forces identified in Section 1; for convenience we continue to focus on the

complementarity FhL > 0. Note that integration may still yield the surplus gains described in Proposition

13 and illustrated by Figure 3b; all that matters is that S be concave. In principle, a state government
concerned with either inequality or inefficiency (if S" < 0) could bring about integration by making poor
communities sufficiently attractive to families with high human capital, and vice-versa. This could be done

directly, through tax incentives or housing subsidies (thr(h, x) > 0) or indirectly, through a contingent
allocation of educational resources

SEG = FhL(h, L(r), (x)) L'(r) + FhE(h, L(x) E(x)) '(r) —(1 + r) th(h, z) < 0,

27

(17)

for all x.31 The new stable equilibrium will be symmetric, with equal expenditures (n) everywhere; E(n)
can

even be chosen optimaily, to equal E(n, L(n)). But what this differential condition shows is that

stratification is likely to be much harder to undo once it has occurred than it is to stop in its tracks early

on. Due to the cumulative nature of the process, the amount of transfers required to induce the first few
rich families to come back is considerably larger than what it would have taken to make them stay in the
first place. For instance, when using only education expenditures, with FhE > 0,

>>
where e is small. Large transfers between the school budgets of rich and poor towns, even if only temporary,

may well be politically infeasible. The dynamic aspects of such policies also raise problems of credibility.
This kind of ir-reversibililg may explain why magnet schools and similar programs recently implemented in

,ome US cities are not very succeful at fostering racial and economic desegregation of schools: the scope

of redistribution required for such policies to be effective (advocates speak of a "Marshall Plan" for the
inner cities) seems to be politically unacceptable. In metropolitan areas which are new or have retained a
balanced urban-suburban composition, on the other hand, modest policy interventions can be effective; see

Rusk (1993). But the point is perhaps most relevant for European countries where despite a centralized,
fairly egalitarian allocation of school resources, economic and racial stratification appears to be on the rise,

with quasi-ghettos starting to emerge at the periphery of many cities. If action is to be taken, it should be
before polarization has reached the point where large gains and losses have become locked in.

7

Conclusion

The model developed in this paper allowed us to link together important issues of local public finance,
income distribution and productivity growth. Five main results emerge. First, minor differences in edu-

cation technologies, preferences, or wealth can lead to a high degree of stratification. Imperfect capital
markets are not necessary, but will compound these other sources. Second, stratification makes inequality
31An important issue, not taken up here, is whether competition among communities allowed to charge different
prices t(h, p, r) to agents with different characteristics will also achieve efficiency; see Eden (1992) and Epple and

Romano (1993) for an analysis of school competition with student vouchers. The use of E to improve on an
inefficient residential equilibrium, which does not require family chaxactenitjcz to be observable, was considered by
Dc Bartolome (1990). Ii can only be implemented in a centralized manner.

28

in education and income more persistent across generations. Whether or not the same is true of inequality
in total wealth depends on the ability of the rich to appropriate the rents created by their seceion. Third,

the polarization or urban areas resulting from individual residential decisions can be quite inefficient, both

from the point of view of aggregate growth and in the Pareto sense, especially in the long run. Fourth,
when state-wide equalization of school expenditures is insufficient to reduce stratification, it may improve
educational achievement in poor communities much less than it lowers

it in richer communities; thus av-

erage academic performance and income growth both fail. Yet policies better tailored

to the interaction

between purchased and non-purchased educational inputs may still improve both equity and efficiency.
Fifth, because of the cumulative nature of the stratification process (hence of any offsetting transfers), it
is likely to be much harder to reverse once it has run its course than to arrest at an early stage.

Important issues not addressed in the paper include the role of private schools and the effectiveness

of voucher programs for education or housing. It would be interesting to try and extend the model to
explore these matters as well. But perhaps the most intriguing direction for further research follows from
two of the points mentioned above, concerning dynamics. The first is the creation and appropriation of

rents during the "real time" process of stratification. The second is how considerations of credibility and
political equilibrium constrain the time path of desegregation policy, or even its feasibility. These issues
merit a more detailed analysis than the first steps taken here.

29

Appendix
A-Proof of Proposition 1. For all (p1,x',p2,z3) let V(h I p',x',p2,x2)

V(h,p',z') —

V(h,p2,z2). Standard reasoning shows that if R,, > 0 (respectively, < 0) everywhere, then V(h) 0

implies V(h') >

0

for all h' > h (respectively, h' < h), with strict inequality if x1 > x2. It is then

straightforward to show that an equilibrium is a solution

to one of the following three conditions.

(a) AV(hA) = EV(h8) = 0. This requires x1 = x2 = n, hence p' = p3. Conversely, this symmetric
allocation is always an equilibrium.

(b) AV(hA) > V(hB) = 0. This requires x2 = 0, z1 = 2n, hence 2n < 1. Clearly, one can always
find p',p2 such that V(h5

p',2n,p2,0) = 0. When R, >0 (respectively, <0), the other condition is

automatically (respectively, never) satisfied, hence the allocation is (respectively, cannot be) an equilibrium.

(c)LV(hA)=0>AV(hB). Thisrequires(1—z')/2=0,(1—x2)/2=l—n,hence2n> 1. Onecan

= 0. The rest of the proof is identical to case (b).

always find p p2 such that AV(hA p', 1, p2, 2n — 1)

This concludes the derivation of equilibria. We now turn to stability, which is defined very simply. An

equilibrium

(p1

x1, p2, x2) is said to be stable if, for all small let, moving e A agents from C2 to C' and

the same number of B agents in the reverse direction makes B agents the highest bidders for land in

C',

and vice versa. Formally;
I

p',x' + e,p2,z2 —c) —

V(hB I p',x' +e,p2,x2 — e)) <0,

for any feasible e0. Clearly, the symmetric equilibrium is stable if and only if Rh < 0. The stratified
equilibrium, which exists only when Rh >0, is then stable since it satisfies V(hA)—V(hB) >0, which
is preserved by continuity for small perturbations e < 0 (which are the only feasible ones).

B-Alternative Wealth-Sorting Mechanisms. (1) Taxes. Consider first the case of lump-sum
taxes or user fees. For instance, if V(h, T, E) =

i(h T) + w(E), —VE / VT clearly increases with h.

As a standard result, agents segregate as much as permitted by the number of communities. Sorting
through proportional taxes requires restrictions on preferences the income effect must dominate the sub-

stitution effect. For instance, let V(h, r, x) =

ii((l — r) h) + w(r L(r)), where L(x) rh + (1 — x) h8

is average community income and E(z) = rL(z) school quality, as in Fernandez-R.ogerson (1992). Then
—V /

V

r L'(x) w'(r L(z)) /( h i'((l — r) h)) increases with h if and only if i has relative risk aversion

—z"(z)/iP(z) > 1.
30

(') Status groups Let us re-tabel each community C' a "proièssional occupation", conferring on its
nieriibers: (i) a social status which increases with the fraction x' of highly educated (A) co-workers; (ii) &

wage p' = p(H) ) per unit of human capital, which falls with the sector's total human capital input II',
due t, ,.li,niiiishiiig returns. Agents derive utility from wages and from belonging to a higher status group:

zJ) = (iJ h) + w(:'). Under the same condition as above, V / V, = w'(x') /(h

'() h))

icicreases with h. better educated agents are more willing to accept a lower remuneration in exchange for

uglier status. As a result, the labor iiiarket stratifies, so that at least one occupation has a homogeneous
workforce. 'Flie specification used here differs somewhat from Fershtman and Weiss (1992), but the basic

iiechariisin and result are similar.

C-Proof of Propositiosa 7. (I) In the first case, some B agents remain in C1 after stratification, so
L1'(hA)

—

U2(h8) = Ut(liA) — Ut(h8)

= V(hA,p1z') — V(h8,p',x') >

—

V(h8,i,) since

and pt > . The opposite reasoning applies when it is C2 which remains mixed after agents sort
themselves. Part (2) is inaruediate

D-Proof of Proposition 11. First, r'(z) K 0 if and only if E'(r) A(z) < E(x) A'(x), or

using (12).

.1(r)( _F+(zPL+(l_:)FIL)L'(z))+(_XFE_(1_Z)FIE)h0
l'or iiiall

h / h 4(r)

ii, L'(z) h, to a second-order approximation-

h and for any (2ES index, L

b), where E argrnax{F(h, L, E)—(1+r)E) and all derivatives
are evaluated at (h, I, E). Finally, g\) F (Ah, AL, AE) — FE(h, L, E) < 0 for all A > I implies g'(l) < 0,
[lierefore

h (h 14L +L EL+ E

heflce the result. Nole iii particular that when F(h, L, E) is homogeneous of degree one, r'(r) = 0.

E- Proof of Proposition 3. Only the case where E = (E' + E2)/2 remains to be proved. With
expenditures tixed, the change in average student achievement equals the change in total surplus. This,

in turn, equals the change in surplus achieved with the optimal E(n, L(n)), minus the distortion from
choosiiig E instead. By the envelope theorem, this distortion is of second order in 6

E' — E"(n, L(n)) =

(E(.r') + E(z))/2 -- L((z1 + :2)12). But 6 is itself of second order in .h, as can be seen from (12):

wheu I is a CES with elasticity e, L'

h and

L"

(Ah)2/2c; hence E'(x) is of order h, and,

differentiating (12), E"(.r) is of order (h)2. The distortion 62 is therefore negligible compared to the
gains S(ri) — (S(:' )+ .S(r)/2 which are of second order in .h, as shown bythe expression (15) givrngS".

31

References
Baumot, W. (1967) "Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Cri8is," American
Economic Review, 57,415-426.
Becker G. (1975) "Human Capital. a Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to
Education," Columbia University Press, New York.
Bénabou, R. (1992) 'Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth," MIT Working Paper 93-4, December.

Bénabou, R. (1993) "Workings of a City: Location, Education and Production," Quavlerly Journal of

Economics, 108, 619-652.
Borjas, C. (1992a) "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility" Quarterly Journal of Economics,
108, p. 123-150.

Borjas, G. (1992b) "Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human Capital Externalities," U.C. San Diego
mimeo, September.

Brooks-Gunn, J., Duncan, G.,Kato Klebanov, P. Sealand, N. (1993) "Do Neighborhoods Influence
Child and Adolescent Development?," American Journal of Sociology, 99, 353-395.

Card, D. and Krueger, A. (1992) "Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States," Journal of Political Economy, 100, 1-40.
Case, A. and Katz, L. (1991) The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and Neighborhood on
Disadvantaged Youth," NBER Working paper No. 3705.

Coleman, J. (1988) "Social Capital in the Formation of Human Capital," American Journal of Sociology, 94, S95-S120.
Cooper, S. (1992) "A Positive Theory of Income Redistribution," Stanford University mimeo, July.
Cooper, S., Durlauf, S. and Johnson, P. (1993) "On the Evolution of Economic Status Acr068 Genera,-

tions" University of Oregon Working Paper 146, October.
Corcoran, M., Gordon, R., Laren, D., and Solon, G. (1990) "Effects of Family and Community Background on Community Status," American Economic Review, 80, 362-366.
Conies, R. (1993) "Dyke Maintenance and Other Stories: Some Neglected Types of Public Goods,"

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108,259-272.
Crane, J. (1991) "The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos, and Neighborhood Effects on Dropping out and
Teenage Childbearing," American Journal of Sociology, 96,1226-1259

Datcher, L. (1982) "Effects of Community and Family Background on Achievement," Review of Economic and Statistics, 64,32-41.

De Bartolome, C. (1990) "Equilibrium and Inefficiency in A Community Model with Peer Group
Effects," Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1, p. 110-133.
Downes, T. (1992) "Evaluating the Impact of School Finance Reform on the Provision of Public Edu-

cation: The California Case," Notional Tax Journal, 45 405-419.

32

Downes, T., and Pogue, 1'. (1993) "Adjusting School Aid Formulas for the Higher Cost of Educating
Disadvantaged Students" Northwestern University mimeo, June.

Durlauf, S. (1992) "A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality," NBER Working Paper 4056, April.
Durlaiif, S. (1993) "Neighborhood Feedbacks, Endogenous Stratification and Income Inequality," Uni-

versity of Visconsin. Madison Working paper rninieo, April.
Dynarski, M., Schwab, R., and Zampelti, E. (1989) "Local Characteristics and Public Production: The

Case of Education," Journal of Urban Economics, 26, 250-263.

L'conouiisl, (1993) "The Cash Street Kids," August 28hSeptember 3, p. 23-25.
Eden, B. (199'2) "How to Subsidize Education and Achieve Voluntary Integration: An Analysis of
The

Voucher Systems," University of Iowa inimeo, December.

Eppie, 1) and Roiiiano, R. (1993) "Competition Between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers and
peer Group Effects," Carnegie-Mellon University mimeo, April.
Feldstein, M. (1975) "Wealth Neutrality and Public Choice in Education," American Economic Review,
65, 75-89.

Fernandez, It and Rogerson, R. (1992) "Income Distribution, Communities and the Quality of Public
Education; A Policy Analysis," rnimeo, Boston University, July.
Fernandez, R. and Rogerson, R. (1993a) "Keeping People Out: Income Distribution, Zoning and the

Quality of Public Education" Boston University Working Paper No. 19, January.
Fernandez, It and Rogerson, H., (1993b) "Public Education and the Dynamics of Income Distribution:

A Quantitative Evaluatioii of Education Finance Reform," Boston University mimeo, November.

Fershimaii (2., and Weiss, Y. (1992) "Social Status, Culture and Economic Performance," Tel-Aviv
University miriieo, November.

Galor, 0. arid 'I'siddon, 1.). (1992) "Income Distribution and Output Growth: the Kuznets Hypothesis
Revisited," Brown University mirneo, November.

C slot, 0. and Zeira, J. (1993) "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics," Review of Economic Sgudie.s,

60, 35-52.

Glaeser, E., Scheinkman, J. and Shleifer, A. (1993) "Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Cities,"

Harvard University niinieo, April.
Glotrim, C. and Ravikumar, B. (1992) "Public vs. Private Investment in Human Capital: Endogenous

Growth and Income Inequality," Journal of Polnhcal Economy, 100, 818-834.
tlaiiiilton, 13. and Macauley, M. (1991) "Determinants and Consequences of Private—Public School
Choice," Journal of Urban Economics, 29, 282-294.

Ilanushek, E. (1986) "The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public Schools,"
Journal of Economic Literature, '24 1147-1177.
iencks, C. and Mayer, S. (1990) "The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a Poor Neighborhood,"

in inner City Poverly in the United States, L. Lynn and M. McGreary, eds., National Academy Press,
33

Washington DC.
Kozol, J. (1991) "Savage Inequalities: Children in America's Schools, Crown Publishers, New York.
Loury, G. (1977) "A Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences," in A. Le Mond (eds.) "Women,

Minoril.ie and Employment Discrinunation," Lexington Books, MA.

Loury, G. (1987) 'Why Should We Care about Group Inequality?", Social Philosophy and Policy,5,
249-271.

Lucas, R. Jr. (1988) "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary Economics,
22, 3-42.

Lundberg, S., and Startz, R. (1993) "On the Persistence of Racial Inequality," Universityof Washington
mimeo, August.
Manski, C. (1993) "Identification of Social Effects: The Reflection Problem," Review of Economic
Studies, 60, 531-5.12.

Montgomery, J. (1991) "Social Networks and Persistent Inequality in the Labor Market: Toward an
Economic Analysis" American Economic Review, 81, 1408-1418.
Miyao, T. (1978) "Dynamic Instability of a Mixed City in the Presence of Neighborhood Externalities,"
American Economic Review, 68, 454-463.

Pelzman, S. (1992) "The Political Economy of the Decline of American Public Education," Working

Paper No, 78 (June), Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, University of Chicago.

Romer, P. (1986) "Increasing Returns and Long-Term Growth," Journal of Political Economy, 94,
1002-10037.

Rusk, D. (1993) "Cities Without Svburós," John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore
Sah, R. (1991) "Social Osmosis and Patterns of Crime," Journal of Political Economy, 99, 1272-1295.
Schellirig, T. (1978) "Micromotivcs and Mocrobehavior," W.W. Norton and Company, New York.

Stiglitz. .1 (1973) "Education and Inequality," The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Sciences, 409, 35-145.

Streufert, P. (1991) "The Effect of Underclass Social Isolation on Schooling Choice," University of
Wisconsin-Madison Working Paper DP 954-91, August.
Tamura, R. (1991a) "Efficient Equilibrium Convergence, Heterogeneity and Growth," University of
Iowa Working Paper No. 91-16, August.
Tamura, R. (l991b) "From Decay to Growth: A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of Income Distribution,"
University of Iowa mimeo, November.

Tamura, R. (1993) "R.egionalEconomies and Market Integration," Universityoflowamimeo,January.
Tiebout (1956) "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," Journal of Political Economy, 64, 416-424.
Wilson, W. (1987) "The Truly Di.sadvantaged," University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Wheaton, W. (1993) "Land Capitalization, Tiebout Mobility and the R.ole of Zoning Regulations,"

Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming.
34

</ref_section>

