                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         OVER-THE-COUNTER DERIVATIVES
                           AND SYSTEMIC RISK TO THE
                           GLOBAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM




                                     Michael R. Darby




                                  Working Paper No. 4801



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 1994



I acknowledge very useful comments from Andreas Grunbichier, Mark Levonian, Francis
Longstaff, Susan M. Phillips, and Lynne 0. Zucker and research assistance from Paul J. Alapat,
Christine Beckman, and Lynda I. Kim. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the
Conference on International Financial Markets in North-East Asia: Assessment and Prospects,
organized by the Seoul National University and Korea Development Institute, Hilton Hotel,
Seoul, Korea, May 26-27, 1994. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Asset
Pricing and International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4801
                                                                                    July 1994

                            OVER-THE-COUNTER DERiVATIVES
                              AND SYSTEMIC RISK TO THE
                              GLOBAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM

                                          ABSTRACF

       Over the last decade dealing in derivative financial instruments (basically forwards,

futures, options and combinations of these), particularly in the over-the-counter (OTC derivatives

market has become a central activity for major wholesale banks and financial institutions.

Measured in terms of notional principal amount, OTC derivatives outstanding are near, if not

greater than, US$10 trillion, even after deduction of double-counting for intra-dealer transactions.

Major new regulatory initiatives, including proposed new capital requirements, are under
consideration as a means of reducing systemic risk. This paper examines the concept of systemic

risk-- thatfailureofonefirmwillleadtothefailureofalargenumberofotherflrmsorindeed
the collapse of the international financial system. Alternative proposed definitions are considered

and integrated and the effects of OTC derivatives on these risks discussed. The key conclusion

is that systemic risk has been reduced by the development of the OTC derivatives market due

to shifting economic risks to those better able either to bear the risk or, in many cases, cancel

it against offsetting risks. The implications of the Baste 11 capital proposals for systemic risk are

analyzed and shown to increase this risk due to encouraging transactions which increase portfolio

risks of the dealers and discouraging transactions which decrease their portfolio risk.



Michael R. Darby
Anderson Graduate School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90024-1481
and NBER
       The rapid rise of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives to a central role in wholesale

banking and finance with notional principal amounts rivaling stock market capitalization

poses central policy issues for banking and financial regulation. In particular, policymakers

are concerned with whether OTC derivatives have increased systemic risk of general failure

of the global financial system. This paper attempts to bridge the gap between the academic

literature and regulatory concerns by defining "systemic risk" rigorously and examining
whether or not such risk has been increased or decreased by the advent of the OTC
derivative market.

       Since beginning work on what at the time seemed a somewhat esoteric theme,
derivatives have become as tiniely as each morning's newspapers. This may point out one

of the most salient features of the integrated global financial market -- the speed of change

and evolution. We must always remember that evolution in the financial markets -- like in

infectious viruses -- is often responsive to attempted cures. As a result, we are constantly

at risk with regulatory initiatives of engendering new financial products and procedures to

get around the latest rules that may pose more risk to the system than the prior practices

which were the reason for the new regulations.

       While new regulations may always engender unintended consequences in the
international financial markets, this is particularly likely when regulations are aimed at

dealing with a loosely defined concept such as systemic risk. If regulators are not sure what

target they are shooting at, it should not be surprising if they hit something else.

       In Section I, I first describe swaps and other derivatives, their magnitude and uses

in the global financial market. Next I turn to the concept of systemic risk and the reasons


                                              1
that many officials believe that market forces cannot be relied upon to achieve appropriate

self-regulation in the over-the-counter swaps and derivatives market. Section III contains

an analysis of market arrangements in response to risk elements in the current lightly

regulated regime. Section IV is a review and evaluation of the "Basle II" proposals for

capital requirements on derivatives. Finally, I draw some conclusions on the implications

of these financial instruments for the operation of the global financial niarket.



                                 I. Swaps and Derivatives

       Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system and the capital controls used to

permit a modicum of monetary policy discretion while maintaining pegged exchange rates,
the financial markets have become increasingly globally integrated.' In part this global

integration is a return to earlier norms, but to a greater extent it reflects the revolution in

commu nication which has occurred contemporaneously.

       A parallel development which has perhaps proceeded furthest in the United States

is the securitization of traditional bank liabilities. As banks' traditional intermediary
functions have grown less and less profitable, major financial institutions have increasingly

turned to trading and underwriting activities in order to remain competitive with alternative

uses of their shareholders' capital. Furthermore, governments' efforts to regulate -- and

implicitly to tax -- bank assets have played a significant role in banks' increasing
concentration on off-balance-sheetproducts. In addition, needs to strengthen balance sheets

and capital pressures, from both the market and regulators, have been particularly relevant

in the general movement to off-balance-sheet activities and fee-producing initiatives. Over-


                                              2
the-counter (or OTC) derivative products today are a major if not the largest source of

earnings for approximately 150 of the world's largest commercial banks and securities firms

which are active dealers in these markets.2

       Derivatives are defined most generally to refer to a variety of bilateral contracts

whose value derives from an underlying asset, reference rate, or index. Basically derivatives

embody forward contracts, options, or some combination of these building blocks.3
Exchange-traded futures and options as well as derivative securities are not the focus of

current regulatory concerns although they play an important role in allowing dealers to lay

off net risk and discover prices of the forward and options components of OTC derivatives.

       OTC derivatives are generally privately-negotiated forwards (such as forward

commodity or foreign-exchange contracts, forward rate agreements [FRAs] or currency,

interest-rate, commodity, or equity swaps) or privately-negotiated options (such as
commodity, currency, equity, FRA, swap, and bond options, and caps, floors, and collars).

From the point of view of the end users, OTC derivatives provide customized tools to

manage risk, reduce transactions costs, lower financing costs, and enhance portfolio yields.4

OTC derivatives are available for longer maturities than are generally available for
exchange-traded derivatives.5 These end users -- corporations, governments, institutional

investors, and other financial institutions-- could accomplish much the same results by using

exchange-traded futures and options and derivative securities, but only at the higher cost

of establishing a sophisticated in-house unit capable of continually managing the equivalent

portfolios without the benefit of only having to layoff the net exposure of a dealer

portfolio.6


                                              3
       Thus the market is organized so that a relatively small number of banks and other

financial institutions serve as counterparties to a large number of OTC derivative
transactions and then actively manage the risks of the resulting net portfolio position. End

users are able to shift important elements of risk to those wishing to either hedge an
offsetting risk or more willing to hold a speculative position.

       These are powerful advantages which have contributed to the rapid growth of the

OTC derivatives market from about US$1 trillion in 1987 to perhaps US$5 to US$10 trillion

of underlying contract or notional principal amount now outstanding to end users.7 The

exact amount is hard to pin down because of substantial potential double-counting of intra-

dealer transactions, but the market is clearly huge. Table 1 presents some gross estimates

of the growth of the derivatives markets over 1989-1992 broken down by nature of the
underlying risk. Although inclusive of intra-dealer contracts, these data are consistent but

incomplete as measures of total global amounts.8 The largest and fastest growing amount

of contracts are concerned with interest rate risk. With notional amounts doubling every

two years and currently of the same order of magnitude, it is not surprising that derivatives

are receiving serious interest. However, the dealers' actual exposure to default is only a

veiy small fraction of the principal amount, probably well less than US$1 trillion even in the

event of a major market break. Even with all due caveats taken, this is indeed a large and

rapidly growing market.9
       In Table 2, the totals in Table 1 are broken down by the type of derivative product

Forwards are the largest category because of inclusion of the traditional banking business

of forward foreign exchange contracts in the GAO data. Excluding these contracts, the


                                              4
standard industry figures would place swaps in first place.
      As alluded to earlier, there have also been recent horror stories as a number of end

users appear to have moved from hedging risk to speculation on a scale that may have been

literally inconceivable to their Boards of Directors. Surely, the best summary of the recent

reports of speculative losses of such firms as Procter and Gamble was the Financial Times

headline "Procter and guess what" (1994).'° Perhaps that corporation's suit against
Bankers Trust will help ensure that dealers obtain their clients' Boards' of Directors
authorization for use of derivatives in a form that makes the directors aware of the crucial

importance of internal controls to prevent officers from taking uncontemplated speculative

positions." Needless to say objections to these transactions occur only when they result

in losses, and in some cases when the losses are offset by gains on the assets whose value

they were intended to hedge.'2

       Despite the fact that OTC derivatives provide another channel for fraud and
mismanagement, they have become an essential element of the global wholesale banking

industry. Banks must be able to provide these risk management and financing services to

major corporate, governmental, and institutional clients or else see their business
increasingly flow elsewhere. Similarly a country which establishes burdensome regulations

on its banks will either see the banks move their derivatives business offshore or, failing

that, become mere correspondents of the global banks capable of offering wholesale clients

a full range of demanded services.
       In conclusion, OTC derivatives are now a mainstream element of the global banking

business. The issue for national policymakers is what that implies for their economies and


                                              5
the appropriate regulatory environment.



                            II. Systemic Risk from Derivatives

       Despite the alarm with which those of us of a certain age respond to any sudden

change, particularly one which favors younger colleagues, OTC derivatives have largely

survived skeptical scrutiny. Looking first at the end user, derivatives provide a means to

manage risk and reduce the risk-adjusted cost of capital, thus facilitating investment,
economic growth, and rising living standards. It is true that they provide a new arena for

fraud and mismanagement, but those activities surely will continue whether or not
derivatives exist.

       Considering the banks -- and other financial institutions -- which act as dealers and

the regulatory agencies which supervise them, it turns out that the risks associated with

derivatives are familiar ones and subject by and large to familiar solutions: market risk,

credit risk, operational risk, and legal risk. The latter three types of risk have some
interesting twists in this particular setting, but are basically amenable to management by

existing best practices.'3 For example, before entering into a transaction dealers should

and generally do assess both expected and worst case exposure and post that exposure

against the client's overall institutional credit limit.'4 Furthermore, since end users of

derivatives generally have access to the commercial paper market, they are the kind of
credits which are increasingly absent from bank loan portfolios; thus the overall credit

quality of the banks' exposure is generally strengthened by its derivatives operations.

       Market risk for OTC derivatives is somewhat more difficult to measure than for most


                                             6
other bank balance sheet items, but there are important exceptions such as callable bonds

and mortgage loans for which the borrower has the option to prepay.'5 The Board of

Governors of the Federal Reserve System has recently informed the U.S. Congress (1993a,

p. 91) that it "believes that the greater awareness and understanding of risk and the

enhanced methods of managing risks probably have reduced the likelihood of systemic

problems, and will continue to do so over time as industry and supervisory practices

advance." They go on to note that the devotion of "substantial resources to the

development of more sophisticated risk management tools and ... increasing use of netting

to reduce their credit exposures ... have had favorable spill-over effects on institutions'

abilities to manage their total portfolios, not just their derivative activities." (p. 92)

       Indeed in private conversations, U.S. regulators see the greatest challenge due to the

growing use of derivatives to be upgrading their staff of examiners so that there are

sufficient numbers competent to assess the validity of the banks' more sophisticated and

safer approach to market and other risks. Federal Reserve Governor Susan M. Phillips

(1994, p.2) sees the current round of rulemaking on OTC derivatives "as offering

opportunities to provide bankers with incentives to adopt more widely and to refine the new

risk management practices that have begun to be implemented by the leading derivatives

dealers."

Thinking about Systemic Risk

       The main charge remaining against OTC derivatives is that they increase systemic

risk. This is the essence of the so-called "Promisel report" prepared by a Working Group

of the Central Banks of the Group of Ten countries. Systemic risk is defined in the


                                                7
Promisel report as 'the risk that a disruption (at a firm, in a market segment, to a
settlement system etc.) causes widespread difficulties at other firms, in other market

segments or in the financial system as a whole."'6 Basically the fear is that derivatives will

somehow increase the possibility of a general collapse of a significant part of if not the

entire financial system: specifically, that firms' true financial conditions are less transparent,

that risk may be substantially miscalculated for complicated instruments, that activity is

concentrated in too few dealers, that market liquidity may be insufficient for management

of very complex positions, and that increased volume may increase the level of settlement

risk.

        Before returning to these specifics, I would first like to approach systemic risk from

another, more personal point of view. In the summer before the October 1987 market
crash, then-Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson and I for the Treasury were

made co-chairmen of a crisis contingency planning group which brought in representatives

from the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodities Futures Trading
Commission and other agencies as well. This provided valuable infrastructure when the

crash occurred and more senior hands took over crisis management. At Treasury, I was

principally responsible for oversight of the derivative markets during the crisis and had the

opportunity to follow closely what was going on at our sister agencies as well. I must say

that living through that experience, actually seeing the threat of major financial institutions

being denied access to credit lines needed to cover cash flows required by hedged positions,

and overcoming those threats only by Federal Reserve and Treasury officials giving
assurances that the institutions were sound and in any case would not be allowed to fail


                                                8
gives me a personal sympathy for the concept of systemic risk that seems to be lacking

among many academics. I believe that those who lived through that experience may be

prone to require greater proof of safety than others might deem reasonable.
      These concerns form the core of the following excerpt from the interim report of

Treasury Under Secretary Gould, Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan, S.E.C. Chairman

Ruder, and C.F.T.C. Chairman Gramm:

      The size and speed of the decline initiated by fundamental revaluation of

      equity values was exacerbated on October 19 by a number of factors:             -
      --     many participants pulled back from the markets because of fear and

             shock     and because of uncertainties and concerns over (i) the

             accuracy and timeliness of information, (ii) counter-party solvency, (iii)

             credit availability, and (iv) de facto, ad hoc market closures or other

             market disruptions.
             the financial system came under great stress in the credit, clearing, and

             settlement area.t8

       Thus I see October 1987 as the crucible in which present regulatory concerns about

systemic risk were formed. I would go further and say that the perceived failure in that
episode of "portfolio insurance" to work as promised because of gapping prices, and the

perception that the failed attempt to pursue dynamic hedging strategies made the situation

worse, as argued by the Brady Commission,t9 leaves a residual of official distrust for

derivative instruments in general and dynamic hedging strategies in particular. While other

reports and subsequent academic literature indicate that portfolio insurance played a lesser


                                             9
role than sketched by the Brady Commission, the influence of the Brady report on official

concerns remains profound.

       Recently, William J. McDonough, the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New

York, worried about "systemic risk of liquidity failure in the OTC derivatives market." He

admitted that "our admonitions have a nagging quality because we have not specified a

concrete approach to controlling and managing this risk.'20

       The impasse between some regulators' concerns and the analyses of academics and

practitioners over this ill-defined concept of systemic risk thus is hardly surprising. I am

reminded of the hypothesis that car seat belts increase injuries and deaths because they give

drivers a sense of security that leads them to take greater risks. This is pretty much the

core of the systemic risk indictment: Instead of being diffuse where risk gets absorbed by

much nonfinancial capital, derivatives permit nonfinancial corporations to take on riskier

fundamental positions, the risk of which is transferred to and concentrated in the financial

sector. Furthermore, the quantitative types in the financial markets lack the experience and

judgement to weigh appropriately the danger of pricing gaps while the senior managers they
report to do not really understand the risks they are taking.



                         HI. Market Solutions and Systemic Risk

       Substantial regulatory proposals may be enacted on the basis of concerns such as just

described. It is important to see what the market solutions are to the extent that these
concerns can be made specific and testable. Let us now examine the specific components

that underlie the systemic risk idea.


                                             10
       The Group of Thirty's Systemic Issues Subcommittee, following the Promise! Report,

decomposed the systemic concerns into nine categories: the size and complexity of the

exposures, concentration among a relatively small number of financial institutions, reduced

transparency of financial activities, itliquidity in the hedging markets, settlement risk, credit

risk, the importance of unregulated market participants, market linkages, and legal risks.2'

McDonough (1994, pp. 4-6) combines the more important of these into four thematic
clusters:

  o    Instrument risks (complexity)

  o    Risks to institutions (size, credit risk, transparency)

  o    Risks to markets (illiquidity, market linkages)

  o Evolution of risks (concentration)
The fourth of these is, in part, distinct from the Group of Thirty/Promisel list. The distinct

idea is that risk borne by the derivative dealers is not only more concentrated but also in

the aggregate larger. The increased aggregate risk is supposed to occur because the ability

to shift risk at a low cost induces risk-taking in the nonfinancial sector. In essence this is

the seat-belt argument, with no explanation why introduction of a risk reduction technology

should not results in aggregate risks intermediate between those initially existing and those

which would exist if there were no behavioral adjustment to the new technology. There are

other taxonomies, but little substantively new beyond these.

       Market participants have incentives to deal with these risks; so we need to examine

what self-regulatory practices or institutions the market has developed to handle any or all

of these concerns. This section first reviews them in terms of the Group of Thirty/Promisel


                                              11
taconomy and then returns to the missing element added by the McDonough approach.

Size and complexity. The size issue is real in the sense that these are clearly large enough

positions that, if they were mismanaged, they could cause the failure of one of the large

dealer institutions. However, the same could be said about a number of other lines of

business, such as prepayable mortgages. It should be noted that actual exposure is normally

only 2 or 3 percent of the notional principal amount -- say, US$200 or US$300 billion on

US$10 trillion. Losses on the rather rare defaults have averaged just over 3 percent of
notional principal at risk for the defaulted transactions, and defaults are most likely where

the counterparty is an unusually big loser.
       Complexity is not nearly so significant an issue as it is made out to be. While
tailored OTC derivatives cannot be directly hedged, they can always be broken down into

their constituent components of forwards and options which can and should be managed at

the portfolio level by hedging only the net position in each. Applying this sort of reasoning

to such traditional bank products as mortgages is one of the very positive ways in which

derivative risk management techniques have reduced the overall riskiness of banks.

Concentration. Because of the need for the highest credit standiig and expensive talent and

capital investment to be effective, the major dealers even in the United States can be
counted on the fingers of two hands. Often, their derivatives business is conducted through

AAA-rated subsidiaries continuously monitored by in-house representatives of the Moody's

and Standard and Poors credit-rating firms. Moreover, these wholesale financial markets

are truly global and no single firm has more than ten percent of the dealer activity.

       On the other hand considerable risk has been shifted to these firms from other


                                              12
financial and nonfinancial corporations, and this concentration of risk could have the
potential to leading to disruption of funding of the dealers' hedging activities in the hours

of a major price break as lenders hold back to investigate rumors about individual dealers'

creditworthiness.

Transparency. Perhaps in part as a result of this danger, the major dealers have worked

closely with the Financial Accounting Standards Board to develop FASB Interpretation 39

effective this year to report current credit exposures from derivative transactions on dealer

balance sheets. Clearly, ever increasing sophistication of risk management has made mark-

to-market reporting and stress simulations standard tools for internal management and
control as well. I would also note that an unhedged major underwriting of common stock

was a major factor in the rumors which threatened financial flows in the October 1987 crisis;

one wonders whether such a risk could have been undertsken today given current risk-

management standards.
       On the other hand, end users are not yet required to report in their financial
statements on the hedges or speculative positions taken through. derivative instruments.

Such reporting is clearly desirable from the point of view of systemic risk, but also would

help ensure that the Boards of Directors are aware of the risks that they are hedging or
          23
taking on.

Illiguidity. As discussed above, portfolios are managed in term of individual risk
components, so liquidity need not be present for individual products so long as there is risk

liquidity. However, experience during October 1987 and the September 1992 EMS crisis

has taught dealers that even these increasingly deep risk component markets can gap


                                             13
substantially.
       As a result of their concern about potential price gapping as well as for other normal

business reasons, dealers run relatively balanced portfolios and thus have little net exposure

to hedge. What remains are mostly hedged by exchange-traded options so that only minor

mismatches remain to be hedged through dynamic trading strategies. These strategies are
subject to loss due to gapping, but stress simulations are used to ensure that the potential

losses are manageable. Thus awareness of the potential danger has led to strategies that

do not rely on the absence of discrete price movements.

Settlement risk. Settlement risks exist but are relatively small compared to other areas of

these institutions' business, primarily because only net payments are routinely transferred.

To provide perspective: aggregate daily cash flows associated with OTC derivatives appear

to amount to less than 5 percent of those for traditional foreign exchange transactions.

Credit risk. As discussed previously, existing practices for management of credit risk are

directly applicable to OTC derivatives credit exposures. Further, overall systemic risk has

been reduced in this area by the growth of OTC derivatives, since "bank dealers have

increased the average quality and diversity of [credit] risk to which they are exposed."'

       Table 3 provides the best available evidence on the credit standing of dealers'
counterparties in OTC derivative contracts. Nearly all are investment grade and 78 percent

are rated A or higher. These are precisely the borrowers which banks have lost to the
commercial paper and other direct lending markets. While the effect on the overall
creditworthiness of bank exposures is salutary, this should not be overemphasized: Among

the seven largest U.S. bank dealers only Bankers Trust had larger credit exposure from


                                             14
derivatives than loans, and for five of the others the loan exposure was three or more times

as large as the derivatives exposure.

       Market participants have endorsed the desirability of the legal and regulatory reforms

that would be required to establish an international netting scheme as recommended by a

high-level Working Group of the Central Banks of the Group of Ten countries in the so-

called "Lamfalussy report." If these changes were made, such an entity would somewhat
further reduce credit risk.

Unregulated entities. Central bankers and securities regulators sometimes express concern

about the unregulated status of several major OTC derivatives dealers such as insurance

company affiliates. Given the high credit standards required to compete as a dealer, this

concern does not appear to have much substance beyond a universal desire for more data.

Market linkages. While the OTC derivatives markets seem to be very much an element of

the integrated global financial market, there is no apparent net contribution to systemic risk

from this fact. A recent joint study by the U.S. Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit

Insurance Corporation, and Comptroller of the Currency concluded that "it is unlikely that

the underlying markets would have performed as well as they did in [the] September [1992

EMS crisis] without the existence of related derivatives markets that enabled currency
positions to be managed, albeit with some difficulty in some instruments,"

Legal risks. While market participants appear to be cognizant of and responsive to legal

risk, the U.K. local authorities case illustrates that residual systemic risk from an unforeseen

legal ruling remains. Dealers have concerns about the enforceability in bankruptcy in some

jurisdictions of netting agreements, particularly for cross-product exposures.


                                              15
       The international regulatory groups, such as the Bank for International Settlements,

the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, and the Group of 10, are involved in a major

effort to address legal risks. These efforts are likely to result ultimately in new legislation.

Conclusions on Systemic Risk. This review of the Group of Thirty/Promisel laundry list

of risk factors suggests that while there is some systemic risk associated with the OTC

derivatives markets, they do not appear to be unusual or disproportionate to that element

in other bank activities such as commercial or mortgage lending. Nonetheless, there are

areas which could be improved and national and international regulatory bodies are working

to do so.

       We are left then with McDonough's fourth point (the evolution of risks) to consider:

Has aggregate risk been increased because it is now possible to manage risk so much better

through derivatives?

       The first question is whether or not nonfinancial risk taking has increased. Of
course, reducing the cost of an activity -- including taking risks -- will increase the amount

of it, but such an increase does not imply an increase in aggregate or systemic risk as an

unintended by-product of growth in these markets since the cost reduction results from a

risk reduction technology.

       To that latter issue, I conclude that on balance there has been a decrease in systemic

risk. The reason that this is true is because systemic risk at root is about failure of firms

and fears of resulting failure of other firms, especially financial firms. The growth of the

derivatives markets have reduced that risk through widespread cancelling of risk as well as

shifting of risk to those most able to manage and bear it.


                                               16
         If we look at each derivatives transaction, we see a principle of conservation of risk

apparently at work -- risk can be transferred but not eliminated. But, as discussed above,

dealers generally run closely balanced books, with the fundamental risk components closely

balanced. Residual risk is generally laid off with other dealers or through exchange-traded

options or futures. This entire process involves a great deal of cancellation of offsetting

hedges placed by the end users, and that cancellation eliminates risk in the system as a

whole.

         This result should not be surprising. After all, most of the real economic transactions

which give rise to the end users' demand for hedging involve symmetric risks of loss and

gains to the parties to the transaction. In principle, those risks could be directly cancelled

through appropriately constructed contingent contracts. Since the costs of negotiating such

contracts are generally quite large relative to the underlying value, it makes sense for the

parties instead to collect their risks and hedge them with risk specialists who can do so in

a cost effective manner.

         It is in just this manner that the derivatives markets promotes production and trade,

and the associated risk-taking, by the end users. This is a clear channel by which financial

institutions contribute to growth and development.

         Note finally that growth in the OTC derivatives markets reduces a number of
features that those involved in crisis management in October 1987 found troublesome:

Because they are largely options-based contingent contracts, they involve thought-out
positions of what should happen in case of large market price changes and thus reduce the

potential for panic-motivated sales. Since the dealers' books are managed so as to be as


                                               17
close as practicable to balanced, there is relatively little need for potentially destabilizing

dynamic hedging strategies. Most of these transactions are settled at fixed dates; so large

cash flows are not required among the potential confusion of rumors associated with a

financial crisis.

       Thus, concerns about systemic threats of OTC derivatives are not sustained by this

analysis of the market structure. Indeed, it appears that these instruments have contributed

to reduction in the overall level of economic risk.



                                IV. The Basle II Proposals

       In April 1993 the BasIc Committee on Banking Supervision released through its

constituent Group of Ten central banks three supervisory documents addressing market risk

and bank capital for banks active in the Global capital market. These proposals are seen

to supplement the original Basle Capital Accord which was primarily concerned with credit

risk, including credit risk on OTC derivatives.

       One of these three documents, a consultative proposal entitled "The Supervisoiy

Treatment of Market Risks," has been the subject of considerable debate. In fact, a number

of observers see this "Basle II proposal" as so fatally flawed in its measurement of risk as

to set up incentives for unbalanced portfolios which could result in higher probability of

failure of individual institutions and significant increase in systemic risk. Obviously, that

result is not the intention of the G-1O central-bank governors and the Basle H proposals

may be subject to considerable revision if the governors are convinced the current versions

are flawed in concept.


                                              18
       Indeed, these proposals, if substantially enacted in the 0-10 countries and elsewhere,

may provide an opportunity for nonadopting jurisdictions to develop as an offshore venue

for the OTC derivatives business just as recent regulatory increases in transactions costs in

Japan have promoted growth in exchange-traded Japanese derivatives in Singapore. To
demonstrate this potential market shift, I first review the proposal and then show why its

enactment would create a demand for doing business in jurisdictions which treat risk more

consistently with the underlying economics.

       First, the Basle II proposal establishes the principle that a bank or other financial
institution's trading book is to be treated separately from the rest of the bank's business and

have minimum capital requirements based on a separate set of rules. This proposal would

not necessarily increase overall capital requirements for banks with significant trading
activities, since moving certain bonds to the trading book would lower the capital
requirements against those bonds so as to more of less than offset increased requirements

against other activities.

       Next, the proposal follows economic theory and market practice in separating

exposure to interest rates, exchange rates, and equity prices, and in treating specificrisk and

general market risk differentially.27 Capital requirements for market risk are then based

on a standard of 95 percent confidence intervals for historic two-week moves for the various

market factors.

       Despite these firm foundations, the proposal would implement risk measurement in

an adding up with disallowances manner which seems to have been designed by accountants

rather than economists or market practitioners. Practitioners are alarmed that depending


                                              19
on interpretation of some of the rules, capital requirements on what appears a well-balanced

book could in fact be doubled.

         One exception to the general dismay over the Basle II proposals is the analysis of

Mark Levonian at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, who has recently done a

remarkable job of defending the seemingly indefensible. Levonian (1994) interprets the

Basle II capital standards as a linear approximation to the results of a more economically

appropriate but administratively costly measure of risk based on the variance-covariance

matrix of a bank's exposures. Specifically, Levonian shows that the Basle II standards can

be more generally interpreted as proportionate to a weighted average of a bank's long and

short positions with the weights valying according to whether applied to foreign-exchange,

debt, or equity positions. Levonian showed that the weights used for foreign-exchange risk

would have resulted in an acceptable approximation to actual risk in the foreign-exchange

markets for the few banks in the San Francisco district which had any such exposure.

Levonian did not show that the other weighting schemes were sensible even within that

district nor that the approximation schemes would continue to work if capital requirements

were laid against positions in this way.

         Formal comments have generally taken a different view on administrative costliness

than have the Basle II proposals.          Commentators have generally pointed out that
realistically very few banks run the kind of trading book to which the market risk proposals

apply. Other banks should be exempted from regulation for those few through de minimis

rules.

         For the relatively few trading banks in the global financial market, the Basle II


                                              20
capital approach would at best require them to calculate a redundant measure of the risks

they face, and more likely impose taxes on some, possibly fully hedged, transactions which

would otherwise contribute to their profitability and at the same time provide effective

subsidies to taking on market risks which would otherwise not be undertaken. Why not

simply require them to do what is already in their self interest to do? That is, why not
require trading banks to measure risk appropriately and then apply capital standards based

on the actual risks undertaken as a result of their activities?

       Once this question is asked, all the administrative practicality arguments for the

building-blocks with disallowances approach disappear. Clearly, the compliance costs are

lower for the regulated firms because they don't have to create a set of economically
meaningless reports nor take on risks which would not be taken except in order to reduce

their capital requirements. From the point of view of the regulators, the argument is made

that the arithmetically simpler process of adding and subtracting is necessary because
budgetary requirements limit severely the number they can hire and retain of examiners

qualified to understand the more complicated, correct computation of risks. But, if the

examiners for these institutions cannot understand the business well enough to audit

whether the banks' internal risk management systems and controls are well designed and

effectively implemented, there is little hope that they would do any good against a
sophisticated effort to circumvent the Basle H proposal. Since regulators ultimately must

rely on self-enforcement, compliance is far more likely if the rules are seen as reasonable

and as not putting particular institutions at an unfair competitive disadvantage relative to

other institutions.


                                             21
                                      V. Conclusions

       OTC derivatives are an important innovation which have contributed substantially

to risk management wherever they have been available and used. As a result at the same

time that the market has grown rapidly, risks faced by end users have declined. These risks

have not simply been shifted to the dealers, however, as many of the risks can be cancelled

in the market. Furthermore, the growing size of the market has led to the development of

new risk management techniques and skills in dealer financial institutions which have had

the effect of reducing their overall riskiness by managing risks which were previously not

actively faced and managed.

       This general reduction of risk in the system has on balance contributed to the overall

reduction of systemic risk. There are several areas where further improvements are
underway to ensure that balance is maintained and enhanced:

  o    Increased transparency of the derivatives positions in financial statements,
       particularly in those of end users, would reduce unfounded rumors during a crisis.

  o A proposed international netting arrangement could make some further contribution
       to reducing credit and settlement risks.

       Turning finally to the Basle II proposals on market risk, we see that these proposed

regulatory changes could ultimately increase systemic risk or drive the derivatives offshore

from adopting jurisdictions. The problem is not with the intentions or even analytical
approach of that document, but rather with short-cuts taken where none are required.




                                            22
                                        References


Arak, Marcelle, Arturo Estrella, Laurie Goodman, and Andrew Silver, "Interest Rate
       Swaps: An Alternative Explanation," Financial Management, Summer 1988, 17: 12-18.

Bank for International Settlements, Report of the Committee on Interbank Netting Schemes
      of the Central Banks of the Group of Ten Countries, ["Lamfalussy Report"], Basic:
      Bank for International Settlements, November 1990.

Bank for International Settlements, Recent Developments in International Interbank Relations,
       Report prepared by a Working Group established by the Central Banks of the Group
       of Ten countries, ["Promisel Report"], Basic: Bank for International Settlements,
       October 1992.

Basic Committee on Banking Supervision, "The Supervisory Treatment of Market Risks,"
      Basic, April 1993.

Becketti, Sean, "The Prepayment Risk of Mortgage-backed Securities," Federal Reserve
      Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, February 1989, 24: 43-57.

Bicksier, James, and Andrew H. Chen, "An Economic Analysis of Interest Rate Swaps," The
      Journal of Finance, July 1986, 41: 645-655.

Calla, James J., and Sidney S. Pomper, 'Interest Rate Swaps: A Derivative Product for
       Portfolio Management," Journal of Commercial Lending, June 1993, 75: 12-22.

Darby, Michael R., "The Internationalization of American Banking and Finance: Structure,
       Risk, and World Interest Rates," Journal of international Money and Finance,
       December 1986, : 403-428. [Reprinted in Internationalization of Banking and
       Finance -- Analysis and Prospects, Proceedings of the Second International Symposium
       on Financial Development, Seoul, Korea: Korea Federation of Banks, 1986.]

Darby, Michael R., "Real Exchange Rates and Freedom of International Trade and Capital
      Flows," Cato Journal, Fail 1988, 8: 473-475.

Evans, Richard, Carol Bere, and Betsy Massar, "Derivatives Superstars: Anonymous No
      Longer," Global Finance, February 1994, 8(2): 39-74.

Gennotte, Gerard, and Hayne Leland, 'Market Liquidity, Hedging, and Crashes," American
     Economic Review, December 1990, 80: 999-1021.

Global Derivatives Study Group [0-30], Derivatives: Practices and Principles, Washington,
      DC: The Group of Thirty, July 1993. (1993a)

                                             23
Global Derivatives Study Group [0-30], Derivatives: Practices and Principles. Appendix I:
      Working Papers, Washington, DC: The Group of Thirty, July 1993. (1993b)

Gumerlock, Robert, "Double Trouble," Risk, September 1993, 6(9).

International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. [ISDA], "Consultative Proposal by the
       Basle Committee: Capital Adequacy for Market Risk," comment letter to the Basic
       Committee on Banking Supervision, December 28, 1993.

Levonian, Mark E., "Bank Capital Standards for Foreign Exchange and Other Market
       Risks," FederaiReserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review, 1994, Number 1, pp.
       3-18.

Litzenberger, Robert H., "Swaps: Plain and Fanciful," The Journal of Finance, July 1992, 42:
       831-850.

Longstaff, Francis A., and Eduardo S. Schwartz, "A Simple Approach to Valuing Risky
      Fixed and Floating Rate Debt and Determining Swap Spreads," UCLA Finance
      Working Paper no. 22-93, revised April 1994.

Melnik, Arie L., and Steven E. Plaut, "Currency swaps, hedging, and the exchange of
       collateral," Journal of International Money and Finance, October 1992, fl: 446-461.
McDonough, William J., remarks presented at the Conference on Financial Markets,
    sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Coconut Grove, florida,
       February 25, 1994.

Morris, Charles S., "Managing Interest Rate Risk with Interest Rate Futures," Federal
       Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, March 1989, 74: 3-20. (1989a)

Morris, Charles S., "Managing Stock Market Risk with Stock Index Futures," Federal
       Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, June 1989, 4: 3-16. (1989b)

Morris, Charles S., and Thomas J. Merfeld, "New Methods for Savings and Loans to Hedge
      Interest Rate Risk," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, March
       1988, 73: 3-15.

Phillips, Susan M., "Derivatives and Risk Management: Challenges and Opportunities,"
       remarks presented at the Conference on Financial Markets, sponsored by the
       Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Coconut Grove, Florida, February 25, 1994.

"Procter and guess what," editorial, Financial Times, April 21, 1994, p. 21.



                                            24
Remolona, Eli M., "The Recent Growth of Financial Derivative Markets," Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York Quarterly Review, Winter 1992-93, 17: 28-43.

Schrage, Michael, "Innovation: As Derivatives Debacles Add Up, It's Time to Ask: Hedge
      or Risk", Los Angeles Times, May 5, 1994, pp. Dl & D3.

Taylor, Jeffrey, and Kenneth H. Bacon, "How the Nymex Cooled MG's Oil Crisis," Wall
      Street Journal, April 5, 1994, pp. Cl & C6.

U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Responses to Questions on
      Financial Derivatives Posed by Congressman James A. Leach, Committee on
      Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives," Washington:
       Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 6, 1993. (1993a)

U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Responses to Questions on
      Financial Derivatives Posed by Congressman Henry B. Gonzalez, Chairman,
      Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives,"
      Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 26, 1993.
      (1993b)
U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance
      Corporation, and Comptroller of the Currency, Derivative Product Activities of
      Commercial Banks, Joint study conducted in response to questions posed by Senator
      Riegle on derivative products, Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal
      Reserve System, January 27, 1993.

U.S. General Accounting Office, Financial Derivatives: Actions Needed to Protect the
      Financial System, Report GAO/GGD-94-133, Washington: General Accounting
      Office, May 1994.

U.S. Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms, Report, ["Brady Commission Report"],
       U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, January 1988.

U.S. Working Group on Financial Markets, "Interim Report of the Working Group on
       Financial Markets," submitted to The President of the United States, U.S.
       Government Printing Office: Washington, May 1988.

Wall, Larry D., "Interest Rate Swaps in an Agency Theoretic Model with Uncertain Interest
       Rates," Journal of Banking and Finance, May 1989, 13: 261-270.




                                           25
                                         Footnotes


1. See Darby (1986, 1988) for   fuller arguments on these points.
2. These dealers are represented by a trade association known currently as the International
Swaps and Derivatives Association and formerly as the International Swap Dealers
Association (ISDA in either case). See ISDA (1993) for a current discussion of the
membership. At the end of 1991, the 25 top dealers in interest rate and currency swaps
comprised 19 banks, 4 securities firms, and 2 insurance companies; 14 were U.S. based and
11 from other countries (Global Derivatives Study Group [0-301 1993a, p. 42).
3. The most comprehensive and comprehensible source on the OTC derivatives market is
the Group of Thirty study, especially Global Derivatives Study Group [0-30] (1993a). I can
only attempt to briefly summarize that material here.

4. Although widely accepted by practitioners who appear to know their business, the idea
that swaps or other derivatives can reduce financing costs or enhance portfolio returns is
controversial in the academic literature. Significant contributions to the discussion include
James Bicksier and Andrew H. Chen 1986, Marcelle Arak, Arturo Estrella, Laurie
Goodman, and Andrew Silver 1988, Larry D. Wall 1989, Robert H. Litzenberger 1992, and
Arie L. Melnik and Steven E. Plaut 1992.

5. The availability of long maturities seems to be a particularly attractive feature to the end
users. As we shall see, dealers are able to serve as counterparties in the place of a
clearinghouse because they run trading books with closely matched exposures to underlying
risk.

6. Writing for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Charles S. Morris (1989a and
1989b) and Morris and Thomas J. Merfeld (1988) lay out risk-management strategies for
financial institutions using exchange-traded futures and options or combinations of those
instruments with interest-rate swaps.

7. Estimates vary widely depending on date and amount of netting out of double counting
used. Global Derivatives Study Group [G-30] (1993a) uses ISDA data which exclude
double-counting of intra-dealer transactions to estimate that swaps notional principal was
US$4.5 trillion at the end of 1991. Global Finance reported in August 1993 that the
notional principal amount exceeded US$10 trillion (Evans, Bere, and Massar 1994, p. 41).
Eli M. Remolona (1992-93) reports intermediate estimates for the Federal Reserve Bank
on New York. U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993b) reports a
great detail of data on the derivatives activities of U.S. bank holding companies and their
affiliates.




                                              26
8. These data include foreign exchange forward contracts which are generally excluded from
industry estimates.
9. For example, gross credit risk for 14 major U.S. financial institutions with $6.5 trillion on
notional amount outstanding was only $114 billion or 1.8 percent of the notional amount
(U.S. General Accounting Office 1994, p. 53.)
10. The Procter and Gamble loss is currently estimated at US$157 million. The January
1994 MetallgesellschaftAG bailout amounted to US$1.95 billion for losses from speculating
both on and off exchange in the oil market (see Taylor and Bacon 1994).
11. The House of Lords in 1991 found that the London Borough of Hammersmith and
Fulham lacked the authority to undertake the swap contracts it had transacted at great loss
during the 1980s. This finding resulted in: (a) most of the default losses since the inception
of swap activity and (b) more fastidious concern as to whether dealers' customers were
authorized to undertake the transactions which they were making.
12. In the GAO's survey -- which some observers considered a politically motivated search
for horror stories to justify regulatory initiatives -- only 1 percent (2 respondents) reported
ever filing a complaint or litigating over a derivatives transaction. In one case, a complaint
to a fund's management resulted in a resolution satisfactory to the respondent and the other
case resulted in litigation. (U.S. General Accounting Office 1994, p. 135.)
13. There are many private and official analyses of the internal risk management and
supervisory issues which come to similar conclusions. Most follow closely the analysis in
Global Derivatives Study Group [G-30] (1993a, pp. 43-52).
14. James J. Calla and Sidney S. Pomper (1993, Pp. 17-19) report on how this is done at one
U.S. superregional bank.
15. On the latter point, see Sean Becketti 1989.


16. Bank for International Settlements ["Promisel Report"] (1992, p. 61).
17. See Global Derivatives Study Group [G-30] 1993b, pp. 127-129.
18. U.S. Working Group on Financial Markets 1988, Pp. 1-2.
19. See, for example, the indictment of portfolio insurers and their "mechanical, price-
insensitive selling" in the fourth and fifth paragraphs of the Brady Commission's Executive
Summary. U.S. Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms 1988, p. v. The Promisel
report returns to portfolio insurance "as an example of the destabilizing potential of the
market linkages associated with dynamic hedging strategies." (Bank for International
Settlements 1992, p. 26. Gerard Gennotte and Hayne Leland (1990) provide an academic
analysis of how dynamic hedging strategies could have caused a large price drop in 1987.

                                              27
20. McDonough 1994, p. 6.
21. Global Derivatives Study Group 1993b, pp. 128-129. Although theirs is the best analysis
of systemic risk of which I am aware, I believe that their reading of the Promisel Report
may overstress the importance of systemic risk as seen in that document.

22. My review of the Group of Thirty/Promisel issues relies heavily on Global Derivatives
Study Group 1993b and International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. 1993.

23. Michael Schrage (1994) makes this point: "The greatest risk derivatives bring to the
marketplace is not their complexity of volatility; it's the shadowy way in which they can be
used by companies that would rather not tell the marketplace the truth about their
investment intentions. The antiseptic for that infection is not more regulation; it's better
and fuller disclosure."
24. Global Derivatives Study Group [0-30], 1993b, p. 135. Academic economists have done
some interesting work recently on the role of credit risk in the pricing of OTC derivatives;
see Francis A. Longstaff and Eduardo S. Schwartz (1994) and the references cited there.

25. U.S. General Accounting Office (1994), pp. 53-55.

26. U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, and Comptroller of the Currency 1993, p. 18.
27. See Robert Gumerlock (1993) for a careful analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of
the proposal. The ISDA comment letter (International Swaps and Derivatives Association,
Inc. 1993) is also an important piece of analysis.
28. Commenting on a draft of this paper, Mark Levonian has made two important points
(a) the internal systems adopted by dealers might differ if they knew their capital
requirements would be based on the indicated net risks and (b) "nobody knows as well as
the insiders how to game the bank's internal systems." I think that the Lucas critique [point
(a)] is wrong in this case because one cannot really bias the calculations in general unless
one also knows the desired bias to be maintained in the book. Since dealers do not show
any desired bias, it is hard to cook the books. I agree that insiders may ti-y to game the
internal risk control system, but in that case their supervisors have a clear reason to try to
catch them before they cause disaster. Their supervisors would have little reason to do the
same in the face of avoidance of capital controls.




                                             28
                               Table 1
             Notional Amount of Derivatives Outstanding
                  by Nature of the Underlying Risk
                              1989—1992

                                                            Pct.
Underlying           1989      1990      1991      1992

Interest Rates       4,311     6,087     8,404     10,923   153

Exchange Rates       2,779     3,927     5,415      6,475   133

Equity/Comxnodityb     108       158       209        245   127

Total Outstandings 7,198      10,172    14,028     17,643   145


Amounts in billions of U.S. dollar equivalents.
Source: U.S. General Accounting Office (1994), p. 35.
Notes:
a.   Percentage increase from 1989 to 1992.
b.   Data on individual-firm-equity-price and physical-commodity—
     price derivatives are especially incomplete.




                                 29
                             Table 2
           Notional Amount of Derivatives Outstanding
                 by Type of Derivative Product
                            1989—1992

                                                            Pct.
Derivative Product 1989       1990      1991      1992

Forwards            3,034     4,437     6,061      7,515    148

Futures             1,259     1,540     2,254      3,154    151

options               953     1,305     1,841      2,263    137

swaps               1,952     2,890     3,872      4,711    141

Total Outstandings 7,198     10,172    14,028     17,643    145


Amounts in billions of U.S. dollar equivalents.
Source: U.S. General Accounting Office (1994), p. 36.
Notes:
a.   Percentage increase from 1989 to 1992.
b.   Forwards include foreign exchange, FRAs, equity and commodity
     forwards.




                                30
                             Table 3
    Credit Ratings of 200 Companies with More than $1 Billion
            in Swaps Outstanding as of Year—End 1991


                         No. of        Notional Amts.
Credit Rating            Firms         Outstanding    Percent

AAA of Aaa                 21            535              9.7

kA or Aa                   34           1,747            31.7

A                          78          2,023             36.7

Total A or Better         133           4,305           78.2
BBB or Baa                 38           1,066            19.4

Total Investment Grade    171          5,371             97.5

Speculative                15              30             0.6

Unrated                    14             106             1.9

Total Noninvestxnent Grade 29             136             2.5

Total All Grades         200           5,507            100.0


Amounts in billions of U.S. dollar equivalents.
Source: U.S. General Accounting Office (1994), p. 59.




                                  31
