NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN EVALUATION OF THE SWEDISH
ACTIVE LABOR MARKET POUCY:
NEW AND RECEIVED WISDOM

Antlers Forsiund
Alan B. Krueger

Working Paper No. 4802

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1994
We are grateful to Per-Anders Edin and Bertil Hoimlund for providing us with their county-level

data set, and to Jörn-Steffen Pischke for providing us with data on Germany. We are also
graceful to Antlers Bjorklund, Per-Anders Edin, Richard Freeman, Batil Hoimlund, Lawrence

Katz, Birgitta Swedenborg. and two reviewers for helpful comments. Naturally, we are
responsible for any errors. This paper is part of NBER's reseaivh program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4802
July 1994
AN EVALUATION OF THE SWEDISH
ACTIVE LABOR MARKET POLICY:
NEW AND RECEIVED WISDOM

ABSTRACT
About 3% of GM' is spent on government labor market programs in Sweden, compared

to 2% in Germany and less than 0.5% in the U.S. In Sweden these programs include extensive
job training, public sector relief work, recruitment subsidies, youth programs, mobility bonuses,
and unemployment benefits. Using county-level data, we provide new evidence that public relief
workers displace other workers, especially in the construction sector. Our review of the previous

literature suggests that job training programs have small effects on wages and re-employment in

Sweden. but precise inferences are difficult because of small sample sizes. We also investigate

alternative reasons for the stability of the Beveridge Curve in Sweden, and compare regional
evolutions of employment and unemployment in Sweden and the U.S. Lastly, we present cross-

country analysis for 1993 which, contrary to studies that use earlier data, shows that the extent

of a country's active labor market programs is positively associated with the national
unemployment rate.

Anders Forslund
Department of Economics
Uppsala University

Alan B. Krueger
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University

Box513
S-iS 1 20 Uppsaia

and NBER.

SWEDEN

Ptinceton,NJ08544

A visitor to Sweden is struck by the breadth and generosity of the labor market
programs designed to limit the adverse effects of unemployment and expand employment.
These programs include extensive job training, public sector relief work, recruitment

subsidies, youth programs, mobility bonuses, and unemployment benefits. About 3% of
GNP is spent on government labor market programs in Sweden, compared to 2% in

Germany and less than 0:5% in the U.S. Several prominent observers have argued that the
Swedish active labor market policies are responsible for the enviable unemployment

experience of Sweden in the 1970s and 1980s. Layard, Nickell, and Jackman (1991, p.
473) go so far as to recommend that Sweden's "active labor market" programs serve as a
model for other countries.
Figure 1 illustrates the Swedish unemployment rate semi-annually over the past 25

years. In the 1970s Sweden managed to maintain a low unemployment rate in the face of
adverse oil price shocks that caused high unemployment and severe recessions in other

industrialized countries. The unemployment rate in Sweden also remained low in the
1980s, while it trended upwards in other European countries. But a dramatic increase in

the unemployment rate can be seen beginning in 1991. In July 1993, the U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics calculated that the unemployment rate in Sweden reached 9.5%, on a

comparable basis to the U.S. unemployment concept. The U.S. rate at the same time was
6.8%. For the first time in our lifetimes, the unemployment rate is higher in Sweden than
in the U.S.! The dramatic increase in unemployment in Sweden over the last two years
casts doubt on the ability of the active labor market policies to blunt unemployment. At the
same time, Sweden's history of low unemployment in the 1980s suggests that its labor
market proirams are not responsible for the 199 1-93 downturn because the programs were

2

substantially as generous in the 1980s as in the early 1990s.
The expense of the Swedish labor market programs may be justifiable if they
produce benefits that exceed their costs. But the programs are a very expensive luxury if

unemployment is high and if the programs are not effective at reducing unemployment or

raising workers' skills. Given the rising level of unemployment, and other changes in the
Swedish economy, an assessment of the effectiveness of the active labor market programs is
especially timely.

As the pattern in Figure 1 suggests, macroeconomic indicators can give a possibly

misleading indication of the efficacy of Sweden's labor market policies. In this paper we
first review microeconometric evidence on two major active labor market programs in

Sweden: public• relief work and job training. One concern with public relief work is that
such programs may displace other workers. We provide new evidence on "fiscal
substitution" between public relief workers and other workers using couiny-level data.
Specifically, we find evidence that public relief workers tend to displace private
construction workers, which potentially limits the usefulness of public relief workers in

reducing unemployment. The evidence is less clear on whether relief workers displace
social welfare workers, which is another major sector in which relief workers are
dispatched.

We also review previous evidence on the impact of job training programs on wages -.
and

re-employment probabilities. Due to small samples used in past studies, we find it very

difficult to draw precise conclusions about the payoff to job training programs. In sum, our
view of the microeconomeiric evidence is that one should remain agnostic about the

3

effectiveness of job Iraining and public relief programs in fighting unemployment.

We then attempt to reconcile the macroeconomic and international evidence -- which

has beenicited by many as support for the effectiveness of Sweden's active labor market
programs — with the microeconometric evidence. We first provide evidence on the stability

of the Beveridge Curve in the 1980s across counties in Sweden. One possible explanation
for the stable Beveridge Curve is that rapid expansion of public sector employment has
absorbed unemployed workers. We test this hypothesis with county-level data, and find
little support for it. Second, we evaluate and update the cross-country unemployment rate
analysis that Layard, Nickell and Jackman (1991) and others have performed. Using 1993
unemployment rate data, we find that greater spending on active labor market programs has

a statistically insignificant and negative impact on unemployment. This finding is in sharp
contrast with estimates for the 1980s. We also discuss several statistical limitations of the
cross-country approach.

Finally, we present evidence on the reaction of employment and unemployment to

regional shocks in Sweden. Specifically, we compare our fmdings on regional evolutions itt
Sweden to comparable results for the U.S. based on Blanchard and Katz (1992) and for the

rest of Europe based on pecressin and Fatas (1993). These results suggest that Sweden's
response to shocks is not particularly different from other countries', implying that

Sweden's extensive labor market programs have not had a marked effect on regional labor
market adjustments.

In our judgment, the evidence provides little support for the view that Sweden's past
success in maintaining low unemployment stemmed primarily from its active labor market

4

policies. On the other hand, the extensive labor market programs in Sweden are most

likely not the cause of Sweden's current economic crisis. But our analysis of the evolution
of unemployment suggests there is a real danger that the current high level of
unemployment Will persist for some time in the future. We conclude by considering

policies that might help to improve the active labor market programs in the current
economic climate.

L Overview of Programs
As way of background, it should be noted that within the central blue-collar trade

union (LO) in the early l950s the question of how to combine full employment and price
stability was discussed.' These discussions led to the formulation of a program
subsequently adopted by the Social Democrat government, based on a few cornerstones,

one of which being active labor market policies. First, LO would pursue a so called

"solidaristic wage policy.' In its original form this policy aimed at 'equal pay for equal
work," irrespective of the productivity levels of individual firms. Later, the policy principle
(still under the same name) changed to one of unconditional wage equalization, or "equal

pay for unequal work? Second, a strict stance of stabilization policies (primarily fiscal
policy) was advocated in order to keep inflation low. One intended result of these two
principles was shut-downs of low-productivity firms and layoffs. This motivated the third

cornerstone of the program, active labor market policies," which were given the role of

'See Björklund (1990), Calmfors (1992), flanagan (1987) and Stafford (1981) for
excellent overviews of the labor market programs.

5

transferring laid-off workers to expanding high-productivity firms.
Two points about the origin of the programs are worth noting: First, labor market

policies are not considered a substitute for stabilization policies; second, labor market

policies entail the so called work principle" -- the aim of the programs is to accomplish a
smooth and rapid transfer of laid-off workers to new employment rather than to provide

welfare for the unemployed (i.e., "workfarC rather than welfare). Starting in the I 950s a
system of manpower policy emerged based on active labor market policies. The present
system can be described in terms of the following main ingredients: Unemployment
insurance, measures to create employment, mobility enhancing measures, and measures
targeted at the handicapped.

Unemployment insurance

Unemployment compensation is provided in two forms: First, there is a number of

so called certified unemployment insurance (UI) hinds, run by the trade unions at the

industry level, but to a large extent tax financed. In 1990 the coverage was slightly less
than 80% of the labor force. Second, in addition to the UI system administered by the
trade unions, since 1974 there is also a supplementary compensation system, cash benefit
assistance (kontant arbetsmarknadsstod, KAS), mainly designed for new entrants in the

labor market, who usually are not members of any UI hind. U! fund members are entitled
to compensation for 300 days (450 days for workers over age 55) whereas cash benefit
assistance runs for 150 days (300 days for persons Cover age55, 450 days for persons over

age 60). Daily compensation in the UI fund system is, within limits, fixed by the

6

government regulating minimum and maximum Levels at 80% (90% before July 5. 1993) of
the recipient's normal incOme prior to unemployment. The level of compensation in cash

benefit assistance is significantly lower than the average paid by the certified UI funds (in

1990 174 versus 402 SEK per day). Carling, et al. (1994) find that the duration of
unemployment spells for those on KAS benefits is only slightly shorter than those on UI
benefits, in spite of the large benefit differential.

A special feature of the UI fund system is that fund coverage roughly coincides with
wage bargaining units, as the funds are run by trade unions at the industry level. But the
state grants to the UI hinds are designed so that the marginal cost of extra unemployment

among a hind's members is zero.'
A number of criteria, many of which are common to the UI hinds and KAS, have to
be met in order that a person be entitled to unemployment compensation. The two most
important conditions are that recipients actively search for a job at a public employment

office, and that an offer of "suitable" work must be accepted. Refusal to accept a job offer
might lead to expulsion from compensation. To receive compensation from a UI fund, a
"membership condition" and a "work condition" have to be met: the claimant must have
paid membership fees to the UI hind for at least 12 months and must have been working

for at least 75 days distributed over at least 4 months and must have been working for at
least 75 days distributed over at least 4 months during the 12 months preceding the current
unemployment spell. Participation in relief work as well as labor market retraining

2Qjig in the UI system initiated in 1994 make membership compulsory, and add
hinds administered by the state.

7

programs count as work in this respect.
Workers who do not meet the membership condition are entitled to KAS benefits if
they meet either a work requirement of roughly the same type as for UI find compensation.
or an "education condition." The education condition is met if individuals have finished at
least one year of school in excess of the nine compulsory years and searched for a job at a
public employment office for at least 90 days.
As the duration of compensation is limited, the system also creates incentives to find

a job before compensation runs out.3 This aspect has been stressed by Layard, Nickell and
Jackman (1991) as a key factor behind the high observed Swedish real wage sensitivity to

changes in unemployment. This, in turn, is a potential explanation for Sweden's favorable
unemployment experiences during the l9SOs. It is important to note, however, that the
system has recently changed. Since the late 1980s participation in labor market programs
qualifies for new periods of unemployment compensation, so in principle there is no limit

on the amount of time a jobless person can spend outside the regular labor market by
switching between training and unemployment compensation.4 There is some indirect

evidence supporting this view: Axelsson and Löfgren (1991), studying the effects of
retraining programs on incom; found a significant positive effect on persons finishing
training programs in 1981, whereas Regnér (1993) finds significant negative income effects

for 1989 and 1990 program participants. A possible explanation for this difference is that

3When unemployment compensation runs out, individuals are eligible for social
security, which offers significantly less generous compensation.

the change in the system pertains to training programs; relief work has always been
considered Mwo&"

$

in the latter period training qualified for unemployment compensation, so that the negative

income effect reflects negative selection of program participants. Unfortunately, there is a

lack of direct evidence (e.g. in the form of event histories) on the extent of a circular
flow" between unemployment and programs.

Measures to create employment
The principal measure to create employment has for a long time been public relief
work. The primary stated aim is to counteract temporary downturns in labor demand, but
relief jobs have also been targeted for groups with permanently high unemployment risks.
Unemployed UI fund members who run out of unemployment compensation are in principle

granted the right to a relief job. To quali for a relief job one must be registered as an
unemployed job applicant at a public employment office for a minimum number of days

(about a week). The duration of relief jobs is normally capped at 6 months, and payment is
according to collective agreement in the regular labor market. Relief workers are obliged to
accept suitable job offers and can be expelled from relief jobs upon refusal. Relief work
can be arranged by central or local governments, or (rarely) by the private sector. The
typical relief job has traditionally been in building and road construction, but the emphasis

has gradually changed to jobs in health and welfare. From the "workfare" point of view,
relief work offers a "work test": if the employment office fails to find a suitable job for the
applicant, it can test his willingness to work by offering a relief job.

Recruitment subsidies, introduced in 1984, aim at facilitating employment for long-term

9
unemployed and at creating permanent jobs in the local public sector for the long-term or

partially unemployed. Subsidies normally amount to at most 60% of the total wage cost,

and can be given for a maximum of 6 months.
Beginning in 1984, a variety of special "youth measures" have been used, arid their

use has intensified recently. The most recent form ('introduced in July 1992) is called
"youth practice," and is targeted at youths between 18 and 24 years old. Participants
receive compensation roughly equal to unemployment benefits, and employers receive free

labor. In addition to keeping participants out of unemployment, youth practice offers a

work test of the same kind as relief work. The combination of youth practice and a deep
recession are believed to have weakened significantly the incentives to hire youths.
Finally, since January 1993, unemployed persons can prolong their period of
unemployment compensation by taking part in so called "labor market ventures". These
last for at most 6 months and the participant receives income equivalent to unemployment
compensation benefits. The employer, nonnally organizations, associations, or the public
•

sector, gets free labor. To prevent crowding out, participants are supposed to perform
duties which would otherwise not have been performed. As the number of participants has
increased rapidly, this last condition might prove to pose problems: either participants do
what they are supposed to do, in which case large numbers of people perform superfluous
tasks, or, alternatively, crowding out will prove to be an important issue.

Mobility enhancing measures
The traditional mobility enhancing measure is employment service administration.

10

The Swedish employment service is not limited to just a brokerage function -. another
important function of it is to administer both unemployment insurance and selection to
labor market programs. A distinguishing feature of the Swedish set-up regarding job

brokerage is that the public employment service has had a legal monopoly position. Since
the late 1970s there has also been compulsory notification of vacancies through the public
employment service.'

Another mobility enhancing measure is "mobility grants/starting allowances." These
grants are intended to facilitate geographical mobility by making moving an economically

feasible alternative• to unemployment in the home region. To qualify, one must be an
unemployed person looking for a job in another region through the public unemployment

service. Other, more strict criteria, such as belonging to certain" scarce' professions, have
also been eligible from time to time.
Last, but not least, among the mobility enhancing measures is labor market

retraining. The official aims are to help unemployed or persons facing unemployment risks
to get a job, help persons with little education or obsolete education to attain a stronger
position in the labor market and to facilitate for firms to find workers with adequate

education. Labor market retraining comes in many different forms and is produced by a
plethora of educational institutions on requisition by county-level authorities under the

National Labor Market Board. Retraining eligibility is conditional on being unemployed or
facing risk of unemployment and job-search through public employment service.

5

.

One side benefit of the employment service s monopoly is that Swedish vacancy data are

likely to be of high quality.

II
Compensation on retraining programs is roughly equivalent to unemployment compensation.

Measures targeted for the disabled
There are of four basic measures targeted for the disabled: employment in
community enterprises, public sheltered work, wage-subsidized employment, and vocational

rehabilitation. A common feature of these measures is that their goal is to provide work for
persons who, due to various disabilities, have difficulty obtaining employment in the regular
labor market.

Ouantitative Descriotion

Table I summarizes the magnitude of key labor market programs in Sweden. the

U.S., and Germany in various years. It is clear that Sweden spends much more on training
and unemployment benefits per recipient than the U.S. Sweden's unemployment benefits
are particularly generous by comparison to the U.S.6 Since workers who are in training
programs also qualifr for unemployment benefits, the total amount spent on workers
undergoing training is of the same order of magnitude as the cost of tuition and room and
board for a year at Harvard!1

Readers may be surprised to see, however, that 1% of the labor force is enrolled in
public training programs in the U.S., which is slightly hither than the comparable figure for

6Sweden reduced its replacement ration by 10 percentage points in 1993, but benefits are
still well above the U.S. level.

'As Richard Freeman has ointed out to us. this is also roughly equivalent to the cost of
a year in a high-security prison.

12

Sweden or Germany. This fact casts some doubt on the relative importance of "disguised
unemployment" in labor market programs in Sweden. Even if one counted all of the
Sweden's workers who are on training or public relief programs as unemployed, the
unemployment rate in the 1980s would have increased only by roughly 1%. Thus,
disguised unemployment cannot account for much of Sweden's historically low
unemployment rate.

Although the proportion of the labor force receiving training is about the same. a
much higher proportion of the unemployed undergo training in a given year in Sweden than

in the U.S. In 1990, government training participants were 62% as large as the number of
unemployed workers. Moreover, a sizable proportion of the unemployed are also placed in

public relief jobs in Sweden, a program for which there is no current analog in the US.
Sweden devotes about 3% of GNP to labor market programs, which exceeds Germany

(2.1%) and the U.S. (.4%). The increase in unemployment in Sweden in the past two years
can be expected to cause a substantial increase in expenditures on labor market programs
relative to GNP.

The changing importance of some of the main Swedish labor market programs is

illustrated in Figure 2. The figure presents the proportion of the labor force that is directly

involved in retraining, relief work, youth programs, or recruinent subsidies. A number of
features stand out. First, relief work shows a clear counter-cyclical pattern. Second, the
incidence of relief work has trended steadily downward in the I 980s. Third, labor market
retraining has not had the same cyclical variability as relief work, again except for the past

few years. Fourth, the incidence of retaining gradually tended upward in the I 980s. As a

l3

result of these contrasting trends, the relative importance of retraining has grown in the
1980s and 1990s, while the relative importance of public relief work has declined. Sixth,
there has been a dramatic increase in the prevalence of youth measures in recent years.
Finally, the incidence of retraining and youth measures declined in 1993. This decline was

panty a result of budgetary cutbacks and partly a result of greater participation in"labor
market ventures."

II. Theoretical Framework
The Swedish labor market programs are diverse and extensive. It is important to
consider each program in this overall context. For example, one must recognize that
solidarity wage policy is likely to set a floor on wages; workers whose productivity level
fall below this floor will find it difficult to obtain employment (see Edin and Topel, 1994).
Thus, the benefit of raising worker productivity through government training, say, is greater

given the pre-existing wage rigidity. Similarly, wage subsidies to employers of low-wage
employees will relax the constraint imposed by the solidarity policy, and thus could
increase employment and enhince efficiency.
Moreover, the social cost of unemployment (or low productivity) is especially high

in Sweden because unemployed workers qualify for generous transfer benefits, retraining,

and public relief work. The high income tax also raises the social cost of unemployment or
low productivity because tax revenue is foregone, which requires even higher tax rates

(which in turn probably cause further labor supply distortions). And the fact that income
taxes are progressive reduces the incentive to invest in human capital and search for better

14

paying jobs. The adverse effects of these distortions could be reduced by effective
government intervention to encourage training, mobility and employment.'

If one takes the network of government programs as given, then the proper

theoretical framework is to start from a situation with pre-existing distortions. As is well
known, in this second-best setting government intervention could improve economic

efficiency. In this framework, the benefits of successful labor market programs in Sweden
are potentially greater than in the U.S., which may explain why the Swedish labor market

programs are more extensive. But if the external environment changes, such as a reduction
in marginal tax rates or unemployment benefits -- as has been the case in Sweden -. then
this theoretical framework suggests that the social benefit of active labor market programs
may be reduced.

One must also consider possible indirect effects of labor market programs on wage

and employment outcomes. Theoretical bargaining models predict that labor market
programs will exert upward pressure on wages. Aggregate time-series studies provide some
empirical support for this prediction (Caimfors and Forslund (1991), Calmfors (1992) and
Calmfors and Lang (1993)), although Edin, Holmlund, and Oslros's (1992) county-level

analysis finds that labor market programs do not put upward pressure on wage bargains. It
is thus possible that labor market programs cause higher wages and depress employment.

The total social costs and benefits of labor market programs must be compared to

'Notice, however, that the government intdvention does not necessarily have to involve

government-provided fraijtg. For example, the government could provide vouchers to
individuals for private training, or the government could lower tuition costs through grams or
loans.

Is
determine their optimal level. Rational design of policy would take into accowit the
efficacy of labor market programs. If, on the margin, a kronor spent on retraining has a

higher reward than a kronor spent on public relief work, then the retraining program shoul4

receive a larger share of the available resources. Such cost-benefit comparisons are
especially important given the rising expense of labor market programs, and the rising

government budget deficit Next we present an evaluation of the effectiveness of retrainint
programs and public relief works, drawing on the past literature and some new analysis.

III. Disolacement Effects of Public Relief Workers
There was a large shift away from public relief work and toward job training in the
1980s. Nevertheless, over 10% of unemployed workers are placed on public relief jobs in
1990, and there is some discussion of expanding public relief in response to the current

economic crisis. One potential drawback of public relief work is that public relief workers
may displace private sector workers. There is an extensive literature on this topic in the
U.S.. beginning with Johnson and Tomola (1977). The theoretical argument is
straightforward: If the public sector provides relief workers to a local government agency or

private sector flrni the local government or private firm will hire fewer workers than it
otherwise would have hired.
Johnson and Tomola conclude that public sector employment, programs used in the

U.S. in 1966-75 tended to displace other workers, on net creating few additional jobs after

6 quarters. This conclusion is not without controversy. Borus and Hamennesh (1978)
argued that Johnson and Tomola's estimates are sensitive to their Almon lag specification,

16

and nonrobust because of tong multicollinearity in their aggregate time-series data.

Adams, et a1. (1983) estimate displacement effects using a panel data set of annual

observations on cities 1970-79. They find that public sector employment grants in 1978

and 1979 had a significant negative effect on payrolls, but not in 1977. In 1978, for
example, 77 cents of every dollar in public sector employment grants was reflected in

higher city payrolls. They attribute the finding of less of a displacement after 1977 to a
redesign of the program, which tightened eligibility and required specific projects.

There has been only one previous study of displacement effects of public relief
workers in Sweden. That study, by Gramlich and Ysander (1981), analyzes 14 annual time
series observation from 1964 to 1977. They focus on the two largest categories of public
relief expenditures and employment: health and welfare workers and road construction

workers. They estimate aggregate time series models, similar to Johnson and Tomola.
Gramlich and Ysander find evidence of considerable displacement in road construction, but
not in the health and welfare sector.
We investigate the displacement effects of public relief workers using annual data
for 24 counties in Sweden over the period 1976-1991 for all construction workers, and over

the period 1982-1990 for health and welfare workers.9 Specifically, we estimate
employment equations of the form:

(1) Eft=I%+l3lPRW +w÷pç+÷;+
'The hellth and welfare workers series is shorter because of comparability problems with
the county-level data in earlier years.

17

where E is employment in county i in year t, PRW11 is the total number of public relief

workers in county i in year t-l, W is the log of the average real wage in county i in year t,
and X, is a vector of cyclical demand measures, such as the unemployment rate and

vacancy rate. We also include unrestricted county fixed effects (gj and unrestricted year
effects (rJ. Equation (1) is estimated separately for construction workers and for health and
welfare workers. Relief workers should not be counted among the workers included in the
dependent variable. Thus, fiscal substitution (i.e., displacement) will imply a negative
coefficient on PRW, and complete fiscal substitution will imply a coefficient of -1.0. We
have also experimented with specifications using various lags of public relief workers, and
with subsets of the covariates.

Results for construction workers are presented in Table 2. Each specification shows
a negative and statistically significant coefficient on public relief workers, implying

substantial displacement. Column 6, which includes the largest set of covariates, indicates
that .69 fewer private construction workers are employed for every additional public relief
worker hired. The lowest estimate of displacement we find is -.36, in specifications where
we omit the year effects.

The results for health and welfare workers, reported in Table 3, are much less clear.
The estimated displacement effect for health and welfare workers is not stable when
different sets of covariates are included — it bounces from -2.26 to +.9l. Moreover, the

standard errors are quite large, and the estimated effect is statistically insignificant in

column 6, which includes the full set of covariates. Unfortunately, it is difficult to draw
much of a conclusion on the extent Of displacement for this group of workers.

18

One potential problem with our estimates of displacement is that causality may run

in the reverse direction. A prolonged downturn in the economy may stimulate the use of
relief workers, thus generating a negative correlation between (lagged) relief workers and
non-relief employment. We include cyclical demand measures (unemployment and vacancy
rates)

in the regressions to control for this possibility. Nevertheless, in a highly cyclical

industry like construction, reverse causality may still be a concern. To explore this issue
further we also estimated vector autoregressions for employment and relief workers in each

sector. These estimates are reported in Table 4. The results indicate that lagged relief
workers and lagged employment have a statistically significant effect in the employment
equations, but lagged employment does not have a statistically significant effect in the relief

worker equations. This finding suggests that causality does not run from employment to

relief workers, but with our relatively short time period it is hard to draw r conclusions
from the vector autoregressions.

As a final check on the plausibility of our estimates, we estimated a vector

autoregression for the durable manufacturing sector, an industry that is j directly affected
by public relief workers. Since the durable manufacturing sector is highly cyclical, this
industry provides a test of whether our previous results for the construction industry are

spuriously reflecting cyclical patterns. The p-value for a joint test of three lags of the
public relief variable in the employment equation for durable manufacturing workers is I 1

(F'2.03). The corresponding test for construction workers has a p-value of .0000 (N9.07).
These results suggest that the effect of relief workers on construction employment is not
just spuriously reflecting the business cycle.

19

To summarize, we find evidence of substantial displacement in the construction

sector, but not in the health and welfare sector. This conclusion is very much like
Oramlich and Ysander's, even though we analyze data for a more recent time period.
exploit county-level data, and use different estimation methods.

IV. Job Training
In view of the large amount of resources devoted to job retraining in Sweden, one

would expect to find a vast microeconometric literature on the effectiveness of training

programs. This is not the case. There have been only about one half dozen studies of the
impact of job training on earnings with Swedish data. These studies use a variety of
econometric models and data sets, and some studies use several estimation techniques. In
Sweden as in the U.S., there is considerable uncertainty regarding the proper estimation

method and specification for estimating the "treatment effect" of job training. But in
Sweden problems of imprecise estimates are at least as important as model specification. In
summarizing the literature, we report fixed effects estimates when multiple estimates were
available.'0

Figure 3 summarizes the past literature on the impact of job training on earnings.
The figure shows the estimated payoff to training as a proportion of earnings, with a bound

of plus or minus two standard ettors around the estimate. As a benchmark for these
estimates, one should bear in mind that if job training raises participants' annual earnings
by 3% for 20 years, then the present value of the payoff to the training roughly equals its

'°See Bjorklund (1990) for a thoughtful summary of this literature.

20

costs." Thus, one should hope that studies have enough precision to detect payoffs on the
order of 3%. Unfortunately, there is a wide range of estimates, and each of the estimates

has a large standard error. Two of the estimates are significantly below .03. and one is
significantly above .03.
To improve the precision of the estimates, we calculated the weighted average of the

estimates, using as weights the inverse sampling variance of the estimate. (We also
calculated the standard error of the weighted-average estimate.) This is reported as study 6.
The weighted average payoff is slightly negative (-.8%). but not statistically different from

zero (std. errorl.2%). One could, however, reject the null hypothesis of a payoff on the
order of 3% using the weighted average of the estimates. On the other hand, the arithmetic
average of the estimated effects in the studies is positive, but it is not statistically different
from zero or from 3%.
These studies show that there is not enough support to reject the null hypothesis that

training has no effect on participants' subsequent earnings. If we use the weighted average
of the estimates, we would reject the null hypothesis that the payoff is on the order of 3%,
which is roughly the break even level for the training programs.
individually, the studies of earnings lack sufficient power to reach a convincing

conclusion on this critical issue. A high priority for researchers in Sweden should be the
construction of data sets that permit precise estimates on the effect of job training programs.

"In making this calculation, we assume that the typical participant earns $15,000 per year.
that job training increases annual earnings permanently by 3%, and that the individual works
for 20 years. If we apply a real interest rate of 3% to future earnings, the present value of the

payoff to training is $6,695, which exceeds the avenge cost of $6,568 in 1990.
calculation ignores the time costs of participants while they undergo training.

This

21

The following calculation indicates approximately how large a sample is required to draw

reasonably precise inferences2 Suppose a standard error of about 1% is desired. If we
take Regnér's (1993) sample and estimates as representative, we would need a sample of
roughly 41,000 observations to achieve a standard error of .01, compared to the actual

sample of 5,000 observations. We feel that Bjorklund's (1990; p. 12) recommendation is
worth repeating, "More attention must be paid to these -- less glamorous -- issues of data

quality in order to get estimates of reasonable precision." In light of Heckrnan and Smiths
(1993) finding that JTFA experimental and nonexperimental evaluations yield similar results

when the comparison sample for nonexperimental sample is carefully selected, we feel this
suggestion is particularly prescient.

There is an even smaller set of studies to review that examine the effect of training
on subsequent employment probabilities. A careful study by Bjorklund (1989) finds that
retraining programs raise the probability participants are subsequently employed by 4.4-5.5

percent if a linear control function is estimated and by 2-8 percent if a fixed effects model
is estimated, depending on the period. Only the 8% estimate is significantly different from
0, however. Duration models estimated by Korpi (1992) indicate that longer experience in
labor market programs is associated with greater employment stability for youths in
Stockholm, and that youths who found jobs directly after participating in manpower

programs tended to stay on the jobs longer.
Until sufficient data are available to make precise estimates for Sweden, we believe

12Another issue to consider is the proper statistical methods and specification to estimate
the payoff to job training.

22

that estimates for the U.S. could prove informative for Sweden. The U.S. literature
consistently finds that job training programs have their largest payoff for women. Men

tend to have smaller payoffs, and the available estimates for youths suggest that training has
no effect, or possibly negative effects, on their subsequent labor market outcomes (see

LaLonde, 1992). Although the selection into training programs and the content of programs
in Sweden are likely to be quite different, the American estimates may provide a rough

indication of the likely returns in Sweden. In the absence of compelling evidence to the
contrary, we suspect that a similar qualitative pattern will hold in Sweden. Moreover, the
small payoff to training based on the weighted-average study in Figure 3 is consistent with

the modest payoffs found in the American literature. All of this suggests to us that one
should not expect heroic returns from job training programs. The benefits may justify the
costs (especially in Sweden because of pre-existing distortions noted earlier), but the returns

are likely to be in the neighborhood of 3% higher income per year.

V. Beveride Curve
The stability of the unemployment-vacancy relationship, or Beveridge curve, is one

of the features of the Swedish labor market that many observers have pointed to. One
possible explanation for the stable Beveridge curve in Sweden is that active labor market

policies have improved the matching of workers to vacancies. But there are alternative
explanations as well. First, the public relief jobs and training programs may mask
unemployed workers. Second, public sector employment has grown rapidly in Sweden,
with the percent of Swedish workers directly employed by the government increased from

23

20% in 1965 to 38.2% in 1985. The increase in public sector employment is even more
dramatic for women, rising from 29.5% in 1965 to 54.8% in 1985. Government

employment may have soaked up workers who otherwise would be unemployed, preventing

an outward shift in the Beveridge curve)3 We explore

these

alternative explanations for

the stable Beveridge curve.
We consider two sources of unemployment data: labor force survey data and register

data. Panel A of Figure 4 documents the stability of the Beveridge curve using biannual
unemployment data from the labor force survey. Panel B of Figure 4 contains the
data consist
corresponding plot using register data. The unemployed counted in the register

of people looking for work and immediately available to take a job. In both figures the

vacancy rate is measured by the number of vacancies listed in the register divided by the
labor force.
The unemployment-vacancy rate relationship is fairly stable over time when the

unemployment rate is derived from the labor force survey. The register data, by contrast.
indicate that the unemployment-vacancy relationship shifted in somewhat between 1990 and

1992 (see Panel B). Both of these patterns present a sharp contrast with most other
industrialized countries, ivhich experienced a shift out of the unemployment-vacancy locus
in the 1970s and 1980s. We utilize the register data in our county-level analysis because

the relatively small sample size in the labor force survey would induce considerable
sampling variability in county-level estimates. Our goal then is to explain why the

Beveridge curve has shifted in for Sweden.

"This explanation is hypothesized by Lindbeck (1990) and OECD (1992), for example.

24
Table 5 presents estimates of the Beveridge curve using county-level data for

Sweden for 1981-91. In the first four columns the unemployment rate derived from the

registers is the dependent variable. Columns 5 and 6 contain estimates that use a broader
measure of the unemployment rate as the dependent variable; the broader measure also
counts workers on public relief jobs, training programs, and youth programs as among the

unemployed. Results with either dependent variable cast some doubt on the importance of
public sector employment for the stability of the Beveridge curve in Sweden.
The regression reported in column (1) reveals a negatively sloped relationship

between the unemployment rate and the vacancy rate. Notice that the coefficient on the
linear time trend reported in column (2) indicates that the county-level Beveridge curve has

shifted in, as expected from Panel B of Figure 4. In the model in column (3) we substitute
a variable measuring the proportion of workers in the county who are employed in the

public sector for thetime trend. The estimates in column (3) are consistent with the view
that public sector employment has absorbed unemployed workers, as the public sector share

has a negative and statistically effect on the county unemployment rate. However, once we
add a linear year trend to the model in Column (4), the public sector employment variable
changes sign. Moreover, the year trend is hardly affected by the inclusion of the public

sector employment variable. In columns (4) and (5) we use the broader definition of the
unemployment rate. These results also indicate that the Beveridge curve has shifted in, and
that the proportion of workers employed in the public sector has a positive effect on
unemployment when a linear time trend is included.

From the estimates in Table 5, one may be tempted to conclude that a growing

25

public sector absorbed many unemployed, workers, only that the growth in public sector

employment was roughly constant making it difficult to distinguish from a linear time

trend. In other words, including both public sector employment and the time trend causes a
multicollinearity problem. Although this interpretation is possibly correct, the time path of
public sector employment differed across counties, enabling us to estimate the model with
both variables in columns (4) and (6). importantly, the standard error of the estimate for

the proportion in the public sector increases only slightly once the time trend is added to
the model, suggesting that multicollinearity is not a serious problem.
We are also, aware that a valid criticism of the regressions in Table 5 is that public

sector employment is possibly an endogenous variable. Nevertheless, we consider these
results suggestive that growing public sector employment does not account for the inward

shift of the Swedish Beveridge curve. In addition, when we use a broader measure of
unemployment — one that includes program participation as well as open unemployment

we still find that the Beveridge curve has shifted in. Thus, we have no satisfactory
explanation for the time-trend in the Bevetidge curve in Sweden.
Although the reasons for Sweden's unemployment-vacancy relationship are unclear,

we should stress that a stable or inward shift of the Beveridge curve is not necessarily a

virtue if the unemployment rate has increased. if the Beveridge curve had shifted out, at
least there would be substantial job vacancies at the prevailing high unemployment rate, and

the issue would be matching people to jobs. But in Sweden's current economic
environment the level of vacancies is low and the level of unemployment is high. Unless
we were confident of steps that would move the Swedish labor market down along a stable

26
Beveridge curve, this is not a desirable situation.

VI. International Evidence on Active Labor Market Programs

Our main approach in this paper has been to try to measure the impact that specific
labor market programs (such as public relief work) have on key outcome variables (such as
construction worker employment). For the programs ..nd outcome measures that we have

been able to study, this analysis provides little support for the view that Sweden's labor
market policies have greatly enhanced the operation of the labor market. Most of the
favorable impression of active labor market policies, however, is due to a different
approach -- cross-county analyses. In these studies, an aggregate measure of a country's

labor market performance (usually the unemployment rate) is related to institutional

characteristics of the country, such as variables measuring the extent of its active labor

market programs, and other economic variables (e.g. Bean, Layard and Nickell, 1986, and
Layard. Nickell and Jackman, 1991). The international evidence has generally found that
countries with greater spending on active labor market policies tend to have lower

unemployment. In this section we review, update, and evaluate the international evidence
on the effectiveness of labor market programs.

In their influential book, Layard, Nickell and Jackman (1991, Cli. I) present a crosscountry regression of the average unemployment rate for 1983-88 on a variable measuring

active labor market programs and several other variables. Their sample consists of 20
OECD countries. Active labor market programs are measured by expenditures on these
programs per unemployed person relative to GDP per capita in 1987. Their regression

27
coefficients (t-ratios in parentheses) are reported below:

Unemployment rate (%) = 0.24 (0.1)

+ 0.92 (2.9) benefit duration (years)
+ 0.17 (7.1) replacement ratio (%)
- 0.13

(2.3) active labor market spending (%)

+ 2.45 (2.4) coverage of collective bargaining (1-3)
- 1.42

(2.0) union co-ordination (1-3)

- 4.28

(2.9) employer co-ordination (1-3)

- 0.35 (2.8) change in inflation (% points)
R2-adj. = 0.91;

s.c.

=

1.41;

N = 20.

The statistically significant point estimate on the active labor market variable implies that

the derivative of the unemployment rate with respect to the share of the labor force in
programs equals -1.5, so that the reduction in open unemployment exceeds the direct effect
of lifting people out of unemployment by means of active labor market policies (see
Calmfors, 1994, footnote 18).

In related work, Zetterberg (1993) pools time-series data for 19 OECD counties for
the period 1985-1991, and regresses unemployment on the ratio of expenditures on active
labor market measures relative to total expenditures on labor market policies. Consistent
with Layard, et aL, he finds that as the share of expenditures on labor market policies
increases, the national unemployment rate declines.

28

We think there are two major weaknesses with the cross-country analyses which

limit their usefulness in evaluating active labor market programs. The first problem arises
because the source of variability in the countries' labor market policies is unclear. In this

situation, one would like to control for a great many variables that might influence the
unemployment rate and national labor market policy. However, with only 20 observations.
the number of variables that one can hold constant is greatly restricted.
A related issue is that cause and effect in the cross-country regressions are very

difficult to ascertain. If a nation is in a prolonged downturn, it may be difficult to deny
generous unemployment insurance benefits to unemployed workers. In this scenario, high

unemployment causes high UI replacement rates and long benefit durations, not vice versa.

A possible approach to solving this simultaneity bias problem would be to instrument for

the labor market variables, but valid instrumental variables are difficult to find for this
problem.

A similar concern arises with the active labor market variables. As pointed Grubb
(1993) and OECD (1993) point out, spending on active labor market measures tends to rise

less than in proportion with unemployment in most OECD countries. As spending on
unemployment benefits typically varies approximately in proportion to unemployment, this
has induced a negative correlation between unemployment and spending on active labor
market measures per unemployed worker, and between unemployment and the share of total

labor market program expenses devoted to active labor market programs."

'This point is demonstrated in OECD (1993, Annex 2.A), which shows that the significant
effect of active labor market programs found by Layard, et ai. vanishes when spending on
active labor market programs is instead related to the total wage bill.

29
Our second, and perhaps more important concern, is that the cross-country evidence

on the active labor market programs is not very stable over time. The cross-country
evidence has been conducted mainly using data for the l980s, when the unemployment rate
in Sweden and other countries with extensive active labor market programs was relatively

low. The situation has changed quite dramatically in the early I 990s. To probe the
stability of the international evidence, we have conducted a cross-country analysis of the

1993 unemployment rate that is similar in spirit to the work of Layard, Nickell, and
Jackman (1991) and Zetterberg (1993)
Specifically, we regress the unemployment rate in 1993 on two measures of active
labor market programs, the change in inflation, and the same institutional variables used by

Layard, Nickell, and Jachnan (1991). For comparison, we present corresponding estimates
for the years 1983-88, the period analyzed by Layard, Nickell, and Jackman. We measure

the importance of active labor market programs in two ways. First, we calculate the
fraction of (}DP spent on active labor market programs. Second, we use Zetterberg's
(1993) variable, which equals the share of expenditures on active labor market measures

relative to total expenditure on labor market programs. Both of these measures have
problems. Most obviously, active labor market expenditures relative to C}DP may rise when
unemployment rises because more people become eligible for programs -- the simultaneity

problem we noted previously. The simultaneity bias is likely to impart the opposite bias for.
the share of expenditures on active labor market programs relative to total expenditures on

labor market programs. But bear in mind that our main interest here is in examining
whether the effect of the active labor market variables has changed between the 1980's and

30
1993, not whether the estimates are biased at any one time.'5

Table 6 summarizes the main regression results)6 The table indicates a striking
change in the coefficients for the active labor market variables. In the 1983-88 period both
active labor market variables have a negative association with unemployment, whereas they
both have a positive association in 1993. The t-ratio for a test of the difference between

the estimates for the active labor variable in Columns (3) and (4) is 1.89. It is also worth

noting that the union coverage and union coordination variables have changed signs and
become statistically insignificant in 1993. On the other hand, the duration and generosity
of unemployment insurance benefits continue to have a positive association with the
unemployment rate, and an increase in the inflation rate continues to have a negative (albeit
statistically insignificant) effect on the national unemployment rate in 1993.
One could argue that 1993 is an aberration — that the international evidence in other

years suggests that active labor market programs have reduced unemployment. But together

with the statistical issues that we raised previously, we think the results of the updated
cross-country regressions challenge the favorable impression of active labor market
programs that several observers have drawn from international comparisons.

"The correlation between Layard, Nickel! and Jackman's active labor market variable
(expenditures on.active labor market programs per unemployed worker relative to GD? per
capita in 1982) and ours (the fraction of GD? devoted to active labor market programs circa
1993) is .82.
"Because the sample size is small, in each mode! we use the largest available sample. This
leads to different samples of countries in different years. However, our results are qualitatively
smu!ar when we restrict the samples to a common set of countries.

31

VII. Comparison of Regional Evolutions
Finally, we examine the responsiveness of employment and unemployment to

regional shocks in Sweden. This analysis is motivated by two issues. First, if Swedens
labor market policies are unusually successful, we would expect economic shocks to have

less persistent effects in Sweden than in other countries. Second, Sweden's past record of
adjustment to economic shocks may tell us something about how the labor market will react
to the current economic downturn.
Specifically, we investigate the evolution of employment and unemployment using

pooled time-series and cross-sectional data for the 24 counties in Sweden. As a first look,
Figure 5 presents a plot of the unemployment rate in 1992 against the unemployment rate

in 1976 using data on each of the 24 counties in Sweden. There is considerable persistence
in the level of unemployment across regions in Sweden. This is similar to the pattern
found for regions in the France. Germany, Spain, and the U.K. by Decressin and Fatas
(1993), but quite different from the pattern for states in the U.S. found by Blanchard and

katz. Figure 6 shows a plot of each county's percentage growth in employment 1983-91
against its growth between 1976-83. There appears to be little persistence in employment
growth rates across counties in Sweden. Again, the pattern for Sweden more closely
resembles the European pattern found by Decressin and Fatas than the U.S. pattern found
by Blanchard and Katz.
Following Blanchard and KAtz (1992). we define Aib as the change between year

and t-1 in the logarithm of employment in county i minus the change in the logarithm of
employment in Sweden nationwide between year t and t- 1. We estimate the same

32
univariate process for employment as Blanchard and Katz:

(2) A11 =

where

+ 3(L)Mi,.,

-c

we allow four lags in &_,, a represents a county fixed effect, and Ek is

au

idiosyncratic error term)7
Results are presented in Table 7, and the implied impulse response function is

shown graphically in Figure 7. For comparison, we also report Blanchard and Katz's
estimates for the 50 U.S. states. Regional shocks to relative employment have lasting

effects in Sweden; they are 86% of their original size after 20 years. In the U.S. regional
employment shocks also have permanent effects, but they tend to be amplified over time.

Interestingly, Decressin and Fatas (1993) find that the Swedish pattern is more typical of

other European countries." The U.S. would thus seem to be the outlier here, not Sweden.
Next we examine the evolution of relative unemployment rates. Specifically, we
follow Blanchard and Katz and estimate:

(3)

Pit i#it4 +I32MI.2+c

'1A Dickey-Fuller test did not reveal a unit root in the Swedish county-level employmentseries. Nevertheless, we estimate the same specifications as Blanchard and Katz for
comparability.

11Decrssjji and Fatas's results are not directly comparable to our estimates and to
Blanchard and Katz's because they deviate regional employment from county-specific
coefficients times aggregate European employment But their country coefficients are close
to one, and they report similar restilts for the U.S. as Blanchard and Katz when they apply their
procedure to U.S. data.

33

where .s, is the unemployment rate in county i in year t minus the aggregate unemployment

rate in Sweden in year t, a1 is a county effect, and

and js,.2 are one and two year lags

of the relative unemployment rate.
As shown in Table 7 (Columns (3) and (4)) and Figure 8. the relative unemployment
rate series in both Sweden and the U.S. displays lcss persistence than the relative

employment growth series. Half of the impact of an innovation in a countys relative
unemployment rate is predicted to dissipate three years after the initial shock. Ten years
after a shock, the innovation is predicted to have completely dissipated.

The implied impulse response functions for the unemployment rate are quite similar
in Sweden and the U.S., and Decressin and Fatas find a similar pattern for regional data in

several European counties. Our finding of similar regional evolutions in the relative
unemployment rate series in Sweden, the U.S.. and Europe suggests that active labor market

programs in Sweden have not had a marked effect on unemployment adjustment in regional

labor markets in Sweden.

VII. Conclusions
We conclude by considering what our review

of the literature and original analysis

imply for the current problems facing the Swedish labor market. We also consider possible
lessons from Sweden's experiences for labor market policy in the U.S. and elsewhere.
One important question that we can partially address is whether the recent dramatic

increase in unemployment in Sweden is likely to have a persistent effect. We can base our
estimate on the estimated unemployment rate equation in Table 7 if we make two strong

34

assumptions: (1) the regional shocks that identi& the autoregressive models in Table 7 have

similar effects as the shocks causing the current depression in the Swedish labor market;

and (2) the 7 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate in Sweden between 1990

and 1993 is the entire innovation to the unemployment rate series. If these assumptions are
valid, the coefficients in Table 7 imply that the Swedish unemployment rate will gradually

decline, but will still be at historically high levels for at least the next few years, and
probably longer.

Our analysis also suggests that the active labor market programs are not as effective
at combatting unemployment or enhancing workers' skills as some observers believe. How
might certain policy changes affect the labor market programs, especially in the current

high unemployment environment? The answer to this question is particularly important if
the high rate of unemployment persists in the future. Indeed, relatively generous
unemployment benefits (compared to the U.S.) is a reason why one might expect the high
rate of unemployment to persist.

First, Sweden's UI find benefits are very generous by U.S. standards and are
available for a long duration. Benefits last for 300 days, which is more than twice the
maximum duration of unemployment benefits in the U.S. Furthermore, the maximum
duration of unemployment benefits in Sweden may be effectively longer given the

possibility of re-qualifring for benefits after working on public relief jobs or undergoing
retraining. The extent to which individuals rotate between receiving unemployment benefits

and participating in labor market programs should be investigated, if this appears to be a
widespread phenomenon, one possible response would be to limit the total duration that

35

individuals may receive unemployment benefits in a specified window of time.
A second possible response is an expanded set of programs to encourage

entrepreneurial activity by unemployed workers. Experimental evidence and experience in

the thS. suggests that a minority of unemployed workers are interested in self-employment.
and that government assistance can help to increase the number of unemployed who start

their own businesses- For example, the state of Washington has had favorable results from

providing unemployment benefits in a lump sum to those who are interested in obtaining

seed capital to start their own business (U.S. Department of Labor, 1992). In addition,
training in business, activities and other support services may prove useful. The sociai

reward to pursuing this kind of a policy is likely to be greater in Sweden where high
marginal tax rates discourage entrepreneurial ventures. Another possible issue to study is
that to encourage more entrepreneurial activities the government might allow some "tax and
regulation havens" in which start-up businesses are exempted from tax and regulatory

requirements for a specified period of time. Although only a small minority of the
unemployed could possibly become successful entrepreneurs, this is a margin in which

employment could possibly be expanded, especially in a downturn.

Third, our review of studies of training lead us to the same conclusion reached by
Robert Flanagan six years ago: "There is disappointingly little evidence that these

expenditures have improved the productivity of the Swedish work force.' Although the
handful of studies on the impact of training employ state-of-the-art statistical methods, the
data have proved insufficient for deriving precise estimates of the payoff to trainingAggregating over several studies, we conclude that the payoff is modest, at best. The US.

36

evidence supports a similar concluMon. Furthennore, the immediate benefit of job training

when the labor market is weak is likely to be smaller than when the labor market is strong.
An important question is whether some training expenditures could be more profitably
redirected, perhaps toward programs that would stimulate aggregate demand. From a

research standpoint, it would be useful if any policy changes could be implemented in such
a way as to facilitate evaluation of the impact of the policies. Specifically, this may
include selection of individuals for certain policies based on an arbitrary criterion (e.g.,
birthday falls after certain date) and administrative monitoring of nonparticipants and

program exhaustees for data collection purposes and subsequent analysis.

Finally, our

results and those of Gramlich and Ysander (1981) suggest that in the past public relief
workers have displaced other workers, on net creating few new jobs in the consiruction

sector. It is possible that displacement effects could be limited by requiring local

governments to propose new projects in order to quali for relief workers. If public relief
work assumes a greater role in the current downturn, this issue would be worthy of further
study.

What does our analysis imply for the U.S.? The U.S. seems to be moving in the
opposite direction of Sweden, having recently elected a President with a platform of
"putting people first" by improving the skills of the work force. In addition, unemployment
benefits have recently been extended in the U.S. in some regions, whereas the level of

benefits was recently cut in Sweden. It is possible that both countries are moving in the
"optimal" direction, since the active labor market programs in the U.S. are much smaller

than those in Sweden. The optimal level of labor market programs may lie somewhere in

37

between the two countries. Nevertheless, Sweden's experience that active labor market
programs atone are not capable of fending

off high

levels of unemployment shoutd be

instructive to the U.S. and other countries. Countries should not expect supernormal returns
from government labor market programs. Policy makers in eastern European countries who

look to Sweden as a model for labor market institutions would be well advised to keep this
lesson in mind.

38

References
Susanne Ackum, "Youth Unemployment, Labor Market Programs and Subsequent
Earnings", Scandinavian Journal of Economics 93, (1991): 351-543.

Charles Adams, et a!., "A Pooled Time-Series Analysis of the Job Creation Impact of
Public Service Employment Grants to Large Cities," Journal of Human Resources 18
(Spring 1983): 283-94.
ft Axelsson and K.G. Lofgren, "Arbetsrnarknadsutbildningens Privat-och
Samhöflsekonomiska Effekter", 1992, Rapport 25 fran EFA.

Bean, Charles, Richard Layard and Steven Nickell, "The Rise in Unemployment: A MultiCountry Study", Econometrica vol. 53, no. 2, 1986.
Anders Bjorklund, "Evaluation of Training Programs - Experiences and Suggestions for
Future Research", Discussion paper 89-13, 1989, Wissenchaftszentrum Berlin.
Anders Björklund, "Evaluation of Training Programs," Finnish Economic Paners 3 (Spring
1990): 3-13.

Olivia Blanchard and Lawrence Katz, "Regional Evolutions," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity. 1 (1992): pp. 1-75.
Michael Borus and Daniel Hamermesh, "Estimating Fisa1 Substitution by Public Service
Employment Programs," Journal of Human Resources 13 (Fall 1978): 561-65.
Lars Caimfors and Anders Forslund, "Real-Wage Determination and Labor Market Policies:
The Swedish Experience," The Economic Journal 201 (September 1991): 1130-48.

Lars Calznfors, "Lessons from the Macroeconomic Experience of Sweden," lIES Seminar
Paper No. 522, 1992.
Lars Calmfors and Harald Lang, "Macroeconomic Effects of Active Labor Market Programs
— Basic Theory," lIES Seminar Paper No. 541, 1993.
Carling, Kenneth, Per-Anders Edin, Anders Harkman, and Bertil Holmlund.
"Unemployment Duration, Unemployment Benefits, and Laborm Market Programs in
Sweden," Working Paper 1994:12, Department of Economies, tlppsala University.

Grubb, David, "Some Indirect Effects of Active Labor Market Policies in OECD
Countries", mimec., OECD, Paris, 1993.

Jörg Decressin and Antonio Fatas, "Regional Labor Market Dynamics in Europe and
Implications for EMU," mimeo., IMP, Washington, D.C., 1993.
Per-Anders Edin, "Individual Consequences of Plant Closures", Studia Oeconomica
Upsaliensia 15, 1989.
Per-Anders Edin, Bertil Holrniund and Thomas Ostros, "Wage Behavior and Labor Market

Programs in Sweden: Evidence from Micro Data," Uppsala University, Working Paper No.
1993:1, December 1992.
Per-Anders Edin and Robert Topel, "Wage Policy and Restructuring: The Swedish Labor
market Since 1960," this volume.

Robert Flanagan, "Efficiency and Equality in the Swedish Labor Markets,' The Swedish
Economy. B. Bosworth and A. Rivlin (eds.), (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution,
1987): 125-186.
Edward Gramlich and Bengt-Christer Ysander, "Relief Work and Grant Displacement in
Sweden," in Eliasson, Holmiund and Stafford, Studies in Labor Market Behavior. 1981, pp.
139-66.

James Heckman and Jeffrey Smith, Presentation on JTPA Evaluation Project, NBEL
October 1993.
George Johnson and James Tomola, "The Fiscal Substitution Effects of Alternative
Approaches to Public Service Employment," Journal of Human Resources 12 (Winter
1977): 3-26.
Korpi, Tomas, "Employment Stability Following Unemployment and Manpower Programs."
Stockholm Research Reports in Demography, Stockholm University, 72. December 1992.

Robert LaLonde, "The Earnings Impact of U.S. Employment and Training Programs,"
University of Chicago, mizneo., December 1992.
Richard Layard, Stephen Nickell, and Richard Jackman, Unemployment: Macroeconomic
Performance and the Labor Market (Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1991).
Assar Lindbeck, "The Swedish Experience," LIES Seminar Paper No. 482, 1990.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD Economic Surveys:
Sweden 1991/1992 (Paris: OECD, 1992).
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, (1993), Unemployment
Outlook. Paris.

40
Regnér, H. "Choosing Among Alternative Non Experimental Methods for Estimating the
Impact of Training: New Swedish Evidence," mimeo, Swedish Institute for Social Research.
Stockholm University, Meddelende 8:1993.
Frarilc Stafford. "Unemployment and Labor Market Policy in Sweden and the United
States,TM in Eliasson, B. Holmlund and F. Stafford, Studies in Labor Market Behavior
(1981): pp. 139-66.

U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration, "The Washington
Reemployment Bonus Experiment: Final Report," Washington, D.C.. UI Occasional Paper
92-6, 1992.
Zetterberg, Johnny, (1993), °Arbetsloshet, Arbetsmarknadspolitik och
Loneforhandlingssysytem". In Politik mot Arbetsloshet. Betankande av EFA, SOU 1993:43,
Stockholm.

Figure 1

Swedish hJnempthyment Pate, ty Ha!' '?ar 197O—;93
.09
.08

07 0I

.06.05M4
C)

C

D

70 72 74

76

78 80 82 84 86 88 90
Year

I.

9293

U

1
S

flun 2. Laboit vms'td progasnrnn (slim. ot tdaii fan) 1970:1 - 19fl2. sesilnuS dsts

I

0.125

0-02

_*1o

1'

0.015

b

-— youth caucs
— -'— leotitmet it

0.01

0.006

0

I 1—F (-I ti-Hi F II I-t-+H t-I-t--t-$ liii I--t-i—Ff-+-

I I-I-i

e eS—
— '*e 1- * s C N S S 0 — a F)o
aaaarSaaaaa
N—
P. N
N flN N N CN NNW
N r C .-a a
—

?igur. 3
Returns

to Retraining Programs in Sweden - Selected Estimates

0.2
—

0.I5.

oI
w

0.1

-

4,

•

S.

0.05

I

I

.1.

-0.15

I

2

3

5

4

6

7

Studies:
1 -

Edin

(1.989)

2 - BjOrklund (1989)
3 - Ackum (1991)
4 - Axelason and LOfgren (1992)
S 7 -

Regnér

(1993)

Inverse-variance weighted
Arithmetic average

average

a

.Q

'.3

.

0-

I

b
—

a

t
4

a

S

3

I

5

2

I

to

Ufle.ploy.ent Rate
(Register Data)

I

IA

UI

Lb

0.

I

b

S

51

S

4

5
a

3

3!
a

mc

b
La
I
5

Une.ploy.ent Rate
(Labor Force Survey)

b

—

0
.05 0
.04
CI

•1

0

.03-

C

0

0

0

0

.

CI

a.

0
0

fO

d
E

0

0

0
0

0

.02-

.01

0•
.03
.02
1g76 Unemp. Pate

0

.04

TC

Figur.

5

0

.2
0

—.

C,

0

4S

0

o
CCD

—

0

o
E
0
—

0
0
0

0
0

0.

a

U.,

0

00

-

•

a
0
C-

0

0.

00

.1

i

.

ii

•

A

.4

Prop. Employment Growtfl, 16—83

SXaVp

Figure 6

Figure 7

lmpu!se Response Fn. —— Sweden & U.S.
Change Log Employment

1.7- 1.6 1.5 -

1.41.3-

1.21.1-

1

H:: ::::;

234S0

a

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

u.s.

Year

+

Sweden

Figure 8

Impulse ResponseFn. —— Sweden & U.S.
Unemployment Rates

'Li —

1.
0.9 0.8 C

1

0:5:

—

04-

'A

0.3-

E

0.2 0.1

0-

1—4
I

1

I

I

I

I

1

I

I•I

I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 18 20
0

Year
U.S.

1-

Swedan

Table 1
Comparison of Labor Market Policies in Sweden, the U.S. and Germany'

Sweden

Sweden

U.S.

U2

510,843

$17,655

52,111

S12,7B2

Average training costs
per recipiente

$9,214

$6,568

$2,035

NA

Trainees as a proportion of
labor forced

0.0085

0.0094

0.0103

0.0132

Trainees as a proportion of
unemployedd

0.32

0.62

0.19

0.16

Public relief workers as
a proportion of unemployed

0.39

0.12

0 "0

0.04

Proportion of GNP devoted to
labor market policies

0.039

0.025

0.004

0.021

Average unemployment
compensation per recipientb

a. All monetary figures are in 1990 U.S.

U1

Germany

liii

Labor Market Policy

dollars.

112.Q

Swedish kronor

were converted to dollars using the exchange rate, and were
converted from 1982 to 1990 dollars with the CPI-U.

b. Only certified UI fund benefits are included for Sweden.

c. Net training coot are reported for Sweden (i.e., average
unemployment benefits have been subtracted off) .

For U.S.,

training programs include JTPA and Job Corps.

d. Only trainees who receive government compensation are included for
Germany.

Table 1 --

continued

e. policies included in U.S4 figure are: job training, summer youth

employment, unemployment benefits, and employment services. Policies
included in Sweden figure include: job training, relief, worker, youth

measures, unemployment benefits, and handicapped programs. Policies
included for Germany include: unemployment benefits, retraining.
employment services, pre-retirement benefits, subsidized employment
programs, compensation for short-time workers, compensation of
construction workers during inclement weather, and administrative costs.

Sources: Unemployment benefit data for U.S. are from 1991 Green

Book, p. 466. Training data for the U.S. are from 1991 Green
Book,

pp.

1454-1456. and pertain to ,TrPA LEA, and Y1TA Its, and

Job Corps programs. Swedish data are from Statistisk Arsbok 1992

and OECD Economic Surveys. German

data

are from Stptjstisches .Yahrbuch

flfl and Zahl!n zur Wirtschaftlichtlichen Entwicklunc der
Bunderirepublik Deutschland 1992, Institut der Deutschen Wirtschaft.

Table 2

Displacement

Effects of Public Relief Workers

Dependent Variable: Number of Private Construction Workers

Model

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.65
(0.11)

-0.59
(0.17)

-0.36
(0.11)

-0.59
(0.18)

-0.36
(0.13)

-0.69

County Dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year Dummies

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Log Wage (x 1,000)

—

(0.22)

-12.38
(6.62)

1.65
(0.22)

-11.88
(627)

64.77
(28.31)

95.28
(50.36)

66.78
(37.89)

(49.83)

0.97
(12.18)

(23.24)

Variable

•

Relief Workers (t-l)

Vacancy Rate (x 1,000)

R2

Sample Size

—

!

Unemployment Rate (x 1,000)

—

—

--

1.65

—

--

(0.1

94.27

44.64

0.98

0.98

0.98

0.98

0.98

0.98

384

384

360

360

360

360

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Equations also include intercept terms. Mean of
dependent variable is 9,385. Observations in columns 1-2 are for 1976-91; observations in
columns 3-6 ase for 197690. There are 24 counties in the sample each year.

Table 3
Displacement Effects of Public Relief Workers
Dependent Variable: Number of Health and Welfare Workers

Model

Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-2.26
(0.39)

-1.09
(0.59)

0.91
(0.40)

-0.46
(0.62)

0.58
(0.43)

-0.56

County Dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year Dummies

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Log Wage (x 1,000)

—

12.61

48.76

17.45
(3.09)

(27ATh

Relief Workers Ct-i)

—

(2.02) (26.55)
Vacancy Rate (x 1.000)

—

—

343.95

375.34 374.06

(6)

(0.6

53.15

365.43

(146.90) (198.88) (146.39) (199.17)
Unemployment Rate (ii 1,000)

—

—

—

—

123.91

(60.21)

Sample Size

72.04
(73.81)

0.98

0.99

0.99

0.99

0.99

0.99

240

240

216

226

216

216

Standard errors axe in parentheses. Equations also include intercept teEms. Mean of
variable is 33,140. Observations in columns 1-2 are for 1982-91; observations in
columns 3-6 axe for 1982-90, There are 24 counties In the sample each year.
Notes:

dependent

Table 4
Vector Autoregressions for Employment and Relief Worker, by Sector

Construction

.

Health and Welfare

Relief

.

Variable

Employment

Relief workers (t-1)
•

Workers

-.68

1.12

(.15)

(.06)

Employment

Relief
Workers

.020
(.654)

.79
(.05)
-.21

.37

-.71

(.20)

(.08)

-.38
(.85)

-.35
(.16)

.37
(.06)

-.72
(.60)

(.05)

Employment (t-1)

.79
(.06)

-.02
(.02)

.58
(.08)

-.007
(.007)

Employment (t-2)

-.15

.01

(.08)

(.03)

-.13
(.09)

-.009
(.008)

Employment (t-3)

-.19
(.07)

.02
(.03)

.13
(.07)

-.005
(.006)

F-Statistic and
(p-value for Lagged
Relief Workers)

9.01
(.001

(.003

(.OBJ

150.02
[.00]

F-statistic and
(p-value for Lagged
Employment)

146.19
(.001

.64
[.59)

28.16
(.00)

.54
(.65)

Relief workers (t-2)
Relief workers (t-3)
•

Sample Size

137.68

2.31

(.07)
.0.4

.

288

288

168

168

Notes: Equations also include county dummies, year dummies, log average wage, vacancy rate and
unemployment rate.

Table St Exploration of Stability of Beveridge Curve in Sweden
County—Level Data, 1981—91

Dependent Variable:
UR+ProaraLs
Unemployment Rate

.

Variable

(1)

Vacancy Rate

—2.34
(.19)
——

Year(+100)

(2)

(3)

(4)

—1.70

—1.83

—1.76

(.16)

—.16

(.18)

——

(.01)
——

—.13

Proportion
Public Sector

——

23 County

Yes

Yes

Yes

R2

.69

.80

.74

Sample Size

264

264

264

Dummies

(.02)

(5)

(6)

—2.07

—2.22

(.16)

(.25)

(.25)

—.19

—.22

—.31

(.02)

(.02)

(.03)

.052
(.025)

Yes

——

.123
(.039)

Yes

Yes

-

.81
364

.80
364

.81
264

Notest Regressions also include constants. Proportion public
sector is the proportion of the labor force employed in the public
sector. Vacancy rate is the number of registered vacancies
relative to the labor force. Unemployment rate is the unemployment
rate derived from the registers. UR+Prograss is (Unemployed + Relief

Workers + Number on Training Programs + Number on Youth Programs)/Labor
Forge.

Table 6: Models for Cross—Country Differences in
Unemployment, 1983—08 and 1993
Dependent Variableu Unemployment Rate (Percent)
Year

Independent
variable

Aft Spending

Relative to GDP
kill Spending

Relative to all
Labor Mkt. Programs

Union coverage
(1—3)

Union coordination
(1—3)

Employer coordination

1983—88
-.42
(1.1$)
——

1993
1.73
(1.42)
——

1983—88

•

—8.78
(3.19)

2.68

—.79

3.00

(1.38)

(2.12)

(1.05)

—1.98

1.16
(1.57)

-2.01

—5.15

-3.76

(.84)

-4.42

1993

(.66)

10.19
(9.49)

1.48
(1.59)
1.48
(1.59)

—6.31

(1—3)

(.77)

(1.22)

(.64)

(1.44)

Unemployment Insurance
Replacement Ratio

.15
(.03)

.25
(.07)

.14
(.02)

.32
(.07)

Unemployment Insurance
Duration (Years)

.96
(.36)

1.68

.60
(.36)

1.60

Change in
Inflation

—.39

—.41

—.99

(.13)

(.84)

sample Size
R2—adj.

S.E.

(.15)

20

(.60)

—1.04
(.89)

20

19

(.72)

17

.85

.63

.91

.75

1.79

296

1.41

2.51

- Motesg
a. standard errors are in parentheses.
b.

The AIM spending relative to GDP and 1.121 spending relative

to all labor market program variables pertain to 1987 in
Columns (1) and (3), and

in

available years between 1991 and 1993

columns (2) and (4) (Source: OECD Employment outlook. 1993).

Table 6 ——

continued

The change in inflation variable is for 1983 to 1987 in Columns
(1) and (3), and to 1992 to 1993 in Columns (2) and (4)

(Source: OECD Main Economic Inidicators). All other
explanatory variables are from
(1991)

Layard,

Nickell and Jackman

Table 1: Univariate Models of Relative Employment
and Unemployment Across Regions

u.s.

Coefficient on
lagged dependent

variable

Unemployment
Log
Rate
Employment

(I)

Sweden
A Log
Unemployment
Rate
Employment

(2)

(3)

(4)

One lag

.492
(.023)

.899
(.032)

-.103
(.039)

1.020

Twolags

-.099
(.025)

-.159

-.028

(.033)

(.038)

-.289
(.052)

Three lags

.010

-.026

(.024)

(.024)

-.054

Fourlags

022)

1952-90

.002
1978-92

1981-91

1972-90

-

.018

.083

.017

a,
Sample period

..003
(M22)

—

(.051)

Imni led Imnulse Resnonses

1.00

1.00

1.00

YearS
Year 10
Year 20

1.52
1.53

.04
.01

.90
.88
.86
.86
.86
.86

1.02

1.63
1.67
1.62

.90
.65
.44
.29

Year 1
Year 2

1.00
1.49

Year3
Year 4

.75
.47
.26

.00
.00

Note: Models include state dummies (US) or county dummies (Sweden). Columns (1) and (2) are from
Blanchard and Katz (1992). Change ia log employment and unemployment rate are measured
relative to national levels.

