                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHY DO AMERICANS AND GERMANS
                            WORK DIFFERENT HOURS?




                                        Linda Bell
                                     RichaM Freeman




                                 Working Paper No. 4808




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge. MA 02138
                                   July 1994




We thank John LaBarre for providing extremely helpful research assistance. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4808
                                                                                  July 1994


                         WHY DO AMERICANS AND GERMANS
                             WORK DIFFERENT HOURS?


                                         ABSTRACT


       This paper documents the difference between the annual hours worked by employed

Americans and Germans. decomposes the difference into differences due to vacation and holiday

dine and to hours worked while on the job, and examines alternative explanations for the

difference. Employed Americans work roughly 10-15% more hours than Germans. Since

American employment-population rates exceed those of Germans, adult Americans avenge some

20% more work time than adult Germans. At the same time. Americans show greater preference

for additional hours worked than do Germans. Both of these differences developed in the past

20 years. Two decades ago. Americans worked less than Germans. and it was the Germans who

wanted to work more hours. Standard labor supply analyses do not appear able to explain this

difference. We show that differences in hours worked are related to differences in earnings

inequality across countries, and hypothesize that the high rewards to success in the U.S.. lack of

job security, and low social safety net compared to Germany or other European counuies may

explain the cross-country differences in an extended supply model.



Linda Bell                                                  Richard Freeman
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
Sounder 124                                                 Harvard University
Haverford College                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
Haverford, PA 19041                                         and NBER
       'The simple fact is that (Germany is) ... organized like a collective leisure
       park' — Chancellor Kohl, quoted in Financial Times Survey on Germany Oct
       25, 1993, p1.

       'Americans    are crazy workaholics    ...   because   they haven't a clue   how to live"
       - sophisticated Berliner, quoted in coffee      shop.



       At the outset of the 1990s German workers worked fewer hours over the year than

did workers in the United States and in most OECD European countries. Several

pathbreaking IG Metalle contracts in the 1980s and 1990 will lower normal German work

hours in the next several years1 unless Germany alters its policies along lines laid out           in   the


Rexrodt   Report.2 On the other   hand, it is difficult   to see any factors reducing work hours in

the United States.

       The difference between the hours worked by Americans and by Germans -- that

places the U.S. second to Japan in time worked in the OECI9 and that makes Germany a

'collive leisure park", according to Chancellor Kohl — is a recent phenomenon. In the

not so distant past the United States led the developed world in reductions in hours worked.

Shorter working time was a major goal of American labor since the turn of the century. The

U.S. was among the earliest countries to establish the 8 how-five day work week. The U.S.

expanded vacation time after World War II. In the 1950s and early 1960s Americans

worked considerably fewer hours than Germans and other Europeans. Not until the I 980s

did German hours worked fall below American hours worked.1

       What has caused the gap between the average hours worked by An'iericans and the

hours worked by Germans in recent years? Is the difference a matter of demographics-- such

as differences in the age, family, or educational composition of the populations? Does the

gap reflect labor supply responses to incentives? What is the role of institutions --
                                                 2
  Germany's stronger unions, works councils (which have co-determination rights over work

 hours), or legal regulations — in the gap in time worked? Finally, are differences in hours

 worked due to different tastes for work caused perhaps by different norms of effort and

 relative pay?

         This paper examines these questions using micro data from the International Social

 Survey Programme, the May 1985 Current Population Survey, the 1989 EEC Ad Hoc Survey

 of the Labor Market. and other sources. In contrast to studies that deal strictly with

 observable hours of work, we also examine preferences for work schedules as revealed in

 surveys of attitudes. We begin by describing the recent hours gap between Americans and

 Germans using a variety of sources of data. We then contrast preferences for work versus

 leisure between workers in the two populations and compare these preferences with OECD

 European countzy norms. We find that although American workers work more hours than

do workers in Germany and other European countries they are still more likely to prefer

additional hours than are German and other European workers. Similarly, although Germans

work fewer hours than Americans, they are morepredisposed to further reductions in hours

than are American workers and workers in other European countries. The data suggest that

while Americans are unique in the sense of working long hours and desiring longer hours of

work, Germans are also unique in working relatively few hours and desiring less work. We

cannot explain the U.S.-German difference in hours worked and preferences for work by

standard labor supply factors. We hypothesize that the difference may partially reflect more
subtle supply behavior in the form of responses to differences in labor market inequality, and

present some suggestive evidence that, in fact, people in settings with greater earnings
                                               3

inequality work more than those in settings with less inequality.



I. HOURS WORKED IN THE U.S. AND GERMANY

       Line 1 of Table 1 presents OECD estimates of annual hours worked of American and

German workers that constitutes the basic "fact" that motivates this study. The In differential

between the two estimates suggests that in 1990 German employees in 1990 worked

approximately 10% fewer annual hours than did their American counterparts. While

substantial, this estimate understates the full difference in market activity between the two

populations because the ratio of employees to working age population also differs. In 1990,

86% of American men participated in the work force compared to 81% of German men,

while 68% of American women were in the work force compared to 57% of German

women.5 Adjusting for differences in the employment to population ratios in the two

countries (line 2) produces a differential in working hours per adult of .19 In points.

Although a complete accounting of why Americans work more than Germans would explore

differences in workforce participation as well as in the hours worked of employed persons

we concentrate on the latter issue, or in explaining the roughly 10% differential between

annual hours worked by employed persons in the two countries.

       To examine the factors that may underlie the difference in hours worked per

employee we use the following identity:

       (1) AR = (H + EH)IH x (H) x (0) x WW

This divides Al-I, annual hours worked per employed person into: (i) H, hours worked per

day on a job, which both countries legislate; (ii) EH, extra hours worked per day -- overtime
                                               4
 at a given job or moonlighting on a second job; (iii) D, days worked per week, which

 depends on whether workers are full-time or part-time and the prevalence of work during

 weekends; and (iv) WW, weeks worked per year, which are largely determined by the extent

 of vacation and holiday days but are also affected by unemployment and the prevalence of

 contingent employment as well. Unfortunately, micro data are not available from a single

 data source for all of the components of equation (1) above. Thus, we estimate the

 components of (1) from diverse data sources that do not necessarily add to the OECD

 differentials on line 1.

        Lines 4-7 of table 1 summarize differences in annual work hours in the two countries

 that arise from differences in vacation and holiday time. Consistent with analyses of working

 time that stress the importance of vacation and holiday time as the major cause of country

differences in annual work time (Owen, 1986, 1983), the data suggest that such differences

are the prixnazy factor behind greater American work hours. Differences in weeks of

vacation and holiday time translate into a 17% reduction in worktime in Germany compared

to 9% reduction of worktjme in the United States, and therefore contributes .08 in points to

the annual hours gap between the two countries.

        In addition to the sizeable differences in weeks worked per year between American

and German workers there are also differences in hours worked per day and days worked per

week in the two countries. For example, estimates of hours worked per week from the CPS

(U.S.) and EEC (Germany) show that Americans avenge 38 hours compared to 36 hours for

Germans (line 8) — a .05 In point differential. Combining these numbers and the vacation

and holiday figures in line 8 gives an estimated annual hours worked for Germans of1554,
                                               5

which is a bit below the OECD figures, and an estimate for the U.S. of 1798, which is a bit

above the OECI) figure. and suggests an in differential of .15 in working hours over the

year.

        The bottom panel of table I examines in greater detail differences in work schedules

between Americans and Germans using data for the U.S. from the March 1985 CPS and

1989 ISSP, and data for Germany from the 1989 EEC Study and 15SF'. Line 10 shows that

the distributions of hours per week differ substantially between the two countries, and

suggests that differences in the avenge hours worked per week are not due primarily to

Germans working less than the standard weekly hours but to Americans working more hours.

Line 11 shows that although both a,untxies have institutionalized the basic 5-day working

week, Americans put in a bit more time than their German counterparts (4.9 days per week

versus 4.8 days for Germans). The distribution of days (line 12) tells a similar story:

Americans are twice as likely to work Saturdays. three times as likely to work Sundays, and

three times as likely to work 7 days a week as are Germans. Finally, Americans are also

more likely to do shift work and night work; and are more likely to moonlight with second

jobs than are German workers. In sum, the message of table I is that along all dimensions

of work time, Americans work more than Germans.

        1-las the hours worked gap among employees 'always" existed or is it a relatively

recent phenomenon? The evidence in Figure 1 shows that the gap is not a long-standing

historical pattern, although the exact timing of the cross-over in hours worked is debatable.

Maddison's estimates in the upper panel show that from 1870 to 1929 Americans worked

about the same number of hours as Germans; but that they worked less hours from the 1930s
                                              6

 and through 1984, with the gap rising from 1929 to 1950 and then declining. The OECD

data in the bottom panel show Americans working fewer hours in 1970 but more hours by

 1973, and an increasing gap thereafter. Evidence from Owen (1986, 1989. 1990) and the

15SF estimates suggest that U.S hours surpassed German hours worked by the early 1980s, at

least, consistent with the OECD figures. Indeed, while in the 1970s and 1980s the U.S.

standard workweek did not change, weeks worked per year seem to have increased. Owen

(1988, p. 43) estimates that from 1975 to 1986 the full-week vacation time of non-

agricultural wage and saiazy workers in the U.S. felt by 13% and the BLS reports a drop in

paid holidays and vacations from 1980 to 1989 in medium and large firms (BLS, 1990). By

contrast, Germans continued to reduce their work time, lowering the standard hours worked

per day (from 8A in 1960 to 7.9 in 1986), reducing days per week (from 5.5 in 1960 to 5.0

in 1970). and adding more vacation days (Owen. 1989, table 2). Since the employment to

population ratio rose in the U.S. relative to Germany from the early 1970s to the 1980s.

while unemployment rates in the U.S. fell relative to those in Germany. measures of time

worked per adult strengthen the conclusion that the longer U.S. hours worked is a relatively

recent phenomenon.6 The observed shift over time in who works more makes any "cultural'

explanation of the 1990s U.S.-German gap dubious to us.



A Comparison with Hours Worked in the OECD

      Table 2 presents estimates on hours worked for full-time manufacturing workers in

European OECI) Countries and the United States using data from yet another source, the

Federation of German Employers Associations (BDA). According to the BDA figures, full-
                                               7

time manufacturing workers in the United States and Germany are "outliers" in the hours

they work. Column I shows that U.S. manufacturing workers work 130 hours more per

year than the avenge number of hours worked in European OECD countries (column 1).

Similarly, German workers work 131 hours less than the average European OECD worker

annually (column 1). Columns 2-4 of the table show that in terms of vacation and holiday

time, U.S. workers have below avenge time off and German workers have above avenge

time off when compared to their European counterparts. Finally, column 5 of the table shows

that full-time U.S. manufacturing workers work 0.7 hours more per week and German

workers about 1.7 hours fewer per week, than the typical OECI) European worker.7B

       In sum, a multi-country perspective on the U.S-German hours worked gap suggests

that both countries are extreme in their working hours. U.S. workers work more on average

than workers in most European countries. German workers work less.



Hours Worked in the ISS?

       To obtain data on American and German hours worked from a comparable micro

survey we turn to the 1989 International Social Survey Programme (15SF). The ISSP is a

program of cross-national collaboration carried out by research institutes that conduct annual

surveys of social attitudes and values. The virtue of the survey is that it seeks to ask similar

questions in identical form in the participating nations. In 1989 the surveys focused on

work, with numerous questions exploring attitudes toward work time and effort. Although

the ISSP would seem the perfect data source for a study of this sort it is not ideal for several

reasons. First, questions on hours worked are limited to weekly hours, and exclude vacation
                                                8

 or holiday time. The survey does not therefore permit us to evaluate difference in hours

 worked per day or days worked per week in the two countries. Second, earnings relate to

 yearly earnings rather than to hourly pay. Third, there is no useful measure of assets or

 wealth in the study. Fourth, despite the attempt for comparability, not every question is

phrased the same way across countries, and different countries do not always ask the same

questions in any given year. Despite these limitations, the ISSP is the best available cross-

countty data set for our purposes and provides us with additional information on work

preferences.

        Table 3 presents estimates of ISSP-based hours worked by American and German

workers from 1985 to 1989. While the mean level of hours exceeds that shown in line 8 of

table 1 and column 7 of table 2, the gap in hours is a comparable .05 in differential for all

workers. However, the figures for all workers mask considerable differences in hours

worked for key demographic groups. Because 58% of German workers in the ISS? were

male versus 52% of American workers and 83% of German workers are full-time versus

79% of American workers, the aggregate hours figures understate the difference in work

time among demographic groups. Differences in how worked among both men and women

exceed those for the aggregate (lines 2 and 3). And when we look only at full-time workers,

the gap in hours nearly doubles, to 4 hours worked per week or .09 in points (line 4)•!O

Only among the self-employed is the difference reversed."

       In sum, there is a sizable hours worked difference between Germans and Americans,

that is a relatively recent phenomenon, and that reflects both the relatively long hours worked

by Americans and the relatively short hours worked by Germans.
                                                9



II. PREFERENCFS FOR HOURS WORKED

       How much do Germans and Americans want to work? Would Germans prefer to

work more hours? Do Americans want reduced hours? Which of the two populations seems

closer to attaining its preferred number of hours worked? While economists often eschew

self-reports of preferences, the difficulties in standard labor supply analysis suggest that

evidence on preferences can illuminate hours worked issues.

       Table 4 tabulates the responses to the key question about preferences for hours

worked by American, German, and other European OECD workers on the ISS?:

       "Think of the number of hours you work and the money you earn in your
       main job. including regular overtime. If you only had one of these three
       choices, which of the following would you prefer: work longer hours and earn
       more money; work the same number of hours and earn the same money; work
       fewer hours and earn less money."

       The results in part A show a striking U.S.-Gerrnan difference. Although the majority

of both populations are "satisfied" with their hours of work, a disproportionately large

number of Americans want to work more hours than want to work fewer hours (33% versus

6% in the first panel) while the proportions of Germans who want to work more hours is

roughly equal to the proportion who want to work fewer hours (14% versus 10%). Strong

differences in preferences for work axe also shown for males, union workers, and self

employed, with U.S. workers preferring relatively longer hours, and German workers

relatively fewer hours, and with Germans more satisfied with their actual hours worked.

       The results in part B show a similar difference at all levels of actual work. Even

among workers putting in greater than 45 hours per week significantly more Americans want
                                                10
  to work longer than want to work fewer hours.'2

        Is the U.S.-Gennan gap in preferences due to the fact that U.S. workers are more

 work minded than workers elsewhere or to the fact that Germans are less work minded?

 Comparison with the OECD avenges (weighted by sample size) in part C of the table shows

 that both statements are true. A far greater number of U.S. workers prefer to work longer

 hours than the European norm, and fewer American workers prefer shorter hours. Similarly,

 fewer Germans desire to work more hours and more Germans chose to work fewer hours

 than is the avenge throughout the OECD countries surveyed here.

        Since the ISSP question specifically includes overtime pay, it is possible that the

 different answers across countries reflect responses to differences in the rate of overtime pay.

 For example, the overtime rate in the U.S. (1.5 times regular pay) exceeds the overtime rate

 in Germany (1.25 times regular pay), which ought to induce Americans to favor additional

 (or overtime) work to a greater extent than Germans. The fact that U.S. and German

workers are outIiers" among OECD workers suggests that an overtime explanation for the

difference is not likely. Moreover, the fact that self employed workers in the U.S. and

Germany show similar preferences as other workers in the countries also contravenes this

view. Still, the explicit inclusion of overtime in the ISSP work preference question is a valid

concern which we address more directly below.

       What meaning should be attached to the finding that a disproportionate larger share of

Americans wish to work more hours than they are currently working or to the fact that a

substantial share of Germans would like to work fewer hours? In a static competitive market

equilibrium with no adjustment costs or c nnaints all workers would work to equate their
                                              11

marginal rate of substitution of work for leisure and the wage they receive, and would report

no desire to change their hours of work. In a more dynamic setting (random shocks that

disturb this static equilibrium) some workers would want to work more and some would want

to work less, but the numbers in each category would presumably be the same. Viewed in

this way, the data in Panel C suggest that the more institutionalized German market produces

a distribution of working hours and pay that is nearer to equilibrium (the largest proportion

of workers chose to work the same hours and roughly equal numbers report they wish more

and less hours) whereas the flexible decentralized American labor market is in greater

disequilibrium (a smaller proportion are satisfied with their hours and a disproportionate

share want to work more hours) — failing to supply the amount of work desired by the

population at the relevant pay, or alternatively generating unfulfillable demands for work

hours.




Corroborating Evidence on Preferences

         We have checked the reliability of the table 3 difference in German and U.S. work

preferences by examining the responses of workers on two other surveys that ask comparable

questions.

         The May 1985 CF'S contained detailed questions on work scheduling and preferences

for hours worked among U.S. workers, including the following question:


         TMIf you had a choice would you prefer to work: (1) the same number of hours
         and earn the same money; (2) fewer hours at the same rate of pay and earn
         less money?; (3) more hours at the same rate of pay and earn more money?"
                                              12
        Since the CI'S asks about usual hourly earnings (exclusive of overtime), this question

asks for work preferences at one's normal pay. Table 5 gives our tabulations of the

responses of American workers. The pattern corroborates the pattern in the ISS?. While a

majority of American workers are satisfied with their hours worked, many more want to

work more hours than want to work fewer hours at the going rate. This is true for men and

women, for the self employed, and for union workers. When the responses are

disaggregated by actual time worked, moreover, we replicate Shank's (1986) finding that the

proportion wanting to work more hours falls with hours worked)"4

       The 1989 EEC survey of worktime preferences asked the following question that

provide comparable information about German workers:


       "Assuming that your present hourly rate remained unchanged, would you like
       to work less, as long, or longer?"


       This question abstracts from issues of overtime pay and is therefore comparable to the

1985 CPS question. The responses, tabulated in part A of table 6, diverge noticeably from

the !SSP figures for Germans. Instead of a roughly symmetric distribution around current

work time, many more Germans prefer less work time to more work time.

       A follow-up to this question on the 1989 EEC asked workers to indicate how many

hours per week they actually preferred to work. Part B of table 6 contrasts this response to

actual hours worked, and shows that Germans want to reduce hours from 35-40 to 30-34,

with a resultant average gap between actual and desired hours of 2 hours.

       A second question on the EEC relevant for determining work preferences asked

workers to chose between a pay increase for the same amount of work or a work hours
                                              13

decrease for the same amount of pay worded as follows:


       "If the choice were offered in the next wage round between an increase in pay
       for the same hours of work and shorter working time for the same pay you get
       now, which would you prefer?"


       This is adiffilt question to analyze because it specifies neither the increase in pay

nor the added leisure time (although presumably respondents would consider marginal

changes in pay and in working time).'5 The results, given in part C of table 6, are close to

the ISSP results for German workers, showing just about as many choosing higher income as

less work time, a pattern to be expected if workers are considering modest changes from an

equilibrium situation.

       Figure 2 combines the results of the 1985 CPS Survey and 1989 EEC Survey for the

U.S. and Germany. It shows extremely large differences in preferences between the two

countries, which therefore strengthen the ISSP findings. The EEC evidence that Germans

want to reduce work hours is, moreover, consistent with the trend in German working hours

and the importance attached by German trade unions to a negotiated reduction of work hours

in the future.

       Additional evidence that American and German workers have different preferences for

work can be found in responses to other questions in the ISSP. For example, if Americans

work more and want to work more than Germans and Europeans, they should give more

work-oriented (pm-work) responses to other work-related questions as well. Table 7 shows

that they do. Americans are more likely to report that they work hard "even if it interferes

with the rest of (their) lives" than are Germans and other Europeans. Similarly. Germans
                                                  14

are   less likely to work hard "even if it interferes with the rest of their lives' than are their

European and U.S. counterparts, and more likely to respond that they work "only as hard as

they have to."

         Finally, we offer the following short list of responses to different qualitative questions

in the ISSP as corroborative evidence that American and Germans have markedly different

attitudes about work. First, in response to a question asking if people work just for the

money, 18% of Americans compared to 33% of Germans say they work just for the money.

Second, asked if they would work without pay in their job, 67% of Americans said yes

compared to 59% of Germans. Third. asked if leisure was important to them, 40% of

Americans said yes compared to 74% of Germans.

         All told, the impression from the ISSP is that American workers are more "into"

work than are Germans and other European workers. In the same vein, Germans seem to be

less into work than their European and U.S. counterparts. The puzzle is why large

differences in actual hours worked have failed to quell American workaholiSm and a

German love of leisure.



Preferences over Time

        If the U.&-Oennan difference in work preferences always held we would wonder if it

reflected the particular (cultural) way Americans and Germans answer questions of this type,

rendering the responses suspect to an economic analysis of the actual hours gap. If

preferences changed over time, particularly in ways consistent with changes in hours worked,

we would have greater confidence in believing the differences. Data reported by Katona,
                                              15

Strumpel and Zahn (1971) for German and American workers in the 1960s show that the gap

in preferences, like the gap in actual hours, must have developed in the 1970s and 1980s.

Specifically, they compare responses to the following question:'6


       "Some people would like to work more hours a week if they could be paid for
       it. Others would prefer to work fewer hours per week even if they earned
       less. How do you feel about this?"


       American responses to the survey are similar to those in the ISSP and CR8 surveys.

Specifically. 34% of U.S. workers responded that they wanted to work more while only 10%

wanted to work less, with the majority of workers (56%) satisfied with their work hours.

German responses, on the contrary, were strikingly different fmm the ISSP: 44% of German

workers wanted to work more, 7% wanted to work less, and 49% were satisfied and happier

not to change their working hours (Katona, Strumpel, and Zahn, table 9.5). On net, the

survey results suggest that Germans had a greater desire to work than Americans -- the net

balance favoring work was 24 percentage points in the U.S. case and 37 percentage points in

the German case -- indicating that at least in the 1960s, German attitudes towards work were

similar to American attitudes today. The fact that Germans would chose to work more hours

when their incomes were lower than American incomes in the 1960s fits nicely with standard

income effects in labor supply. The fact that Germans have reduced their desire for hours as

their incomes have risen in the 1970s and 1980s is also consistent. What is odd is that in the

1990s, with comparable living standards, Americans and Germans are so different and so

extreme in their preferences for work.
                                               16

Il. TOWARDS AN EXPLANATION OF ThE WORK HOURS GAP

       Documenting the fact that differences exist in the hours and preferences of German

and American workers naturally leads to the question of why these differences occur. Are

they due to differences in taxation that affect marginal wages or public provision of goods
that has an income effect on workers? Are differences a function of cultural attitudes or are

they related to institutions? Is there something inherently different in the structure of pay

and the system of rewards in the two countries? In this section we explore the plausibility of

two alternate explanations for the gap -- a standard labor supply interpretation stressing

differences between the two countries in the value of an extra hour of work, and a more

subtle supply explanation stressing differences in the structure of pay and the rewards to

effort in the two countries.



A Standard Supply Explanation

       Several facts favor a labor supply interpretation of the work hours and preference gap

differences between U.S. and German workers. First, avenge (and marginal) tax rates for a

typical German production worker are roughly 30% higher than tax rates for a typical U.S.

production worker)7 This difference implies that the rewards to working extra hours are

smaller in Germany even at the same rate of pay. Second. social income (welfare transfers,

health care, unemployment insurance, subsidized college and university education and

apprentiship programs) is more generous in Germany than in the U.S.. which should increase

demand for leisure through the income effect.

       Turning to changes over time, the rise in real income in Germany over the last
                                              17

twenty-five years should, according to standard theory, encourage greater leisure over work.

By contrast, real earnings have not grown in the U.S. over much of the same period, and

have fallen for large portions of the working population,'9 which might necessitate worlthig

harder to maintain a given living standard. In the 1980s, significant tax changes in the U.S.

substantially reduced the progressivity of federal taxes, possibly encouraging preferences for

additional work among large segments of middle income American workers.2°

       Unfortunately, the ISSP data do not allow us to estimate the labor supply parameters

needed to test the standard supply model. The hourly earnings variable in ISSP is

constructed from information on annual earnings and weekly hours and is therefore not

independent of reported hours worked. The annual earnings data are, moreover, reported in

ranges of annual earnings. leading to measurement error of actual earnings, with resultant

negative bias in estimates of the effects of hourly pay on hours worked. Finally, there is no

data in the ISSP on assets or wealth.

       Given these problems, we examined the possible effect of income and substitution

effects on hours differences across countries as follows. We first estimated reduced form

hours equations of the form:


       (2) In Hours =   f (Country, Demographics, Union Status)

where country is the country specific dummy variable controls; the demographic variables

include controls for gender, marital status, prime age working age status, household size, and

education; and union status is equal to I if the individual is a union member and zero

otherwise. Preferences for work as revealed by qualitative responses to a set of work related
                                               18

questions were included in certain specifications of the modeL2' The coefficients from the

individual country specific dummy variables are then used to estimate an auxiliary regression

of the form:


        (3) Country Dummy = f(Jncome, Hourly Earnings)


using the eight individual country dummy variables plus constant term from equation 2

above, and aggregate data on income and earnings within countries. Equation (3) tests the

importance of income and earnings in explaining hours differences across countries

abstracting from the effects of demographics and union density.

       Ordinary least squares estimates of equation (2) are presented in table 8 for all

workers, male workers only, and full-time workers only for all of the countries in the 1989

15SF. Column 1 includes country specific dummies and shows that U.S. workers work an

avenge of 6% more hours per week than do German workers, and work significantly more

hours than workers in all other surveyed European OECD countries with the exception of

Ireland. Note, however, that in these data the hours worked by Germans are not particularly

low: the Netherlands. U.K. and Northern Ireland, and Norway have lower hours worked

than Germany. These regressions are thus better attuned to treat the greater work time of

Americans than the low work time of Germans. The addition of demographic information

and union membership in column (2) does little to reduce the gap between the U.S. and other

countries, nor between the 11.5. and Germany. Column (3) adds a set of dummy variables

that measure responses to several questions on attitudes toward work. These measures enter

the equations in a complicated way that is not always consistent in later calculations. The
                                               19

most powerful and important variable is whether or not people say they work hard even if it

interferes with their lives, inclusion of these attitude variables reduces the differences in

hours worked between U.S. and German workers, although not between U.S. and most other

European OECD countries.

       Columns (4)-(9) of the table perform the same analysis on a subsample of male

(columns 4-6) and full-time (columns 7-9) workers. The coefficient estimates in columns (4)

and (7) confirm that differences in usual weekly hours of work between U.S. and German

workers are smaller among male workers and are larger among full-time workers. The

addition of demographic controls and qualitative preferences reduces the difference between

U.S. and German males in hours worked but not between the U.S. and other countries. The

demographic and qualitative variables are less important in explaining differences in hours

worked among full-time U.S. and German workers.

       In sum, the table 8 calculations show that some of the U.S. -German differences are

associated with attitudinal or demographic differences but that the big gap in hours between

Americans and Western Europeans cannot be so explained.

       Table 9 presents estimates from auxiliary regressions using the country specific

dummy variables plus the constant in Table 8 as dependent variables, and 1989 country-

specific data on personal disposable income per capita (from OECD J-I&orical Statistics) and

average hourly wages (from ILO Yearbook of Labor Statistics). The auxiliary regressions

offer no support for the idea that differences in In hours across countries are explained by

differences in either mean hourly earnings or personal income • and therefore no support for

the view that basic labor supply factors can readily explain these differences.
                                              20
        In sum, there remain substantial differences in hours worked across countries after

accounting for demographics, preferences, and avenge wages and income. In the case of the

U.S. and Germany at least, differences in attitudes towards work seem to matter in

determining actual hours worked, although less so for full-time workers.



Are Attitudes Toward Work Related to Incentives?

       Given the difficulties with estimating a labor supply model in the JSSP data, we

consider next whether the information on preferences in the survey can be used to evaluate

the importance of labor supply factors. Is there evidence that differences in preferences for

work are explained by the incentives that affect labor supply?

       To the extent that differences in the preferences of American and German workers

reflect different marginal valuations of an extra hour of work, the impact of earnings on

preferences should differ across countries. An extra hour of work in Germany should be

valued less compared to an extra hour in the U.S., since Germany has relatively high taxes

and generous public income. We can test this idea by estimating equations linking

preferences for work to a set of country controls, and demographic and union controls and to

hourly earnings, since measured earnings are exogenous in this specification!2

       Results of the probit models using worker preferences are presented in Table 10 for

all workers. The preference question asks workers (see table 4) to indicate whether they

would chose to work more hours at more pay, the same number of hours at the same pay, or

fewer hours at less pay. Workers who say that they wish to work more hours receive a

value equaJ to 1, and all other responses receive a value of zero. The earnings variable
                                               21

obtains a significant negative coefficient in columns 2, 5 and 8, indicating that for all the

groups of workers, those with higher earnings are less Likely to want to work more hours --

an income effect. But the differences between U.S.-German and U.S.-European preferences

for longer work (column 1) are not consistently and uniformly muted by the inclusion of In

earnings, demographic, union status, and other qualitative controls (column 2). The country

specific interaction terms (column 3) are not significant, suggesting that differences in

preferences are not related to differences in the marginal valuation of an extra hour of work

as so measured. Columns (4)-(6) repeat the analysis for male workers, and columns (7)-(9)

for full-time workers, with qualitatively similar conclusions in all cases. There is no support

in the probits that American-German differences in preferences for work are explained by

earnings differences.

       In addition to the regressions above, other factors make us waxy of a standard labor

supply interpretation of the U.S-German hours and preferences gap. First, although tax rate

and social income differences favor reduced work effort in Germany relative to the U.S..

they do not necessarily favor reduced work effort between German workers and workers in

many other European countries with similar taxation and welfare state benefits. Second,

estimates of rather modest wage, wealth, and marginal tax effects in determining U.S.

vacations (Green and Poterban, 1987) suggest that marginal decisions are unlikely to explain

large differences between work effort in the United States and in Germany and Europe.



Hours Differences and Earnings Inequality

       How then are we to explain sizeable differences in the preferences and work hours of
                                               22

American and German workers? In this section we take a different approach to this

question, focusing not on differences in the avenge valuation of an extra hour of work, but

instead on differences in the distribution of rewards that determine the average.

       In the decentralized U.S. labor market, which produces relatively high earnings

inequality among workers, the rewards to greater effort are large and the penalties to slack

substantial. By contrast in the highly centralized German labor market, which produces

relatively low earnings inequaiity acmss workers and imposes institutional jaws that make

employee dismissal difficult, the rewards and penalties to greater effort are presumably less

extreme. If earnings inequality allows for a system of rewards that encourages working

harder, then the U.S. -German hours and preference gap may represent different payoffs to

effort which are not related to differences in mean (tax and social income adjusted) earnings

but are instead related to differences in earnings variance among workers. Put differently,

the U.S. wage determining system may be closer to a tournament or piece rate wage system -

- you work hard to advance, to keep the good job, to keep from falling into a shallow safety

net — whereas the German wage determining system and social benefits system is closer to a

guaranteed annual income.

       Our notion that it is the difference in the payoff from working many hours or working

few hours or working more or less hard that motivates people to work many hours diverges

from normal labor supply analysis, but is consistent with the basic economics of incentives.

It suggests that the "right" substitution variable in explaining hours is not the wage (holding

fixed for income) but the difference in lifetime earnings from worldng more hours or not

working more hours, where lifetime earnings would reflect advancement, the loss of income
                                              23

from loss of job. etc. From this perspective, inequality of earnings is a proxy measure of

the potential gain/loss from working more, and hours worked should be longer the greater

the level of earnings inequality.

       Table 11 presents statistics on earnings and hours to gauge the plausibility of such a

link. Column 1 of the table lists the mean of In hourly earnings in dollars in each country

(using 1989 purchasing power equivalents). Column 1' then ranks each country according to

thepayofitsworken(witharankoflindicatingthehighestpaycountryandarankof9
indicating the lowest pay country). Columns 2 and 2' do the same thing for the standard

error of In earnings across countries. Finally columns 3 and 3' list mean weekly hours and

rank respectively. As is clear from the table, differences in hours worked across countries

do not appear to be related to differences in mean earnings, but do appear to be related to

differences in earnings inequality. For example, three of the four countries with the highest

hourly earnings inequality— Ireland, the U.S., and Italy-- also rank in the top four in hours

worked, with identical hours worked and inequality rankings. Similarly, the three countries

with the lowest inequality ranking— Norway, the Netherlands, and Germany-- have the

lowest work hours, again with identical hours and inequality rankings. The only exception to

this pattern of matching seems to be in Austria and Northern Ireland.

       The Table 11 rankings do not control for demographic differences and contain limited

information about the relationship between hours and earnings inequality. In order to control

for demographics and union density while evaluating the link between hours worked and

earnings inequality, we poe1 information across countries from the 1985-1989 ISSP, and

regress mean In hours on the standard deviation in earnings in each country and a set of
                                              24

demographic and union density controls (limited by availability in all years). The results of

these regressions are given in Table 12. The table shows a statistically significant link

between hours worked and earnings inequality which is independent of differences in

demographics (column 2) and mean earnings (column 3) and is robust for a subsample of

men (columns 4-6) and full-time workers (columns 7-9).

       In sum, the results offered here are consistent with the idea of a link between hours

worked and earnings inequality across countries, and suggest that American workers may

work more hours and German workers may work less hours because of differences in the

structure of rewards and penalties for work effort in the two countries.



W. CONCLUSIONS

       This paper has documented several facts of note. First, significant differences exist in

the hours worked by American and German workers. Our estimates suggest that in 1989/90.

German workers worked between 10-15% fewer hours on an annual basis than do U.S.

workers. Large differences between U.S. and German work hours appear to be driven, at

least in part, by the fact that U.S. workers work comparatively long hours relative to

workers in other OECD European countries, and that German workers work relatively short

hours. Forces at work in Gennany today suggest that if anything, differences in the actual

hours worked between Americans and Germans will widen in the 1990s.

       Second1 sizeable differences exist in the preferences of U.S. and German workers for

work. Responses to a series of qualitative questions from a number of surveys paint a clear

picture-- Americans have a greater desire for work than do Germans. Although a majority
                                              25

of American workers are satisfied with their working hours, far greater numbers would
prefer more over less work if given the choice. Among Germans the opposite preferences

prevail, with greater shares of German workers preferring less over more work. Although

American workers are extreme among surveyed OECD countries in their desire for work,

Gennans are equally extreme in their desire for leisure. The preference for work gap

between Americans and Germans, like the hours gap, is wide for these reasons.

       Third, differences across countries in hours worked are not related statistically to

income and earnings, and differences in preferences do not represent distinct responses to

earnings across countries.

       Forth, we present empirical evidence that workers work longer hours in countries

with high earnings inequality and shorter hours in countries with low earnings inequality, that

suggests a different sort of labor supply interpretation of the American-German work hours

gap. In Germany the payoffs to working more may be limited by a centralized systemthat

encourages uniformity in pay. In the U.S. high earnings inequality may be responsible for

the view that the harder Americans work and the harder they say they want to work, the

more likely will the unequal system reward their good efforts.
                                              Notes


 1. For example, the 11990 IG Metalle agreement specifies an agreed weekly hours reduction to
 36.0 effective 1.4.93 and a further reduction 1035.0 hours effective 1.10.95. For more detailed
 information on these agreements see Bosch (1992).

 2. This report calls for considerable greater work effort on the part of Germans. Chancellor
 Kohl has stated "With ever shorter working hours, rising wage costs• and ever longer holidays,
 our competitiveness is in danger" (quoted in Financial Times Survey of Germany. October 25,
 1993, p1).

3. Given the higher female participation in the United States, American workers actually work
nearly as many hours as the Japanese per adult person. Similarly, although Luxembourg ranks
slightly above the United States in annual hours according to the German Employers Association
data, it lies below the U.S. annual hours after adjustment for the higher employment to
population rate in the United States.

4. The precise period, when U.S. and German hours crossed varies depending on whose
estimated hours worked one uses. Al] estimates that we know of suggest however that the
crossover occurred no earlier than the 1970s, and moreover, all estimates indicate a substantial
widening of the gap after 1983.

5. In addition, there were modest differences in unemployment rates (OECD Employment
Outlooks 1992) which would effect the uniformity of the annual estimated hours across the
working population.

6. A further refinement in hours comparisons is also possible: estimating lifetime hours worked
by taithig account of years of retirement and life span. We have not made estimates of lifetime
hours worked.

7. Note that the annual hours in columns (1) provide estimates of the In differential in U.S. and
German hours of .15, and are therefore consistent with the OECD data calculated adjusted
differences for all workers,

8. The data are establishment survey equivalent data provided by European sister employer
associations to the German BDA. Estimates of German work hours and vacation time are
roughly consistent with OECD data, although the differences between countries in holiday time
are somewhat larger in this source. These differences presumably reflect actual differences
caused by the sample of full-time as opposed to all workers.

9. The hours question asked of U.S. and German workers were not identical. The question was
phrased to U.S. workers as, "How many hours did you work last week, how many hours do you
usually work a week, at all jobs?" The same question was phrased to German workers as,
"How many hours per week do you normally work in you main job, including overtime?" Two
possible sources of noncomparabiljty arise in this context. First, German workers hours
explicitly include normal overtime hours, where U.S. workers hours should, but may not.
                                                27

Second, German hours should correspond to the main job and not all jobs, whereas the U.S.
hours question explicitly corresponds to all jobs. In order to correct for this difference reported
second job hours are added to the hours of German workers who report a second job, and it is
this adjusted figure that is used in the regression analysis.
10. This difference is due to the fact that the U.S. hours distribution is more variable and a
greater percentage of U.S. workers (24%) are working less than full-time (35 hours per week)
than German workers (19%).

11. The large difference between the hours of German and American sell-employed workers
is due in part to the fact that the U.S. distribution of self-employed hours is far more variable
(the standard deviation of hours is 17.08 in the U.S. and 10.40 in Germany). For example.
when we consider the preferences of fuH-time self-employed in the two countries, the hours
differences narrow-- German full-time self-employed work 52.5 hours and Americans work 50.4
hours.

12. Note also the U-shape to the relation between hours worked and preference for work among
Americans. The proportion of Americans who want to work more hours compared to the
proportion who want to work fewer hours falls as hours worked rises from less than 35 to 35-40,
and then rises after 45 plus hours.

13. An interesting test of the meaning of the hours preference question would be to isolate the
frequency of behavioral changes in people who said they preferred more/fewer hours in ensuing
periods. The group rotation stnzcture of the CI'S would permit such an analysis to be
conducted; although we have not evaluated this issue.

14. Note that this differs from the ISSP result in table 4. Given the much larger CPS than ISSP
sample and the law of diminishing marginal value, we find this pattern more believable.
Workaholics Americans may be. but when they reach 60 plus hours, enough work seems to be
enough work.
15. It also has a problem because it poses a situation in which the marginal rate of substitution
of goods for leisure is not equal to the wage. People would do better with some mixture of a
higher wage and change in hours.
16. The U.S. question was asked in 1966; the German question in 1968.
17. For example, the avenge tax rate for a typical German production worker in 1991 was 37%
(including social security contributions). The average tax rate for a typical American production
worker was 27 percent in 1991. For more details on the institutional structure of the tax codes
in each country see OECD (1990).

18. For example. Esping-Anderen's (1990) "de-commodification° scores for the welfare
programs of various countries gives the U.S. the lowest score-- considerably below that for
Germany. Empirically, the countries with high "de-commodification" indices (most notably
                                                28

Sweden, Norway, Netherlands, and Sweden) have low hours per employee in the OECD data,
while the three countries with the least 'de-commodification" scores (the U.S., Japan, and
Canada) rate very high in hours worked per employee.
19. A substantial literature has arisen charting the course of real earnings stagnation in the U.S.
since 1970. See Levy and Murnane (1992) for an excellent summary of the literature.
20. Major tax reform legislation was passed in 1981 and 1986. For details on these changes
see Pechrnan (1991).

21. Questions asked respondents to agree or disagree with the following statements:
(i) work is the most important activity; (ii) leisure is not important; (iii) advancement in my job
is important; (iv) I work at my job not only for the money; (v) I work hard even if it
interferes with the rest of my life, and (v) quality should determine pay. Variables were coded
as = 1 if respondent agreed with the statement and =0 otherwise.
22. Using workers responses to questions about their preferences for work as opposed to actual
hours worked in an hours regression eliminates the endogeneity between annual weekly earnings
and hours discussed above, and therefore allows us to test the importance of earnings differences
in preferences for work.
                                        Rderences


Bosch, Gerhard. "From 40 to 35 Hours: Reduction and Hexibilisation of the Working Week
in the Federal Republic of Germany." International Labour Review, Vol. 129, No. 5, 1990

___________      "The Dispute over the Reduction of the Working Week in West Germany."
Cambridge Journal of Economics, no. 10. 1986. pp. 271-290.

European Economic Community. European Economy. March, 1991.

Esping-Andersen. G. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Princeton, 1990.

Green. F. and M. Poterban. "Vacation Time in the U.S. and Europe," paper delivered at
EMRU Study Group, April 1987.

Katona, G.. B. Strwnpel. and E. Zahn. Aspirations and Affluence: Comparative Studies in
the u.s. and Western Europe. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971.

Levy. Frank and Richard Murnane. "U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A Review
of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations," Jounwl of Economic Literature. Vol. XXX,
No. 3, September 1992.

OECD. Economic Outlook. July, 1992

OECD. Historical Statistics 1960-1989. 1990.

OECD. The Tax Benefit Position of Production Workers. July, 1990.

Owen, 3. Reduced Working Hours: Cure for unemployment or Economic Burden?
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1989.

_____     "Work-Time Reduction in the U.S. and Western Europe," Monthly Labor Review,
December 1988, pp. 51-54.

______ Working Lives: The American Work Force Since 1920. Lexington. 1986.
Pechman. J. World Tax Reform D.C: Brookings Institution, 1988.

Shank, S. "Preferred Hours of Work and Corresponding Earnings," Monthly Labor Review.
November, 1986. pp.40-44.
           Figure 1: Ln Differential in Annual flours Worked per Employee
                                    US vs Germany, 1870-1984

0.05


   0




                                                                      /
-0.05
                                                                                            /
                                                                                       //
                                                                                   /
 -0.I


-0.15


 -0.2


-0.25 —
        1870      1890       1913       1929          1938           1950     1960              1973   1984
                                                      years




                                    US vs Germany, 1970-1990

 • 0.1


 0.08

 0.06

 0.04

 0.02

    0

-002

-0.04
        1970        1973        1975           1979           1983          1986        1989           1990
                                                      years




         Source for Top Panel: Maddison, Angus "Growth and Slowdown in Advanced Capitalist
         Economies" Journal of Economic Literature. June 1987. p. 686.

         Source for Bottom Panel: OECD Employment Outlook, 1992.
Figure 2: Percentage of Workers Who Prefer to Work Fewer Hours, Same Hours or
                       More Hours at the Same Rate of Pay

                                                   Panel A: Alt

         70

         60
         50
         40                                                                                      o US All
     2
     a 30                                                                                           Germany All

         20
         10               9#4fl
          0
                     work less                 work ssme                  work more

                                                   Panel B: Men

         70

         60
         50

     C 40
     a
     U
                                                                                                    0 Men
     a 30                                                                                              GM Men

         20

         l0
          0
               tXI
                      work less                  work same                   work more

                                                 Panel C: Women

         70

         60

         50

     PC
     2
                                                                                                 Dijswomen
     &3o                                                                                            GM Women




                                                                    Pb
         20
         I0
         0
                     work less                 work same                  work more

The question in the EEC survey was 'Assuming that your present hourly rate remained unchanged, would you like to
work less, as long, or longeC
The question in the CPS survey was: 'ltyou had a choke, would you prefer to work: the saint number of hours and
earn the same money; fewer hours at the sante rate of pay and earn less money; more hours at the same rate of pay
and earn more money'?'
Source: EEC. European Economy. March 1991 • table 22
         CPS. tabulated from May 1985 CPS Supplement
                                         Table 1
                 Hours Worked in The U.S. and Germany, 1990 approxImately




                                 Part A. Hours Worked per Year

                                                           U.S.     (ennany       in differential
1. Annual Hours Worked                                     1750         1589                0.10
2. Employment/Population (15-64)                           0.73         0.66                0.09
3. AnnudHounpaAduh                                         1272         1047                0.19
4. Vacation Time InS day weeks                              2.5             6.2
5. Holiday Time in 5 day weeks                              2.0             2.4
6. Vacation and Holiday/52                                 0.09         0.1?                0.08
7. Vacation and Holiday She of payroll                     0.08         0.15
8. Hon PWor1clng Weelc                                       38              36              .05
9. Annual Hour, Worked (52 *     (8) S   [1-(6)])          1798         1551               0.15



                                         Part B. Work Schedules

                                                    U.S.          Germany
10. Distribution of Hours/Week                              12           11
<24                                                          4              2
25-29                                                        5              3
30-34                                                        7           31

35-40                                                      37           29
41-45                                                      30            17
>45

11. Days Worked P Week                                     4.9          4.8
12. Distribution of Days
Usually Work Saturday                                      24           12

Usually Work Sunday                                        12               4
Work7daysaweeJc                                             3               1
 13. Work Shifts
 on shift schedule                                        22                8

 nightwork                                                13                8

 14. Moonlighting (2nd Job)
 Usually work a second job                                 8                2

 Sometimeswodcaseaindjob                                  18                5



Source:   Oa,nin Figwt, lines 1-3,OECD; lines4-7, Owen, 1989, table2; lines 8, 1I-I3EEC, iable2l;
          lines 10. 14 ISSP
   U.S.   fsgur. lines 1-3. OECD; lines 4-7, Owen, 1988, lines 8, 11-13, Shank; lines 10.14 ISSP
                                        Table 2
                         Hours Worked In OECD Countries, 1990
                            Full-lime Manufacturing Workers'




                   (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)

              Annual Hours      Vacation time in   Holiday time in   Vacation and    Hours per
                                  Sdayweeks         Sdayweeks          Holiday
                                                                      weelcs/52     working week


  Austria        1714                 5.3               2.5             0.15           38.6

 Belgium         1737                 4.0               2.2             0.12           37.8
 Denmark         1672                 5.0               2.0             0.13           37.0
  Finland        1716                 8.0                1.8            0.19           40.0
  France         1763                 5.0               2.0             0.13           39.0
 Germany         1643                 6.0               2.5             0.16           37.6
  Greece         1840                 4.4               1.8             0.12           40.0
  Ireland        1810                 4.2               1.6             0.11           39.0
   Italy         1764                 6.3               1.8             0.16           40.0
Luxembourg       1792                 5.4               2.0             0.14           40.0
Netherlands      1709                 6,9                1.4            0.16           38.9
  Norway          1718                4.2               2.2             0.12           37.5
 Portugal         1935                4.4               2.8             0.14           43.0
   Spain          1790                4.7               2.8             0.14           40.0
  Sweden         1784                 5.4               2.2             0.15           40.0
                 Switzerland                        1864             4.7               1.6               0.12             40.6

                    U.K.                            1769             5.0               1.6               0.13             38.8
                United States                       1904             2.4               2.2               0.09             40.0


                  Average                           1774             5.1               2.1               0.14             39.3


                  US- Avg                            130             -2.7              0.1              -0.05             0.7

               Gennany-Avg                          -131             0.9               0.4               .023             4.7

                                                            averages are from onunuies ti listed.
'Data do not include short-time or part-time workers. Unweigbted
Source: Federation of Gman Employers Associations (BDA) using information from European sister organizations. Supplied by Bureau   of Labor Statistics.
Department of International Labor Statistics.
                                          Table 3
                        Avenge Hours Worked by Germans and Americans



                           1985          1986       1981        1988         1989    1989 (Adjusted)°
 All
       Gamany             43.63         41.57      41.19       40.71        39.19          39.78
       U.s.               42.45         41.58      40.93       41.22        41.43          41.43
       Difference         -1.18          0.01      .0.26       4.51          2.24           1.65
       In DIfference      -0.03          0.00      -0.01         .01         0.06           0.04
 Male
    Garnany               46.17         44.78     43.59        44.06       42.74          43.31
       U.S                44.72                   43.63        44.94       45.32          45.32
       Difference         •1.45         44.90      0.04         0.88        2.58           2.01
       In Difference      4.03           0.12      0.00         0.02         0.06          0.05
                                         0.00
 Female
    Gemany                38.68                   3917         35.48       34.20          34.80
       U.S.               38.06         36.16     38.24        37.49       37.17          37.17
       Difference         -0.60         37.76      0.93         2.01        2.97            2.37
       In Difference      -0.02          1.60      4.02         0.06        0.08            0.07
                                         0.04
 35+ hours
       Germany           47.11                    44.04       43.77        42.59          43.06
       U.S..             47.14          44.52     46.12       46.07        46.71          46.71
       DIfference          0.03         46.38      2.08         2.30        4.12           3.65
       In Difference       0.00          1.86      0.05         0.05        0.09           0.08
                                         0.04
 Union
       Germany           42.34                    40.31       40.74        39.46          40.16
       U.S.              43.25          40.90     42.95       43.31        40.16          40.16
       DIfference          0.91         42.85                  2.57         0.70           0.00
       In DIfference       0.02          1.95      2.64        0.06         0.02           0.00
                                         0.05      0.06
SeW Employed
   Germany               56.55                                52.75        47.55         48.68
   U.S.                  44.48          51.83     50.95       42.29        40.10         40.10
   Difference           -12.07          42.86    41.39       -10.46        -7.45         -8.58
   In Difference         -0.24          -8.97    -9.56        4.22         4.17            -0.19
                                        -0.19




Source: ISSP 1985-1989

 How, adjusted for second job hours for German workers to account for differences in the hours
worked question in the two countries.
                                                 Table 4
                                       Feelings About Work Effort
                                  (peroenisge of worker. with prelerence.)


                             (U                            (2)                       (3)

                  More Uou&Mon P.7              Saint Hours/Sun. Pay         La. Hours/Less Pay

                                    Pen A. Demographic Differences
AN
  u.s.                3267                            61.83                       5.31
  Gamsa               13.50                           76.4*                       10.09
  DilTenaa            89.16                          "11.51                       -4.58
Male
 U.S.                 37.18                           37.18                       3,65
                      12.32                           77.13                       10.36
  DIIVer...ce         21.14                          -19.15                       .491
Pen,.).
  u.s.                27.51                           67.11                       5.35
  Gamin               *5.16                           75.11                       9.13
 DhTers.a             82.38                           .1.31                       .4.11
User.
 u.S.                 38.35                           56.63                       482
 Gamin                11.51                           78.57                       9.89
     DIfference       27.12                          -21.94                       -3.87
S. Employed
  U.S.                36.78                           50.57                       12,64
  Gamin               11.11                           70.37                       11.11
  DiITaa.oe           21.97                          .19$S                        .217

                                   Put B.   Hours Worked Differences
1-Il how
  u.s.                61.34                           38.16                       0.00
  Gnm.n               33.33                           33.33                       33,33
11.21 Man
  u.s.                28.26                           63.04                       8.70
  Gamin               *2.50                           12.14                       5.36
21'3U Man
  us.                 39.71                           54.41                       5.68
  Gain...             25.71                           68.57                       5.7*
11-35 Man
  U.S.                26.57                           69.05                       2.38
  Gamin               19.05                           76.19                       1.76
35-Il hours
  U.S.                27.33                           70.00                       2.67
  Gamin               9.83                            81.69                       8.47
41-45 Man
  US.                 29.33                           64.00                       6.67
  Gamin               17.57                           73.68                       6.76
46-SI Man
  U.S.                39,33                           52.81                       7.87
  Gain...             17.65                           61.71                       17.63
58+ bean
  U.S.                37.59                           52.48                       9.93
  Gamin               15.91                           59.09                       25.00

                                      Part C. OECD Comparison.
UnkMSea.a             32.67                           61.83                       5.51
Gainsay               83.50                           76.4*                       10.09
Linked KMgdoni        23.77                           68.05                       8.17
Asisl.                22.59                           71.53                       5.88
NdbeI.Ms              87.31                           70.16                       12.29
tly                   31.03                           62.43                       6.53
Inland                30.37                           61.64                       4.99
Nathan Ireland        26.85                           67.59                       5.56
Nany                  21.16                           68.70                       6.93
U.S-WL An.            III                             -4.31                        -1.81
Gnsay-Wt.An.          -18.83                           1.21                        2.75
Nose: Rapocles so the question asked of every worktg iodividual Thirak 01 the DwT.beá of hours your work and the money that
yost make b your main Job. bicluding regular overtime. If you bad only one of three choices, whidi of followktg would yos petter?
(1) Work longer bonn and earn more money: (2) Work the nine number of hours and earn the same money: (3) Work fewer bonn
and un len —
Sou,u: ISSP 1989
                                            Table 5
                               Choica over Hours Worked and Pay
                              US. Employed, 198$ CI'S Supplement
                                 (Percentage of workers with preference)

                                 (1)                           (2)                          (1)
                         More Hours/More Pay        Seine Hours/Same Pay           Fewer Hours/Less Pay

                                        Pert A. Demographic Characteristics

All Workers                      27.0                           65.2                          7.8
   (11=47,054)

Male Workers                     29.1                           6.4.5                         6.4
  (an. 24,066)
Female Workers                  24.7                            65.9                          9.4
  0" 22.993)
Union Worker,                   22.2                            69.3                         8.5
  (n- 1.978)
Self Employed                   25.4                            65.3                         9.3
  (a a 3.889)

                                        Part B. Hours Worked Characteristics

Working < 35 Hours              42.6                            52.4                         4.9
   (a = 8 .502)

WorkIng 35 + Hours              23.5                            68.0                         8.5
  (a =38,552)

Working 35-39 Moon               29.0                           63.4                         7.7
   (n—3,751)

Working 40-49 Hours             23.8                            68.9                         7.3
 (a =28.312)

Working 50-59 Hours             20.7                            66.4                         12.8
 0- 3.957)
Working 60+ Hour,               16.2                            67.3                         16.5
 (n-2,532)


Note: Responses to the following queslion: sit you had. choice would you prefer to work: (1) the samenumber of
hour, mid era the same money; (2) fewer hours it the same rue oIpiy and era less money. and; (3) more hours ax
the anne r.te of pay mid era more money.

Sounre: CPS May 1985 Supplement on Work Schedules and Dual Job Holders.
                                               TabIe
                   EEC Survey Evidence on Gennsn Preferred Working Hours


                                               Part A.
   Percentage of Workers Preferring Less, the same, or longer working hours a! the same rate oi pay

                         All             Men       Women         <30          30-49       >49
WorkLas                  38           41           35            30            37          36

WorkAsLong               55              54        55            58            57          57

WorkMore                 4            4            4             11            4              4




                                               Part B.
                          Distribution of Daired and Actual Working Hours


                         Avenge <20            20-24     25-29        30-34   35-40   41-45       45 +

ActualHours              36          3         5         5            7       71      3           6
 DairedHoun              34          3         7         7            19      55      5           3




                                               Part C.
 If the thoice Were Offered in the Next Wage Rotmd Between an ma-ease in Pay (or the Same Hours of
       Work and Sbcner Working Time for the Same Pay You Get Now, Which Would you Prefer?

                         All             Men       Women         <30          30-49       >49

 IncreaseinPay           42              45        39            41           44          41

 &ionerWoutTune          44              44        45            45           44          44

 Undecided                10             11        16            14           12          15



Source: EEC, &smpain &onomy, Mart' 1991 lines A. C1 from table 22; line B from table 2.
                                                table 7
                          Feelings About Work Effort How Hard Do You Work?
                                         (percentage .4th preferences)



                             Only as Hard As Have To      Bard But Not So    Hard Even If It Interferes
                                                             Interferes

All Workers

Gatn.s_ny (n628)                      16.56                    48.89                   34.55

Great Brtin (ci" 720)                  5,69                    36.94                   57.36

Unfrad States 6852)                    7.63                    31.10                   61.27

Antis 6=869)                           9.67                    43.50                   46.84

Ndherlanth(n692)                       7.37                    63.87                   28.76

Italy (n=581)                          7.75                    43,72                   48.54

Irad (u=477)                          10.48                    38.99                   50.52

N. Inland 6=333)                       7.81                    32.73                   59.46

Norway 6=1070)                        12.24                    43.74                   4.4.02

US-WI-Average                         .1.96                    -11.89                   13.84

German. Wt. Average                   6.97                      5.98                   -12.86

P.6k Worker,
Gantany (n391)                         15.05                   48.12                    36.83

Crest &irath (,.s450)                  5.37                    33.76                    60.87

tThksd States 6=504)                   8.22                    28.44                    63.33

Antis 6=324)                           9.92                    47,22                    42.86

Neehatada(a=443)                       8.80                    62.53                    25.67

Italy   6=354)                         8.19                    41.81                    50.00

Inland 6=309)                          1137                    35.92                    52.10

N. haMad (nt196)                       7.14                     33.67                   59.I8

Norway 6=598)                          13.55                   43.81                    42.64

U.S.- WI. Average                      -1.54                   -14.16                   16.58

German-WI. Average             .       4.99                     5.52                    41.5$

FmaIe Workan
Onny (a=249)                           18.75                    50.00                   31.25

Ott.' &iraii 6=329)                    6.08                     40.73                   53.19

Linked Sates     6=402)                6.97                     34.08                   58.96

AntIs 6=365)                           9.32                     38.36                   52.33

Ncahotnds(n=249)                       4.82                     66.21                   28.92

bb'h=227)                              705                      4670                    46.26

Inland 6=168)                          7.74                     44.64                   47.62

N. Inland 6=137)                       8.76                     31.39                   59.85

Norway 6=472)                          10.59                    43.64                   45.76

U.S. - Wt. Avenge                      -137                     4.45                    11.44

German-WI Average                      9.81                     6.47                   .15.27
Unla Workevi
                                               17.26                            51.78                            30.96
Germany Cn=197)
                                               5.47                            40.15                             54.38
QmgDdlsM(n274)
                                               5.62                             32.58                            6180
unkodsiata(n=89)
                                               10.26                            46.54                            43.20
Mini (n=419)
                                                8.54                            64,32                            27.14
Nethaland.(ae199)
                                                6.29                            45.91                            47.80
liaJy (n 159)
                                                7.85                            45.02                            47.12
freind (n191)
                                                8.05                            38.26                            53.69
N. Ireland (a=149)
                                               12.54                            44.22                            43.23
Norway (..= 606)

US. - WI.                                      .4.33                            .13.32                           17.65
            A.e.g.
Germs.. - WI. Annge                            7.32                              5.88                            43.9


Self Eanployed
                                                11.86                           30,55                            57.63
Gamsnytn=59)
                                                3.57                            28.57                            67.86
 0st &irain 6.=84)
                                                6,00                            25.00                            69.00
 Unkedsestn(n=I00)
                                                10.64                           34.04                            55.32
 Minis (n=94)
 Netherlands 6i=40)                             5.00                            52.50                            42.50

                                                9.14                            32.57                            58.29
 Italy (n=175)
                                                17.71                           21.88                            60.42
 Inland (ea96)
                                                10.00                            16.00                           74.00
 N. Inland(n.50)
                                                13.11                            36.07                           50.08
 Newsy (n=6l)
 US - WI. A.e.g.                                -3.75                            .5.14                            8.79

                                                3.5!                             1.4?                             -2.58
 German - WI. Avenge

Responses to the following question asked of every working individual. 'Whidi of the following statements best
descrlbesyourfeeltgsabotstyourjobl: (1)1wockonlyashardasIbavet0:(2)1w0rkh&&bUtt1OItht
Interferes with the rest of my life, and; (3) 1 make a point of doing the best work I can even if it sometimes
huierfern with the rest of my life.5

Source: ISS? data. 1989
                                                    Table S
                                               Hours Regrrsslons


Depaidcnt Variable: in (hours)



                               (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)     (5)    (6)      (7)     (8)    (9)

  OananDummy                   -.056    -.051      -.022      -.043   -.018    .002   -.074   -.057   -.036

  U.LDmnmy                     -.076    -.131      -.121      -.002   -.057   -.049   -.048   -.025   -.014

  Austria Dununy               .010     -.037      -M20       -.006   -.036   -.021   -.029    .014    .029

  NetbaiandsDwmny             -094      -.114      -.089      -.074   -.059   -.037   -.119   -.121   -.099

  ItalyDwnmy                  -.024     -.083      -.065      -.047   -.085   -.077   -.028   -.005    .007

  Ireland Dummy                .038      049        .051      -.002    .038   .039     .008    .035    .038

  N.IrelandDwnmy              -i09      -.154      -.150      -.067   -.120   -.119   -.099   -.064   -.058

  NcrwayDummy                 -.093     -.142      -.122      -.079   -.091   -.084   -.154   -.135   -.125

  FemaleDwnmy                           -.267      -.268                                      -.078   -.079

  Unlooflummy                           -.043      -.038              -.083   -.079           -.079   -.073

 Married Dwnmy                          -.051      -.053               .045   .037             .023    .018

 Sup&visor Dummy                         .106       .090               .065   .052             .047    .032

 Rime Age Dummy                          .026       .038               .016   .028            -.004    .007

 Work Most Important                                .007                      .024                     .018

 Leisure Most                                       OM                        .021                    .022

 Mvance Important                                   .032                      .007                    -.001

 Jobnotordyformooey                                 .014                      .006                    .010

 Work hard if interferes                            064                        064                    .061

 Quality should                                     .013                      .014                    .028



 N                           3953      3953        3953       2430    2430    2430    3179    3179    3179

 Mj. a'                       .014     .166         .175      .008    .040    .053    M69     .163

Qualtitative questions asked of respondents ISS?. 1989. Respondents were asked liethcr they agreed
of disagreed with the following statements. Variable are I if agreed. 0 if disagreed.

Education categorical controls were included in all regressions.
                                             Table 9
                                       Au*lllary Regressions



 Depudeot Variable: Coimhy Dummy Coefficients from in hours Regrsions

                                                (2')                (5')                    (8)

                                            All Worken         Male Workers       Full-dme Workers



 In Income                                      S84                 .055                    .031
                                               (.102)              (.074)                  (.085)



 In Average Hourly Earnings                    -.004                .022                   -.128
                                               (.166)              (.120)                  (.139)




                                               .111                .085                    .174



Cotmuy Dummy Coefficient Variables are taken from Table 8 regressions by cdumn number as
indicated.

Number of Observations In each case Is 9.

Source: Aggregate Country Income data for 1989- OECD HISIOrICRJ Statisli, 1960-1990.
        Aggregate Country Earnings data for 1989- 1W Yearbook of Labour Sta1isti, 1992.
                                                                            Table 10
                                                                Probit Estinuta of Preference

         Depadad Variable: -lit MdJvIthai p.ef. N wt Ig bow, C nat pay, .0 odia.iae

                                                    MI Workers                           Male Workers                      FvIl-ThneWorker,

                                          (I)           (2)        U)          (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)


          Cantandawny                      -.661         .623        .334       .883          -.892       -.721       -.693       -.692       -.729
                                          (.116)       (.125)      (.345)      (.156)        (.167)      (.494)      €130)       (.139)       (.425)
          U.Lth,'.ny                       -.169         .159       -.055      -.132           .279        .117       -.103        .233         .166
                                          (.065)       (.162)      (.240)      (.110)        (.199)      (.326)      (.094)      (.183)       (.2891
          Auaria ó,nny                     -.169        -.00?        .044      .206            .09?        .231      -.155         .056        .106
                                          (.083)       (.160)      (.221)      (.106)        (.195)      (.279)      (.089)      (.180)       (213)
          Nethatadthareny                  -311         -.533       -A85        -.633         -.634      -.234        -.605       -.704       -J99
                                          (.098)       (.104)      (.254)      (.122)        (.129)      (.332)      (.112)      (.220)       (.306)

          Iis&amy                           .007         .216        .129       -.037          .269      .080         .010         .269         .182
                                          (.091)       (.859)      (.241)      (.117)        (.196)      (.317)      (.101)      (.282)       (.266)

          1N15S14&aIIT%y                    .059        -.249       -.332       -.129         -.313      -.305       -.031        -.266        -.299
                                          (.092)       (.101)      (.172)      (.1 Il)       (.129)      (.241)      (.099)      (.110)       (.189)

          N.Iawlaadóa,vny                  -.135         .117       .145       -.163           .178       -.263       -.184        .080        .095
                                          (.105)       (.175)                  (.136)        (.217)      (.399)      (.118)      (.199)      (.352)
          Neraay &ai.ny                   —.148          .128        .732      -.283           .063        .30!      -.195         .114        .553
                                          (.094)       (.140       (.300       (.121)        (.178)      (.443)      (.100       (.262)      (.383)
                                                                   -.859                                 -.089                                 .022
                                                                   (.257)                                (.312)                              (.221)
          U.Lfl, earn                                                .235                                 .04!                                 .031
                                                                   (.214)                                (.156)                              (.143)
         Aislaia a'.                                               .05l                                   -.241                               -.055
                                                                   (.221)                                (.247)                              (.2323

                                                                   -.031                                 ..242                               -.256
                                                                   (.140                                (.184)                              (.180)
                                                                     .059                                 .232                                .061
                                                                   (.122)                               (.157)                              (.144)
         InlaMb n                                                    .071                                -.004                                 .038
                                                                   (.114)                               (.152)                              (.129)
         N. k&S1. earn                                              .17!                                  .296                               -.022
                                                                   (.212)                               (.229)                              (.220)
         Nnayin a't                                                -.336                                 -.133                               -.340
                                                                  (.694)                                (.212)                              (.189)
         learn                                         -.147       -.154                     -.224       -.323                   I81          .lfl
                                                      (.042)      (.055)                     (.057)     (.078)                   (.0481     (.062)


         lag L&Jood                             -   -1788.06    -1783.01    -1190.54      -1149.29    .1145.91    -1537.68    .1459.06    -1456.82
         N                                3315          3315       33)5        2005          2005        2005        2716        2716         2716


         IS PSkin N                       26.37       26.37       26.37       29.83          29.83      29.83       26.4?        26.47      26.47


        Qualitadn questions asked of respondent IP, 1989. Rapondaits were asked whether they agreed or disagreed Mt the
        following nanaies. Variables as. 1 If agreed. 0 if disagreed. Columns 1.4.7 Include no conimla. The reai.akilng IwYtns
        conisin contok for danogriphia aid .mion stasis (lassie. prlmeage. minted. supervisor and union dummy variables). educsdonal
•   -   cngy conDole, and controls for wo&er preferences as gI'ai In TableS. Individual earnings were idjwled using purchasing
        power parity 1989 equIvalent horn OECD Labosr Force Sat,. Earnings are net of 'axes I. alt countries.
                                                    Table!!
                               Relationship between Hours Worked and Earnings




                                (1)         (1')           (2)        Ct)            (3)    (3')

                                Mean       Rank        Std. Fair Rank               Mean    Rank
                              ln(Ean)                    In (Earn)                 Weekly
                                                                                   Hou&

U.S.                            1.814        4             .033        2           46.712    2

                               2.O!2         1             .023        6           42.589    7
Germany

                                1.798        5             .022        7           44.425    5
U.K.

                                1.435        8             .024        5           45.975    3
Austria

Netherlands                     1.844        3             .021        8           41.506    8

                                1.644        7             .027        4           45.070    4
!taly
Ireland                         .676         9             .036         1          47.849     1



N. Ireland                      1.664        6             .030        3           42.779     6

                                1.943        2.            .015        9           38.765     9
Norway




'Data pertain to usualbonn worked for full-tune workers (working 35 + howl).
Individual eanings were Sjusted using purchasing power parity 1989 equilvalenls from OECD

Sourve: 1989 ISSP.
                                            Table 12
                            Hours Dlffercnoes and Earnings inequality




Dependent Variable: mean of In bows

                                    All Workers                   Male Workers           Full-Time Workers

                              (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)    (7)      (8)      (9)


 Std In Hourly Earnings      .272      .577       .537      .128      .354     .383     .106     .493     .468
                            (.107)    (.070)   (.089)      (.070)    (.051)   (.058)   (.120)   (.149)   (.135)
 Mean Female                           .116       .026                                           .558     .698
                                      (.332)   (.358)                                           (.733)   (.666)
 Mean Sup&visory                       .266       .347                .178     .164             -1.479   -1.555
                                      (.161)   (.196)                (.080)   (.081)            (.483)   (.438)
 Mean Union                            .741       .750                .235     .259             .494     -.298
                                      (.161)   (.163)                (.079)   (.082)            (.425)   (.395)
 Mean Mairied                         -.008       -.092               .209     .223             1.467    1.334
                                      (.235)      (.262)             (.140)   (.140)            (.499)   (.456)
 Mean Prime Age                       -2.158 -2.043                  -1.009   -1.077            -.247    -.288
                                       (258)      (.303)             (.130)   (.145)            (.425)   (.385)
 Mean In Hourly Earnings                          -.036                        .027                      -.238
                                               (.048)                         t026)                      (.109)



 Adjusted R'                 .190      .813       .808     .093       .760     .761    -.010     .304     .430



Nut of Observations is equal to 24 in all regrnssions.
Source: ISSP. 1985-1989.
