                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE MACROECONOMICS OF THE GREAT
                       DEPRESSION: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH




                                      Ben S. Bernanke




                                  Working Paper No. 4814



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1994


Presented as the Money, Credit, and Banking Lecture, Ohio State University, May 16, 1994. I
thank Barry Eichengrecn for his comments and han Mihov for excellent Research Assistance.
This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Ben S. Bernanke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4814
                                                                                August 1994



                       THE MACROECONOMICS OF THE GREAT
                      DEPRESSION: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH


                                         ABSTRACT


       Recently, research on the causes of the Great Depression has shifted from a heavy

emphasis on events in the United States to a broader, more comparative approach that examines

the interwar experiences of many countries simultaneously. In this lecture I survey the current

state of our knowledge about the Depression from a comparative perspective. On the aggregate

demand side of the economy, comparative analysis has greatly strengthened the empirical case

for monetary shocks as a major driving force of the Depression; an interesting possibility

suggested by this analysis is that the worldwide monetary collapse that began in 1931 may be

interpreted as a jump from one Nash equilibrium to another. On the aggregate supply side,

comparative empirical studies provide support for both induced financial crisis and sticky nominal

wages as mechanisms by which nominal shocks had real effects. Still unresolved is whynominal

wages did not adjust more quickly in the face of mass unemployment.




Ben S. Bernanke
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
      To understand the Great Depression is the Holy Grail of

macroeconomics. Not only did the Depression give birth to macroeconomics

as a distinct field of study, but also——to an extent that is not always

fully appreciated—-the experience of the 1930s continues to influence

macroeconomists' beliefs, policy recommendations, and research agendas.

And, practicalities aside, finding an explanation for the worldwide

economic collapse of the 1930s remains a fascinating intellectual

challenge.

      We do not yet have our hands on the Grail by any means, but during

the past fifteen years or so substantial progress toward the goal of

understanding the Depression has been made. This progress has a number of

sources, including improvements in our theoretical framework and

painstaking historical analysis. To my mind, however, the most significant

recent development has been a change in the focus of Depression research,

from a traditional emphasis on events in the United States to a more

comparative approach that examines the experiences of many countries

simultaneously. This broadening of focus is important for two reasons:

First, though in the end we may   agree   with Rorner (1993) that shocks to the

domestic U.S. economy were a primary cause of both the Merican and world

depressions, no account of the Great Depression would be complete without

an explanation of the worldwide nature of the event, and of the channels

through which deflationary forces spread among countries. Second, by

effectively expanding the data set from one observation to twenty, thirty,

or more, the shift to a comparative perspective substantially improves our

ability to identify--in the strict econometric sense——the forces

responsible for the world depression. Because of its potential to bring

the profession toward agreement on the causes of the Depression-—and
                                                                             2




perhaps, in consequence, to greater consensus on the central issues of
contemporarY macroeconomics——I consider the improved identification

provided by comparative analysis to be a particularly important benefit of

that approach.

      In this lecture I provide a selective survey of our current

understanding of the Great Depression, with emphasis on insights drawn from

comparative research (by both myself and others). For reasons of space,

and because I am a znacroeconomist rather than an historian, my focus will

be on broad economic issues rather than historical details. For readers

wishing to delve into those details, Eichengreen (1992) provides a recent,

authoritative treatment of the monetary and economic history of the

interwar period. I have drawn heavily on Eichengreen's book (and his

earlier work) in preparing this lecture, particularly Section 1 below.

      To review the state of knowledge about the Depression, it is

convenient to make the textbook distinction between factors affecting

aggregate demand and those affecting aggregate supply. I argue in Section

1 that the factors that depressed aggregate demand around the world in the

1930s are now well understood, at least in broad terms. In particular, the

evidence that monetary shocks played a major role in the Great Contraction,

and that these shocks were transmitted around the world primarily through

the workings of the gold standard, is quite compelling.

      Of course, the conclusion that monetary shocks were an important

source of the Depression raises a central question in macroeconomics, which

is why nominal shocks should have real effects. Section 2 of this lecture

discusses what we know about the impacts of falling money supplies and

price levels on interwar economies. I consider two principal channels of

effect: 1) deflation—induced financial crisis and 2) increases in real
                                                                                 3



wages above market—clearing levels, brought about by the incomplete
adjustment of nominal wages to price changes. Empirical evidence drawn

from a range of countries seems to provide support for both of these

mechanisms. However, it seems that, of the two channels, slow nominal-wage

adjustment (in the face of massive unemployment) is especially difficult to

reconcile with the postulate of economic rationality. We cannot claim to

understand the Depression until we can provide a rationale for this

paradoxical behavior of wages. I conclude the paper with some thoughts on

how the comparative approach may help us make progress on this important

remaining issue.



1.   AGGREGATE DEMAND: THE GOLD STANDARD AND WORLD MONEY SUPPLIES




       During   the Depression years, changes in   output and in the   price level
exhibited   a strong positive correlation in almost every country, suggesting

an important role for aggregate demand shocks. Although there is no doubt

that many factors affected aggregate demand in various countries at various

times, my focus here will be on the crucial role played by monetary shocks.

       For many years, the principal debate about the causes of the Great

Depression in the United States was over the importance to be ascribed to

monetary factors. It was easily observed that the money supply, output,

and prices all fell precipitously in the contraction and rose rapidly in

the recovery; the difficulty lay in establishing the causal links among

these variables. In their classic study of U.S. monetary history, Friedman

and Schwartz (1963) presented a monetarist interpretation of these

observations, arguing that the main lines of causation ran from monetary

contraction—-the result of poor policy—making and continuing crisis in the
                                                                             4




banking system--to declining prices and output. Opposing Friedman and

Schwartz, Temin (1976) contended that much of the monetary contraction in

fact reflected a passive response of money to output; and that the main

sources of the Depression lay on the real side of the economy (e.g., the

famous autonomous drop in consumption in 1930).

      To some extent the proponents of these two views argued past each

other, with monetarists stressing the monetary sources of the latter stages

of the Great Contraction (from late 1930 or early 1931 until 1933), and

anti-monetarists emphasizing the likely importance of non—monetary factors

in the initial downturn. A reasonable compromise position, adopted by many

economists, was that both monetary and non—monetary forces were operative

at various stages (Gordon and Wilcox (1981)). Nevertheless, conclusive

resolution of the importance of money in the Depression was hampered by the

heavy concentration of the disputants on the U.S. case--on one data point,

as it were.1

      Since the early 1980s, however, a new body of research on the

Depression has emerged, which focuses on the operation of the international

gold standard during the interwar period (Choudhri and Kochin (1980),

Eichengreen (1984), Eichengreen and Sachs (1985), Hamilton (1988), Temin

(1989), Bernarike and James (1991), Eichengreen (1992)). Methodologically,

as a natural consequence of their concern with international factors,

authors working in this area brought a strong comparative perspective into

research on the Depression; as I suggested in the introduction, I consider

this development to be a major contribution, with implications that extend


1That both sides considered only the u.s. case is not strictly true; both
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Ternin (1976) made useful comparisons to
Canada, for example. Nevertheless, the Depression experiences of countries
other than the u.s. were not systematically considered.
                                                                             5




beyond the question of the role of the gold standard. Substantively--in

marked contrast to the inconclusive state of affairs that prevailed in the

late 1970s——the new gold standard research allows us to assert with

considerable confidence that monetary factors played an important causal

role, both in the worldwide decline in prices and output and in   their
eventual recovery. Two well—documented observations support this

conclusion2:

      First, exhaustive analysis of the operation of the interwar gold

standard has shown that much of the worldwide monetary contraction of the

early 1930s was not a passive response to declining output, but instead the

largely unintended result of an interaction of poorly—designed

institutions, shortsighted policy-making, and unfavorable political and

economic pre-conditions. Hence the correlation of money and price declines

with output declines that was observed in almost every country is most

reasonably interpreted as reflecting primarily the influence of money on

the real economy, rather than vice versa.

      Second, for reasons that were largely historical, political, and

philosophical rather than purely economic, some governments responded to

the crises of the early 1930s by quickly abandoning the gold standard,

while others chose to remain on gold despite adverse conditions. Countries

that left gold were able to reflate their money supplies and price levels,

and did so after some delay; countries remaining on gold were forced into

further deflation. To an overwhelming degree, the evidence shows that

countries that left the gold standard recovered from the Depression more

quickly than countries that remained on gold. Indeed, no country exhibited

2More detailed discussions of these points may be found in Eichengreefl and
Sachs (1985), Ternin (1989), Bernanke and James (1991), and Eichengreefl
(1992) . An important early precursor is Nurkse (1944)
                                                                             6




significant economic recovery while remaining on the gold standard. The

strong dependence of the rate of recovery on the choice of exchange—rate

regime is further, powerful evidence for the importance of monetary

factors.

      Section 1.1 briefly discusses the first of these two observations,

and Section 1.2 considers the second.



1.1 The sources of monetary contraction: multiple monetary equilibria?



      Despite the focus of the earlier monetarist debate on the U.S.

monetary contraction of the early 1930s, this country was hardly unique in

that respect: The same phenomenon occurred in most market—oriented

industrialized countries, and in many developing nations as well. As the

recent research has emphasized, what most countries experiencing monetary

contraction had in common was adherence to the international gold standard.

      Suspended at the beginning of World War I, the gold standard had been

laboriously reconstructed after the war: The United Kingdom returned to

gold at the prewar parity in 1925, France completed its return by 1928, and

by 1929 the gold standard was virtually universal among market economies.

(The short list of exceptions included Spain, whose internal political

turmoil prevented a return to gold, and some Latin American and Asian

countries on the silver standard). The reconstruction of the gold standard

was hailed as a major diplomatic achievement, an essential step toward

restoring monetary and financial conditions--which were turbulent during

the 1920s——to the relative tranquility that characterized the classical

(1870—1913) gold standard period. Unfortunately, the hoped-for benefits of

gold did not materialize: Instead of a new era of stability, by 1931
                                                                                7




financial panics and exchange-rate crises were rampant, and a majority of

countries left gold in that year. A complete collapse of the system

occurred in 1936, when France and the other remaining "Gold Bloc" countries

devalued or otherwise abandoned the strict gold standard.

        As noted, a striking aspect of the short—lived interwar gold standard

was the tendency of the nations that adhered to it to suffer sharp declines

in inside money stocks. To understand in general terms why these declines

happened, it is useful to consider a simple identity which relates the

inside money stock (say, Ml) of a country on the gold standard to its

reserves of monetary gold:



(1.1)     Ml =     (Ml/BASE) x (BASE/RES) x (RES/GOLD) x PGOLD x QGOLD


where

Ml Ml money supply (money and notes in circulation plus
         commercial bank deposits)

BASE = monetary base (money and notes in circulation plus reserves
         of commercial banks)

RES =   international reserves of the central bank (foreign assets plus
         gold reserves), valued in domestic currency

GOLD      gold reserves of the central bank, valued in domestic currency
          PGOLD x QGOLD

PGOLD —   the   official domestic-currency price of gold

QGOLD      the physical quantity (e.g., in metric tons) of gold reserves



        Equation (1.1) makes the familiar points that, under the gold

standard, a country's money supply is affected both by its physical

quantity of gold reserves (QGOLD) and the price at which its central bank

stands ready to buy and sell gold (PGOLD) .     In   particular, ceteri$ paribus,
                                                                              8




an inflow of gold (an increase in QGOLD) or a devaluation (a rise in PGOLD)

raises the money supply. However, equation (1.1) also indicates three

additional determinants of the inside money supply under the gold standard:

      (1) The "money multiplier", Mi/BASE. In fractional-reserve banking

systems, the total money supply (including bank deposits) is larger than

the monetary base. As is familiar from textbook treatments, the so-called

money multiplier, Mi/BASE, is a decreasing function of the currency-deposit

ratio chosen by the public and the reserve—deposit ratio chosen by

commercial banks. At the beginning of the l930s, Mi/BASE was relatively

low (not much above one) in countries in which banking was less developed,

or in which people retained a preference for currency in transactions. In

contrast, in the financially well—developed U.S. this ratio was close to

four in 1929.

      (2) The inverse of the gold backing ratio, BASE/RES. Because central

banks were typically allowed to hold domestic assets as well as

international reserves, the ratio BASE/RES--the inverse of the gold backing

ratio (also called the coverage ratio)——exceeded one. Statutory

requirements usually set a minimum backing ratio (such as the Federal

Reserve's 40% requirement), implying a maximum value for BASE/RES (e.g.,

2.5 in the United States). However, there was typically no statutory

minimum for BASE/RES, an important asymmetry. In particular, sterilization

of gold inflows by surplus countries reduced average values of BASE/RES.

      (3) The ratio of international reserves to gold, RES/GOLD. Under the

gold-exchange standard of the interwar period, foreign exchange convertible

into gold could be counted as international reserves, on a one—to-one basis
                                                                              9




with gold itself) Hence, except for a few "reserve currency" countries,

the ratio RES/GOLD also usually exceeded one.

      Because the ratio of inside money to monetary base, the ratio of base

to reserves, and the ratio of reserves to monetary gold were all typically

greater than one, the money supplies of gold standard countries——far from

equalling the value of monetary gold, as might be suggested by a naive view

of the gold standard--were often large multiples of the value of gold

reserves. Total stocks of monetary gold continued to grow through the

1930s; hence, the observed sharp declines in inside money supplies must be

attributed entirely to contractions in the average money—gold ratio.

      Why did the world money—gold ratio decline? In the early part of the

Depression period, prior to 1931, the consciously—chosen policies of some

major central banks played an important role (see, e.g., Hamilton (1987)).

For example, it is now rather widely accepted that Federal Reserve policy

turned contractionary in 1928, in an attempt to curb stock market

speculation. In terms of quantities defined in equation (1.1), the ratio

of the U.S. monetary base to U.S. reserves (BASE/RES) fell from 1.871 in

June 1928, to 1.759 in June 1929, to 1.626 in June 1930, reflecting both

conscious monetary tightening and sterilization of induced gold inflows.4

Because of this decline, the U.S. monetary base fell about 6% between June

1928 and June 1930, despite a more-than-1O% increase in U.S. gold reserves

during the saute period. This flow of gold into the United States, like a



3The gold-exchange standard was proposed by participants at the Genoa
Conference of 1922, as a means of averting a feared shortage of monetary
gold. Although the Genoa recoxrunendations were not formally adopted, as the
gold standard was reconstructed the reliance on foreign exchange reserves
increased significantly relative to the prewar practice.
4U.S. monetary data in this paragraph are from Friedman and Schwartz
(1963).  Sumner (1991) suggests the use of the coverage ratio as an
indicator of the stance of monetary policy under a gold standard.
                                                                             10




similarly large inflow into France following the Poincare' stabilization,

drained the reserves of other gold standard countries and forced them into

parallel tight-money policies.5

      However, in 1931 and subsequently, the large declines in the money—

gold ratio that occurred around the world did not reflect anyones

consciously chosen policy. The proximate causes of these declines were the

waves of banking panics and exchange-rate crises that followed the failure

of the Kreditanstalt, the largest bank in Austria, in May 1931. These

developments affected each of the components of the money—gold ratio:

First, by leading to rises in aggregate currency-deposit and bank reserve—

deposit ratios, banking panics typically led to sharp declines in the money

multiplier, Mi/BASE (Friedman and Schwartz (1963); Bernanke and James

(1991)). Second, exchange—rate crises and the associated fears of

devaluation led central banks to substitute gold for foreign exchange

reserves; this flight from foreign exchange reserves reduced the ratio of

total reserves to gold, RES/GOLD. Finally, in the wake of these crises,

central banks attempted to increase gold reserves and coverage ratios as

security against future attacks on their currencies; in many countries, the

resulting "scramble for gold" induced continuing declines in the ratio

BASE/RES 6

      A particularly destabilizing aspect of this process was the tendency

of fears about the soundness of banks and expectations of exchange-rate

devaluation to reinforce each other (Bernanke and James (1991), Temin



5The gold flow into France was exacerbated by a 1928 law that induced a
systematic conversion of foreign exchange reserves into gold by the Bank of
France; see Nurkee (1944).
6Declinez in BASE/RES also reflected sterilization of gold inflows by gold
surplus countries concerned about inflation; and, more benignly, the
revaluation of gold reserves following currency devaluations.
                                                                              11




(1993)). An element that the two types   of   crises had in conunon was the so-

called "hot money, short-term deposits held by foreigners in domestic

banks. On the one hand, expectations of devaluation induced outflows of

the hot—money deposits (as well as flight by domestic depositors), which

threatened to trigger general bank runs. On the other hand, a fall in

confidence in a domestic banking system (arising, for example, from the

failure of a major bank) often led to a flight of short-term capital from

the country, draining international reserves and threatening

convertibility. Other than abandoning the parity altogether, central banks

could do little in the face of combined banking and exchange—rate crises,

as the former seemed to demand easy money policies while the latter

required monetary tightening.

      From a theoretical perspective, the sharp declines in the money—gold

ratio during the early 1930s have an interesting implication: namely, that

under the gold standard as it operated during this period, there appeared

to be multiple potential equilibrium   values   of the money supply.7 Broadly

speaking, when financial investors and other members of the public were

"optimistic", believing that the banking system would remain stable and

gold parities would be defended, the money—gold ratio and hence the money

stock itself remained "high". More precisely, confidence in the banks

allowed the ratio of inside money to base to remain high, while confidence

in the exchange rate made central banks willing to hold foreign exchange

reserves and to keep relatively low coverage ratios. In contrast, when

investors and the general public became "pessimistic', anticipating bank

runs and devaluation, these expectations were to some degree self-


    am investigating this possibility more formally in ongoing work with
 Ilian Mihov.
                                                                               12




confirming and resulted in "low" values of the money-gold ratio and the

money stock. In its vulnerability to self-confirming expectations, the

gold standard appears to have borne a strong analogy to a fractional-

reserve banking system in the absence of deposit insurance: For example,

Diamond and Dybvig (1983) have shown that in such a system there may    be   two

Nash equilibria, one in which depositor confidence ensures that there will

be no run on the bank, the other in which the fears of a run (and the

resulting liquidation of the bank) are self—confirming.

      An interpretation of the monetary collapse of the interwar period as

a jump   from one expectatiorial equilibrium to another one fits neatly with
Eichengreen's (1992) comparison of the classical and interwar gold standard

periods (see also Eichengreen (forthcoming)). According to Eichengreen, in

the classical period, high levels of central bank credibility and

international cooperation generated stabilizing expectations, e.g.,

speculators' activities tended to reverse rather than exacerbate movements

of currency values away from official exchange rates. In contrast,

Lichengreen argues, in the interwar period central banks' credibility was

significantly reduced by the lack of effective international cooperation

(the result of lingering animosities and the lack of effective leadership)

and by changing domestic political equilibria—-notably1 the growing power

of the labor movement, which reduced the perceived likelihood that the

exchange rate would be defended at the cost of higher unemployment.

Banking conditions also changed significantly between the earlier and later

periods, as war, reconstruction, and the financial and economic problems of

the 1920s left the banks of many countries in a much weaker financial

condition, and thus more crisis—prone. For these reasons, destabilizing
                                                                             13




expectations and a resulting low-level equilibrium for the money supply

seemed much more likely in the interwar environment.

      Table 1 illustrates equation (1.1) with data from six representative

countries. The first three countries in the table were members of the Gold

Bloc, who remained on the gold standard until relatively late in the

Depression (France and Poland left gold in 1936, Belgium in 1935). The

remaining three countries in the table abandoned gold earlier: the United

Kingdom and Sweden in 1931, the United States in 1933.   (Throughout this

lecture I follow Bernanke and James (1991) in treating any major departure

from gold standard rules, including devaluation or the imposition of

exchange controls, as "leaving gold".) Of course, the gold leavers gained

autonomy for their domestic monetary policies; but as these countries

continued to hold gold reserves and set an official gold price, the

components of equation (1.1) could still be calculated for those countries.

      Several useful points may be gleaned from Table 1: First, observe

the strong correspondence between gold standard membership and falling Mi

money supplies (a minor exception is Poland, which managed a small growth

in nominal Ml between 1932 and 1936). Second, note the sharp declines in

Mi/BASE and RES/GOLD, reflecting (respectively) the banking crises and

exchange crises (both of which peaked in 1931). Third, the table shows the

tendency of gold surplus countries to sterilize (i.e., BASE/RES tends to

fall in countries experiencing increases in gold stocks, QGOLD).

     A striking case shown in Table 1 is that of Belgium: Although that

country was the beneficiary of large gold inflows early in the Depression,

the combination of declines in Mi/BASE (reflecting banking panics),

RES/GOLD (reflecting liquidation of foreign-exchange reserves), and

BASE/RES (the result of conscious sterilization early in the period, and of
                                                                                14




attempts   to defend the exchange rate against speculative attack later in

the period) induced sharp declines in the Belgian money stock. Similarly,

because of falls in Mi/BASE and RES/GO.D, France experienced almost no

nominal growth in Ml between 1930 and 1934, despite a more     than   50%

increase in gold reserves. The other Gold Bloc country in the table,

Poland, experienced monetary contraction principally because of loss of

gold reserves.

      Another interesting phenomenon shown   in   Table 1 is the tendency of

countries devaluing or leaving the gold standard to attract gold away from

countries still on the gold standard. In the table, the U.K., Sweden, and

the U.S. all experienced significant gold inflows starting in 1933. This

seemingly perverse result reflected the greater confidence of speculators

in already-depreciated currencies, relative to the clearly overvalued

currencies of the Gold Bloc. This flow of gold away from some important

Gold Bloc countries was the final nail in the gold standard's coffin.



1.2 The macroeconomic implications of the choice of exchange-rate regime



      We have seen that countries adhering to the international gold

standard suffered largely unintended and unanticipated declines in their

inside money stocks in the late 1920s and early 1930s. These declines in

inside money stocks, particularly in 1931 and later, were naturally

influenced by macroeconomic conditions; but they were hardly continuous,

passive responses to changes in output. Instead, money supplies evolved

discontinuously in response to financial and exchange—rate crises, crises

whose roots in turn lay primarily in the political and economic conditions

of the 1920s and in the institutional structure as     rebuilt after the war.
                                                                                    Is


Thus,   to   a first approximation, it seems   reasonable   to characterize these

monetary shocks as exogenous with respect to contemporaneous output,

suggesting a significant causal role for monetary forces in the world

depression.

        However, even stronger evidence for the role of nominal factors in

the Depression is provided by a comparison of the experiences of countries

that continued to adhere to the gold standard with those that did not.

A.lthough, as has been mentioned, the great majority of countries had

returned to gold by the late 1920s, there was considerable variation in the

strength of national allegiances to gold during the 1930s: Many countries

left gold following the crises of 1931, notably the "sterling bloc" (the

United Kingdom and its trading partners). Other countries held out a few

years more before capitulating (e.g., the United States in 1933, Italy in

1934). Finally, the diehard Gold Bloc nations, led by France, remained on

gold until the final collapse of the system in late 1936. Because

countries leaving gold effectively removed the external constraint on

monetary reflation, to the extent that they took advantage of this freedom

we should observe these countries enjoying earlier and stronger recoveries

than the countries remaining on the gold standard.

        That a clear divergence between the two groups of countries did occur

was first noticed in a pathbreaking paper by Choudhri and Kochin (1980),

who considered the relative performances of Spain (which as mentioned never

joined the gold standard club), three Scandinavian countries (which left

gold following the sterling crisis in September 1931), and four countries

that remained part of the Gold Bloc (the Netherlands, Belgium, Italy, and

Poland). Choud.hri and Kochin found that the gold—standard countries

suffered substantially more severe contractions in output and prices than
                                                                            16




did Spain and the three Scandinavian nations. In another Important paper,

Eichengreefl and Sachs (1985) examined a number of macro variables in a

sample of ten major countries over the period 1929—1935, they found that by

1935 countries that had left gold relatively early had largely recovered

from the Depression, while the Gold Bloc countries remained at low levels

of output and employment. Bernanke and James (1991) confirmed the general

findings of the earlier authors for a broader sample of 24 (mostly

industrialized) countries, and Campa (1990) did the same for a sample of

Latin American countries.

      If choices of exchange—rate regime were random, these results would

leave little doubt as to the importance of nominal factors in determining

real outcomes in the Depression. Of course, in practice the decision about

whether to leave the gold standard was endogenous to a degree, and so we

must be concerned with the possibility that the results of the literature

are spurious; i.e., that some underlying factor accounted for both the

choice of exchange-rate regime and the subsequent differences in economic

performance. In fact, these results are very unlikely to be spurious, for

two general reasons:

      First, as has been documented in detail by Eichengreen (1992) and

others, for most countries the decision to remain on or leave the gold

standard was strongly influenced by internal and external political factors

and by prevailing economic and philosophical beliefs. For example, the

French decision to stay with gold reflected, among other things, a desire

to preserve at any cost the benefits of the Poincare' stabilization and the

associated distributional bargains among domestic groups; an overwhelmingly

dominant economic view (shared even by the Coninunists) that sound money and

fiscal austerity were the best long-run antidotes to the Depression; and
                                                                                17




what can only be described as a strong association of national pride with

maintenance of the gold standard.1 Indeed, as Bernanke and James (1991)

point out, economic conditions in 1929 and 1930 were on average quite

similar in those countries that were to leave gold in 1931 and those that

would not; thus it is difficult to view this choice as being simply a

reflection of cross-sectional differences in macroeconomic performance.

      Second, and perhaps even more compelling, is that any bias created by

endogeneity of the decision to leave gold would appear to go the wrong way,

as it were, to explain the facts: The presumption is that economically

weaker countries, or those suffering the deepest depressions, would be the

first to devalue or abandon gold. Yet the evidence is that countries

leaving gold recovered substantially more rapidly and vigorously than those

who did not. Hence, any correction for endogeneity bias in the choice of

exchange-rate regime should tend to strengthen the association of economic

expansion and the abandonment of gold.

      Tables 2 and 3 below extend the results of Bernanke and James (1991)

on the links between exchange-rate regime and macroeconomic performance,

using a data set similar to theirs. Both tables employ annual data on

thirteen macroeconomic variables for up to 26 countries, depending on

availability (see the Appendix for a list of countries, data sources,     and

data availabilities). Following similar tables in Bernanke and James,

Table 2 shows average values of the log—changes of each variable (except


8The differences in world views were most apparent at the ill—fated 1933
London Economic Conference, in which Gold Bloc delegates decried lack of
sound money as the root of all evil, while representatives of the sterling
bloc stressed the imperatives of reflation and economic expansion
(Eichengreen and Uzan (1993)). The persistence of these attitudes across
decades is fascinating; note the attachment of the French to the franc fort
in the recent troubles of the EMS, and the contrasting willingness of the
British (as in September 1931) to abandon the fixed exchange rate in the
pursuit of domestic macroeconomic objectives.
                                                                              18




for nominal and real interest rates, which are measured in percentage

points) for all countries in the sample, and for the subsets of countries

on and off the gold standard in each year.9 Averages for the whole sample

are reported for each year from 1930 to 1936; because almost all countries

were on gold in 1930 and almost all had left gold by 1936, averages for the

subsaruples are shown for 1931—1935 only.

      The statistical significance of the divergences between gold and non-

gold countries is assessed in Table 3. Lines marked Maw in Table 3 present

the results of panel-data regressions of each of the macroeconomic

variables in Table 2 against a constant, yearly time dummies, and a duixiny

variable for gold standard membership (ONGOLD). (Lines in Table 3 marked

"b" should be ignored for now). For each country-year observation, the

variable ONGOLD indicates the fraction of the year that the country was on

the gold standard (the number of months on the gold standard divided by

12). The regressions use data for 1931—1935 inclusive, but the results are

not sensitive to adding data from 1930 or 1936 or to dropping 1931.

Because each regression contains a full set of annual time dummies, the

estimated coefficients of ONGOLD in each regression may be interpreted as

reflecting purely cross—sectional differences between countries on and off

gold, holding constant average macroeconomic conditions. Absolute values

of t—statistics, given under each estimated coefficient, indicate the

significance of the between-group differences.

9As noted earlier, we treat a country as leaving gold if it deviates
seriously from gold standard rules, for example by imposing comprehensive
controls or devaluing, as well as if it formally renounces the gold
standard. Dates of changes in gold standard policies foe 24 of our
countries are given in Bernanke and James, Table 2.1. In addition, we take
Argentina and Switzerland as leaving gold on their official devaluation
dates (December 1929 and October 1936, respectively). Reported values are
simple within-group averages of the data; however, weighting the results by
gold reserves held or relative 1929 production levels (available in League
of Nations (1945)) did not qualitatively change the results.
                                                                             19




      Tables 2 and 3 are generally quite consistent with the conclusions

that (1) monetary contraction was an important source of the Depression in

all countries; (2) subsequent to 1931 or 1932, there was a sharp divergence

between countries which remained on the gold standard and those that left

it; and (3) this divergence arose because countries leaving the gold

standard had greater freedom to initiate expansionary monetary policies.

      Turning first to the behavior of money supplies, we can see from

Table 2 (line 3) shows that the inside money stocks of all countries

contracted sharply in 1931 and 1932. In an arithmetic sense, much of this

contraction can be attributed to declines in the ratio of Ml to currency

(line 4), which in turn primarily reflected the effects of banking crises

(note the concentration of this effect in 193l).10 During the period 1933—

1935, however, Table 2 shows that the money supplies of gold-standard

countries continued to contract, while those of countries not on the gold

standard expanded. Table 3 (line 3a) indicates that, over the 1931-1935

period, the growth rate of Ml (line 3a) in countries on gold averaged about

5 percentage points per year less than in countries off gold, with an

absolute t—value of 3.26.

      The behavior of price levels corresponded closely to the behavior of

money stocks. Table 2 (line 2) shows that, although a sharp deflation

occurred in all countries through 1931, in countries leaving gold wholesale

prices stabilized in 1932—1933 and began, on average, to rise in 1934.11

'0The preferred measure, Ml/BASE, is not used owing to lack of data on
coninercial bank reserves for many countries in the sample. Note from Table
3, line 4a, that the fall in the Ml—currency ratio is greater on average in
gold—standard countries (and the difference is statistically significant at
approximately the 5% level), consistent with our earlier observation that
banking problems were more severe in gold-standard countries.
11Thus price-level stabilization preceded monetary stabilization in the
typical country leaving gold. A possible explanation is that devaluation
raised expectations of future inflation, lowering money demand and raising
current prices.
                                                                              20




Countries remaining on gold experienced continuing deflation through 1935,

leading to a cumulative difference in log price levels over    1932—1935 of

.329. According to Table 3 (line 2a), over the 1931-1935 period wholesale

price inflation was about 9 percentage points per year lower (absolute t-

value = 8.20) in countries on gold.

      Declines in output and employment were strongly correlated with money

and price declines: Manufacturing production (Table 2, line 1) and

employment (Table 2 line 7) fell in all countries in 1930-1931 but

afterward began to diverge between the two groups. Over the period 1932-

1935, the cumulative difference in log output levels was .310,    and the

cumulative difference in log employment levels was .301, in favor of

countries not on gold. The corresponding absolute t-values (Table 3, lines

la and 7a, for the 1931—1935 sample) were 4.04 and 4.38 for output and

employment, respectively. These are highly significant differences, both

economically and statistically.

      The behavior of other macro variables shown in Tables 2 and 3 are

also generally consistent with the monetary-shocks story. For example, a

standard Mundell-Fleming analysis of a   small   gold-standard economy

 (Eichengreen and Sacha (1986)) would predict that monetary contraction

 abroad would depress domestic aggregate demand by raising the domestic real

 interest rate. It also would predict an increase in the domestic real

 exchange rate (price of exports), relative to countries not on gold, and an

 accompanying declines in real exports. Table 2 (line 9) shows that ex—post

 real interest rates were universally high in 1930, coming down gradually in

 both gold and non-gold countries, but being consistently lower in countries
                                                                                21




not on gold.'2 Table 3 (line 9a) confirms that, on average, ex-post real

interest rates were 2.7 percentage points higher in gold—standard countries

(t =   2.07)   .   The real exchange rate in gold-standard countries (line lOa of

Table 3, measured relative to the U.S.) grew on average close to S

percentage points per year relative to that of non-gold countries (but with

a t—value of only 1.70), and correspondingly real exports (Table 3, line

ha) of gold-standard countries fell between 7 and 8 percentage points per

year more quickly (absolute t-value         2.08). There was no difference in

the growth rates of imports between gold and non—gold countrries (Table 3,

line l2a), presumably reflecting the offsetting effects in Gold Bloc

countries of lower domestic income and improved terms of trade.

        Interestingly, real share prices (a nominal share-price index

deflated by the wholesale price index) did not fare that much worse in

gold-standard countries, falling about 3 percentage points a year faster

(absolute t—value =       1.12).   There are significant differences between gold

and non—gold countries in the behavior of nominal and real wages, but as

these variables are most closely linked to issues of aggregate supply, we

defer discussion of them until the next section.


'2A finding that ex-post real interest rates were higher in gold-standard
countries of course does not settle whether ex-ante real interest rates
were higher; that depends on whether deflation was anticipated. For the
U.S. case, Cecchetti (1992) finds evidence for, and Hamilton (1992) finds
evidence against, the proposition that people anticipated the declines in
the price level.   (I do not know of any studies of this issue for countries
other than the U.S.) This debate bears less on the question of whether the
initiating shocks were monetary than it does on the particular channel of
transmission: If deflation was anticipated, so that the ex-ante real
interest rate was high, then the channel of monetary transmission was
through conventional IS curve effects. If deflation was unanticipated, as
both Cecchetti and Hamilton note, then one must rely more on a debt—
deflation mechanism (see Section 2). The behavior of nominal interest
rates, which remained well above zero in most countries and were not
substantially lower in gold—standard than in non—gold—standard countries
 (Table 2, line 8), suggests to me that much of the deflation was not
expected, at least at the medium—term horizon. Evans and Wachtel (1993)
draw a similar conclusion based on U.S. nominal interest rate behavior.
                                                                            22




2. AGGREGATE SUPPLY: THE FAILURE OF NOMINAL ADJUSTMENT



     Although the consensus view of the causes of the Great Depression has

long included a role for monetary shocks, we have seen in Section 1 that

recent research taking a comparative perspective has greatly strengthened

the empirical case for money as a major driving force. Further, the

effects of monetary contraction on real economic variables appeared to be

persistent as well as large. Explaining this persistent non-neutrality is

particularly challenging to contemporary macroeconoin.ists, since current

theories of non—neutrality (such as those based on menu costs or the

confusion of relative and absolute price levels) typically predict that the

real effects of monetary shocks will be transitory.

      On the aggregate supply side, then, we still have a puzzle: Why did

the process of adjustment to nominal shocks appear to take so long in

interwar economies? In this section I will discuss the evidence for two

leading explanations of how monetary shocks may have had long-lived

effects: induced financial crisis and sticky nominal wages.



2.1 Deflation and the financial system



      If one thinks about important sets of contracts in the economy that

are set in nominal terms, and which are unlikely to be implicitly insured

or indexed against unanticipated price—level changes, financial contracts

 (such as debt instruments) come immediately to mind. In my 1983 paper I

argued that non-indexation of financial contracts may have provided a

mechanism through which declining money stocks and price levels could have
                                                                             23




had real effects on the U.S. economy of the 1930s. I discussed two related

channels, one operating through "debt-deflation" and the other through bank

capital and stability.

      The idea of debt-deflation goes back to Irving Fisher (1933). Fisher

envisioned a dynamic process in which falling asset and commodity prices

created pressure on nominal debtors, forcing them into distress sales of

assets, which in turn led to further price declines and financial

difficulties.13 His diagnosis led him to urge President Roosevelt to

subordinate exchange—rate considerations to the need for reflation, advice

that (ultimately) FDR followed. Fisher's idea was less Influential in

academic circles, though, because of the counterarguznent that debt-

deflation represented no more than a redistribution from one group

(debtors) to another (creditors). Absent implausibly large differences in

marginal spending propensities among the groups, it was suggested, pure

redistributioris should have no significant macroeconomic effects.

      However, the debt—deflation idea has recently experienced a revival,

which has drawn its inspiration from the burgeoning literature on imperfect

information and agency costs in capital markets.14 According to the agency

approach, which has come to dominate modern corporate finance,   the

structure of balance sheets provides an important mechanism for aligning

the incentives of the borrower (the agent) and the lender (theprinCiPal).

One central feature of the balance sheet is the borrower'3 net worth,

defined to be the borrower's own ("internal") funds plus the collateral



13Kiyotaki and Moore (1993) provide a formal analysis that captures some of
Fisher's intuition.
l4 important early paper that applied this approach to consumer spendinga
in the Depression is Mishkin (1978). Bernanke and Gertler (1990) provide
theoretical analysis of debt-deflation. See Calomiris (1993) for a recent
survey of the role of financial factors in the Depression.
                                                                             24




value of his illiquid assets. Many simple principal-agent models imply

that a decline in the borrower's net worth increases the deadweight agency

costs of lending, and thus the net cost of financing the borrower's

proposed investments. Intuitively, if a borrower can contribute relatively

little to his or her own project and hence must rely primarily on external

finance, then the borrower's incentives to take actions that are not in the

lender's interest may be relatively high; the result is both deadweight

losses (e.g., inefficiently high risk—taking or low effort) and the

necessity of costly information provision and monitoring. If the

borrower's net worth falls below a threshold level, he or she may not be

able to obtain funds at all.

      From the agency perspective, a debt-deflation which unexpectedly

redistributes wealth away from borrowers is not a macroeconom.ically neutral

event: To the extent that potential borrowers have unique or lower—cost

access to particular investment projects or spending opportunities, the

loss of borrower net worth effectively cuts off these opportunities from

the economy. Thus, for example, a financially distressed firm may not be

able to obtain working capital necessary to expand production, or to fund a

project that would be viable under better financial conditions. Similarly,

a household whose current nominal income has fallen relative to its debts

may be barred from purchasing a new home, even though purchase is justified

in a permanent-income sense. By inducing financial distress in borrower

firms and households, debt-deflation can have real effects on the economy.

      If the extent of debt-deflation is sufficiently severe, it can also

threaten the health of banks and other financial intermediaries (the second

channel). Banks typically   have both nominal   assets and nominal liabilities

and so over a certain range are hedged against deflation. However, as the
                                                                              25



distress   of banks' borrowers increases, the banks' nominal claims are

replaced by claims on real assets (e.g., collateral); from that point,

deflation squeezes the banks as well.15 Actual and potential loan losses

arising from debt-deflation impair bank capital and hurt banks' economic

efficiency in several ways: First, particularly in a system without

deposit insurance, depositor runs and withdrawals deprive banks of funds

for lending; to the extent that bank lending is specialized or information-

intensive, these loans are not easily replaced by non—bank forms of credit.

Second, the threat of runs also induces banks to increase the liquidity and

safety of their assets, further reducing normal lending activity. (The

most severely decapitalized banks, however, may have incentives to make

very risky loans, in a gambling strategy.) Finally, bank and branch

closures may destroy local information capital and reduce the provision of

financial services.

      How macroeconomically significant were financial effects in the

interwar period? My 1983 paper, which considered only the U.S. case,

showed that measures of the liabilities of failing commercial firms and the

deposits of failing banks helped predict monthly changes in industrial

production, in an equation that also included lagged values of money and

prices. However, this evidence is not really conclusive: For example, as

Green and Whiteman (1992) pointed out, the spikes in commercial and banking

failures in 1931 and 1932 could well be functioning as a dummy variable,

picking up whatever forces——financial or otherwise——caused the U.S.

Depression to take a sharp second dip during that period. As with the


15Banks in universal banking systems, such as those of central Europe, held
a mixture of real and nominal assets (e.g., they held equity as well as
debt). Universal banks were thus subject to pressure even earlier in the
deflationary process.
                                                                                 26




 debate on the role of money, the problem is the reliance on what amounts to

 one data point.

         However, in the comparative spirit of the new gold standard research,

 Bernanke and James (1991)    studied the   macroeconomic effects of financial

 crises in a panel of 24 countries. The expansion of the sample brought

with    it data limitations: Bernanke and James used annual rather than
monthly data, and lack of data on indebtedness and financial distress

 forced them to confine their analysis to the effects of banking panics.

 Further, not having a consistent quantitative measure of banking

instability, they chose to use duxzuny variables to indicate periods of

banking crisis (as suggested by their reading of historical sources).

Offsetting these disadvantages, expanding the sample made it possible to

compare the U.S. case with both countries that also suffered severe banking

problems and countries in which banking remained stable despite the

Depression. In particular, Bernanke and James argued that cross—national

differences   in vulnerability to banking crises had more to do with
institutional and policy differences       than macroeconomic conditions,

strengthening the case that banking panics had an independent macroeconomic

effect (as opposed to being a purely passive response to the general

economic downturn) 16

        As a measure of banking instability, Bernanke and James constructed a

dumny   variable   called PANIC,   which they defined as the number of months



16Factors cited by Bernanke and James as contributing to banking panics
included banking structure ("universal" banking systems and systems with
many small banks were more vulnerable) reliance on short—term foreign
liabilities; and the country's financial and economic experiences and
banking policies during the 1920s. See Grossman (1993) for a more detailed
and generally complementary analysis of the causes of interwar banking
panics.
                                                                               27




 during each year that countries in their sample suffered banking crises.17

 In regressions controlling for a variety of factors, including the rate of

 change of prices, wages, and money stocks, the growth rate of exports, and

 discount rate policy, Bernanke and James found an economically large and

 highly statistically significant effect of banking panics on industrial

 production.

       A reduced-form sunznary of the effects of PANIC on our list of macro

 variables is given in the rows of Table 3 marked "b", which reports

 estimated coefficients from regressions of each macro variable against

 PANIC, the duimny for gold standard membership (ONGOLD), and time dummies

 for each year. For these estimates we have divided the Bernanke—James

PANIC variable by 12, so that its estimated coefficients may   be   interpreted
as annualized effects.

      The results suggest important macroeconomic effects of bank panics

that are both independent of gold standard effects and consistent with

theoretical predictions: On the real side of the economy, PANIC is found

to have economically large and statistically significant effects on

manufacturing production (line ib) and employment (line 7b). In

particular, with gold standard membership controlled for, the effect of a

year of banking panic on the log-change of manufacturing production is


'7Bernanke and James dated periods of crisis as starting from the first
severe banking problems, as determined from a reading of primary and
secondary sources.    If there was some clear demarcation point, such as the
U.S. banking holiday of March 1933, that point was used as the ending date
of the crisis; otherwise, they arbitrarily assumed that the effects of the
crisis would last for one year after its most intense point. Countries
with non-zero values of PANIC included Austria, Belgium, Estonia, France,
Germany, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Poland, Rumania, and the U.S. Results
presented here add data for Argentina and Switzerland to the Bernanke—James
sample; consistent with the Bernanke—Jaxnes banking crisis chronology, we
treat Switzerland (July 1931—November 1933) as a crisis country. Grossman
(1993) includes all of these countries as "crisis" countries in his study
but differs in counting Norway as a crisis country as well.
                                                                             28




estimated to be —.0926 with an absolute t—value of 3.50; and the effect on

the log-change of employment is —.0456, with a t—value of 2.10. Banking

panics are also found to reduce both real and nominal wages (lines 6b and

5b), hurt competitiveness and exports (lines lOb and lib), raise the cx—

post real interest rate (line 9b), and reduce real share prices (line 13b),

although estimated coefficients are not always statistically significant.

      On the nominal side of the economy, banking panics significantly

lower the money multiplier (proxied in line 4b of Table 3 by the ratio of

Ml to currency), as expected. We also find (line 3b) that banking panics

in a country significantly reduce the Ml money stock. This effect on the

money supply is actually inconsistent with a simple Mundell—Fleming model

of a small. open economy on the gold standard: With worldwide conditions

held constant (by the time dummies), a small country's money stock is

determined by domestic money demand, so that any declines in the money

multiplier should be offset by endogenous inflows of gold reserves.

Possible reconciliations of the empirical result with the model are that

banking panics lowered domestic Ml money demand or raised the probability

of exchange-rate devaluation (either would induce an outflow of reserves);

our finding above that panics raised the real interest rate fit with the

latter possibility. A finding that .i, consistent with the Mundell-Fleming

model is that, once gold standard membership is controlled for, banking

panics had no effect on wholesale prices (line 2b). This last result is

important, because it suggests that the observed effects of panics on

output and other real variables are operating largely through nonmonetary

channels, e.g., the disruption of credit flows.

     As with the earlier debate about the role of monetary shocks, moving

from a focus on the U.S. case to a comparative international perspective
                                                                              29



 provides much stronger evidence on the potential role of banking crises in

 the Depression. Ideally, we should like to extend this evidence to the

broader debt-deflation story as well. Indeed, the strong presumption is

 that debt-deflation effects were much more pervasive than banking crises,

which were relatively more localized in space and time. Unfortunately,

consistent international data on types and amounts of inside debt, and on

various indicators of financial distress, are not generally available.5



2.2 Deflation and nominal wages



      Induced financial crisis is a relatively novel proposal for solving

the aggregate supply puzzle of the Depression. The more traditional

explanation of monetary nonneutrality in the 1930s, as in macroeconomics

more generally, is that nominal wages and/or prices were slow to adjust in

the face of monetary shocks. In fact, widely available price indexes, such

as wholesale and consumer price indexes, show relatively little nominal

inertia during this period (admittedly, the same is not true for many

individual prices, such as industrial prices). Hence-—in contradistinction

to contemporary macroeconomics, which has come to emphasize price over wage

rigidity——research on the interwar period has focused on the slow

adjustment of nominal wages as a source of nonneutrality. Following that

lead, in this subsection I discuss the comparative empirical evidence for

sticky wages in the Depression. I defer for the moment the deeper question




18Eichengreen and Grossman (1994) attempt to measure debt—deflation by an
indirect indicator, the spread between the central bank discount rate and
the interest rate on conmtercial. paper. As they note, this indicator is not
wholly satisfactory and they obtain mixed results.
                                                                                30




of how wages could have failed to adjust, given the extreme labor—market

conditions of the Depression era.

        The link between nominal wage adjustment and aggregate supply is

straightforward: If nominal wages adjust imperfectly, then falling price

levels raise real wages; employers respond by cutting their workforces.19

Similarly, in a country experiencing monetary reflation, real wages should

fall, permitting re-employment. Although the cyclicality of real wages has

been much debated in the postwar context, these two implications of the

sticky—wage hypothesis are clearly borne out by the comparative interwar

data, as can be seen in Tables 2 and 3:

        First,   during the worldwide deflation of 1930 and 1931, nominal wages

worldwide fell much less slowly than (wholesale) prices, leading to

significant increases in the ratio of nominal wages     to   prices (Table 2,

lines 2, 5, and 6). Associated with this sharp increase in real wages were

declines in employment and output (Table 2, lines 7 an 1) •20

       Second, from about 1932 on, there was a marked divergence in real—

wage behavior between countries on and off the gold standard (Table 2, line

6) :   In countries leaving gold, prices rose more quickly than nominal wages




191n the standard analysis, increases in the real wage lead to declines in
employment because employers move northwest along their neoclassical labor
demand curves. An alternative possible channel is that higher wage
payments deplete firms' liquidity, leading to reduced output and investment
for the types of financial reasons discussed above (my thanks to Mark
Gertler and Bruce Greenwa].d for independently making this suggestion).
This latter channel might be tested by observing whetier smaller or less
liquid firms responded to real-wage increases by cutting employment more
severely than did large, financially more robust firms.
20The wholesale price index is not the ideal deflator for nominal wages; to
find the product wage, which is relevant to labor demand decisions, one
should deflate by an index of output prices. The very limited
international data on product wages are less supportive of the sticky-wage
hypothesis than the evidence given here; see Eichengreen and Hatton (1988)
or Bernanke and James (1991) for further discussion.
                                                                            31




(indeed, the latter continued to fall for a while), so that real wages

fell; simultaneously, employment rose sharply. In countries remaining on

gold, real wages rose or stabilized and employment remained stagnant.

Table 3 (line 6a) indicates a difference in real wage growth between

countries on and off the gold standard equivalent to about six percentage

points per year, with a t—value of 5.84.

        This latter result, that real—wage behavior varied widely between

countries in and out of the Gold Bloc, was first pointed out in the

previously cited article by Eichengreen and Sachs (1985). Using data from

ten European countries for 1935, Eichengreen and Sachs showed that Gold

Bloc countries systematically had high real wages and low levels of

industrial output, while countries not on gold had much lower real wages

and higher levels of production (all variables were measured relative to

1929)

        In a recent paper, Bernanke and Carey (1994) extended the

Eichengreen—Sachs analysis in a number of ways: First, they expanded the

sample from ten to 22 countries, and they employed annual data for 1931—

1936 rather than for 1935 only. Second, to avoid the spurious attribution

to real wages of price effects operating through nonwage channels21, in

regressions they separated the real wage into its nominal-wage and price-

level components. Third, they controlled for factors other than wages

affecting aggregate supply and used instrumental variables techniques to




21Suppose that deflation affects output through a non—wage channel, such as
induced financial crisis, and that nominal-wage data are relatively noisy
 (e.g., they reflect official wage rates rather than rates actually paid).
Then we might well observe an inverse relationship between measured real
wages and output, even though wages are not part of the transmission
channel.
                                                                                      32




correct for simultaneity bias in output and wage determination. With

these modifications, Bernanke and Carey's "preferred" equation describing

output supply in their sample was (their Table 4, line 9):




(2.1)     q       —.600 w +    .673 p + .540    q..1 —    .144 PANIC —.69—05 STRIKE
                  (3.84)      (5.10)   (7.66)            (5.79)      (3.60)




where



q, q..1 =     current   and lagged manufacturing production (in logs)

w = nominal       wage index (in logs)

p        wholesale price index (in logs)

PANIC         number of months in each year of banking panic (see
    the text or Bernanke—James, 1991), divided by 12

STRIKE        working days lost to labor disputes (per thousand employees)



        Absolute values of t—statistics are shown in parentheses. The

regression pooled cross-sectional data for 1931—1936 and included time

dummies and fixed country effects. A consistent estimate of within—country

first-order serial correlation of —.066 was obtained by application of

nonlinear least squares.

        The equation indicates that banking panics (PANIC) and work stoppages

(STRIKE) had large and statistically significant effects on the supply of




22lnstruinents used in the equation to follow included, as aggregate demand
shifters, a trade-weighted import price index and the discount rate for
Gold Bloc countries, and Ml for countries off gold. Additionally, the
banking panic and strike variables, and lagged values of the nominal wage
and output, were treated as predetermined.
                                                                             33




output, and the coefficient on lagged output indicates that output

adjusted about half-way to its "target" level in any given year. Most

importantly, the coefficient on nominal wages is highly significant and

approximately equal and opposite in magnitude to the coefficient on the

price level, as suggested by the sticky—wage hypothesis.24 In particular,

equation (2.1) indicates that countries in which nominal wages adjusted

relatively slowly toward changing price levels experienced the sharpest

declines in manufacturing output.

      To illustrate this last point in a very simple way, Figure 1 shows

1935 outputs and nominal wages for five Gold Bloc countries (Belgium,

France, the Netherlands, Poland, and Switzerland). As they shared a coson

monetary standard throughout the period, these countries had similar

wholesale price levels in 1935, but nominal wages differed among the

countries. As Figure 1 indicates, France and Switzerland had significantly

higher nominal wages than the other three countries (indeed, those

countries had shown almost no nominal wage adjustment since 1929), these

two countries also had significantly lower output levels. A regression for

just these five data points of the log of output on a constant and the log

of the nominal wage yields a coefficient on the nominal wage of —.628 with

a t—statistic of —1.49.

      A.Lthough Bernanke and Carey (1994) found cross—sectional evidence for

the sticky—wage hypothesis, they emphasized that the time series evidence

is much weaker (recall that their regression included yearly time dusmies,



23The coefficient on PANIC implies that one year of banking crisis reduced
output by approximately 14%. The coefficient on STRIKE is about what one
would expect if output losses due to strikes are proportional to hours of
work lost. See Bernanke and Carey (1994) for further discussion.
24That the coefficients on wages and prices are equal and opposite is
easily accepted at standard significance levels (p .573).
                                                                             34




so that the results are based entirely on cross—country comparisons).

Broadly, the problem with sticky wages as an explanation of the time    series
behavior of output in the Depression is as follows: Although real wages

rose sharply around the world during the 1929—1931 downturn, in most

countries real wages didn't decline much during the recovery phase of the

Depression; indeed, some countries (such as the U.S.) enjoyed strong

recoveries despite rising real wages. Bernanke and Carey report that, for

the 22 countries in their sample, average output in 1936 was nearly 10%

above 1929 levels, even though real wages in 1936 remained nearly 20%

higher than in 1929.25 One possible reconciliation of the cross-section and

time-series results is that actual wages paid fell relative to reported or

official wage rates as the Depression wore on; and that the ratio of actual

to reported wages was similar among the countries in the sample.



2.3 Can failures of nominal adjustment in the Depression be explained?



      I have discussed two general reasons for the failure of interwar

economies to adjust to the large nominal shocks that hit them in the early

1930s: 1) non-indexed debt contracts, through which deflation induced

redistributions and financial crisis; and 2) slow adjustment of nominal

wages (and presumably other elements of the cost structure as well). From

an economic theorist's point of view, there is an important distinction

between these two sources of non—neutrality, which is that——following an

unanticipated deflation—-there are incentives for the parties to


251n principle this result could be explained by secular increases in
capacity at a given real wage. However, Bernanke and Carey estimate that
trend capacity growth of 5.6% per year on average would be needed to
reconcile the behavior of output and real wages.
                                                                             35




renegotiate nominal wage (or price) agreements, but not nominal debt

contracts. In particular, if the nominal wage is "too high" relative to

labor market equilibrium, both the employer and the worker (who otherwise

would be unemployed) should be willing to accept a lower wage, or to take

other measures to achieve an efficient level of employment (Barro, 1977).

In contrast, there is no presumption that the redistributjve effects of

unanticipated deflation operating through debt contracts will be undone by

some sort of implicit indexing or renegotiation cx post, since large net

creditors do gain from deflation and have no incentive to give up those

gains.26 Hence the failure of nominal wages (and, similarly, prices) to

adjust seems inconsistent with the postulate of economic rationality, while

deflation-induced financial crisis does not (given that nonindexed

financial contracts exist in the first place27).

      One interesting possibility for reconciling wage—price stickiness

with economic rationality is that the non-indexation of financial

contracts, and the associated debt—deflation, might in some way have been a

source of   the slow adjustment of wages and other prices. Such a link would

most likely arise for political reasons: As deflation proceeded, both the

growing threat of financial crisis and the complaints of debtors increased

pressure on governments to intervene in the economy in ways that inhibit



26Fol models In the literature, such as Bernanke—Gertler (1990),
typically predict that debt-deflation lowers aggregate output and
investment but does not lead to a situation that is Pareto—inefficient
 (given the information constraints). Thus there is no incentive for
renegotiation between creditors and debtors. If the Bernanke—Gertler model
were enhanced by assuming production or aggregate demand externalities,
then debt-deflation could imply Pareto—inefficiency, but not of the sort
that can easily be remedied by bilateral renegotiation.
27Non—Indexation of financial contracts might be rationalized as an attempt
to minimize transactions costs cx ante. This strategy is reasonable if the
monetary authority is expected to keep inflation stable—-an understandable
assumption given the restoration of the gold standard.
                                                                                 36




adjustment. In the case of France, for example (which, note from Figure 1,

seemed a particularly slow adjuster), a historian reported:


    "...as prices broke and incomes declined, as farmers, shopkeepers,
    merchants, and industrialists faced bankruptcy, the state began,
    on an empirical basis, to build up a complex and inchoate array of
    interventionist measures which interfered with the free operation
    of market forces in order to preserve certain situations
    acquises." (Kemp, 1972, p. 101).

      Examples of interventionist measures by the French government
included tough agricultural import restrictions and minimum    grain   prices,

intended to support the nominal incomes of farmers (a politically powerful

group of debtors); government-supported cartelization of industry, as well

as import protection, with the goal of increasing prices and profits; and

measures to reduce labor supply, including repatriation of foreign workers

and the shortening of workweeks.2 These measures (comparable to New Deal-

era actions in the U.S.)   tended   to block the downward adjustmentof wages

and prices.

      Other links from debt—deflation to wage—price behavior operated

through more strictly economic channels. For example, in France, heavy

industries such as iron and steel expanded extensively during the 1920s,

which left them with heavy debt burdens. In response to th. financial

distress caused by deflation, firms acted singly and in combination to try

to restrict output, raise prices, and maintain profit margins (Kemp, 1972,

pp. 89ff.) Such behavior is predicted by modern industrial organization

theory and evidence (see, e.g, Chevalier and Scharfstein (1994)).



280f course, the most obvious interventions would have been to stop the
deflation by devaluing or to mandate a writedown of all nominal claims. As
we have seen, however, in France devaluation was widely considered an
heralding a plunge into chaos; while the writedown of debts and other
claims, besides being administratively complex, would have been considered
a politically unacceptable violation of the sanctity of contracts.
                                                                             37




      A variety of other factors no doubt contributed to incomplete nominal

adjustment. In some countries, many wages and prices were either directly

controlled by the government (so that change involved administrative or

legislative action, wi€h the usual lags), or were highly politicized.

Legislatively-set taxes, fees, and tariffs were an additional source of

nominal rigidity (see Crucini (1994) on tariffs). Complex, decentralized

economies also no doubt faced serious problem.s of coordination, both

internally and with other economies, an issue that has been the subject of

recent theoretical work (see, e.g., Cooper (1990)).

      I believe that, as with other issues relating to the Depression, the

comparative international approach holds the most promise for improving our

understanding of the sources of incomplete nominal adjustment. In this

case, though, the comparative analysis will need to include political and

institutional variables, such as the proportion of workers covered by

unions; the extent of representation of workers, farmers, industrialists,

etc., in the legislature; the share of the workforce employed by the

government, and so on. More qualitatively, historical and case—study

comparisons of the political response to deflation in different countries

may help explain the differing degrees of economic damage inflicted by

falling prices.



3. CONCLUSION



      Methodologically, the main contribution of recent research on the

Depression has been to expand the sample to include many countries other

than the United States. Comparative studies of a large set of countries

have greatly improved our ability to identify the forces that drove the
                                                                              38




world into depression in the 1930s. In particular, the evidence for

monetary contraction as an important cause of the Depression, and for

monetary reflation as a leading component of recovery, has been greatly

strengthened.

      On the aggregate supply side of the economy, we have learned and will

continue to learn a great deal from the interwar period. One key result is

that wealth redistributions may have aggregate effects, if.'they are of the

form to induce systematic financial distress. Empirical evidence has also

been found for incomplete adjustment of nominal wages as a factor leading

to monetary non-neutrality. Understanding this latter phenomenon will

probably require a broad perspective that takes into account political as

well as economic factors.
                                                                             39



                                   REFERENCES


Barro, Robert J. "Long-term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
Policy." Journal of Monetary Economics 3 (1977), 305—16.

Bernanke, Ben. 'Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression." American Economic Review 73 (June
1983), 257—76.

Bernanke, Ben, and Kevin Carey. "Nominal Wage Stickiness and Aggregate
Supply in the Great Depression." Unpublished, Princeton University,
January 1994.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler. "Financial Fragility and Economic
Performance." Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (February 1990), 87—114.

Bernanke, Ben and Harold James. "The Gold Standard, Deflation, and
Financial Crisis in the Great Depression: An International Comparison."
In R. G. Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Banking and Monetary
Statistics. Washington: National Capital Press, 1943.

Calomiris, Charles W. "Financial Factors in the Depression." Journal of
Economic Perspectives 7 (Spring 1993), 61-86.

Campa, Jose Manuel. "Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s:
An Extension to Latin America." Journal of Economic History 50 (September
1990), 677—82.

Cecchetti, Stephen G. "Prices During the Great Depression: Was the
Deflation of 1930-1932 Really Unanticipated?" American Economic Review 82
(March 1992), 141—56.
Chevalier, Judith A. and David S. Scharfstein. "Capital Market
Imperfections and Countercyclical Markups: Theory and Evidence." National
Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 4614, January 1994.

Choudhri, Ehsan U. and Levis A. Kochin. "The Exchange Rate and the
International Transmission of Business Cycle Disturbances: Some Evidence
from the Great Depression." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 12
(1980), 565—74.

Cooper, Russell. "Predetermined Wages and Prices and the Impact of
Expansionary Government Policy." Review of Economic Studies 57 (1990),
205—14.

Crucini, Mario, "Sources of Variation in Real Tariff Rates: The United
States, 1900—1940." American Economic Review 84 (June 1994), 732—43.

Diamond,   Douglas W. and Philip H. Dybvig. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance,
and Liquidity." Journal   of Political Economy 91   (June 1983), 401—19.
Eichengreen, Barry. "Central Bank Cooperation Under the Interwar Gold
Standard." Explorations   in Economic History 21 (1984), 64—87.
                                                                           40


Lichengreen, Barry. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great
Depression, 1919-1939. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Eichengreen, Barry. "Central Bank Cooperation and Exchange Rate
Commitments: The Classical and Interwar Gold Standards Compared."
Financial History Review (forthcoming).

Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Grossman, "Debt Deflation and Financial
Instability: Two Historical Explorations." Unpublished, University of
California at Berkeley, June 1994.

Eichengreen, Barry and Timothy J. Hatton.    "Interwar Unemployment in
International Perspective: An Overview." In Eichengreen, B. and Hatton,
T., eds., Interwar Unenployment in International Perap.ctiv., London:
Kiuwer Academic Publishers, 1988.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffrey Sachs. "Exchange Rates and Economic
Recovery in the 193Cc." Journal of Economic History 45 (1985), 925-46.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffrey Sachs. "Competitive Devaluation and the
Great Depression: A Theoretical Reassessment." Economics Letters 22
(1986), 67—71.

Eichengreen, Barry and Marc Uzan, "The 1933 World Economic Conference as an
Instance of Failed International Cooperation." In Peter B. Evans et al.,
eds., Double-Edged Diplomacy, Berkeley CA: University of California Press,
1993.

Evans, Martin and Paul Wachtel. "Were Price Changes During the Great
Depression Anticipated? Evidence from Nominal Interest Rates." Journal of
Monetary Economics 32 (August 1993), 3—34.

Fisher, Irving. "The Debt—Deflation Theory of Great Depressions."
Econornetrica 1 (October 1933), 337—57.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.

Gordon, Robert J. and James Wilcox. "Monetarist Interpretations of the
Great Depression: Evaluation and Critique." In Karl Brunner, ed., The
Great Depression Revisited. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981, 49—107.

Green, Susan J. and Charles H. Whiteman. "A New Look at Old Evidence: On
'Nonxnonetary Effects of the Financial. Crisis in the Propagation of the
Great Depression'." University of Iowa, April 1992.

Grossman, Richard S. "The Shoe That Didn't Drop: Explaining Banking
Stability During the Great Depression." Wesleyan University, March 1993.

Hamilton, James D. "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression." Journal of
Monetary Economics 19 (1987), 145-69.

Hamilton, .James D. "The Role of the International Gold Standard in
Propagating the Great Depression." contesporary Policy Issues 6 (1988),
67—8 9.
                                                                              41



Hamilton, James D. "Was the Deflation During the Great Depression
Anticipated? Evidence from the Commodity Futures Market?N American
Economic Review 82 (March 1992), 157-78.

Kemp, Tom. The French Economy, 1913-39: The History of a Decline.
London: Longman Group, 1972.

Kiyotaki, Nobu and John H. Moore. "Credit Cycles." Unpublished,
University of Minnesota and LSE, March 1993.

League of Nations. Industrialization and Foreign Trade. Geneva, 1945.

Mishkin, Frederic S. "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great
Depression." Journal of Economic History 38 (December 1978), 918—37.

Nurkse, Ragnar (with W. A. Brown, Jr.). International Currency Experience:
Lessons of the Inter-War Period.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press for the League of Nations, 1944.

Romer, Christina. "The Nation in Depression." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7    (Spring 1993), 19—40.
Sumner, Scott.  "The Equilibrium Approach to Discretionary Monetary Poliby
under an International Gold Standard: 1926—1932." The Manchester School of
Economic Studies (December 1991), 378—94.

Ternin, Peter. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York:
W.W.    Norton, 1976.
Temin, Peter.     Lessons from   the   Great Depression. Cambridge MA MIT Press,
1989.

Tem.in, Peter. "Transmission of the Great Depression." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7 (Spring 1993), 87—102.

Thorp, Rosemary, ed., Latin America in the 1930s: The Role of the
Periphery in the World Crisis. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1984.
</ref_section>
Table 1. DeterminantS of the money supply in six countries, 1929-1936


yr4NcZ   (devalued October 1936)
            Ml            Mi/BASE      BASE/RES    RES/GOLD         PGOLD      QGOLD

1929         101562           1.354         .109      1 .623          16.96     2456. 3
1930         111720           1.325         .106     .489             16.96     3158. 4
1931         122748           1.239         .101   —1.307             16.96     4059. 4
1932         121519           1.263         .010   —1.054             16.96     4893. 9
1933         114386            .264         .156    1.015             16.96     4544. 9
1934
1935
1936
             113451
             108009
             117297       =
                               .244
                               .230
                               .218    =
                                            .098
                                            .298
                                            .557
                                                      1.012
                                                      1.020
                                                      1.024
                                                                      16.96
                                                                      16.96
                                                                      22.68
                                                                                4841. 2
                                                                                3908. 1
                                                                                2661.   8
POLAND (imp osed exchange control Pp ril 1936, devalued October 1936)
            Ml            Mi/BASE      BASE/RES     RES/GOLD        PGOLD      QGOLD

1929              2284         .339        1.390      1.750            5.92      118.3
1930             2212          .328        1.709      1.735            5.92       94.9
1931              1945         .267        1.888      1.355            5.92      101. 3
1932              1773         .275        2.177      1.273         — 5.92
                                                                       5.92       84. 7
1933              1602    — 1.280          2.496      1.185         —5.92         80. 3
1934              1861         .301        2.693
                                           3.155
                                                      1.056
                                                        1.061
                                                                    — 5.92        84. 9
                                                                                  74. 9
1935              1897
1936              2059        1.340        3.634        1.076          5.92       66. 3



BKLGXVW (devalued March 1935)
           Ml          Mi/BASE         BASE/RES     RES/GOLD        PGOLD      QGOLD

                                                                                 245.9
1929             42788        2.504    —1.949           1.492
                                                        1.707
                                                                      23.90
                                                                      23.90      287.1
1930             46420        2.336    —1.697
1931             44863        2.047    —1.266           1.358         23.90      533.4
1932             41349        1.805    —1.395           1.265         23.90      543.1
1933             40382        1.754    —1.314           1.282         23.90      571.9
                                                                                 524.0
1934               NA          NA      —1.113           1.266         23.90
1935             39956        1.579     1.063           1.376         33.19      520.6
1936             43314        1.637        1.098        1.293         33.19      561.6


UNITED XINGD4      (suspended gold sta ndard Septemb er 1931)
            Mi             Mi/BASE      BASE/RES     RES/GOLD       PGOLD      QGOLD

1929              1328        1.560        5.825    1.0               0.1366    1069. —
                                                                                1080.
1930
1931
1932
                  1361
                  1229
                  1362
                              1.618
                              1.579
                              1.667
                                           5.699
                                           6.452
                                           6.823
                                                        1.0
                                                         .0
                                                         .0
                                                                      0.1366
                                                                      0.1366
                                                                      0.1366
                                                                                 883.
                                                                                 877.2
                                                                                          —
1933              1408        1.680        4.395         .0           0.1366    1396.
1934              1449        1.642        4.590         .0           0.1366    1408.
1935              1565        1.694        4.615         .0           0.1366    1465.2
1936              1755        1.700        3.291    =    .0     .     0.1366    2297.
Table 1. (continued)


SWEDEN (suspended gold standard September 1931)
           Ml          Mi/BASE     BASE/RES     RES/GOLD        PGOLD            QGOLD

1929               988        1.498       1.280       2.082         2.48            98.8
1930              1030        1.508       1.082       2.618         2.48            97.2
1931              1021.       1.522       2.631       1.238         2.4R            83.l
1932              1004        1.373       1.740       2.039         24              83.1
1933              1085        1.106       1.202       2.205              4 —       149.
1934
1935
                  1205
                  1353
                               .211
                               .268
                                          1.101
                                          1.029
                                                      2.575
                                                      2.542
                                                                —   24
                                                                        .4
                                                                             —     141.5
                                                                                   164.
1936              1557         .211       1.032       2.355             .4         213.3


UNITED STATES (suspended gold standard March 1933)
            Ml         Mi/BASE     BASE/RES     RES/GOLD        PGOLD            QGOLD

1929             26434        3.788       1.746       1.0         0.6646          6014.0
1930             24922        3.498       1.655       1.0         0.6646          6478.9
1931             21894        2.831       1.854       1.0         0.6646          6278.8
1932             20341        2.534       1.900       1.0         0.6646          6358.6
1933             19759        2.380       2.057       1.0         0.6646          6072.7
1934             22774        2.396       1.154       1.0         1.1253          7320.9
1935             27032        2.335       1.144                   1.1253          8997.8
1936             30852        2.327       1.178       1.0         1.1253         10004.7

Notes: The table illustrates the identity, eq. (1.1), for six countries.
Where possible, values are end—of—year. Data sources are given in the
Appendix.

Definitions are as follows:
      Mi      Money and notes in circulation plus cormrtercial bank deposits;
in local currency (millions)
      BASE      Money and notes in circulation plus commercial bank
reserves; in local currency
      RES — International reserves (gold plus foreign assets); valued in
local currency
      GOLD — Gold reserves; valued in local currency at the official gold
price •  PGOLD x QGOLD
      PGOLD    Official gold price (units of local currency per gram) ; for
countries not on the gold standard, a legal fiction rather than a market
price
       QGOLD —   Physical   quantity of gold reserves; in metric tons
 Table 2. Averag.  behavior of selected macro variables for countries on and
 off the gold standard, 1930-1936



 1. t4anuf*cturina Droduction (loq-change)
           1930     1931     1932      1933           1934       1935 1 1936
            066             -.090      .076           .100       .074   .072
Av.rage            —.116
[ON                -.111
                   —.113
                            —.173
                            —.057
                                       .068
                                       .078
                                                      .025
                                                      .120
                                                             -.001
                                                                 .088
   OFF


 2. Wholesal. prices__(log-change)
           1930     1931     1932         1933        1934       1935    1936
 Averg —.116       —.122    —.045        —.017        .018       .024    .048
                   —.140    —. 133       — .065   — .037     —.038
   OK
   OFF             —.084    —.011        —.002        .033    .036


 3. Ml money supply_(log-change)
F          1930
           .016
                    1931
                   —.088
                             1932
                            —.068
                                          1933
                                         —.006
                                                      1934
                                                      .019
                                                                 1935
                                                                 .027
                                                                         1936
                                                                         .074
 Average
   ON              —.094    —.088        —.045    —.013      —   .067
   OFF             —.076    —.060         .007        .028       .046


 4. M1—curr.ncy_ratio (log-change)
[Av.rag.    1930
             .030
                     1931
                    —.129
                               1932
                              —.006
                                           1933
                                         —.024
                                                      1934
                                                  —.002
                                                               1935
                                                             —.011
                                                             - .037
                                                                         1936
                                                                        - .011
      ON            —.142     —   .052   - .009   -   .016
      OFF           —.102         .014   —.030        .002   -.006


 5.   Nozinsl wages (log—change)
            1930     1931     1932        1933     1934       1935       1936
 Average    .004    —.030    —.053       —.030    —.002      -.001       .031
   ON               —.027    —.070       —.033    —   .031   —   .022
   OFF              —.039    —.045       —.029        .007       .004



 6. Real wages (log-change)
           1930     1931          1932    1933     1934          1935    1936]
           .122     .094          .007   —.009    -.023      - .022     - .018
 Average
      ON             .110         .064    .032     .005       .016
      OFF            .059     —.020      —.025    —.032      -.031



 7. ployment (log-chang.)________
             1930    1931         1932    1933        1934       1935    1936
 Average    —.066   —.117     —.074       .050        .096       .064
   ON               —.113     —.137       .006        .028   -.016
   OFF              —.127     —.047       .065        .113    .083
Table 2. (continued)

8.  Nominal interest rate (percentage points)
          1930     1931      1932     1933     1934    1935     1936
Average   5.31    = .43     5.29      4.37     3.97    3.89     3.79
  ON                 .22    4.20      3.69     3.26    4.05
  OFF             = .90     5.68    =4.56     :4•l3    3.86


9. Ex—post_real interest rate_(percentage_p0 ints)
            1930    193].    1932      1933            1935     1936
Average    16.89    9.39     6.51                     —1.19     —8.93
  ON               10.38     9.41      6.94    3.35   —4.92
  OFF               7.16     5.47      1.64    0.61   —0.62


10. Rd ative price of exports (log-change)
            1930    1931     1932      1933    1934    1935     1936
Average    —.033   —.011    —.047      .076    .084   —.067     .039
     ON             .003    —.019      .134    .140   —.112
     OFF           —.040    —.058      .055    .070   —.058


11. Rca 1 exports (log-cha nge)
            1930    1931     1932      1933    1934    1935     1536
Average    —.073   —.179    —.222      .014    .056    .021     .072
     ON            —.193    —.292     —.008    .015   —.024
     OFF           —.146    —.192      .021    .067    .030


12. Real imports (log—change)
            1930    1931     1932      1933    1934    1935     1936
Average    —.071   —.211    —.264      .004    .038    .020     .049
  ON               —.159    —.250     —.006   —.067   — .012           •


  OFF              —.315    —.271      .008    .070    .027


13. Real share p rices (log-change)
            1930    1931     1932      1933    1934    1935     1936
Average    —.107   —.186    —.214      .133    .060    .091     .115
  ON               —.181    —.219      .139   —.028    .062
  OFF              —.198    —.211      .130    .092    .098


Notes: For each variable and year, the table presents the overall average
value of the variable, and the average for countries on and off the gold
standard in that year (see Bernanke and James (1991)). As most countries
were on the gold standard in 1930 and off the gold standard in 1936,
disaggregated data for those years are not presented. Data are annual and
for up to 26 countries, depending on data availability (see the Appendix).
Real wages, real share prices, and the ex-post real rate of interest are
computed using the wholesale price index. If a country is on the gold
standard for a fraction f of a particular year, the values of its variables
for the whole year are counted with the gold standard countries with weight
f and with non-gold—standard countries with weight 1—f for that year. The
proportion of country—months "on gold" in each year are as follows: 0.676
(1931), 0.282 (1932), 0.237 (1933), 0.205 (1934), 0.160 (1935).
Table 3. Regressions of selected macro variables against gold standard
          and banking panic duxmnies, 1931—1935




D..p.ndant
variab1.                 ONGOLD           PANIC         kdus ted

Manufacturing    Cia)   —.0704                             0.601
production                (4.04)

                 (ib)   —.0496           —.0926            0.634
                          (2.80)          (3.50)


Wholesale        (2a)   —.0914                             0.622
prices                    (8.20)

                 (2b)   —.0885           —.0129            0.620
                          (7.47)          (0.73)


Money supply     (3a)   —.0534                             0.297
(Ml)                      (3.26)

                 (3b)   —.0344           —.0846            0.352
                          (2.06)          (3.40)


Mi—currency      (4a)   —.0329                             0.263
ratio                     (1.91)

                 (4b)   —.0176           —.0680            0.294
                          (0.99)           (2.55)


Nominal          (5a)   —.0204                             0.196
wages                     (2.62)

                 (5b)   —.0145           —.0262            0.219
                          (1.78)           (2.16)


Real wages       (6a)     .0605                            0.466
                          (5.84)

                 (6b)     .0656          —.0230            0.470
                          (5.99)           (1.41)


Employment       (7a)   —.0610                             0.557
                          (4.38)

                 (7b)   —.0507           —.0458            0.569
                          (3.48)           (2.10)
Table 3. (continued)


Dep.nd.at
variabi.                    ON3OLD           PANIC    Adjuited   R2

Nominal             (8a)    —1.22                        0.109
interest    rate            (2.83)
                    (8b)    —1.00            —0.97       0.116
                            (2.20)           (1.43)


Ex—post real        (9a)     2.70                        0.264
interest rate               (2.07)

                    (9b)     2.16             2.39       0.266
                            (1.56)           (1.16)


Relative price (lOa)        .0464                       0.198
of exports                  (1.70)
                   (lOb)    .0288            .0783      0.213
                            (1.00>           (1.83)


Real   exports     (ha)    —.0745                       0.323
                            (2.08)

                   (lib)   —.0523           —.0990      0.334
                            (1.39)           (1.76)


Real imports       (12a)   —.0000                       0.416
                            (0.00)
                   (12b)    .0232           —.1036      0.435
                            (0.75)           (2.25)


Real   share       (13a)   —.0299                       0.354
prices                      (1.12)
                   (13b)   —.0206           —.0413      0.354
                            (0.72)           (0.97)



(Notes to the table are on the next page)
Table 3. (continued)

Notes: Entries are estimated coefficients from regressions of the
dependent variables against dummies for adherence to the gold standard
(ONGOLD) and for the presence of a banking panic (PANIC). Absolute values
of t—statistics are in parentheses. Dependent variables are measured in
log-changes, except for the nominal and ex-post real interest rates, which
are in percentage points (levels). Data are annual, 1931 to 1935
inclusive, and for up to 26 countries, depending on data availability (see
the Appendix). Each regression includes a complete set of year dturaies.
ONGOLD and PANIC are measured as the number of months during the year in
which the country was on gold or experiencing a banking panic (see text),
divided by 12.
  Output and wages in the Gold Bloc, 1935
 0.95

                           Netherlands
  0.9                          a                   .-



O.85
C
     Poland
                     BeIium
O.8l
O.75                                                               -
                                                                        France

°0.7                                         -

 0.65                                        —-.-..—..—...--..-......       ..   ..


                                                 Switzerland
  0.6
     0.7      0.75   0.8        0.85        0.9      0.95               1             1.05
                             Nominal wage (1929=1.0)




                                Figure   1
APPZNDXX.

Data sources
      Manufacturing production data are from League of Nations (1945)
Wages and employment data are from International Labour Organization, Year
Book of Labor Statistics, various issues. Data on conmercial bank
reserves, used in constructing monetary base measures, are taken from
League of Nations, II.A Economic and Financial Series: Money and Banking,
various issues. Monetary data for the United States are from Friedman and
Schwartz (1963) and Board of Governors (1943). Other data are from League
of Nations, Statistical Year Book and Monthly Bulletin of Statistics,
various issues.
      All data are annual and were collected for as many of the following
26 countries as possible: Australia, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Italy, Japan, Latvia, the Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand,
Poland, Rumania, Sweden, Spain, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States.
Data availability by variable is described below. Inclu5ion of countries
in the data set was based on the availability of data for key variables,
particularly output and prices.

Data availability:
      Manufacturing production: All countries, except Spain for 1936.
Industrial production used for Argentina, from Thorp (1984).
      Wholesale prices: All countries.
      Money and notes in circulation: All countries.
      Cormnercial bank deposits: All countries, except Greece and Spain for
1936.
         Nominal wages: All countries, except Finland, Greece, Rumania,
Spain.
      Employment: All countries, except Austria, Belgium, Czechoslovakia,
Greece, Spain, and Denmark for 1930.
      Discount rate: All countries, except Argentina and Switzerland.
      Exchange rates (relative to French franc): All countries.
      Exports: All countries, except Argentina and Spain for 1936.
      Imports: All countries, except Estonia, Finland, Greece, and Spain
for 1936.
      Share price index: Available for Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Spain, Switzerland, U.K., and U.S.
