                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT,
                            EXCHANGE RATE VARIABILITY
                             AND DEMAND UNCERTAINTY




                                      Linda S. Goldberg
                                      Charles I). Koistad




                                   Working Paper No. 4815



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1994


Professor Linda S. Goldberg is grateful for the research support provided by the C.V. Starr
Center at New York University and by NSF Grant HRD-9250102. Professor Charles Koistad was
supported in part by NSF Grant SES-9209943. George Childs provided excellent research
assistance. Comments from Jose Campa. Linda Tesar and Frank Wolak have been appreciated.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Finance and Macroeconomics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

  1994 by Linda S. Goldberg and Charles D. Koistad. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including C) notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4815
                                                                                 August 1994



                              FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT,
                              EXCHANGE RATE VARIABILITY
                               AND DEMAND UNCERTAINTY


                                          ABSTRACT


       Variable real exchange rates influence the country choice for location of production

facilities by a multinational enterprise. With risk averse investors and fixed productive factors,

a parent company should not be indifferent to the choice of production capacity location, even

when the expected costs of production are identical across counuies. If a non-negative

correlation exists between real export demand shocks and real exchange rate shocks, the

multinational will optimally locate some of its productive capacity abroad. The share of

production capacity optimally located abroad increases as exchange rate volatility rises and as

export demand shocks become more correlated. These theoretical results are confirmed by

empirical analysis of quarterly United States bilateral foreign-direct-investment flows with

Canada. Japan, and the United Kingdom.




Professor Linda S. Goldberg                                        Professor atarles D. Kolstad
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics
New York University                                                University of California
269 Mercer Street                                                  Santa Barbara, CA 93106
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
Ii INTRODUCFION

        The importance of exchange-rate variability for domestic and international investment flows has

been argued in numerous contexts. In industrialized economies, the presumed effects of exchange-rate

variability have influenced the choice of international monetary regimes. This issue arose in the early

l970s when the Smithsonian Agreement was discussed and again at the time of the Plaza Accord
during the mid-1980s. In the early 1990s. the posited negative implications of variable exchange rates

was one motivating theme in designing the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) operable over
currencies within the European Monetary System (EMS). The currency crises within the ERM in

September 1992 and Spring 1993 refocused attention on the rationale for limiting short-term nominal

exchange rate movements and on the validity of arguments that exchange rate variability is costly and

dampens real economic activity.'

        To date, much of the analysis on the real effects of variable exchange rates has considered

whether variable exchange rates depress domestic exports and thereby worsen international

competitiveness. Empirical tests over both developed and developing country export data have
reached ambiguous conclusions.2 Other recent discussions of the additional costs of variable exchange

rates center on the expense of: irreversible investment decisions, over-investment in productive

capacity, and exchange-rate-induced incentives for domestic producers to located their manufacturing

facilities outside of the United States. As in the literature on hysteresis in trade [Dixit (1989), Baldwin

and Krugman (1989)]. an important issue is whether waftsiwq movements of exchange rates may lead

to persistent restructuring if not deindustrialization of economies and whether this restnictuiing is

stimulated or reduced when future exchange rates are uncertaist'

        In this paper we emphasize and explore the implications of short-term exchange rate variability

for foreign direct investment (FDI) flows. Short term movements of exchange rates about some trend

corresponds to the concept of exchange rate volatility within exchange rate regime discussions. This

'Reductions U, nominal exchange tale variability typically goes together with a Suction in real exchange rate volañlity
See Mussa (1982) and Dorubuscb (1989).
2Edison and Melvin (1989) provide a critical survey of this literaWre.
'Goldbas (1993) and Campa and Goldberg (1994) finds that seal exchange rare variability is correlated with reduced
thvesent activity     U.S. manufacturing seem



                                                           1
distinction deliberately excludes the longer term volatility measures that would include the persistent

currency realignments pertaining both to flexible and controlled exchange rate regimes. Our main
theoretical result shows that if short-term exchange rate variability is to have a zeal impact on foreign
direct investment, it will work in the direction of increasing the share of production activity that is

located offshore. Our theoretical proposition is tested using United States bilateral FIN data for the
 1978 to 1991 period. The empirical findings support the main theoretical results.
        The international investment implications of variable exchange rates, often stated in policy
discussions, have not been the subject of much formal analysis. The theoretical work on this subject is

divided among production flexibility arguments and risk aversion arguments.                             The production
flexibility arguments have been expounded most recently by Aizenman (l992). Aizenman relies on a

production structure whereby producers commit to domestic and foreign capacity a ante and commit
to employment decisions ex post, following the realization of some stochastic element such as nominal

or real shocks. The theoretical results are an open-economy extension of the earlier literature on
domestic tnvescmenc, wherein the effects of price variability on investment hinge on the sunk costs in
capacity (i.e. the extent of investment in-eversibilities), on the competitive structure of the industry.
and overall on the convexity of the profit function in prices.5 In the production flexibility arguments.
the important presumption is that producers can adjust their use of a flriable factor following the
realization of a stochastic input into profits. Without this variable factor, i.e. under a productive
structure with fixed instead of variable factors, the potentially desirable effects on profits of price
variability6 are dizninishecL

        An alternative approach linking exchange-rate variability and investment relies on Tisk aversion

arguments. One treatment of this argument emphasizes that higher exchange-rate variability lowers the



 'tn the mranazjonaj context, de Men and van 4cr PIne3 (1987) also have explatd the                                  iaotivC
behind the plant location decisions of a multinational enterprise, arguing that the structure of marginal-cost shocks and
demand elasticities are key determinant of optimal invesunents in domestic and foreign opacity.
'The linkage between investment and price variability has been explored in a distinct kcIirilyaiente4 literature.
Sec Harunan (1972), Abel (1983), Crime (1989), Pindyck (1988) and Caballero (1991).
eThis effect is based on the strength of the Jensen's inequality argument leading to profit convexity in variable prices.


                                                           2
certainty equivalent expected exchange-rate level) These certainty equivalent levels are used in the
expected profit functions of finns that make investment decisions today in order to realize profits in
future periods)t Alternatively, one could maintain a distinction between the effects of exchange rate

variability and the effects of exchange rate levels by directly modeling the utility of expected profits as

decreasing in its variability. This enables one to examine the significance of multiplicative risk factors

on expected profits. e.g. through both revenues and costs, and to isolate the effects of volatility in

exchange rates versus the level effects. We follow this latter approach in this paper.

       These production flexibility versus risk aversion approaches are both important but have merit

under ditTerent circumstances. When considerirg the existence and form of real effects of exchange

rate variability, a clear distinction must be made between short term exchange rate volatility and longer

tenn misalignments of exchange rates. For sufficiently short horizons. cx wife commitments to

capacity and to related factor costs are a more realistic assumption than introducing a model based on

cx post variable factors of production.9 Hence, risk aversion arguments are more convincing than the

production flexibility arguments posed in relation to the effects of short-term exchange rate variability.

For variabihty assessed over longer time horizons, the production flexibility motive provides a more

compelling rationale for lirthng foreign direct investment flows to be variability of exchange nte,s.

       In this paper we are concerned with the implications of exchange rate variability as measured

from quarter to quarter or at even higher frequencies, for example over weekly or monthly data. This

is the type of variability implicit in less rigorous discussions of the zeal effects of exchange rate

movements. Thus, our theoretical exposition relies heavily on arguments based on aversion to the

volatility of profits: production flexibility arguments are less appropriate for this type of data

frequency.




75a Cushman (1985, 1988).
'Another recent theoretical argument about the linkage between exchange-rate movements and Investment is based on
the premise of imperfect capital markets [Froot and Stein (1991)1. In this scuing, exchange rate movements alter the
relative wealth positions of competing International investm. By contrast, the nnplmclz of our paper is oii the foreign
direct wvesunent effects of [mast exchange ruse variability, instesd of ou coateznptieous exchange rate levels.
9Another explanation is that the technology is such that rapacity is fully utilized.


                                                         3
        In Section II, using a two-period model of the inter-temporal decision-making of a producer, we
 demonstrate how current assessments of future exchange-rate variability determine the portion of

 future market demand to be satisfied by production facilities based in domestic versus foreign
 economies.'° This decision is made in the context of multiplicative risk factors, entering both through
 revenues and production costs. Due to the emphasis of our model on short run activity, we do not

 permit ex post adjustment of a variable productive factor: producers cannot fire or hire workers the
 moment that they observe the realization of the stochastic exchange rate or of demand. With labor
 contracts, most factors are quasi-fixed in the production function. In this environment, if the parent
 company is risk neutral and if exchange rate movements do not influence expected production costs,
 the parent company is indifferent to the tocation of its manufacturing facilities By contrast, if the
 parent has even a small degree of risk aversion, the location of production facilities mauers. The actual

division of capacity across borders depends on the distributions of both exchange rate and demand
shocks, and on the correlation between these shocks. If foreign production costs are positively
correlated with revenues from those markets, a portion of productive capacity should be located
abroad.

        In Sections Lu and IV the theoretical propositions are examined empirically using quarterly

bilateral foreign direct investment flows between the United States and the United Kingdom. Canada
and Japan. The estimation interval spans flin 1978 through 1991. The effects on FDI of real
exchange rate variability, real demand shocks and the correlation between exchange rates and demand

shocks are presented. Our main empirical finding is consistent with the theory: exchange rate volatility
does tend to increase the share of productive capacity located abroad. Section V summarizes,
compares our findings with those of previous studies, and concludes.'1



'°See also Wolak and Kolscad (1991) who examine the covarance among different exchange rates in a patfolio tYPe

"Existing empiricat swdies by Cuslunan (1985. 1988) on pooled UnitS States bilateral FDI ouWow data for the 1963-
1978 period and inflow data icr the penod 1963-1986 concluded that exchange rate variability w pthalvely wrehied
with both sets at flows. Bailey and Tavlas (t991), using quarterly data on agpegase zeal direct investment Inflows Cot
1976:1-1986:1, were unable so find any adverse Impact of either exchange raze variability or misalignment.


                                                        4
          Finally, we would like to emphasize that it is not the objective of this paper to survey or test the

merits of alternative explanations for ED! flows. Our paper asks only when and whether real exchange

rare variability may influence the pattern of FDI activity. This emphasis is meant to supplement and not
meant      to eclipse or diminish the range of important motives for ED! exposited elsewhere.'2 We
focuses purely on the effects of expected volatility of exchange rates, without emphasizing the direct
effects of exchange rates on relative production costs and relative cross-country wealth patterns."
fl, THE MODFL

       Our basic model is a two-period one in which a domestic firm produces only for a foreign
market, with a combination of domestic capacity (with output exported) and foreign capacity, sited
with demand.'4 In the first period, the horizontally-integrated multinational decides on and commits to
its capacity in its domestic and foreign plant locations. This investment in capacity represents the
parent company planned sales. The firm chooses productive capacity in both domestic and foreign
locations either to maximize the present discounted stream of expected profits or the utility of those

profits.
       In period two, uncertainty in exchange rates and in demand are resolved: domestic and foreign
facilities produce at capacity and take prices that clear the market. Investors repatriate their profits.
Even though capacity is chosen in the first period, payments for investment capacity are made in the
second period when revenues are realized.

       Producers face an aggregate inverse demand function in the foreign country, denoted by P(q). In

our model q represents the total production capacity of the multinational as well as (second-period)



'2The 'OLI thuinvirate' (Ethier (1986)1 is based On: I) owneTahip advantages, including patents or management
advantages held by the sowve country; ii) locational advantages, whetein the source or destination country reatisres
motivate international inveszmcnq or iii) internalization advantages wherein it Is awn advantageous for a firm to
transact with its international subsidiary than to gage in arms length market activiSt
"Relative wages axe presented as incentives for EN in the explanations based on lolioaal advantagC. Root and
Stein (1992) argue that wealth effects of exchange rate changes may be the dominant channel for exchange rare level
effects. Klein and Rosengren (1994) find support for the wealth channel on annual data for FDI flows into the United
Stases.
t4The assumption that danesuc rums produce only fcr foreign markets is for heuristic thnplithiy and not required For
ow results. The key     iseinent is for foreign demand movements in be more strongly correlated with the exchange rate
than is domestic demand for domestic products.


                                                         5
output since it will never pay to under-utilize capacity. By making all factors of production fixed, we
eUminate the ability of the producers to buy, via foreign direct investment, the option of channeling

production cx post to the more profitable location. Domestic and foreign country variables are denoted

by d and      f respectively. Thus. q1 and q1 are domestic and foreign output. Let 0 = q,/q define the
fraction of capacity overseas. Clearly 05 05 1.

      Foreign demand is subject to random real shocks, denoted by 5 with E(5) = 0. In our model, this

corresponds to vertical movement in the foreign demand curve. Denote the variance of 6 bya. The

exchange      rate, e. is defined in terms of domestic currency per unit of foreign exchange, also is subject
to random shocks. Thus, large e means a weak domestic currency. We choose units so that the
expected value of the real exchange rate is unity. i.e. E(e)=l, and its variance is given by a. Thus, we

would expect (and assume) that a <1 since E(e) = 1 and e 0. The correlation coefficient between e
and c is given by p = Cov(e,5)/            where Cov(e.5) = E(eb) = eS?'

      Although a variety of factors can explain p. the sign of the correlation between foreign demand
and domestic real exchange rate shocks, consider the simple examples of foreign monetary and

productivity shocks. An increase in the money supply in the foreign country would increase demand

while raising foreign prices. With incomplete pass-through of the price changes into the bilateral

exchimge rate, this leads to a short-term real appreciation of the foreign currency and a real
depreciation of the domestic currency. Under this scenario, & increases (i.e. it is positive) while e also
rises, implying a positive value for p. Aitematively, if the foreign monetary shock leads to short-term

exchange rate overshooting, the domestic currency, will appreciate in real terms and P is negative.

Foreign demand shocks also can be caused by foreign productivity shocks occurring outside of the
sector in which our firm is operating. If the relative price index over foreign goods is reduced without

a compensating nominal exchange rate adjustment, the domestic currency appreciates in reaJ terms and
a positive p value is observed, The absolute size of these correlations could increase with wage

rigidities.


"if the d tibuuon oft is highly skewed, It would be possible (or C >1. We preclude this without loss of genenlity.


                                                       6
       Without loss of generality, we assume that capacity costs are equal to 1 per unit of domestic

output and equal to e per unit of output abroad. Thus, e is interpreted as the ratio of foreign to
domestic production costs. Since ours is a short-term model, all production costs are embodied in the

fixed factor, capacity. The profit function of the producer in period 2 is:

            it(q1,q,,e.8) =e(P(q)+8)-q—q—eqf                                                  (I)
       Assessed   in period I. the expected profits of the multinational, based on its capacity choice
across domestic and foreign markets, are:
E(Jt)=q.(P(q)—1+ea)O                                                                          (2)

where individual rationality requires expected profits to be nonnegative. Our first basic result follows

directly from (2):

Proposition    I:      When   exchange rate and foreign demand shocks are positively (negatively)
                     correlated, expected product price is less (more) than expected marginal cost.


       One interesting implication of this result is that expected product price may be less than expected

costs under profit-maximizing behavior and without dumping motives. Thus, the dominance of
positively correlated exchange rates and foreign demand shocks could lead to pricing behavior that is

incoriecdy interpreted as related to dumping. To relate these types of shocks to investment activities,
we consider two versions of the model: one where the producer is risk-neutra] and one where the
producer is risk averse.
ILl Risk Neutrality
         In the case of risk neutrality, the effect of altered aggregate production lewis on total expected

profits is given by:
                                                                                              (3)

and   the first-order conditions for profit maximization axe given by:
         P(q)+P'(q).ql—                                                                       (4)




                                                    7
          The left-hand side of (4) represents expected marginal revenues whereas the right-hand side

 terms represent (constant) marginal costs adjusted for the covariance between exchange-rate shocks

 and foreign demand shocks for the multinational product. Our second result follows from (4):

 Proposition 2:       If the domestic firm is risk neutral and expected production costs are the same in
domestic and foreign markets, then:

          a) if p>O (pcO), marginal costs exceed (are less than) expected marginal revenues and total

output of the multinational expands (shrinks) relative to the deterministic case.

          b) The firm is indifferent regarding the location of production facilities.
          In this simple two-period model with risk neutrality, the multinational's investment in capacity

today is a function of the correlation between the exchange rate used to value export earnings and the

foreign demand for the multinational's product Under risk neutrality, the total volume of production
may be sensitive to the size and correlations between shocks, butthe location of production facilities is
not sensitive. The important point to keep in mind is that the stochastic nature of exchange rates and
demand matter only to the extent that these shocks are correlated. Without risk aversion, and without

expected relative wage or marginal cost effects across countries, foreign direct invesunent flows will
not be significantly influenced by altered variability of exchange rates.

         The correlation between export demand shocks and real exchange rate shocks is important in
Proposition 2 and, in general, will be shown to be an important theoretical detemilnant of the location
of investment facilities.


11.2 Risk Averse Produeer.Inyestnn

         Suppose that producers are risk-averse)6 Assume that the expected utility of profits can be
written as a function of expected profits and the variance of profits.

'6Dufey and Srinivasula (1984) review the weabiesses of common arguments against die claim that SUms are risk averse
and that firms should hedge against foreign exchange risk. Thu. risk aversion arises if wprre management seeks to
avoid default risk anti the costs of financial distess, where these costs rise with the variability c the net cash flows of
the ibm. Moreover, managers (and shareholders) may be personally heavily exposed to the risk of variable fism ixofits
and thereby would anempi to elimin,t. this risk Rc&iguez (1981) vi4es supporting cvifl on management
amut and behavior. Another mon argument *gaint firm risk aversion is based on the Modigliani-Miller
theorem. This theorem implies that whatever the firm can do (in terms of hedge azivlzjes), lnvestrn an do: If exchange



                                                          8
             E(u(7t)) = U(E(it), Var(it))                                                              (5)

This expected utility specification is justified if utility is quadratic or if the uncertainty induced in

profits is normally distributed (Jarrow, 19881. We will assume (e,8) are bivariate nOnnaJ.t7 We also
assume that E(u(x)) is strictly concave, a somewhat stronger assumption. Using the properties of

stochastic exchange rates and demand, the variance of profits is given by:'8

                                                                                                       (6)

where 8 = q,/q. Using equations (5). (2) and (6), one can determine the period one inve,sixnerns in

domestic and foreign capacity (actually q and 8) that will maximize investor utility. The goal,
maximizing (5) subject to q 0.0 U S 1, and (2), represents a constrained optimization problem.
Consider the case where (2) is non-binding. The first-order conditions depend on whether optimal q
and/or 8 are at the boundaries.
           Assume y=-2U,/U, >0 is constant where U is defined in (5) and the U4 denote the
respective first derivatives. Then, note that

           aE(u(E)) =
               aq
                         ,     aq
                                    + , Var(ir) = u1(A — P (q)B)                                        (7a)

           aE(u(E))
             ae
                    aE()+uavar(E)un
                     ae     ao
                                                                                                        (ib)

where      A = P(q)+ P'(q)q —               —T-Var(n)                                                    (lc)
                                             q
                                                                                                        (ld)

           From the assumed strict concavity of E(z4E)), a constrained maximum of (5) exists, although

of course it may be trivial (4). This assumes regularity (strict complementarity) holds. Note that the



risk is to be hedged. it need not be done by the film. But, this argument Is weakened by Impediments to more efficient
hedging by individuals, Including rum-level acoess to lower cost hedges and asymmetries woss managers and
shareholders in information about firm'Ievel exposure.
"Note that we stated earlier that E(e$l and eis non-negative. The exchange rate process is assumed centered about one
rather than zero. Because of normality,   E(e5) = paa. E(eba) = 2pap5, and E(e282) = 2p2ac + (I +
'8Equasion (6)is derived by taking the expected value of the squared difference between profits as defined in equation
(I) and expected profits as presented in equation (2).


                                                         9
first-order conditions at various boundaries differ primarily in the A tenn in equation (is). Therefore,

the following results hold:

Lemma 1: Assuming regularity conditions hold and expected profits are positive, for any optima!

q>O. the/allowing applies:

                     =0rq4,q1 >0
          P(q)_Q+p!t <Oenq1 0                                                                (g)




        The basic interpretation of this result is that, with even a small degree of risk aversion, the

parent company is not indifferent to the location of facilities, even when the expected unit costs of
production are equal across facilities. Foreign direct investment flows will be influenced by the

expected variability of real exchange rates.
        It is important to remember that p,a,,anda5 are exogenous to the firm. Based on these
characteristics of the distributions of the es and 8's, the firm chooses q, and q1 (both of which may be

zero). Lemma I leads directly to the following corollary:


Corollary 1: Under she conditions of Lemma I with q >0, the following must hold:
        q, zrOlcDJDIq,>0
         q>0=0DJD<0r*q=0                                                                     (9)
         where D=_pEL(l_a)


Proof: Use equation (8) and equation (2) to derive equation (9).


        There are a number of implications of Corollary 1. First, with e and 6 positively correlated.

foreign demand is high precisely when the domestic currency is weak. By locating production facilities

overseas, the producer minimizes the variance of expected profits and increases expected utility. Thus.

the expected utility of profits is maximized by locating all production in the foreign country. Second,
when there is only exchange rate uncertainty and no demand uncertainty (or when these shocks are
orthogonal), then it is always desirable to locate some production overseas, i.e. q, >0. This may be



                                                 10
the case if exchange rates are determined purely by short-term speculation in financial markets and are

unrelated to other market fundamentals. Under risk aversion, there always will be production located

abroad, in contrast to the risk neutrality case where the location choice is indeterminate. Third, if

demand and exchange rate shocks are modestly negatively correlated it will be desirable to have some

domestic production and not place all of one's capacity offshore.

        Corollary 1 also states that when specific patterns in domestic and foreign invesunent activity

are observed, there are relationships between exchange rate and foreign demand shocks that must be

satisfied. For example, if no capacity is located offshore, exchange rates and foreign demand shocks

must be negatively correlated, If there is at least some capacity sourced at home, then these shocks

must be positively correlated.

11.3 Comparative Statics:

        Having defined the condition for optimal choice of q and q1, we now turn to the question of

how these optimal choices are affected by the scale of the uncertainty in exchange razes and demand

and by the covariance structure between these shocks.


Proposition 3: Assume a: an optimal q. that q, q1 >0. Then:

        '—>0 '—<0                                                                          (10)
                   aa
gf: See Technical Appendix.

        This result states that the greater the vasiability of exchange rates, the larger the share of

capacity located offshore, although overall capacity declines. We cannot conclude whether or not the

absolute level of FDI rises or falls. Implicit in this proposition is the fact that exchange rate and
demand shocks are negatively correlated (from Corollary 1); otherwise q, =0. This is somewhat as

expected since only profits as opposed to the entire price are exposed to exchange rate fluctuations

with foreign investment, Further comparative statics results emerge with some xesu'ictions on the form

of the demand function:




                                                 11
Proposition 4: Assume at an optimal q, that q .q, >0. Further assume that demand is nor
excessively convex, i.e. P (q)+ P'(q)q C Ofor all q>O. Then:

         i>o
         ap
                                                                                                 (11)


£WQI: See Technical Appendix.


         By assumption p <0 from Corollaiy 1. A negative p means that foreign demand is high (C is

large) precisely when the domestic currency is strong. But, as this relationship erodes by p becoming

larger, we move closer to the region of p >0 where all production is foreign. Thus, as p rises. 0 rises.

When 0<9<1, an increase in exchange rate variability which would otherwise tend to increase the

share of foreign investment can be offset by an increase in the absolute value of the covariance
between demand shocks and exchange rate shocks.

11.4 TstabIe Implications

     Our model of the implications of real exchange rate variability yields clear predictions for bilateral

flows of foreign direct investment under fixed productive factors. Under risk neutrality. EDT share is

not expected to be correlated with variability measures. By contrast, with just a small degree of risk
aversion and if p 0: positive ED! always occurs (Corollary 1). This share of total capacity located

abroad would be unresponsive to exchange rate variability in this regimeonly tall capacity already is

located on foreign soil. With the share of ED! in total invesunent bounded away from zero and one
and p 0, the FDI share increases as exchange rate variability rises (Proposition 2). Furthermore, as

long as demand is not excessively convex, the ED! share increases as the correlation between exchange

rate and real demand shocks rises (Proposition 3).

     Defining a source country by the index i and a destination market by the index), these theoretical

propositions give rise to the following testing equation:

   = Pt ÷$°h +p;p+e! +y/ +4                                                               (12)

where the share of production capacity from the source county i located in the destination countiyj is
a (unction of: (i) the volatility of the bilateral zeal exchange rate, L. which is expected to enter with



                                                  12
  a positive coefficient ,     ;   (ii) the volatility of real destination market demand, CL. for which the
  coefficient 5, is ambiguously signed; (iii) the correlation between the real exchange rate and zeal
  destination market demand, p, which is expected to enter with a positive coefficient j3,; and (iv) the

  real exchange rate e,u, which is expected to enter with a negative coefficient 5. Destination market
 demand, gdp,', also is included as an explanatory variable in this equation although the sign and

 significance is not determined in our model.2°
 m. THE DATA
       These   theoretical predictions are tested using bilateral foreign direct investment activity between
 the United States and the United Kingdom. Japan and Canada The countzy choices for bilateral

 partners is partially motivated by data availability and partially motivated by the importance of these
 countries to the United States in foreign-direct-investment flows.
       Our model treats foreign-direct-investment as total investment or capacity location choice bythe

 parent in a subsidiaiy at any point in time. We use flow data on bilateral investments, with the foreign

 direct investment data drawn from United States balance-of-payments tables. For inflows into the
 United States, these data capture the increase in the book value of equity in United States businesses

 or asset deemed under foreign control held by foreign persons. An analogous definition applies to
outflows originating in the United States and invested abroad.2' Our sample period begins in 1978 in

order to minimize estimation problems stemming from the majorstep-up in the early 1970s of interest
in the United States as a target for foreign investment ECaves (1989)]. The data are quarterly, from
1978:1 through 1991:IV and are hilly documented in the appendix. To summarize, FDI (q°) is from
the Survey of Current Business; total levels of investment (q1) are from country specific sources;


19Assuming some zisk aversion.
t0We do not conuol [a- changes in tax laws, which have not beai bmW to be significant determinants of real bilateral
EDt flows of the United States. See Slemrod (1989) on US inward bilateral FDI flowt Klein and Rosengren (1994) had
consistent f1ndings tax changes did not alter the pattern of exthange rate level tis on bilateral investments. We also
do not examine the importance of avoiding nade restrictions through FDL or of amy bathers to inflows of FDI, as in
the analysis of inward Jamnese flows by Lawrence (1993)..
'5These balance-of-payments data are sut4ect to a well-kiowa shortcoming: reinvested earnings of foreign subsidiaries.
as invested wealth by the parent, are not appropriately measured. This tanission is more of a problem in the late 19lOs
than in the 1980s, when reinvested earnings were a much smaller portion of bilateral
                                                                                     eqnity positions ILipsey (l992)J.


                                                        13
bilateral exchange rates and GD? are from the international Financial Statistics (IMF), and the

consumer price indices are CPI data drawn from the OECD.

Construction    of FDI Shares The shares 8 are constructed by dividing the FDI outflows from a
source country to a destination market by a measure of investment activity in the source country. The

two-way bilateral flows are between the United States and Canada, Japan, and the United Kingdom.

While this measure captures the flavor of our model, there are limitations in this data. The theory

considers movements in FDI relative to domestic investment, However, for these purposes the

appropriate measure of domestic investment is not aggregate source country investment but instead is

investment in the total new capacity of export-oriented production Linus. Unfortunately this measure is

unavailable. The second shortcoming of our data is that the foreign direct investment data miss

important forms of reinvestment of earnings and tend to understate total foreign investment.

Volatility and correlation measures: For each of the bilateral real exchange rates e' used, both the
levels and distributions of each real exchange rate are constructed (torn the vantage point of the

respective source countries. Exchange rate volatility is constructed as the standard deviation of the

exchange rate over rolling samples of twelve quarters of data, prior to and inclusive of each period t.
normalized by the mean level of the exchange rate within the intervaL This measurea incorporates

both the predictable" and unpredictable" components of exchange rate movements, It is particularly

informative when exchange rates are close to random walks. An analogous procedures also is used to
construct a proxy for real demand variability for each destination country, aj, and for the correlation

between, the real exchange rates and real GD? series, p.

      The USS/Can$ real exchange rates exhibited the smallest amount of variability, at roughly one

third the size of the dollar/yen and dollar/pound levels. The variability of the dolladyen exchange rates

increased signiuicandy in the 1985 to 1990 period as compared with levels in 1978 to 1984. Negative

p' (correlations between exchange rates and foreign real GDP) generally are observed from the

Japanese perspective for its assessment of the United States as a destination country for investments



22Wc normalize because the theoretjcaj model assumes no Shift OYU time in the expected exchange rate.


                                                       14
and for Japanese products.23 Such negative correlations also are observed from the perspectives of the

United Kingdom and Canada in assessing flows to the United States in the second half of the 1980s.

The United States flows to Canada were primarily under a regime of negative correlations in the tate

1970s and early 1980s. This could suggest that monetary shocks in the United States markets or

possibly fiscal shocks in foreign markets were dominant during this period.

Stoilonarity Properties of the Data: We have conducted augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) tests over
the data used in the empirical work. Non-stationarity is rejected for all ratios constructed for ED!

activity with the exception of the shares of United States investment into Japan and into the United

Kingdom. For real FIJI series (the nominal series deflated by the home price index), the oniy series for

which we cannot reject the existence of a unit root is real FIJI of Japan into the United States.2'

      With the possible exception of the exchange rate and GDP series, we do not have unit root

problems for the right hand side (RI-IS) variables included in regressions for bilateral outflows from the

United States or inflows into the United States from Canada. However, inflows into the United States

from Japan and from the United Kingdom may be nonstationaxy series. Regression inference is. of

course, complicated by the observation that stationary series should not be regressed against
nonstatioaaiy series. However, our conclusions regarding which series are nonstation!zy are biased in

favor of not rejecting unit roots. Thus, 'we account for the possibility the ADF tests yield incon'ect

results by following regression procedures suggested by Stock (1992): those right band side variables

that may have unit roots are entered both in level and first difference format into the regressions.

Dependent variables that may have unit roots alternatively enter in level and first difference format




231ta is interesting when considered in the context cj Pcositioo 1. pcall that ose interpretatiai of Proposition I Is
that the existence of positive correlations between exdiange rain and fitgn demand shocks may Inappiopriately lead
to dumping charges. Since the Japanese observe negative carelations, ow unodet does not suggest that evidence
provided in support of dumping charges would be misconstrued.
2'See the appendix icr results or these tests
The ADF test is being apptied to small samples, genesifly 52 obsavadons. and, as shown by Stock (1992) is biased
against rejection of unit roots in the data


                                                        15
 IV. RESULTS OF EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

            The implications of exchange rate and demand patterns for the share of investment activity

 located overseas are reported in Table I. For each of the bilateral investment shares we also tested

 whether the FDI shares responded differentially to the volatility measures across regions of positive

 and negative correlations between demand shocks and real exchange rate shocks, If there was a

 differential response across positive versus negative correlations, the regression results axe reported?6

        Exchange rate variability had a positive and statistically significant effect on four of the six

 bilateral PD! shares: real exchange rare variability increased the share of total United States investment

 capacity located in Canada and in Japan, and increased the share of Canadian and United Kingdom

 investment located in the United States. These results are consistent with the predictions of
 Proposition 3. However, in contrast to the conditions highlighted in the theoretical propositions, we

 did not find evidence that the effects of real exchange rate volatility on investment significantly differed

 across periods when there were positive and negative correlations between exchange rate and demand

 shocks. Of the remaining two sets of regressions where real exchange rate variability was not

 statistically significant, the regressions on shares of FDI relative to total source countiy investment

 were subject to some econometric problems. Japanese PD! shares into the United States is potentially

 a nonstationanj series and first differences of this dependent variable were used in the regressions. The

regression for United States PD! share into the United Kingdom was subject to problems of

heteroskedasticity and corrected using a Newey-West procedure. Thus, exchange rate variability

enters with the expected sign and was statistically significant except when problems arose in estimating

the regression equations.


26We also estimated regressions using real PD! kveis rather than FDI shares. We do not report these regression results
because they are 1101 directiy related ic the theoretical propositions provided in Seaioa U. However, what relevant and
informative we note these results in the texL In all of the OIS regressions pafonned, the regressions contain seasonal
dummy variables and serial correlation ndjussmntts. The a,eftiriaza on aritaegressive and seasonal terms art lbs
reported in the summary tables but are available upon requesL Where appropriate, beteroskedasticity and serial
Correlation problems nit corrected using Newey-West procedures. The models wan diosen based Ofl the Btt*isch
Godfrey test fir serial correlabon, various versions of White's test fir betaoskedastidry, and an ARCH test four lags.
If the models passed all of these tests, their inference is accqted. If not, the models were estimated by a 0MM procedure
with a Newey-West correction for serial correlation, If required, the regression equation is modified to account
nonstationarities by also entering We potentially first order integrated series into the regressions in first differencet


                                                            16
                Table 1: FDI Outflows as a Share of Source Country Investment
                      = p,           +O +p1 +e +y1 +j4
EMS variables       Direction of Bilateral FDI as Share of Source Country Investment

                  Can. PD!   U.S. EDI      UK FIJI              US FDI      Japan FDI         US EDI
                   intothe    into         intothe              intothe     intothe            into
                     US      Canada     United Statesl'a         UKt      United statSa       Japan
      ae            1.58'     .225      1.525'                    .354      .027     .012     .037"
                   (.586)     (.114)    (.440)                  (.378)    (.022)    (.039)    (.021)
     D'ee           -.567       ..               .                                            -.021
                   (.932)                                                                     (.020)
     äae                                0.637          .492      -.164    -.114'
                                        (1.24)       (.962)     (.266)    (.040)
    D'aae                                            -.198
                                                     (.497)
     05             .851       .394     -0.454                   .81.9    -.270'     .161      .091
                   (1.07)     (.396)    (.860)                  (.766)    (.050)    (.334)    (.097)
     aa8                                4.140•        937         .681     .021                .131
                                        (2.61)       (3.82)     (.516)    (.191)              (.273)
      p             .072'      .008     -0.005       -.012       .012      003      -8E-4      .001
                   (.030)     (.010)    (.020)       (.021)     (.020)    (.009)    (.005)    (.005)
     D' p          -.128"                             .033                                    .013"
                   (.065)                            (.046)                                   (.008)
     a.p                                -0.055       -.229'
                                        (.044)       (.090)
    D'&p                                             .401'
                                                     (.138)
      e            -.077      -2E-4     -0.094                  -.023     -6.E6         •     -2.99'
                   (.239)     (.070)    (.113)                  (.024)    (8E.5)              (1.44)
      M            .551"       -.128    0.413        -.082       .009     1.6E-5    SE-S      3.00"
                   (.298)     (.117)    (.286)       (.241)     (.020)    (asE-s)   (9E-5)    (1.73)
      yl            3E-4      -2E-4     0.001'                  -002      8E-5'               2E-7'
                   (9E-3)     (4X-4)    (.000)                  (.001)    (tEE-a)             (7E-8)
                    5E-4      2E-3'     L8E-3        L5E-3       .001      GE-S     5E-5       9E-8
                   (4E-3)     (9E-4)    (.002)       (i.2g.s)   (.001)    (1E-4)    (16E.s)   (8E-7)
   Mj. R2           .176       .068      267          322        -.062     £36       .272      .337
    D.W.            2.17      2.04       2.09         2.29       1.94      1.99      2.14      2.04
  F-statistic       1.64       126       2.03         214                  6.25      2.64      2.40
  #observstwn        43        47         46           43         48        46        45        45
a/ first difference of the dependent variable. S"'rd en-on reporteu below parameter estimates.
P indicates a dummy variable for periods withp> 0. £ indicates the first difference of anriablt
Constants, seasons! dummy variables and AR and MA adjustments are not reported.
  denotes significance at the 5% level; "denotes significance at the 10% level.
+ indicates that the Newsy West procedure was applied.




                                           17
         Proposition 4 stated that, under particular iesu'ictions about the structure of demand, an
 increase in the covariance between destination market demand shocks and real exchange rate shocks

 would lead to an increase in the FDI share. l'his direction of response is supported for all data on
 levth of outflows of FDI from the United States and for Canadian EDI into the United States.

 However, the results were statistically distinct from zero only for two of the six bilateral flow shares.
 The lack of statistical significance on four of these six terms may be due to the relatively short testing

 period of our regressions. Alternatively, the series may violate the convexity restrictions on the
 demand functions stated in Proposition 4, or there may be nonlinearities or discrete regimes which we

 do not examine in the relationship between correlation movements and FDI shares.

      Although theory did not yield clear predictions about the effects of variability of destination
 market demand, this force was statistically significant only for Japanese investment into the United
States: the higher was United States real GOP volatility, the smaller was the share of Japanese
investment sited in the United States.

      Exchange rate levels (and first differences) have been found to be highly significant in previous
empirical studies of real FDI activity tested over annual data. By most theoretical arguments, a
domestic currency depreciation is expected to decrease source county foreign direct investments
abroad, The basic arguments fall into two camps: either real depreciations raise the relative price of

foreign productive resources or increase the relative competitiveness of foreign competitors bidding
for the same production site. Note, however, that these arguments apply to levels of FDI and

additional assumptions are required before they pertain to the share data on FDI as used in our
regressions.

     In our tests using quarterly data, the exchange rate levels entered with theexpected sign in all
regressions: exchange rate depreciations of the source country currency lead to a Suction in
investment flow shares to foreign markets. However, these effects generally were neither large or
statistically significant In part, the weak role of exchange rate levels may be attributable to the
potential nonstationarity of quarterly exchange rate series. It alsomay be attributable to a valuation
effect: although the absolute level of FDI may decline in response to a domestic currency depreciation,


                                                 18
the domestic currency value of that PD! at least partially increases due to the change in the exchange

rate. Our findings are consistent with Lipsey's (1992) interpretation of the potential effects of
exchange rate changes on investment: a depreciation of the domestic currency does make foreign

facilities more expensive, and probably leads to a reduction in demand for physical investment abroad.

However the overall impact on the value of foreign direct investment requires a high elasticity of

demand for investment assets. Our results suggest that either the quarterly movements in exchange
rate levels do not matter for FDI flows, or theelasticities of investment demand are not large enough

so that domestic currency depreciations actually reduce investment flows abroad.


IV. CONCLUSIONS

     This paper has contributed to our understanding of the real effects of variable exchange rates in

several dimensions. First, we have argued that there are two classes of models that link real exchange

rate variability to international investment activity. The first class of model relies on the argument that

producers engage in international investment diversification in order to achieve a post production

flexibility and higher profits in response to shocks. This argument is relevant to the extent that a post

production flexibility is possible within the window of time before the realization of the shocks. This

suggests that the production flexibility argument is less likely to pertain to short term volatility in

exchange rates than to realignments over longer intervals.

     Since many of the discussions of the merits of fixed versus flexible exchange rate ieginies

emphasize the implications of short term volatility, the group of arguments based on the risk-taking

characteristics of producers are more likely to be relevant for investment activity in domestic and

foreign markets. We use a simple model to illustrate the linkage between exchange rate variability and

the decision by multinational producers to locate production facilities on domestic venus foreign
shores. Exchange rate variability is expected to have real effects on the share of domestic investment

resources channeled abroad in a limited set of circumstances. If investors are risk neutral, the modeL

does not predict any statistical relationship between exchange rate volatility and the allocation of




                                                     19
production facilities between domestic and foreign markets. But, if there is risk aversion among

producers, exchange rate volatility may expand the share of investment resources located offshore.

     Our analysis of two-way bilateral foreign direct investment flows between the United States, and

Canada, Japan. and the United Kingdom yielded empirical results consistent with the theory: exchange

rate volatility tended to stimulate the share of investment activity located on foreign soil. Exchange
rate volatility did not have statistically different effects on investment shares when one distinguishes
between periods where real or monetary shocks dominate exchange rate activity. Real depreciations
of the source country currency were associated with reduced investment shares to foreign markets, but
these results generally were statistically insignificant in our quarterly data
     Although the theoretical work concluded that the share of total investment located abroad may
rise as exchange rate volatility increases, this does not imply that exchange rate volatility depresses
domestic investment activity. In order to conclude that domestic aggregate investment declines, one
must show that the increase in domestic outflows is not offset by a rise in foreign inflows. In the
aggregate United States economy, exchange rate volatility has not had a large contractionary effect on

overall investment (see Goldberg (1993) and Campa and Goldberg (1994)].
     These results lead to the conclusion that exchange rate volatility can contribute to the
internationajization of production activity without depressing economic activity in the home market
Thus, it is incorrect to assume that the selection of a flexible exchange rate system will lead to
depressed economic activity, If the lessons drawn from United States investment flows can be viewed
in a broader context, the choice of a controlled exchange rate regime is not clearly associated with a
climate more conducive to economic growth. Even if other studies conclude that exchange rate
volatility depresses export activity, our conclusions are not contradicted: exchange rate volatility can
spur an increase in international capital flows that can substitute for international trade in goods
without depressing overall economic activity.




                                                   20
REFERENCES
Abel, A. (1983) 'Optimal Investment Under Uncertainty,' American Economic Review vol. 73 no.1
         pp.228-33.
Aizenman,   J. (1992) "Exchange Rate Flexibility, Volatility and Patterns of Domestic and Foreign
         Direct Investment," JMF Staff Papers.
Bailey, M. and C. Tavlas (1991), 'Exchange Rate Variability and Direct Investment," The Annals
        AAPSS. vol.5 16 (July) pp.106-116.
Baldwin. R. and P. Krugman (1989), "Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate Shocks", The
         Quarterly Journal of Economics vol,CIV, no. 4 (November) pp.635-654.
Caballero, K. (1991) "On the Sign of the Investment-Uncertainty Relationship." American Economic
         Review vol.81 no.1 (March) pp.279-288.
Can'ipa, I. and L. Goldberg (1994). "Investment in Manufacturing. Exchange Rates and External
         Exposure", Journal of International Economics (forthcoming).
Caves, K. (1989). "Exchange Rate Movements and Foreign Direct Investment in the United States" in
         The Iruernatiorsodization of United States Markew, edited by Audretsch and Claudon (New
         York University Press).
Craine. K. (1989). "Risky Business: The Allocation of Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics
       (March) vol.23 pp.210-218.
Cushman. D.O. (1985), "Real Exchange Rate Risk, Expectations, and the Level of Direct Investment,"
       Review of Economics and Statistics voL67:2 (May).
Cushman, 110. (1988). "Exchange Rate Uncertainty and Foreign Direct Investment in the United
         States" Welrwinschafrliches Archly 124:2 pp.322-334.
De Men, 0. and F. van der Ploeg (1987), "Production Flexibility as a Motive for Multinadonality,
         Journal of Industrial Economics voL3S no,) (March) pp.343-351.
Dixit, A. (1989) 'Enuy and Exit of Firms under Uncertainty", Journal of Political Economy vol.97,
       no.3 pp'620-638.
Dornbusch, R, (1989) "Credibility, debt and unemployment Ireland's failed stabilization," Economic
         Policy vol,4 pp.174-201.
Du.fey, C. and Si. Srinivasulu (1984), "The Case for Corporate Management of Foreign Exchange
         Risk," Financial Management vol.12, no.4, pp.54-62.
Edison, H. and M. Melvin (1990). "The Determinants and Implications of the Choice of an Exchange
         Rate System," in eds. Harof and Wille Monetary Policy for a Global Economy (American
         Enterprise Institute: Washington. D.C.).
Ethier, W. J. (1986) "The Multinational Firm", Quarterly Journal of Economics 101:4 (November)
         pp. 805-833.



                                              21
From. K.. and I. Stein (1991), "Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Invesunent An Imperfect Capital
         Markets Approach". Quarterly Journal of Economics (November) pp.! 191-1217.
Goldberg, L. (1993), "Exchange Razes and Investment in United States Industry", Review          of
        Economics and StatLuics (November).
Goldberg, L. and C. Kolstad (1993), "Foreign Direct Investment, Exchange Rate Variability and
        Demand Uncertainty," University of Illinois Bureau of Economic and Business Research,
        working paper #93-0158.
Hartman. R. (1972), "The Effects of Price and Cost Uncertainty on Investment," Journal of &onomic
         Theory (October) vol.5 pp.258-266.
Jarrow, R. A. (1988). Finance Theory. (Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey).
Klein, M. and E. Rosengren (1994). 9be Real Exchange Rate and Foreign Direct Investment in the
         United States: Relative Wealth vs. Relative Wage Effects, Journal of I,uernafional
         Economics vol.36 (May) pp.373-389.
Lawrence,   R. (1993) "Japan's Low Level of Inward Investment The Role of inhibitions on
         Acquisitions," in ed. K.Froot Contemporary Issues in Foreign Direct Investment, (NBER
         and University of Chicago Press).
Lipsey, R.E., (1993) "Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Changes Over Three Decades".
         in ed. K.Froot Contemporary Issues in Foreign Direct Invesunem, (NBER and University of
         Chicago Press).
Mussa, M. (1982), 'A Model of Exchange Rare Dynamics," Journal of Political Economy vol.90 no.!,
         pp.74-104.
Pindyck, R. (1988), "Irreversible Investment. Capacity Choice, and the Value of the Firm," American
         Economic Review (December) vol.78 pp.969-985.
Rodriguez, R. (1981). Corporate Risk Management Theme and Aberrations," Journal of Finance
         (May) pp.427-439.
Slemrod, 3. (1989), 'Tax Effects on Foreign Direct Investment in the US: Evidence from a Cross
          Country Comparison." NBER working paper #3042 (July).
Stock, 1. (1992), "Unit Roots and Trend Breaks." manuscript (Harvard University).
Wolak, F.A, and CD. Kolstad (1991), "Homogeneous Input Demand Under Price Uncertainty,"
        American Economic Review vol.81: 514-38.




                                               22
Technical Appendix
Proof of Prooosirion 2: Totally differentiate the first-order conditions (7) to obtain:
 2EU d2EU1[dq                     a2Eu
  aq2        aqae            =    aqax
 2Eu 22EU                        —
                                   a'EU
 asaq         as2     jldx        asax
                                                                                                    (A-I)
where EU=EJU(n)] and x can be p.o,ora5. Cramers rule is applied to dcuennine
as/ax and dq/dx We know that the kit-hand side matrix of (A-I) is negative semi-definite, and thus
its determinant is positive, since EU is strictly concave by assumption. Since at an optimum A=B)
(from eq. 7a and lb). and eliminating the minus sign of the right-hand-side vector, the following holds
                      a(A—ra) a(A—Po)
sign
       dO
       —    = —sign      aq               3x       =       (aia aaB = —sign(S)-

                                                       —s:gn,j-.-— —•—-j
                         aq               ax
                                                                                          (A-2a)
                   IaaaA a4an
and sign   = —sag                                                                         (A-2b)
         —        n1,-j -— —-)
Note that              2/' (q)+ P1(q)q_[1+a(l+p2)]<O                                      (A-h)

                                    <0                                                             (A-3b)


                                                                                                   (A-3c)
               =2w 4P(q)_e+P&]=o               4


                                                                                                   (A-3d)



               =
               ax
                        a4a5+2qpa(l—afl , x=p
                        pao_2qyo,a(l+p2)O , x=a,                                             (A-4tb.c)

                        pQ_2Wa(1+a(l+p2))0
                                 x=p
               ax
                                  x=a,                                                        (A-44,e,o
                                          x=o5
The sign of (A-4a) is indeterminate; the sign of the other equations in A-4 follow from Corollazy 1 (i.e
                                                                            a
p 0). Lemma 1. and the proposition assumptions. Only dO/dx for x = can be definitively signed.
Proof of Prooosition 3: Using the above notation it is easy to demonstrate that              and        <0.

Since   p 0, this implies aS cO which implies                 a

                                                         23
Table Al: Data Sources

 Forei2n Direct Investment Series                                                                  -



q9: Bilateral foreign direct investment flows between the United States and Canada.
Japan. and the United Kingdom. Source: The Survey of Current Business.

Country Investment Series
q1: Aggregate investment by each countiy i are non-seasonally adjusted dat&
United States: Non-Residential Fixed Investment, source: the National income and
Product Accounts. Lb
Japan: Gross Fixed Capital Formation, source: Economic Planning Agency (of Japan).
United Kingdom: Gross Fixed Capital Formation, source: Cental Statistical Office, data
reported in Economic Trends 1992 Supplement
Canada: Gross Fixed Capital Formation.

Bilateral Exchan2e Rates
Each bilateral real exchange rate is defined as the product of the source county nominal
bilateral exchange rate multiplied by the destination country price index and divided by the
source country price index. The nominal exchange-rate data are from the international
Financial 5t4stjcs (IMF) and the price indices am CPI data drawn from the OECD.

Real GDP
Nominal (MW for each country i, deflated by the respective CR! series, with data drawn
from the international Financial Statistics (IMF) and the OECD, respectively.

t    The quarterly data are from Unfted States International Transactions Tables", by the United States
Department of Commerce. The series are 'Private Foreign Direct tnveslrnait into the United States' and
 United States Direct Invesmwnc. Private Assets Abroad'.
 b:   We have also conducted all of the regression analysis using a snin.ttw at domestic invesent
net of total net foreign direct investment inflows, in order to adjust icr the foreign sotate Investment
included In the total domestic investment mensures. None of ow results are significantly altered by this
atljustmnent, so we report only the results usng total investment in the denominator.




                                                     24
Table Al                  Descriptive Scatisücs on Variance and Covariance Measwes
                                               (period averages)
                      nomialized std.       correlation: real    nonnalized art
                        dcv. of real       exchange mit and        dcv. of real      destination market
                      exchange care        destination market   destination market        county
                              .
                                              GDP shocks               GDP
                      78-84       85-9 1     78-84 85-9 I         78-84     85-91
yen/US$real          0.094        0.111    -0.397   -0.396    0.038      0.037 UniledSiares
exchange rate                           (89.3%) (85.7%)
pound/USS real      0.098        0.093   0.107       -0.311         —             united Suits
exchange rate                           (42.9%) (82.1%)
CanS/USS real      0.029        0.035    0.109       -0.123         —             United Stases
exchange rate                           (46.4%) (67.9%)
USS/yen real       0.097        0.109    0.025       0.144    0.081      0.079 Japan
exchange race                           (53.6%) (42.9%)
USS/pound real     0.098        0.089    0.145     0.237      0.035      0.042 United Kingdom
exchange rate                           (28.6%) (42.9%)
USS/CanS real      0.030        0.035 -0335        0.199      0.051      0.046 Canada
exchange rate                           (96.4%) (46.4%)
numben in parentheses reflect. respecuwly, the share o(p -CO out of a total o(28 observations in the
1978 to 1984 sample and 24 observations In the 1985 to 1991 sample.




                                                    25
Table     p-values from Augmented Dickey Fuller tests for Unit Roots.
A3        Tests performed using constant & no trend (c), constant     and trend (t), neither constant or
          trend (ci). and with range of lag lengths. UK = Unit Root
                                   United Scales         Canada            Japan               U.K.
                  description       [#ol)s.=52J         F#obs.=521       f#obs.=52]         f#obs.=521
VOl share of                                             Ic: p=S           Ic: p=l            4cp=5
US into                                na.              Reject UK        Reject UK          Reject UK
destination                                                                            .                 .


EDt of source                          na.               Sc: p4           3t p>1O            4c: plO
into US as                                              RejectUR       CannotReject        Cannot Reject
source shaze
p (i.j)               US$1                               4cplO             4n:p$              4n:p=I
                  destination          n.a.         Cannot Reject        Reject [JR         Reject UK
p (Li)            destination!                           4np=l            4n r10             ót p10
                      USS              na.              RejectUR         RejectUR          CannotReject
O (i.j)              US$1
                  destination          na.
                                                         Ic: p=l           1cl
                                                                         Reject [JR
                                                                                             3c: pIG
                                                                                           Cannot Reject
                                                        Reject [JR
O (Lj)            destination/                           Ic: p=l           lcp=1             3c: plO
                      USS              na.              RejectOR         Reject UK         Cannot Reject
realCiDP                             4c:p4               4cp=5           4c:p>IO             5c:plO
volatility                          Reject UK           Reject [JR     Cannot Reject       Cannot Reject
realexchange         US$1              n.a.             3cplO             lcp>lO             óc:plO
rate              destination                       Cannot Reject      Cannot Reject       Cannot Reject
real exchange     destination!         na.              3c: plO           Ic: plO            6c: plO
rate                  USS                           Cannot Reject      Cannot Reject       Cannot Reject
rcaJGDP                              5t:p>l0            6tp>IO            4cp>l0             4tpIO
                                  Cannot Reject     Cannot Reject      Cannot Reject       Cannot Reject
The p-values reported correspond to the highest probability of a unit root over the range of tests
performed using the constant and trend, constant and no trend, and neither constant or trend, and at
various lag lengths. In this way, we have a conservative assessment of unit root telethons.




                                                   26
