                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE TIME VARIATION OF RISK AND RETURN
                        IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKErS:
                      A GENERAL EQUiLIBRIUM PERSPECIIVE



                                       Geert Bekaert




                                  Working Paper No. 4818



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1994


This paper has benefitted from the comments and suggestions of Tim Bollerslev. Jonas Fisher,
Steve Grenadier, David Marshall, Ken Singleton, Mark Watson and the participants in seminars
at Carnegie-Mellon University, UBC, University of Chicago. Stanfoni University, U.C.L.A.,
University of Pennsylvania. the Wharton School, Yale University, Columbia University, New
York University, INSEAD, University of Illinois, the Summer Meeting of the Econometric
Society in Seattle, the Sloane School at M.I.T., the Haas School of Business at UC Berkeley and
the 1993 Joint Statistical Meetings in San Francisco. Special thanks go to Robert Hodrick for
his many suggestions and continuous encouragement. Financial support from a Sloan
Dissertation Fellowship. an NSF-grant and the Financial Services Research Initiative of the
Graduate School of Business at Stanford is gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of
NE ER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Geert Bekaert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4818
                                                                               August 1994



                     THE TIME VARIATION OF RISK AND RETURN
                         IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS:
                       A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM PERSPECTIVE


                                          ABSTRACT


       This paper investigates the statistical properties of high frequency nominal exchange rates

and forward premiums in the context of a dynamic two-country general equilibrium model.

Primary focus is on the persistence1 variability. leptokurtosis and conditional heteroskedasticity

of exchange rates and on the behavior of foreign exchange risk premiums. The model combines

temporal dependencies in preferences with a transaction cost technology that generates arole for

money. Agents in the economy make decisions on a weekly frequency and face shocks which

display time-varying uncertainty. Simulations reveal that the model accounts for the statistical

properties of exchange rate data much more accurately than previous structural models.




Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
                                                    I

                                          INTRODUCTION

   The increasing globalization of financial markets has intensified the need to understand foreign

exchange markets. A large body of empirical research has uncovered many interesting empirical

regularities characterizing foreign exchange markets. The following are four well-known stylized facts.

First, the forward rate is not an unbiased predictor of the future spot rate. Second, exchange rate changes

are highly variable and nearly uncorrelated. Third, forward premiums, which predict exchange rate

changes, are less variable and are highly persistent. Fourth, exchange rates display substantial serial

dependence in their second moments.' Furthermore, conditional heteroskedasticity in exchange rates is

only detectable at high frequencies. At the monthly or quarterly frequency, it is no longer statistically

significant (Baillie and Bollerslev (1989)).     As time-varying second moments imply leptokurtic

unconditional distributions, conditional heteroskedasticity may also be an important source behind the fat

tails in unconditional distributions of exchange rate changes. Exchange rate cbanges are the main

component of forward market returns. As is well-known, these returns are an important component of

the return on wry foreign currency denominated uncovered investment. The first and fourth empirical

facts imply that conditional means and variances of forward market returns vary through time.

    This paper develops a two country monetary general equilibrium model that can potentially generate

such empirical phenomena. The model builds on the representative agent framework of Lucas (1978).

The only friction in the model is the presence of transaction costs which give rise to money being valued

in equilibrium and induces variable velocities. Exchange rate movements reflect changes in relative

money supplies, velocities and outputs whereas time-variation in expected returns reflects time-varying

rewards to consumption and Inflation risk.

    Previous attempts at explaining the significant rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis within a fully

parameterized general equilibrium model have failed dramatically.2 The model developed here has

several features that are likely to improve its performance with respect to the empirical puzzles. First,
                                                   2

I explicitly introduce time-variation in the conditional variances of the market fundamentals. Second, I

assume a wee/dy decision interval for the economic agents.' Third, various forms of temporally

dependent preferences are explored as in Ferson and Constantinides (1991) and Heaton (1993).

    The main novelty of the model here is the combination of time-varying uncertainty in the
fundamentals with a high frequency decision interval for the agents. It is well-known that movements

In conditional variances of market fundamentals cause movements in both expected returns and conditional

variances of asset prices. However, there exists little evidence of time-varying conditional variances in

market fundamentals such as monetary shocks and consumption at the monthly or quarterly frequencies

at which they are usually meisured. As I will explain in more detail below, this might be due to

temporal aggregation which causes time-variation in conditional variances to disappear. The same

phenomenon causes conditional heteroskedasticity in exchange rates to be much weaker when exchange

rates are sampled at lower frequencies.

    The discrete-time framework simplifies the introduction of a rich time-nonseparable preference

structure. Backus, Gregory and Telmer (1993) and Bansal, Gallant, Hussey and Tauchen (1993) also

examine the effects of nonseparabilities in an international model but their preference structure is much

less general than the one used In this paper. Backus, Gregory and Telrner (1993) for instance are

successful In generating more variable forward market risk premiums by allowing strong habit

persistence. However, this comes at the cost of unrealistic values for the autocorrelation structure of

forward premiums. By incorporating both durability of consumption and habit persistence of a long run

nature, I am able to generate more realistic variability and correlation patterns for exchange rates and

forward premiums than previous structural models.

    The model allows characterization of the endogenous joint distribution of forward market returns,

exchange rates and forward premiums as a function of the model's structural parameters and the law of

motion of the stochastic forcing variables. I explore the implications of the model through several
                                                    3

simulation experiments. To impose discipline on the simulations, I estimate the conditional mean

parameters and unconditional second moments of the weekiy law of motion for the forcing processes from

quarterly data on consumption and money growth In the U.S. and the U.K.. The embedded temporal

aggregation problem is resolved relying on results in Bekaert (1992).

   The simulation experiments are designed to accomplish two goals. First, the generality of the model

allows the comparison of the model's predictions for the moments of exchange rate changes, forward

premiums and risk premiums to the predictions of simpler models. In particular, I start from a simple

cash-in-advance (CM) model with time-additive preferences, and show the effects of add Lag transaction

costs, durability, habit persistence and time-varying uncertainty in the fundamentals. The importance of

time-varying uncertainty in the firndamefltals driving foreign exchange markets was stressed by Hodrick

(1989), but the idea had surfaced before in the equity pricing literature. Poterba and Summers (1986)

derive a positive relationship between the persistence of stock market volatility and stock prices in a

simple partial equilibrium model for stock prices whereas Abel (1988) generalizes their results to a

general equilibrium Lucas-type (1978) model. He finds that the effect of dividend riskiness on stock

prices can be in either direction whereas the magnitude of the effect is an increasing function of the

persistence of dividend volatility. I investigate the effect on endogenous moments of both the persistence

and the leptokurtic nature of conditional variance shocks in the fundamentals.

   The second goal of the paper is to examine the effects of various non-linearities in the economic

environment on heteroskedasticity and leptokurtosis in exchange rates and forward premiums. Most

research to date has attempted to model these non-linear patterns with purely statistical models. This is

one of the first papers to address how volatility clustering of financial returns can arise endogenously in

an equilibrium model.4

    To anticipate the results, the simulations reveal that the model performs very well along a number

of dimensions. When consumption exhibits short-nm substitutability and long-run complementarity, the
                                                     4

model comes close to matching the autocorrelation structure of the forward premium in the data. The

risk premium is many times more variable than in a model with time-additive preferences. The

introduction of modestly persistent time-variation in the second moments of the fundamentals at the

weekly level, consistent with the tack of heteroskedasticity in these processes at the quarterly level,

generates substantial beteroskedasticity and fat tails in both exchange rates and forward premiums.

Heteroskedasticity in the forcing processes also substantially increases the variability of the risk premium.

without worsening the fit of the model much along other dimensions. Yet, the variability of the risk

premium does not exceed that of the fbrward premium as is implied by the data.

    The paper is organized as follows. The first section briefly re-examines the empirical evidence for

dollar returns in the Europound market. The second section of the paper presents the model in detail.

The third section of the paper discusses the solution procedure and choice of parameters. The fourth

section contains the simulation results. In the conclusions of the paper, I point out some possible

generalizations of the model.



                                   1. EMPIRICAL REQ ULABITIES

                                          Definition of variables
    The   data set consists of weekly observations on dollar-pound rates and one- and three-month

Eurodollar and Europound interest rates for the 1975-1990 period, but the empirical results are

representative for other major currencies as well. The data are described in more detail in the data

appendix. Asterisks Indicate British pound variables. Consider an investment in a Europound deposit

which carries an Interest rate of i, with n the maturity in weeks. The holding period considered in this

paper Is one month (a 30 day contract), and one month Is approximated by 4 weeks in subsequent

analysis.' Let 5, be the dollar price of a pound. The uncovered dollar return on a continuously

compounded Europound investment is (S,J5,) np(i3. The rate of return is then [as,, + i;J, where
                                                      S

        =


and
      = (as1,,, +    i
            In(S,,,,) - In(S). Hence, the excess rate of return over a Eurodollar deposit is given by:

                         - U. This return also corresponds to the difference between the future spot rate

      the current (onward rate. To see this, l f = ln(F) - ln(SJ, where F is the forward rate for
a n-week contact in dollars per pound. Consider covered interest rate parity in continuously

compounded form:

                                                                                                         (I)

It follows that r1,,, = (ln(S,,,)    - ln(F1_)] and hence, re,,, can also be viewed as the logarithmic
approximation to the return on a long forward position in the pound scaled by the forward rate, i.e.

ln(S1,,) - ln(FJ    (Si,, - FJIF,.. The cx ante return to (onward foreign exchange speculation is denoted

by rp,.:

                                                                                                         (2)
                                     rp, Ejr,,,j — EI(E a.sj -+p.,

with as1 referring to weekly exchange rate changes.

                                    Time series propenies of the variables

      Means, standard deviations and autocorrelations of Sc and (p.,,, are reported in Table 1, Panel A.

To summarize the autocorrelation structure of the variables, I report variance ratios. The variance ratio

of a stationary time series (x..fl for a horizon of k periods is defined as:



                                                   var(E;.)
                                                      3-0
                                                                                                         (3)
                                               k (k+1) var(x)

The variance ratio can be consistently estimated as:



                                            tk" 1+2E(1_r41)k

with        the sample autocorrelation of order j for     (xjI.1. The variance ratio is one for a serially
       b
                                                     6

uncorrelated time series, is less than one if negative autocorrelations dominate and is greater than one if

positive autocorrelations dominate.

    Panel A in Table 1 also explores the presence of leptokurtosis and heteroskedasticity in the two series.

To remove the serial correlation from the forward premium series, it was simply differenced.

Autocorrelations and variance ratios are then computed for the squared differenced series. Under the null

of conditional homoskedasticity, the autocorrelations equal zero and the variance ratios equal one.

    Panel B in Table I focusses on cross-correlations. The cross-correlations between                as,,,
as,2,   as1,, and 4,.., are related to what is known as the unbiasedness issue. When future exchange rate

changes are regressed onto a constant and the forward premium, the slope coefficients are typically

negative rather than one.' The sum of the 4 cross-correlations mentioned above times the ratio of the

standard deviation of exchange rate changes to the standard deviation of the forward premium provides

an estimate of this slope coefficient. The coefficient is estimated at -2.116 with a standard error of

.761.' The fitted value of this regression can be used to compute a lower bound to the standard

deviation of the risk premium. The lower bound on risk premium volatility is estimated at 10.841 % in

annualized terms with a standard error of 2.847%.'

    From these tables, several regularities emerge that a successful model should match:

(1) Exchange rate changes show some positive persistence but the autocorrelations are generally small.

On the other hand, the forward premium is very persistent. I term this regularity the 'persistence

puzzle'.
(II) Exchange rate changes are many times more variable than the forward premium whereas the risk

premium in the British pound forward market Is also extremely variable. In fact, o(M.,) > a(rp,J

> c(fp). I refer to this relative variability property as the 'volatility puzzle'.

(Ill) Forward premiums and exchange rates exhibit marked positive serial dependence in their second

moments and substantial leptokurtosis. Somewhat surprisingly, heteroskedasticity and leptokurtosis are
                                                    7
even stronger for forward premiums than they are for exchange rate changes. The predictability of

exchange rate changes by the forward premium extends to the second moments (Panel B), but the

correlations are generally weaker and less precisely measured.




                               2. TIlE ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT

   In this section, I describe the agents' preferences, budget constraints      and   the Euler equations

detennining important endogenous variables. I also show how exchange rates are determined and forward

contracts priced. In addition, some further intuition is given on why this model might perform better than

previous models with respect to the empirical puzzles mentioned above.

                                       Description of the model

   The model analyzed in this paper is a generalization of the two country model proposed by Lucas

(1982). Each country has its own money, which grows at a stochastic rate, and its own endowment tree,

which yields stochastically growing "home' or 'foreign' consumption goods. Identical infinitely-lived

representative agents in both countries maximize the expected discounted sum of a von Neumann-

Morgenstern utility function subject to a sequence of budget constraints.

   To derive the budget constraint, consider the period by period problem facing the domestic

representative agent. Each period, she purchases home goods x and foreign goods yt which are priced

in the respective currencies with prices P (ix,y). The exchange rate St converts the price of the foreign

good into units of the home currency. Whereas in Lucas's model consumption purchases have to be

financed with money, I assume that money balances diminish the transaction costs associated with buying

consumption goods. In particular, let m, (a) be the level of home (foreign) real money balances held by

the household. The transaction cost functions tX4,mJ and t"(y,n,) are decreasing in own real balances

and increasing in the amount of goods bought (see also Marshall (1992) and Bansal, Gallant, Ilussey and

Tauchen (1993)). The domestic household also chooses the level of home and foreign money balances
                                                          S

M•1, respectively Nt,1, to be carried over to the next period and acquires asset holdings. summarized

in the vector ;,. Asset prices are stacked lathe vector Q,. All purchases have to he made with current

nominal wealth W,, denominated in the home currency. Wealth consists of the money holdings chosen

last period and the current market value of the asset holdings including stochastic payoffs (dividends) D,.

The home consumer's budget constraint Is then given by':


                   P' (y•1 +t"(x14,znj) + S, F,' (y,1 + tY(y,d.n)) + ;'. Q, +   + S,N11 W,

                   W,—;'(Q1+D) + M,d+ S,N11

                                                   Preftrentea

    As in Eichenbaum and Hansen (1990). preferences are time separable over the service flows s and

st derived from past consumption purchases of the home good x and the foreign good y:



                                                        if u(s',s')                                   (6)


    Following Ferson and Constantinides (1991) and Heaton (1993), 1 assume that goods are durable and

that consumers form habits over the services derived from them. Let k be the stock of home

consumption goods which depreciates at the rate l-g and h the habit stock defined over past service

flows. I assume:




                                                                                                      (7)
                                          h-t1 (1-8,) E
                                          a,' -k,'-h
Note that ,, is the sum of the habit weightc, and that decreasing 9, will increase habit effects at short

lags.

    Nonsepanbilities embedded in this preference specification are apparent from considering the
                                                     9

expression for marginal utility in this context. The marginal utilityderived from a purchase of the home

good today is given by:

                                                —          %(t I
                                     mux1—E1( a,                   ]                               (8)



where a, are weights that follow from (1)


                                    a,'     q (1 )
                                    0<11<1       O<flL<l 0<02<1
    It is well-known that nonseparable preferences give rise to more variable intertemporal marginal rates

of substitution Qiencefonh, IMRS) and asset prices (see for instance Hansen and Jagannathan (1991)).

Habit forming utility might also account for the "persistence puzzle" mentioned above. In the continuous-

time model of Sundaresan (1989), which features exogenous returns and endogenous consumption, habit

formation induces very smooth and persistent consumption streams. In my model, the service technology

transforms the exogenous endowment shocks into persistent service flows. This implies that endowment

shocks have very prolonged effects on future IMRS. As a consequence, they will cause revisions in

expectations of IMRS not only now but also in the future. Hence, the predictable parts of IMRS, interest

 rates (see below), might become very persistent as they are in the data.

     I explore two commonly used specifications for the utility function which are special cases of the

 general preference framework in Eichenbaum and Hansen (1990). The first utilityfunction is homothetic

 with intratemporal substitution between the "home" and "foreign" service flow equal to one.


                                    ___________ —1                                                 (10)
                                                            ÔE(0,l)
                                          17
 The parameter S is a non-negative share parameter and ' is a curvature parameter. The second

 specification is the so-called addiog utility function:
                                                    10


                                           • (s,')'' + (Y)ly                                         (11)
                                              1-y        1-y
    Although the combination of a multigood economy with nonseparable preferences complicates the

interpretation of the utility parameters, I associate high values of the curvature parameter y with high risk

aversion (low elasticity of intertemporal substitution) and vice versa.'0

                                        Transaction cost function

    The transaction cost function is parameterized as a Cobb-Douglas function in the amount purchased

x (y) and real money balances in (n).


                  t(x,ni) —c1x'-m1'      t'(y,n) =c,y"n'-        c1,c,>0             >1             (12)

The function is increasing in x, decreasing in m and homogeneous of degree I. The transaction cost

technology embeds a CIA (cash-in-advance) constraint (when E -.       , i=x,y).
                                               Equilibriwn

    The home household maximizes (6) over                               subject to the budget constraint in

(5). An analogous problem is solved by the foreign representative resident. For markets to clear, the

money demands in both countries must equal the supplies and the consumption demands including the

incurred transaction costs must exhaust the endowments. With the additional assumption of complete

markets, the risk averse representative agents of both countries will share all risks. This leads to a

tractable perfectly pooled equilibrium, introduced in Lucas (1982), in which no wealth re-distributions

occur, agents consume constant fractions of the endowments and bold constant fractions of the market

portfolio of assets)'

                                         Endogereous varlabtes

    In our frictionless world, the dollar price of an asset is the expected value of its nominal payoff

discounted by the dollar IMRS. Let's denote the dollar IMRS by mrs,. It relates the marginal utility

of wealth at the time of the payoff, \+, to the marginal utility of wealth at time t when the asset is
                                                        11

purchased, >.,:


                                                                                                     (13)



where   S is the discount factor. An analogous stochastic discount factor applies to assets that pay off in

pounds. The X's are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the sequence of budget constraints. The

law of one price implies that the relative value of the marginal utility of pounds versus dollars determines

the dollar/pound exchange rate:

                                                                                                     (14)

where   asterisks refer to pound variables. This indicates that the dollar will depreciate if its marginal

utility decreases relative to the marginal utility of the pound. The home (foreign) interest rate L (i_)

is the net return on a nominal bond yielding one dollar (pound) at time t+n. Hence.


                                  - —ln(E1(mrç,,   J)        i.,.
                                                                    —
                                                                        —ln(E,Imrc])                 (15)

If market fundamentals move so as to increase the expected marginal utility of the dollar, the dollar

interest rate decreases, as It Is the required return on an asset that pays off dollars when they are

relatively valuable. As the forward premium is Just the interest differential, the pound is at a discount

if the value of the dollar's marginal utility is expected to increase more than that of the pound.

    Once expressions for X and )s     are   found, equation (14) yields the exchange rate and the domestic

and foreign interest rates follow from (15). Using the formulas in equations (I) and (2), the forward

premium and risk premium can be computed. Since X, is the marginal utility of a dollar, it equals the

total expected marginal utility of consumption divided by the transaction cost adjusted price of one unit

of the home consumption good:
                                                       12


                                                       mux,
                                                                                                  (16)
                                                (1 +   ät'(t))ps

where t'(t) is short-band for t'(xt,m) evaluated at the equilibrium and mux, was given in equation (8).

    Define consumption velocity V,' as the endowment net of transaction costs times the price level

divided by the money supply? In equilibrium, the first derivatives of the uansaction cost function only

depend on velocity:


                             at'(t) .cj(V1')' at'(t) —c,(l )(V'/                                   (17)


Velocity can be solved for from the intertemporal Euler equation. To derive the intertemporal Euler

equation heuristically, consider saving one dollar today. The marginal cost of this action equals the

marginal utility of a dollar, A. The marginal benefit of the dollar tomorrow not only includes the

marginal utility of wealth tomorrow but also an additional return as the dollar reduces transaction costs.

Hence,


                             mux,       -   E          mux,1       1_ar(t+1)
                                                                       am                          (IS)
                         (j8t'(t))p11
                               ax
                                            '1(1.8t'(t'1))pz
                                                    ax

where m denotes real balances at time t+1. An analogous procedure yields X.

                      Specification of the law of motion of the forcing processes

    In the simple economy described above, agents are subject to money supply and endowment shocks.

Money and endowment growth rates are assumed to be observed weekly by the economic agents. Let M

(N's) be the home (foreign) money supply, and let x (y) be the home (foreign) endowments.

Furthermore, let X, =                                                  I assume the law of motion for X

to follow:
                                                       13



                                       A(L)X-;.M(L)ç
                                       ci 9 — N(O,H)
                                                                                                       (19)
                                        '.w1.b1b111.c&LJ' i—1,2,3,4

                                       h11—p(h5(h,1)

with   a0 a vector   of constants, A(L), M(L) polynomials in the lag-operator, ç a 4x1 vector   of innovations
with conditional covariance matrix H and 2 the information set at time t.          The time variation in the

second moments is parsimoniously modelled by a constant correlation GARCH (1,1) model (see

Bollerslev (1990)). This model has been vexy successful in capturing volatility clustering in financial

series (see the survey in Bollerslev, Chou and Xroner (1992)).

    The conditional mean specification is motivated, estimated and tested below. Time-varying second

moments    in the exogenous forcing processes are potentially important determinants of risk premiums in

the forward market. Previous attempts at modelling the time-series behavior of exchange rates (Ilodrick

(1929)) or the risk premium (Canon and Marrinan (1993), Kaminsky and Peruga (1990)) by explicitly

allowing for conditionally heteroskedastic forcing processes, have not been very successful. These

models assume that the decision interval       of the representative agents coincides with the monthly or

quarterly interval at which the data were sampled. The failure to produce a variable enough risk

premium is then due to the lack of sufficient time-variation in the second moments of consumption and

money measures.

   Time aggregation is an important issue here for two reasons. First of all, using highly aggregated

data to estimate a conditional variance model might lead to poor estimates of the true heteroskedasticity

in the data. A nice illustration is contained in Drost and Nijman (1993), who estimate GARC}! models

for various exchange rate series at different frequencies. They find that a monthly model implied by a

daily or weekly model contains strong conditional heteroskedasticity although the homoskedasticity

assumption could not be rejected by direct estimation of the monthly model. Second, the fact that time-
                                                     14

averaged consumption data are used instead      of spot consumption changes, might severely distort the

measurement of consumption risk and the covariance between consumption and money.                 Both are

important components of the risk premium in this model?



                         3. SOLVING AN) CALIBRATING THE MODEL

    In this section, I first define the parameter and state vector for the model and briefly discuss bow the

model Is solved numerically. Since the model is too complex to allow estimation of all the parameters.

I also discuss the choice of a set of benchmark parameter values. Finally, I describe the estimation

technique for a sub-set of the parameters.

                                      Nwnerical solution oft/it model

    The economic environment can be summarized by the parameters 4', the state vector 0, and a set of

Euler equations that the endogenous variables must satisfy. I partition the parameter space as 4' =

where   Z stacks the parameters of the law of motion of the forcing processes and U =

[P,7.q,c,.c,Ei,EpgL1,fl1.O1,p,,qO71   with 7 denoting the curvature parameter of the utility function and

q=y for addilog utility, and q=b for homothetic utility. It will be useful to further partition the
parameter space as follows. Let Z1 denote the parameters governing the conditional mean equation and

the unconditional variances and correlations of the four exogenous processes and let Z2 denote the

parameters governing the time variation in the conditional variances [b, cj C' 1,2,3,4). Hence, Z =

(Z1',Z']'. Furthermore, let 0 = [U',U']', with 1 = [$,a,7.cc,,E,E,] and U21p,.n..O.as,n,,G,).
    Conditional on estimates for (Z,0J, the state vector 0 of the model can be determined. The growth

rates for the exogenous state variables are denoted by, for example, gin1 = M/M:, (analogous definitions

apply to gx, gn, gy). The conditional variances           are in the time t information set and also part of

the state vector. Because of the constant correlation GARCH model, they suffice to forecast future

conditional variances and co-variances. The stock of durables and the habit stock are introduced in
                                                    15

stationary format by dividing by consumption levels as is done in Heaton (1993). Hence,

   = [1, g, gx, gn, gy0            b÷1,                   k/x, kIy, hIx, hIy'J'
   The crucial endogenous variables to be solved for are the velocities (equation (18)) and the marginal

utilities (equation (8)). Once these variables are solved for, the other endogenous variables follow

straightforwardly. The solution technique proceeds in two steps. First, a stationary representation of the

relevant Euler equations is obtained where all variables depend only on the stationary state vector defined

above. Then the endogenous variables are approximated by polynomials in the state variables and the

Euler equations are numerically solved using the approach of Judd (1990). To evaluate expectations, I

use Monte Carlo integration as in Heaton (1993) with 4,000 observations. A detailed description of the

solution technique can be found in the appendix.

                                         Parameter Calibration

    For the homothetic utility specification I let 0, = (.99(", 1.1, .5, .09, .09, 2.5. 2.5]', for the

addiog utility specification I let 0 = I.97S°'                       09, 2.5, 2.5]'. As described in the

appendix, these parameters are calibrated to imply reasonable velocity and interest rate behavior in the

non-stochastic steady state of the model and to imply low ansaction costs. Previous estimates of the

curvature parameter in the utility function vary wildly but they are often quite low." Although the

current specification of 03 imposes discipline on the simulations, I explore the implications of the model

for a setting with more curvature in the utility function as well.

    The 03-parameters are chosen as follows: i=i,.75 O=8,=.95 ç=p=.?&. With                         = .76,

the half-life of durability is 2.5 weeks and three quartns of consumption vanishes within the month. This

is consistent with the parameter estimates of Dunn and Singleton (1986) and Eichenbaum and Hansen

(1990), since, as in these papers, consumption here is also measured as Nondurables and Services.'3 The

sum of the habit weights i. is based on the parameter estimates of Ferson and Constantinides (1991) and

Heaton (1993), which vary between .60 and .95. Estimates of simple nonseparability parameters typically
                                                       16

typically favor durability when monthly data are used and favor habit persistence when quarterly or

annual   data are used. As Heaton (1993) stresses, these two findings can be plausibly reconciled by a

parameter configuration in which durability dominates In the short run and habit effects in the long run.

Or, lnthenotationofequation), a,> Oforsmallrand a, < Oforlarger. Thisrequires:

                                      i1(1—6,)   )L1        O+i (1—8)                                (20)

My choice of          implies positive a, within the quarter, and negative a, from the 9th month onwards.

As I do not know of any similar estimation exercises for the U.K., I fix these parameter values at the

same levels as chosen for the U.S..

    The parameters 2 are partially estimated using data on empirical proxies to the endowment and

money supply shocks. I interpret the endowments as per capita consumption of nondurables and services

in the U.S. (the home country) and the U.K. (the foreign country), respectively. The monetary shocks

are assumed to be shocks to a broad money concept in these countries.'6 These data are sampled

quarterly, which introduces a temporal aggregation problem into the estimation. In general, an attempt

to Identify parameters from a weekly model with quarterly data is plagued with the aliasingproblem (see

for instance Hansen and Sargent (1983), Nijman and Palm (1990)). There could be many models that

yield observationally equivalent laws otmotion for the quarterly data. Below! motivate a particular form

for the general law of motion in equation (19) which has the implication that E, is identifiable from

quarterly data. The parameter vector 2, can then be estimated by the General Method of Moments

(Hansen (1982)).

    Diebold (1986) proves that GARCH processes converge to unconditional normality under temporal

aggregation, which might make it practically difficult to identify 2, from quarterly data)' Therefore,

I do not attempt to estimate these parameters from the data. I further simplify interpretation of the results

by assuming b1 =b, and q=cj. IJ= 1,..4. Note that this does not imply that the conditional variances

of the forcing processes are identical or that they are perfectly correlated, only that they move similarly
                                                    17

over time, e.g. they have identical persistence. In the benchmark case, I put b=.8O, c1.13, for all i.
Taken as a univariate GARCH-model, this paraineterization implies a kurtosis coefficient of .91 and a

half-life of conditional variance shocks of 3 weeks. This is about half the kurtosis and persistence of

conditional variance shocks implied by a univariate GMtCH(ll) model estimated from the weekly

pound/S exchange rate data used in this paper? The conditional heteroskedasticity assumed at the

weekly level is also weak enough so that it disappears when the data are time-aggregated.'9 In simulanon

exercises below, I explore various patterns of time variation in the second moments of the forcing

processes and their implications for exchange rate bthavior.

   This completes the discussion of the parameter calibration. In what follows, I first further discuss

the estimation of !. In the next section, 1 report all empirical results, including the estimation results

for E and extensive simulation results.

                                              Estimating

    I estimate the following simple parameterization of the general conditional mean specification in (19):

                                                 a11LO 0 0

                                                   0 0 ç1L                                          1)
                                     M(L)=I

In words, the money processes follow an ARIMA(1,l,0), whereas the consumption processes are

martingales but the innovations of all four series are assumed to be correlated. While this model seems

very simple, I will show that it generates sufficiently rich dynamics at the quarterly frequency to be

consistent with the data.

    To motivate this simple model, consider the time-series properties of the forcing processes in Table

2.' The autocorrelations of the first differenced series, reported in Panel A, show that it would be hard

to reject the hypothesis that the first autocorrelation of both consumption series is .25 and that the second
                                                    18

autocorrelation is zero. The monetary aggregates are much more persistent than the consumption series.

Panel B contains the results of a VAR on the 4 variables. Tests on the VAR order support a first order

VAR. For each equation, I perform a Wald test for the joint significance of the coefficients on the

variables other than the lagged left band side variable. Note the significant cross-effects, particularly in

the U.K. equations. A test of the hypothesis that the innovation covariances are jointly zero also rejects.

Diagnostic tests on the residuals of the first order VAR detect little evidence of significant serial

correlation, heteroskedasticity or deviations from normality, with the exception of some remaining serial

correlation in the US. consumption equation residuals.

    I argue that these data patterns can be consistent with the simple law of motion specified in (19)

because of temporal aggregation: The effects of time-averaging flow variables are well-known. In my

model an additional complication arises because of the log-transformation. I choose to approximate logs

of arithmetic averages with geometric averages as in Hall (1988) and Heaton (1993), i.e. I assume:



                                                                                                     (22)


A time-averaged random walk implies a first order autocorrelation of .25 (Working (1960)). For money,

a stock variable, temporal aggregation will introduce an additional MA-component. As is shown in

Bekaert (1992), the implied quarterly law of motion of the ARJMA(1,l ,O) specification is ARIMA(I .1,1),

which is potentially consistent with the data patterns.

    The VAR tests show that the forcing variables are correlated which is accommodated through the

assumption of correlated residuals in (19). The significant cross-effects in the conditional means might

also be due to a time-aggregation effect. Bekaert (1992) gives a detailed description of the restrictions

that the weekiy model imposes on quarterly data and provides an identification proof for a model that

embeds the parameterization in equation (19). Hence, the estimation of Z1 is not subject to the aliasing

critique.
                                                    19

   The model specified in (19) and (21) has 12 parameters: the two autocorrelalion coefficients of the

money processes and the distinct elements of the unconditional covariance matrix ofthe innovations, V1.

To guarantee positive semi-definiteness of V,, I estimate its Cholesky-decomposition. I estimate the
parameters by standard (1MM. Let X contain the de-meaned quarterly observations on log-differences

of money and consumption. Consider the function f(XJ that maps a subset of the data sample into a

vector-valued stochastic process such that (1(F) V fQCJ is a vector of sample moments at time t. Let

E[f(Z11XJJ represent the corresponding vector of population moments. The parameters Z1 are estimated

with 16 orthogonality conditions, using the moments EIf(XJ1)] =[vech(EQ X,J')',E[X4 X,], E[X{..

Z..]1'   for all i and for j = 1.3 with the indexing being the same as for X. As these moments are

analytically known, construction of the orthogonality conditions is ulvial. The estimation is done with

a weighting matrix put equal to the inverse of a consistent estimate of the spectral density at frequency

zero of the orthogonality conditions. The latter is estimated using a Bartlett kernel with an optima]'

bandwidth of 3 (Andrews (1991)). The estimation imposes 4 over-identifying restrictions which can be

tested. To test the validity of the model, various other restrictions of the model will be tested using the

methodology from Eichenbaum, Hansen and Singleton (1988).



                                      4. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

                                             Estimation of Z,

    Table 3 contains the estimation results for Z1. The estimation yields very persistent money supply

rules. The parameters of the innovation covariance matrix are reasonably precisely estimated. The table

reports the resulting standard deviations and correlations. The t(4) test statistic of the over-identifying

restrictions is 4.157 with a p-value of .385. indicating that there is no evidence against the restrictions.

    The C-statistics, reported in the table, test some other restrictions implied by the model. The first

set of restrictions tested is the implication of the model's weekly law of motion for consumptionthat the
                                                  20

second   autocovariance of quarterly consumption data ought to be zero. The second set of restrictions

concerns the cross-moments of the quarterly variables. In general, the first order covariance of the

quarterly measured data is non-zero but restricted by the weekiy model. I test 6 cross-moment

restrictions: the covariance between U.S. money and lagged U.K. money (and vice versa), between U.S.

consumption and lagged U.K. consumption (and vice versa) and between U.S. (U.K.) consumption and

lagged U.S. (U.K.) money. All these covariances were among the strongest in the VAR estimated on

quarterly data. As the table shows, none of the tests performed rejects the restrictions imposed by the

simple weekly model.

                         Sinwiation results: Variability and persistence puzzle

    Simulation results are reported for a CIA-model, the model with time-additive preferences, the model

with durability only, the model with durability and habit persistence and finally for the complete model

incorporating time-varying uncertainty in the fundamentals.

                                           (1) A CIA-Model

    First, consider the case of addilog preferences in Table 4. Panel A contains simulations for the

benchmark parameter values, whereas Panel C increases the curvature parameter for the utility function

to 2. In a CIA-model with time-additive preferences, expressions for as11 and           in terms of the

exogenous processes are given by:




                                            ;
                            Ac,1 =(y—1)[1nt!—ln±] +ln.!2 —ln!
                                                   y1'        M,'    Nt
                                                                                                 (23)




                                                                                                 (24)

where u indicates the conditional mean of ln(JJj'J, j=M,N,x,y and v is a constant depending on the

(co-) variances of the forcing processes. When ' = I (log-utility), exchange rates only depend on money

and are consequently highly persistent and not very variable. Likewise, forward premiums arevery
                                                    21

persistent and show considerable variance because future money supplies are highly predictable. When

y differs from I, exchange rates also depend on the supply shocks, which are uncorrelated (see above).

Therefore, their variability increases and their persistence drops, which is apparent from both Panels A

and C.

    For the homothetic utility case, exchange rates only depend on the money processes and inherit their

persistence. The CIA model, in general, seems to over-predict the persistence of exchange rates and

under-predict its variability. The simple model implies realistic forward premium volatility and under-

predicts its persistence at long horizons.

                                    (2) introducing Transaction Costs

    Intuition on the effects of the different features of the model is best served by focussing on Panet C

The transaction cost technology induces variable velocities. Variable velocity acts as an additional

demand shock and both increases the variability of currency depreciation and dilutes the persistence that

is injected by the highly autocorrelated money rules. However, it also implies less predictable IMRS.

making their predictable parts, interest rates, less variable and less persistent.

                                        (3) introducing Durabiiry

    Introducing durability potentially provides a remedy to this persistence puzzle. Suppose the agent

expects high home endowment growth. Because she desires to smooth consumption, she attempts to

consume part of the bumper crop now. As she is constrained by her present income, she attempts to sell

bonds hence driving up interest rates which makes her willing to buy her share of the current endowment.

With durability, a positive shock builds into the service flows and is likely to cause a revision of

expectations in the next period aswell, hence injecting more persistence in interest rates. The high

depreciation rate 1-M. and the lack of any correlation in the original endowment growth rates reduce the

potential impact of durability. Also note that the IMRS are just about as variable here as they were in

the time-additive model, so that exchange rate variability is virtually unaffected.
                                                    22

                                    (4) liuroducing Habit Persistence

    The next column reports the results for the benchmark parameter configuration but with Z2 still set

equal to 0. It offers the most satisfactory match with the data. The economic intuition behind the results

is straightforward. With habit formation, consum&s are more reluctant to diverge from smooth

consumption streams. One could interpret the habit stock as a subsistence level of which it is very painful

to deviate. This leads to more variable IMRS, exchange rates and forward premiums: when the

fundamentals change or expectations get revised, bigger price movements are needed to induce agents

to hold the endowments. Although the model matches forward premium volatility, exchange rate

variability is still somewhat too low. This specification also comes close to explaining the persistence

puzz.1e. The persistent service flows generated under this preference specification generate substantial

persistence in endogenous interest rates, but the model still fails to deliver the persistence observed in

forward premium data. On the other hand, the supply shocks cause a large enough forecast error in the

IMRS to keep the persistence of exchange rates low. Strikingly, exchange rates show significant mean

reversion at long horizons?' This is also due to the long-run habit persistence built in. A positive home

supply shock weakens the dollar by reducing its marginal utility. The endowment adds to the stock of

durables and hence affects the marginal utility of the dollar next period as well. Of course, new shocks

mitigate this effect and the positive persistence induced by this is not very high. The higher service flow

today also adds to the habit stock tomorrow and the higher habit stock eventually increases the marginal

utiliiy of the dollar causing the negative correlations. As expected, negative correlations start to dominate

after two months.

    When y is dropped to .2 In the benchmark case, the performance of alt models is dismal. They all

severely under-predict both the persistence and variability of exchange rate changes and forward

premiums. Clearly, there has to be some curvature in the utility function for habit persistence to generate

any significant effects.
                                                    23

   With homothetic preferences (Panel B), exchange rate changes and the forwardpremium become less

variable and the forward premium somewhat less persistent. Agents have utility over a geometric average

of the two service flows which implies smoother marginal utilities and IMiRS.

                     (5) introducIng Time-varying Urtcenalnry in the Fundamentals

    As all three panels show, the model under-predicts the varianceof the risk premium by several orders

of magnitude. Although habit persistence increases the standard deviation of the risk premium somewhat,

the biggest effects are observed when time-varying uncertainty in the forcing processes is allowed for.

Risk premium volatility is larger by a factor of over 2 (Panel A) to over 4 (Panel C). compared to the

case without heteroskedasticity in the forcing processes. Time-varying uncertainty also increases the

variability of both exchanEe rates and forward premiums. Still, even with ' = 2, risk premium

variability in the data is more than 50 times larger than in the model!

   To sum up. the benchmark model performs better than previous models do but stills provides a very

poor fit with the data. With risk aversion modesdy higher than log-utility however, the model performs

relatively well with respect to the persistence puzzle although it produces too much mean reversion in

exchange rates and somewhat under-predicts the persistence of forward premiums. On the other hand,

it fails drastically with respect to the variability premium puzzle, producing o(&,3 >        a(J       >

u(rp) instead of c(As,) > o(rp._)> o().
                        Sinndafion results: Risk, uncertainty and exchange razes

   The previous section has shown, that introducing conditional heteroskedasticity in the model's market

fundamentals substantially Increases the variability of the risk premium. In this section, I want to address

two additional questions. One Is whether the model can produce fat tails and/or heteroskedasticity in

weekly exchange rates and the forward premium and how much of these endogenous non-linearities are

due to the heteroskedasticity in the forcing processes. Secondly, I want to further explore the effect on

equilibrium exchange rate moments of different patterns of heteroskedasticity in the forcing processes.
                                                   24
    Table 5 shows the kurtosis coefficient of exchange rate changes and the differenced forward premium,

and variance ratios for the squared series. The additional non-linearities introduced by variable velocity,

durability and habit persistence help to generate leptokurtosis and conditional heteroskedasticity in the

endogenous variables. Nevertheless, the non-linearities induced in exchange rates are fairly weak whereas

there is already quite some fat tails and serial dependence in the second moments of the differenced

forward premium. In fact, for both benchmark specifications the model with habit persistence generates

moments for the differenced forward premium that are almost within a two standard error band of the

observed moments.

    When time-varying uncertainty is introduced, all moments in all three specifications are within or

very near a two standard thor band of the observed moments. The moment that seems the hardest to

match and is under-predicted is the leptokurtosis in exchange rate changes.

    Next I examine the Importance of both the persistence of conditional variance shocks to the

fundamentals and the leptoknrtic nature of the shocks. The former is governed by the coefficient on past

variances in the GARCH specification whereas the later is primarily governed by the coefficient on past

residuals. In a first experiment, the kurtosis coefficient is fixed at its benchmark value and I vary b1 so

as to generate a half-life of conditional variance shocks varying between I and 20 weeks. In a second

experiment. I fix the persistence of conditional variance shocks (i.e. b1 =.80), but I adapt c1 so as to

generate kurtosis coefficients varying between 0.01 and 6.0. To conserve space, I do not report the full

results but offer a brief discussion. First, at the benchmark parameters, varying the conditional variance

properties has only minor effects on the variability of the endogenous variables. When ris set equal to

2 however, increasing the exogenous kurtosis coefficient from 0.01 to 6.0 doubles the variability of the

risk premium, although It only leads to modest increases in exchange rate and forward premium

variability. Increasing the persistence of conditional variance shocks mainly increases the persistence of

the forward premium without having significant effects on the variability of the endogenous variables.
                                                     25

Second, not surprisingly, there are substantial effects on the non-linear behavior of the endogenous

variables.   Generally, a small degree of nonlinearities in the         forcing process, coupled with the
nonlinearities in the model, generates non-linear patterns in exchange rate changes and forward premiums

that are consistent with what Is observed in the data. For instance, there are different ways to generate

a kurtosis coefficient of around 2.0 for exchange rate changes, which is less than 1 standard error below

the sample moment of 3.0. In particular, the exogenous kurtosis coefficient can be increased to 4.0 or

it can be kept at Its benchmark value of .91 and the half life of conditional variance shocks can be

increased from 3 weeks to about 10 weeks. As I will show below, the same effect can be accomplished

through changing preference parameters as well.

                                  Sinwlaflon results: Sensitivity analysis

        To further explore the performance of the model, I vary respectively the curvature parameter,

the habit weight parameter and the curvature parameter in the transaction cost technology, keeping the

other parameters in the benchmark specifications constant. These three parameters are important

determinants of the level of non-linearity in the model. Figure 1 shows the effect on 9 moments of

changing the curvature parameter in the addilog specification. Similar graphs for the other experiments

are available from the author on request. The moments involved are the standard deviation of exchange

rate changes, the forward premium and the risk premium, the variance ratio Qiorizon 13) for exchange

rate changes and the forward premium, the kurtosis coefficient for exchange rate changes and the forward

premium and the variance ratio Qorizon 13) for squared exchange rate changes and the squared

differenced forward premium. The full horizontal Jine represents the sample value whereas the dotted

horizontal lines are two standard error bands around the sample value. The parameter y is varied

between 0 and 5.5 whereas the other parameters are fixed at their benchmark values.

   In discussing the results of the sensitivity analysis, let us first focus on the volatility and persistence

puzzles (Figures Ia and ib). Increasing the curvature parameter, the sum of the habit weights or the
                                                    26

curvature parameter in the transaction cost technology has similar effects, albeit in differing degrees. The

                                                             premium and the risk premium alike
variability of IMRS and hence of exchange rates, the forward

increases. Risk premium variability becomes only more realistic at a relatively high level of curvature

in the utility function or high values for the habit weight parameter. For instance,for        y>    4, risk

premium variability is within the two standard error band. Exchange rate variability and forward

premium volatility can be matched, but not sinuiltaneously. The effect of more habit persistence is

minimal in the addilog case, as there is not enough curvature in the utility function. Increasing the habit

weight also has ambiguous effects on the persistence punle. Forward premium persistence goes up,but

the model generates more mean reversion in exchange rates. Finally, the model does very well in

generating realistic non-linear patterns in the forward premiums and exchange rate changes over a quite

broad parameter range (see Figure ic).          Note how increasing 7 also increases the endogenous

leptokurtosis and heteroekedasticty in exchange rate changes. When -y is larger than 5, leptokurtosis in

exchange rates becomes unrealistically high. Generally, the effects of changing the transaction cost

technology parameter are less pronounced.

    In changing other preference parameters, the most favorable effect occurs when 6 is increased. This

increases the long memory in the service flows. The effects on the addilog utility case with y       = 2 of

increasing 6 to .97 can be seen in the EXP I-column in Table 4, Panel C. The variability of exchange

rates is now within one standard error of the sample moment, whereas the persistence         of the forward

premium also increases. Although the variability     of the forward premium is too high, it does increase

percentage wise less than the variability of the risk premium does.

    Lastly,   t is possible to specify parameter configurations for which the standard deviation of the risk
premium is within 2 standard errors of the sample standard deviation, withoutincreasing the curvature

parameter too much. As shown in the EXP III column of Table 4, Panel C, this comes at the cost of far

too variable exchange rates and forward premiums. In the EXP II column, the same parameters are used
                                                    27

but without heteroskedasticity. This once again shows the dramatic effect of adding time-varying

uncertainty in the fundamentals to the model. Relative to EXP II, time-varying uncertainty almost

doubles the variability of forward premiums and exchange rate changes and leads to a more than tenfold

increase in the volatility of the risk premium.

    The failure of the model to generate sufficient risk premium volatility also surfaces in the correlations

between future spot changes and the current forward premium. Not a single experiment in all my

simulations yields negative correlations!

                                            CONCLUSIONS

    Standard frictionless monetary general equilibrium models fail to explain the relative variability and

persistence of exchange rates, and the forward and risk premium. They also fail to capture their non-

linear behavior. In this paper, I maintained a frictionless rational expectations model but introduced a

more realistic decision interval for the representative agents and more realistic preferences incorporating

various forms of thne nonseparabilities. The combination of time-varying uncertainty in the fundamentals

and time aggregation was shown to be an important factor in explaining the risk premium punle.

Simulation results indicated that the risk premium can be made several orders of magnitude more variable

than in previous models without implying very unrealistic endogenous moments for exchange rate changes

and the forward premium. The non-linearities embedded in the model coupled with weak forms of time-

varying uncertainty in the fundamentals endogenously generate substantial heteroskedasticity and

leptokurtosis in exchange rates and the forward premium. Still, the model has the tendency to over-

predict the variability of the forward premium and severely under-predict the variability of the risk

premium. Although the persistence of forward premiums can be matched, it requires levels of risk

aversion that imply slightly too variable forward premiums and exchange rates that are too mean-

reverting.

    Several generalizatIons of the present model are potentially useful. Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall
                                                    28

(1994) for instance, explore the predictability of asset returns, including forward market returns, in a

recursive preference framework with first-order risk aversion. Although first-order risk aversion also

substantially increases the variance of the risk premium relative to time-additive models, the model

substantially under-predicts the variability of exchange rates, the forward premium and the risk premium.

  The empirical results of Bekaert and Hodrick (1993) suggest another useful direction for further

research. In an empirical re-examination of the unbiasedness hypothesis, we find that unbiasedness holds

for the British pound during the 1975-1980 period. In fact, the slope coefficient in a typical unbiasedness

regression test Is slightly larger than I for that sub-period. In the turbulent eighties, the rejection of

unbiasedness is very severe. Interestingly, for the 1973-1976 period, i.e. before the system of floating

exchange rates was formally implemented, we also find negative slope coefficients. It is possible that

rational agents, faced with an array of policy signals, need time to recognize or 'believe' changes in

policy regimes. Such rational 'learnlnf can lead to systematic forecast errors (see for instance Lewis

(1989)) and partially explain the negative slope coefficients.
    A third generalization is to break the complete markets set-up. In that case, the IMRS need not be

equalized across countries. As agents can still self-insure through asset trading, asset pricas might not

differ very much from the complete market case. However, the perfect risk sharing assumed in this

paper has several ceunterfactual implications.       First of all, the extent of international portfolio

diversification is actually very limited. Second, the set-up implicitly imposes Purchasing Power Parity

(PPP), which is grossly violated in the data. In fact, when PPP-deviations exist, investors in different

countries measure their real returns differently and generally desire to hold different portfolios (see Adler

and Dumas (1983)). An additional channel to break PPP, is to explicitly model non-tradables. When

utility is nonseparable in tradables and non-tradables, the IMRS's which are used to discount asset payoffs

depend on non-tradables as well. Lastly, the large current account imbalances between major industrial

countries indicate the usefulness of a general equilibrium model that allows wealth redistributions. I

intend to explore a heterogeneous agent economy with non-tradable goods in the near future.
                                                    29

                                              FOOTNOTES
I. See the survey on conditional heteroskedasticity in asset prices by Bollerslev, Chou and Icroner (1992).

2. See for instance Bansal, Gallant, }3ussey and Tauchen (1993), Bek.aert (1994), and Canova and
Marrinan (1993).

3. This frequency strikes a balance between the belief that periods of turbulence in asset prices at that
frequency coincide with turbulent movements in market fundamentals such as money growth, productivity
shocks and policy shifts, whereas at higher frequencies market micro structure effects rnjght play a
predominant role.

4. Bansal, Gallant, Hussey and Tauchen (1993) is a related, contemporaneous effort.

5. The analysis in Bekaert and Hodrick (1993) indicates that this is a harmless assumption.

6. For a recent assessment of these tests, see Bekaert and Hedrick (1993).

7. All the moments used in computing this coefficient are estimated in a joint General Method of
Moments System ((3MM).

8. This is consistent with the Vector Autoregressive Regression (VAR)-based estimates of Bekaert (1993).

9. The formulation implicitly assumes that there exist assets paying out the monetary transfers and
endowments.

10. Constantinides (1990) for instance shows in a single good economy that habit persistence drives a
wedge between the coefficient of relative risk aversion and the inverse of the elasticity of interternporal
substitution.

11. Relaxing this assumption can only occur at considerable computational cost and would make it
impossible to solve the model with time nonseparable preferences and conditional volatility shocks.
Preliminary results of general equilibrium analysis with heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets,
suggest that agents manage to smooth consumption very well with only a limited number of available
assets (see e.g. Lucas (1991) and Marcet and Singleton (1990)). Consequently, asset prices do Dot differ
very much from the complete markets case.

12. The empirical proxy for the endowments will be taken to be net of transaction costs.

13. A lognormal example that links the risk premium to the second moments of the forcing processes is
worked out in an appendix available from the author.

14. See for Instance Bansal, Gallant, Hussey and Tauchen (1993) and Canova and Marrinan (1993) for
parameter estimates lower than 1 In an International framework.

15. Whereas they did not allow for lags beyond two months, my specification implies that less than 10%
of the stock remains after 2 months.

16. See the Data Appendix for more details.
                                                   30

17. Results on the time-aggregation of GARCH-processes are scarce. Drost and Nijman (1993) restrict
themselves to univariate models and show that snog forms of GARCH are not closed under temporal
aggregation.
18. The parameter on the past conditional variance equals .882. the coefficient on the past squared
innovation .094, implying a half-life of conditional variance shocks of 5.54 and a kurtosis coefficient of
1.82.

19. For a small Monte Carlo experiment demonstrating this, see Bekaert (1992).

20. The log-difference specification of (19) is justified by the unit root and cointegration tests reported
in Bekaert (1992).

21. Huizinga (1987) actualiy finds evidence for mean reversion in real exchange rates.
                                          DATA APPENDIX

   The exchange rate data are daily data from Citicorp Data Services. Bob Korajzyck supplied DRI

Eurocurrency interest rates running until mid 1988 which were obtained at INSEAD. All rates are

sampled each Friday and averages of bid and ask rates. When Friday was a holiday, the Thursday rate

was picked.

    Quarterly consumption on nondurables and services is taken from the OECD Quarterly National

Accounts. The U.K. semi-durables category is included as it is comprised of consumption items that are

included in the nondurables category for the United States. The series are seasonally adjusted and in

1982 dollars, reap. 1985 pounds.

    Money is measured as end.of-the-quarter M2 money stocks. For the U.S., M2 is taken from

Citibase. Due to the introduction of MMDAS and super NOW accounts, there is an outlier in the U.S.

data in the first quarter of 1983. The money growth rate for that quarter is replaced with a weighted

average of past and future growth rates, incorporating 18 quarters of data. Published monetary
aggregates in the U.K. cannot be used as there were several definitional cbanges that make it virtually

impossible to deduce a consistently defined series over the whole sample. Therefore, I obtained data on

the concept M4 directly from the Bank of England. It is a broad aggregate comparable to M2 in the U.S.

except that it also includes deposits (including Certificates of deposits) with building societies. In

November 1981, a big financial institution (the trustees savings bank) turned into a bank, increasing the

money supply by 7.5% overnight (see Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Dec. 1981). This outlier was

corrected for in a similar fashion as the U.S. outlier. The money series are also seasonally adjusted.

Both the money and real consumption data were divided by total population (series 99z in the

International Financial Statistics data set) to arrive at per capita data. The population data are mid-year

estimates which are linearly interpolated to obtain quarterly data.
                            APPENDIX 1: TUE CALIBRATION OF O

     In the non-stochastic steady state of the model, the expressions for velocity and interest rates only

depend on the parameters in 0s• In the case of addilog utility, steady state home consumption velocity

is given by

                                                        ______ —                                    (1)
                                  —
                                      icU'     —




with upper bars denoting steady state values. Likewise, the four week steady state interest rateis defined

by

                                        (j •   )1 l       gin'
                                                                                                    (2)


The expressions for steady state interest rates and velocity for the homothetic utility case are


                         Va   — tc(t'   —
                                            1)](g(gy1)'                  —                           (3)



                                   (1 + TV1    =    (f,I(*4I)'Cl1)                                   (4)


Total transaction costs as a proportion of total consumption, TC, in steady state are given by

                                            TC, —   c,,(VZ)                                          (5)

The expressions for the foreign good are similar.

     To obtain empirical estimates of the steady state values, I obtain monthly interest rate means from

the interest rate data used in the paper, and quarterly velocity means from the OECD data on

consumption and consumption deflators and the money supply data described in the Data Appendix.

To link quarterly (V) and weekly (V,) velocity, I assume:


                                            vx      v'-1'
                                                    w
                                                                                                     (6)
 An analogous expression holds for foreign consumption velocity.

        1 consider   the following parameter range:

 B E (.95, .955, .96,..., 1.0)

      E (0, .1, .2, .3,..., 2.9, 3.0, 3.25, 3.50, ...,10.25}

      = c,     (.0001, .001, .002        01, .02      I)
 E. =, (1.25,..., 2.0, 23, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0).
       To find a reasonable' parameter configuration for Q, the following procedure is performed:

(1) Compute mean growth rates of borne and foreign consumption and money from the simulated

observations according to the law of motion specified in equation (19) in the text, i.e. 2, is set equal to

its estimated values but Z2 is set equal to 0.

(2) For each parameter configuration, compute the steady states for velocity, the monthly interest rates

and transaction costs TC and TC,, using equations (l)-(S).

(3)   Discard parameter configurations which yield TC or TC,,> .01 and C .0001.

(4) Discard parameter configurations which yield too high or too low velocity. The lower bound is

computed as the weekly equivalent from the quatterly mean, computed with the data used in the paper.

As I used a broad monetary aggregate, I consider these means to over-estimate the mean of velocity

consistent with the transaction cost technology modelled in the paper. I also compute an 'adjusted'

mean by multiplying all the velocities with the ratio of consumption to GNP as in Marshall (1992). 1 use

this quanerly mean as the upper bound for weekly velocities. Hence, the velocity mean requirements

are weak.

(5) 01 the remaining parameter configurations, these parameters are chosen that come closest to matching

the Interest rate means. For both utility functions, the resulting parameter configurations are nearly

within a 3 standard error band of the data means.
                               APPENDIX 2: SOLVING THE MODEL

    As indicated in the text, the marginal utilities mux.., muy1 and the consumption velocities V, V'1 must

be determined. The expression for mu; follows from equations (8) and (9) in the text. It can be

rewritten as:

                                     muç —w1 dniux, +w1binax1


                                              ps—I.
                                                —
                                                        3u(s'
                                                           In,s I)
                                                             3;.,
                                     hrux.E
                                                —
                                                        3u(s'
                                                           mla'I.,)
                               -
                                               c
A remaining problem is that, consistent with what is observed, the endowments and money supplies are

assumed to grow over time. Therefore, I solve fir a stationary equilibrium, in which stationary

endogenous variables such as exchange rate changes, inflation and velocity depend only on stationary state

variables, including growth ntes of money supplies and endowments. To induce stationarity in the stocks

of consumption goods and the habit stocks, I divide by the level of consumption. This normalization is

used by Heaton (1993) and leads to a natural stationary representation of the state vector. Define a scaled

marginal utility as:

                                                       mux
                                            flux—
                                                      3u(x,y)                                       (8)

where   the denominator is the particular period-utility function evaluated at present equilibrium

consumption purchases. Define sdmux, analogously by replacing mu; in (8) by dmux,. Then sdmux

solves the following difference equation:

An analogous equation applies to hmux,. Once market clearing Is imposed, the marginal utiliry ratios in

(9) will be direct functions of the state vector and the difference equation can be solved for sdmu;. Note

that: smu; =    w1   sdmu; +   w2   shmu;. With the solution for smu;, the Euler equation determining
                                    8u(s.s)                       _________
                          sdmux1—               •flp1E, [sdmwç1                    1                 (9)
                                    ôu(x,.y1)                      8u(x11y1)
                                                                        34

velocity can be re-written in stationaiy format:

                                                8u(xt1,y.,)
                                                     8x1                                            (10)
                                                              (DP.1Y1
                        SIDUX, —fiE [smwç1
                          84r(t)                8u(x',y)                  3t'(t.l) ]
                                                                              öx
                                                     34

As the right hand side depends on state variables at time t, equation (10) describes the solution for ôt'/ôx

and hence for velocity.

    Let 8, E RK be the vector of stationary state variables which completely spans the information set

and w,   = [V, \9, smux,, smuyj, the set of endogenous variables to be solved for. The other endogenous
                                                                                                    = [Vi,

                                                                  .
variables are trivia! functions of ç. As the model is dichotomous in          = [V,smux.J and

smuyj, I can restrict the discussion to the solution method for         The two basic Euler equations that

must be solved in this model are (9) and (10). They are of the form:


                                        A(,9,) —E,(F(c,,.6.,) ]                                     (11)

where A(.,.) and r(.,.) are known functions. As o, is a continuous function mapping k", the space of

the state variables e into P, it can be approximated arbitrarily well by polynomials. The polynomial

coefficients are found by minimizing the approximation error over some norm. The technique I use

follows Heaton (1993) in employing Monte Carlo integration to evaluate expectations. Marcet and

Marshall (1993) actually formally prove that, when the sample size and the polynomial order, approach

infinity, the numerical equilibrium solution converges to the Rational Expectations Equilibrium.

    More specifically,! first solve for the scaled marginal utilities. Let p,(O,) be a vector of polynomial

elements in 8, of degree     n.     Denote f(O1;qj   = [G',(ln(O3)aJ), where q. indicatesthe    polynomial
coefficients.   Let sdmu; — f(Oqj. Substitute this in the difference equation (8) to find the

approximation error


                                         au(s:.s)                          __________
                                                                              8x•1
                 u(O;q) —f(e;q) —                    —flpE,(f(G1.,;q)                            (12)
                                         Bu(x11y1)                         au(x,,y1)
                                             8x                               ax?


The parameters a_ are chosen such as to make u(e)q.) orthogonal to the polynomial elements p(e,,Qjk

or:

                                         Efu(01;qjp,(e1)) —0                                     (13)

By the law of iterated expectations, this can be rewritten as:


                                    Ou(s7.s)                     _________
                                       ös,                          a;.,
                                                                                                 (14)
                 E(   (f(e,;q,) —               —fipf(811 q•)                )p(81) ) .0
                                    Su(x1.y1)                    3u(x11y)
                                       8x                           ax

The expectation can be taken by Monte Carlo integration, i.e. by drawing a long time series for O and

taking sample averages of the expression in equation (14). The coefficients q. then follow from solving

a system of non-linear equations. The difference equation for shinu; is solved analogously and smin,

is obtained as in equation (7).

      To solve for velocity, approximate V by polynomials and substitute the approximate velocity function

into equation (10). In this case the polynomials will be exponentiated to guarantee positive velocities.

The marginal utility smu; is replaced by its approximation previously solved for. This will give rise to




          This is the Calerkin method, one of            the     Minimum Weighted Residuals (MWR)
methods, described by Judd (1990).
an approximation error that is projected onto the polynomial elements in order to solve for the polynomial

coefficients.2




        Itis straightforward to compute analytical derivatives for the various
non-linear systems so that solutions are obtained relatively fast even for large
state spaces.
                                          REFERE.CES

Abel, A. B., 1988, 'Stock Prices under Tune-varying Dividend Risk: An Exact Solution in an Infinite
Horizon General Equilibrium Model, Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 375-394.

Adler, M. and B. Dumas, 1983, 'International Porffolio Choice and Corporation Finance,' ]Jj
Journal of Finance 38, 925-984.

Andrews, D. K., 1991, 'Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix
Estimation,' Econometrica 59, 817-858.

Backus, D., A. Gregory and C. Telmer, 1993, 'Accounting for Forward Races in Markets for
Foreign Currency', Journal of Finance 5, 1887-1908.

Baillie, R. and T. Bollerslev, 1989, 'The Message in Daily Exchange Rates: A Conditional Variance
Tale,' Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 7,297-305.

Bansal, R., A. R. Gallant, It. Hussey and (3. Taucben, 1993, 'Nonparametric Structural Estimation
of Models for High-Frequency. Currency Market Data,' Manuscript, Duke University.

Bekaert, 0., 1992, 'Empirical Analyses of Foreign Exchange Markets: General Equilibrium
Perspectives,' Ph. P. Dissertation, Northwestern University.

________ 1993, 'The Tmie-variation of Expected Returns and Volatility in Foreign Exchange
Markets,' Manuscript, Stanford University.

______ 6., 1994, 'Exchange Rate Volatility and Deviations from Unbiasedness in a Cash-in-
Advance Model,' Journal of International Economics 36, 29-52.

                       1993, 'On Biases in the Measurement of Foreign Exchange Risk Premiums,'
Journal of international Money and Finance April 1993.

Bekaert, 6., It. Hodrick and D. Marshall, 1994, 'The Implications of First-Order Risk Aversion for
Asset Market Risk Premiums,' Manuscript.

Ben, A. K. and C. M. Jarque, 1982, 'Model Specification Tests: A Simultaneous Approach, Journal
of Econometrics 20, 59-82.

Bollerslev, T., 1990, 'Modeling the Coherence in Short Run Nominal Exchange Rates: A
Multivariate Generalized ARCH Model,' Review of Economics and Statistics 72, 498-505.

Bollerslev, T., R. Y. Chon and K. F. Kroner, 1992, 'ARCH Modelling in Finance: A Review of the
Theory and Empirica] Evidence,' Journal of Econometrics 52, 5-60.

Canova, F. and J. Marrinan, 1993, 'Profits, Risk and Uncertainty in Foreign Exchange Markets,
Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 259-286.
Constantinides, G. M., 1990, 'Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle, Journal
of Political Economy 98, 519-543.

Cumby, R. E. and 3. Huizinga, 1992, 'Testing the Autocorrelation Structure of Disturbances in
Ordinary Least Squares and Instrumental Variables Regressions,' Econometriep 60, 185-1%.

Diebold, F. X., 1986, 'Temporal Aggregation of ARCH Models and the Distribution of Asset
Returns,' mimeo.

Drost, F. C. and T. K Nijman, 1993, 'Temporal Aggregation of GARCA Processes,' forthcoming
Econornetrica 61, 909-928.

Dunn, K. B. and IC. 3. Singleton, 1986, 'Modelling the Term Structure of Interest Rates under Non-
separable Utility and Durability of Goods' Journal of Financial Economics 17, 27.55.

Eicbenbaum, MS. and L.P. Hansen, 1990, Estimating Models with Intertemporal Substitution Using
Aggregate Time Series Data, Journal of Business and Economic StatIstics 8, 53-69.

______________________ and K. 3. Singleton, 1988, 'A Time Series Analysis of a Representative
Agent Model of Consumption and Leisure Choice under Uncertainty,' Ouarterlv Journal of
Economics, 51-78.

Engle, R., 1982. Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity with Estimates of the Variance of
U.K. Inflation, Econometrics 50, 987-1008.

Ferson, W. and G. M. Constantinides, 1991, 'Habit Persistence and Durability in Aggregate
Consumption: Empirical Tests', Journal of Financial Economics 29, 199-240.

Hall, R. E., 1988, 'Intertemporal substitution in consumption,' Journal of Political Economy 96,
339-357.

Hansen, L. P., 1982. 'Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators,'
Econonietrica 50, 1029-1054.

_________ and It. Jagannathan, 1991. 'Implications of Security Market Data for Models of Dynamic
Economies,' Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-262.

______ and Ti. Sargent, 1983, 'The Dimensionality of the Aliasing Problem in Models with
Rational Spectral Densities,' Ewnornetrica 51, 377-88.

Heaton, J., 1993, 'An Empirical Investigation of Asset Pricing with Temporally Dependent
Preference Specifications,' Manuscript, M.I.T.

Hodrick, R. 3., 1989, 'Risk, Uncertainty and Exchange rates,' Journal of Monetary Economics
23,433460.

Huizinga, J., 1987, 'An Empirical Investigation of the Long-run Behavior of Real Exchange Rates,
Carne2ie-Rocllester Conference Series on Public Polkv 27,
Judd, K. L., 1990. "Minimum Weighted Residuals Methods for Solving Dynamic Economic Models,"
Manuscript, Stanford University.

Kaminsky, G. and R. Peruga, 1990. "Can a Time-Varying Risk Premium Explain Excess Returns in
the Forward Market for Foreign Exchange?" Journal of International Economics 28, 41-70.

Lewis, K., 1989, "Changing Beliefs and Systematic Rational Forecast Errors with Evidence from
Foreign Exchange", American Economic Review 79, 621-636.

Lucas,   D.,   1991, "Asset Pricing with Undiversifiable Income Risk and Short Sales Constraints:
Deepening the Equity Premium Puzzle," Manuscript, Northwestern University.

Lucas, R. E., 1978, "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy', Econometrica, 46, 1429-1445.

Lucas, R. E.. 1982, "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country World," Journal of
Monetary EconomIcs 10, 335-360.

Marcet, A. and D. Marshall, 1993, "Convergence of Approximate Model Solutions to rational
Expectations Equilibria Uslngthe Method of Parameterized Expectations," Manuscript, Northwestern
University.

_______ and K.  I. Singleton, 1990, "Optimal Consumption-Savings Decisions and Equilibrium Asset
Prices with Heterogeneous Agents Subject to Portfolio Constraints, Manuscript, Stanford University.

Marshall, D., 1992, "Inflation and Asset Returns in a Monetary Economy." Journal of Finance 47,
13 15-1 342.

Newey, W.   and K. West, 1987, "A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrics 55, 703-708.

Nijnian, T. E. and F. C. Palm, 1990, 'Parameter Identification in ARMA Processes in the Presence
of Regular but Incomplete Sampling," Journal of Time Series Analysis 11, 239-248.

Poterba, J. A. and L. H. Summers, "The Persistence of Volatility and Stock Market Fluctuations,"
American Economic Review 76, 1142-1151.

Sundaresan, S.M., 1989, "Intertemporally Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of Consumption
and Wealth," Review of Financial Studies 2, 73-89

Svensson, L., 1985, "Currency Prices, Terms of Trade and Interest Rates: A General Equilibrium
Asset Pricing Cash-in-advance Approach" Journal of International Economics, 1741.

Working, H., 1960, "Note on the Correlation of First Differences of Averages in a Random Chain,"
Econometrica 28, 916-918.
                                                 Table I
             TIme series properties of exchange rates, the forward premIum and term spreads

The sample period is Januazy 1975 to December 19%. Observations arc sampled weekly on As the weekly
logarithmic exchange rate change, fp, measured as the difference between the U.S. one month interest rate and
the U.K. one month interest rate. Al] interest rates are annualized, Ic. they arc multiplied by 1.2&). Weekly
currency depreciation is also multiplied with 12(X). The symbol a always denotes the standard dcthtion, a;
denotes the ath autocorrelation and v1 the variance ratio including i autocorrelations, estimated as in Equation
(4) in the paper. In the thkd row, the normalized kurtosis coefficient ha is computed for (de-meaned) currency
depredation and for the differenced forward premium. The standard errors are derived by 0MM. The mean,
standard deviation, kwtosis coefficient and the moments reported in Panel B are estimated jointly using 13
Newey-West (1987) lags in calculating the variance matrix. The standard errors for the variance ratios follow
from the joint estimation of 52 autocorrelations and their variance matrix using 51 Newey-West lags. The coss-
correlations in Panel B are between the forward premium and future excbange rate changes and between the
differenccd forward premium and squared demeaned depreciation respectively.

                                       Panel k Unlvartate propenles

                                       As,               f1\4          (As.,)'      (Alp)'
                   mean               -.319             -2.637
                                     (.702)             (.426)
                     0               17.668             3.481
                                     (1.069)            (.343)
                     hi               3.0(X)                                         8.635
                                     (1290)                                         (2.495)
                    a;                .025               .972          .171          .145
                                     (rn?)              (4)07)        (4)73)        (.057)
                    at,               .006               .949          .160          .228
                                     (.054)             (.012)        (.055)        (4)83)
                    ac,               .044               .925          .194          .199
                                     (.034)             (.019)        (.047)        (.031)
                                      -.033              .873          .197          .208
                                     (.036)             (.031)        (.104)        (.070)
                    a;,               -ms                .678          .4)05         .072
                                     (.039)             (.075)        (.021)        (.022)
                                     1.110              4.794          1.663         1.702
                                     (.070)             (.049)        (.229)        (210)
                                     1304              12.350         2.419         2.718
                                     (.133)             (390)         (.427)        (.413)
                                     1.460             21.097         3.177         3.746
                                     (.195)            (1.295)        (.495)        (.634)
                                     1.725             32.798         4.101         5.957
                                     (314)             (3.667)        (.717)        (1.174)
                   Panel B: Cross corniatloas


        s/(s,,)'         As.J(o1s1,       As.+)/(S;.,? As,.4/(As.j'
          -.097               -.104             -.104      -.112
          (.038)             (.038)             (.039)     (.037)

(AfpJ      .051              .-n36              .020       -020
          (.068)             (.019)             (041)      (.024)
                                                    Table 2
                                 TIme series properties of the forcing processes

The standard enors of the autocorrelations are computed by GMM, using the beteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance estimator described in Andrews (1991) with a Bartiett kernel and optimal
bandwidth of 2. The appropriate lag length for the VAR minimizes the Akaikc or Schwan criterion in Panel
B. Parameter estimates are obtained by 01_S and reported in Panel C with heteroskedastidty consistent standard
errors. The symbol       stands for the rn-weeks difference operator and the subscript a for time-averaged datt
The x'(3) statistic in Panel C tests whether the 3 coefficients other than the one on the lagged left hand side
variable are jointly equal to zero. A test statistic on the joint significance of the 6 innontion covariances is also
repoxted. The test statistic is derived from the joint distribution of the VAR parameters and the innovation
matrix and has a x'(6) distributionln Panel 1), the Cumby-Huiñnga (1992)1-test for serial correlation of the
residuals is robust to conditional beteroskedasticity and lagged dependent variables. The 02-test is the Ljung-
Box test statistic applied to squared residuals. The ARCH-test is the standard Lagrange multiplier test for scSi
correlation in the squared residuals, as proposed by Engie (1982). All tests are f(n) with n the number of
lagged squared residuals included in the test. Ku is the normalized kurtosis coefficient and 5k the normalized
skewness coefficient Their asymptotic distribution is N(0,24JT), N(O,6/T) respectively, with T the sample size,
under the null of normality. BJ is the Bcra-Jarque (1982) test for normality and is x2(2). P-values, based on
the -distxibution, are reported for aU test statist.


                                            Panel t Autocorretatlon,


                            A1n(M!.J                6Jn(at)                A,ln(N1)
                                .464                   .296                    .322                   .376
                               (.102)                 (.128)                  (.167)                 (.119)
         a;                     255                    .067                   .439                    .143
                               (.080)                 (.104)                 (.120)                  (.095)
         ac,                    .345                   .139                   -.0)2                  -.102
                               (.078)                 (.10))                 (.119)                  (.192)
         ac4                    .118                   .284                   .232                   -.130
                               (.163)                 (.117)                 (.122)                  (.150)


                                 Panel L Selection crIteria for the VAR order

                 VAR order Akalke criterion Schwarz criterion
                    1             -40.34            -3920
                    2             -40.03            -38.95
                    3             -40.22            -38.64
                  Panel C: Parameter coefficients for VAR of order 1


          A)n(M) A.In(C) a1Jn(N) a1n()                                      R1         Wald

             .537              297         -.068         -.066              .212       6.008
iJnQsCJ
            (.121)            (.194)       (.123)       (.102)                         (.111)
                                                                            .091       7.078
Ak(tJ        .158              .204         .087
                                           (.100)
                                                            .050
                                                        (.065)                         (.069)
            (.068)            (.142)
             -.012            -.286         .289            .097            .097       14.749
hJn(r&J
            (.137)            (.175)       (.149)       (.)                            (.002)
                               .656         .275         -.092              .152       16335
Ajn&J        -.425
                                                                                       (.001)
            (.164)            (200)        (.164)       (.135)


                      Tell on innovation covariances: 17.793 (.001)


                               Panel Th Residual Diagnostics


                      1(4)      02(4) ARCH(4)          Ku           Sk           B)

          Eq. 1      6.825      3.876      3.922      .265         -.137      .386,
                     (.145)     (.423)     (.417)    (.665)        (.655)    (224)
          Eq. 2      12.462      7.902     8.746      .973          296       3.459
                     (.014)      (.095)    (.068)    (.112)        (.333)     (.177)

          Eq. 3      1371        3.081     3338        431         -370       2320
                     (349)       (344)     (.415)     (303)        (.227)     (.284)

          Eq. 4      10.613      4.912     5.704      .140          .005      .052
                                                 Table 3
                        GMM estimation of the law or motIon for the forcing processes

 The parameters estimated govern the unconditional moments of the law of motion speciflcd in Equation (2.3)
 in the text. Although the Cholesky-decomposition 01 the unconditional covariance matrix of the innovations is
 estimated, I report the resulting correlation matrix of the innovations with standard deviations on the diagonal.
The standard errors are obtained from the standard errors of the estimated parameters using the Mean Value
Theorem. By estimating the Cholesky-decomposition directly, positive semi-definiteness of the covariance matrix
is automatically imposed. The J1 statistic tests the over-identifying restrictions of the original estimation with
 16 moments. P-values are given in parentheses. The C-tests test various restrictions implied by the weekly
model for quarterly data. These restrictions are discussed in the text The test rnethodoloD follows
Eichenbaum, Hansen and Singleton (1988). rant, the parameters are re-estimated using the 8 moment
conditions to be tested in addition to the 16 original moments. This yields a x'O.2) test statistic for the over-
identifying restrictions, which is denoted byJ(I2). Suitable partitions oldie resulting weighting matrix are thcn
used to estimate the model parameters with less moment conditions. The difference of the J,.(12) test statistic
and the new test of the over-identifying restrictions is denoted by C1(n) with ii the number of moment conditions
not used in the final estimation. Hence, C(6) is the test statistic for the 6 eross-moment restrictions, CT(2) the
test statistic for the consumption autocovariance restrictions and Cr(S) tests all 8 restrictions simultaneously.
All test statistics have f-distributions with degrees of freedom equal to the number indicated between brackets.


                                          Autocorrelatlon cocfllclents
                                                     — .893 (.031)
                                                     — £65 (.038)

                                                Correlation matrtx
                    .0003                  .291                      -.198              -247
                   (AkX)06)               (.128)                 (.161)                (.107)
                                          .001.5                 -.055                  .2.55
                                         (.00014)                (.149)                (.1.28)
                                                                                        .465
                                                                                       (.114)


                                                                                      (.G24)
                                                Tests of the model


                                       C(8)                            C(6)                      C(2)
           4.157                       5.110                           3.996                     1.114
          (385)                        (.746)                         (.677)                     (373)
                                                Table 4
                  Simulation molts for exchange rate changes and the forward premium

The simulated sample used in computing the endogenous model moments has 4 observations. Second order
polynomials are used in approximating the endogenous variables. The aeronyms are understood as: CIA = cash-
in-advance, AL-sadilog, HO-homotheti; T=time-additive, D=Durability, DH durability and habit
persistence. TbebenchmarkparametersfOrDHALarefiS7't1Pl.'l,.75,D.695.P.P,.76.c=S.O%.
e1—ç—2.5, —O.2. The benchmark parameters for D1*10 are B—S9, fl5—fl,=.75, 9t#a•95,p,js,s.76,
c-c-a   E.-C,-2.5, 1_U, 8-.5. The first column repeats the data moments and their (3MM based
standard errors. The nefl 3 columns of the table contain simpler variations of the benchmark specification, for
example TAt in Panel A denotes a time-additive model (,j, =q,=0 p='p,=O.O) with addilog preferences and
a curvature parameter equal to .2. The b and ç parameters (1.1,2,3,4) in the far-right column are the
parameters governing the time-variation in the second moments of the forcing processes as specified in Equation
(19) in the tet The forcing processes are generated according to the estimated parameters of Table 3 and with
conditional heteroskedasticity as determined by b and; For any simulation v.4th conditional heteroskedasticity,
polynomial elements with. higher than .99 correlation with other polynomial elements are discarded in order
to reduce the dimensionality of the system. Panel A reports results for addilog preferences, Panel B for
bomothetic preferences and Panel C for addilog preferences at the benchmark parameters but with set equal
to 2. The last three columns in Panel C report simulations for more enreme parameter values. In EXP I, 9 and
8, are set equal to .97, but the other parameters are the ones from the full model with 2.0. In EXP II, there
is no conditionalheteroskcdttidty(b1'.c..O),but —2.2,—,=20andD5—I,—.98. In EXP UI, the parameters
arc the same as in E U but with the benchmark case conditional heteroskedasticity.



                                           Panel M Addliog pretertncn


                                 DATA          CIA      TAt       DAt DUAL DUAL
                                                                                         b1 = .80
                                                                                         q=.l.3
                  o(As,)         17.663       2.825     4.091      4.120      4280        4366
                                 (1.069)
                                  1304        1.653     1.084      1.059      1.077       1.050
                                 (.133)
                                  1.725       1.995     1.04.4     1106        .978       1.084
                                  (314)
                 o( fpJ           3.481       3.812      M6         .646       .909       1.019
                                  (343)
                                 12350        8.142     1.176      2.761      3.905       5.433
                                  (390)
                 v,2(fp)         32.798       12320     1245       3.242      4.926       8.858
                                 (3467)
                                 10.841        .002      .CX)5     .003        .005        .011
                                 (2.847)
                                             Panel t Ilomothetic prtterences

                                   DATA            CIA      TAI-lO DAL DHAL DEAL
                                                                                         b, = .80
                                                                                         c,=.L3
             c(AsJ                 17.668         1.304     4.933     4.901    6385       6.911
                                   (1.069)
            v13(às)                 1304          8.140     1.037     1.041     .948      .992
                                    (.133)
            v(SsJ                   1.725        12.439     1.013     1.024     .762      .746
                                    (314)
             o<fp4)                 3.481         3.757     .474       .674    1.794     2.246
                                    (343)
            v,,(fp4)           •
                                   12350          8.115     1.132     3.168    9303      8358
                                   (390)
            v(fp.4)                32.798        12.345     1.221    3332      20352     17.242
                                   (3.667)
            o(rp)                  10.841         .001      .003      .005     .009       .025
                                   (2.847)


                                     Panel Q Addilog pntenncrs '.4th 2

           DATA CA TAL DAL DI-JAL DHAL                                          EXP      EXP         EXP
                                                                      b-.so       1       II          Iii
                                                                      ç—.l3
 e(s)      17.668       4.159
           (1.069)
v13(A)       1304      2.314            1.038       1.032    .907      .970     .987     .978        .995
            (.133)
v(As)       1.725      3.111            1.048       1.045    .622      414      .661     .700        392
            (314)
o(1p1,)     3.481      3.731            .685        265     3.903     4.953    6.279    9.540       14.781
            (.343)
v13(fp4)   12350       7.952            1.176      3.421    10.009    9.0.49   9.139    11.126      8.670
            (390)
v(fp4)     31798       12.161          1.224       3225     22.620   18.683    20.712   30.057      21.201
           (3.667)

c(rp4)     10241        .003            .006        .011     .041
           (2.847)
                                                  Table S
                        Heteroskedasticity and fat tails In the endogenous variables


See Tables 1 and 4 (or an explanation of the symbols used in this table.




                                          Panel M Addliog Preferences


                                DATA          CIA      TAL DAt DHAL DHAL
                                                                                       b=.80
                                                                                       ç   13

                                 3.W)         .012      -.027     -.042     .1.56      .652
                 ku(As)
                                (1.290)
                v,,((s3)         2.419        1.242     .956      .912      1.126      1.835
                                 (.427)
                                 4.101        1.185     .871      .816      1.262      2.771
                v((As.f)
                                 (.717)
                                 8.635        .052      .731       .589    3.118       12.401
                ku(Mp1)
                                (2.495)
               v,,((Afp)         2.718        1.1.57    1.664     1.713     1.814      2350
                                 (.413)
                                                        1.574     1.743     2.182      2.869
               v((Afpj')         5.957        1.335
                          Panel B: Homotbetic pnrcrtncn


                 DATA          CIA      TAL      DAL DUAL         DUAL
                                                                  b1 = .80
                                                                  ç=.13
  ku(A)           3.000         .040     .010     -.010    .030    .230
                 (1290)
 v13((As32)      2.419         7.374    1.085     1.068   1.058    1.761
                 (.427)
 v((As)')         4.101        10.150    .937     .948     £85    2374
                 (.717)
 ku(Mp)           8.635        -.011    3.015     3.347   3.056   5.198
                 (2.495)
v0((Atp,j2)      2.718         1.030    1.9)4    1.693    1.793   2369
                 (.413)
v((Mp,,)          5.957         .968    1.990    1.889    2.028   3331
                 (1.174)

              Panel C: Addilog pnferenccs with more cun'atun

                DATA           CIA      TAL      DAL OHAL         DI-LAL
                                                                  b= .80
                                                                  ç=.13
  ku(&)          3.000         .031     .020      .047    .128     .772
                (L29
                 2.419         1.429    1.068    1.071    1.032    2.625
                 (.427)
 v((OisJ         4.101         1.373    £69       .909    .901    4.461
                 (.717)
 ku(Afp)         8.635         .249     3.215    2.528    1343    6.363
                (2.495)
v13((Mp1J2)      2.718         1.289    2308     1.713    1.864   2.385
                 (Al))
v((Afpj')        5.957         1.158    2.946    1.934    1.933   3.224
                (1.174)
                                Figure 1:       Sensitivity to (Acidilog Utility)

                                     Figure la:       Effect on Variability
             o(r1)                                                                           u(tpJ

  N

                                                                     C


                                            /
7.a
                                        /                        U

  a
  S..
                                    I


  0
        Porom.t.q Voftts                                                                 Porom.t,r Voiu.


                                                         a(dsJ



                           in
                           SI


                           in
                                                                             /
                                                                                 /



                     Io            — i_
                                                           3
                                                    Porcm.%., Yoh,•
                                                                         4       3   5
                                  Figure ib:             Effect on Persistence

                                                          v13(ds)
      C




tO
•0
>




                      1       .
                                               2                 3         4         5             6
                                                     Parameter Value




                                                         v13(fp)
     2                                     I                 I                   I
     N.

     In..

     In .

a
     e.

     C,.                  -           -.           .-—...——....
     C                                                                               ....
     N        /                                                                             ....

     In
                  I                        I                           I         I
          0       1                        2                3          4         5                 6
                                                    Porometer Value
                                    Figure ic:   Effect on Non-Lineazities

                                                                                                     v3(dfpj)

                                                                  S
                                                                      S




V
                                            !               -C
                                                             —S
                                                                      S

S                                                            a

                                                                      S




    10:::::      Po,oin.I.c Vakia
                                                                                             S
                                                                                                  P1040t4' #.ka.
                                                                                                                                S




                    kv(dIpJ                                                              •          v3(duf)
                                                                 C                   .                             .   .
                                                                 I-


    o
    —
            II                                                   S
                                                           —It
                                                           '0
                                                            I.
                                                                 S                                 -                       -.




                                                                 °H-          •-••




                                                 S
        0               3           4
                                                                      0   I          3                 3           4   S
                 P,gm.Ia Vokae                                                                   Psrcaiqt.. Wfln
