                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          FINANCIAL INThRMEDLITION AND
                             AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS:
                             A QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS




                                        Russell Cooper
                                         JoAo Ejarque




                                  Working Paper No. 4819



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1994


Financial support from the National Science Foundation is gratefully appreciated. The authors
are grateful to Paul Beaudry, Ramon Carninal. Satyajit Chatteijee and Mark Gertler for helpful
discussions on this topic and to seminar participants at Boston University, the University of
California at Los Angeles, Columbia University, LEQAM at the Univeriste d'Aix-Marseille, the
University of Texas at Austin, Texas A & M Univerisity, the Banco de Portugal, the CEPR-
Fundacion BBV Conference on "Indusirial Organization and Finance," the Universidade Nova
de Lisboa and the 1994 NBER Summer Institute for comments and suggestions. This paper is
part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Russell Cooper and JoAo Ejarque. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                      NBER Working Paper #4819
                                                                                  August 1994

                             FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION AND
                                AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS:
                                A QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS

                                            ABSTRACT

        This paper investigates the quantitative implications of two business cycle models in

which aggregate fluctuations arise in response to variations          in the   process   of financial
intermediation. In the first, fundamental shocks in the capital accumulation process lead to

fluctuations in the real returns from intermediated investment. For this economy, we find that

the correlations produced are not consistent with observations of the U.S. economy. In particular,

consumption is not smoother than output, investment is negatively correlated with output,

variations in the capital stock are quite large and interest rates are procycical. In aneconomy

with both intermediation and total factor productivity shocks, the correlations we produce are

closer to those observed in the U.S. economy only when the intermediation shock is relatively

unimportant.

        In the second economy, variations in the returns to intermediation are part of a sunspot

equilibrium. Fluctuations here are driven by self-fulfilling beliefs by private agents regarding the

returns to intermediation as in an economy beset by banking crises. For this non-linear economy,

we find that the correlations are closer to those observed but the variability of capital relative to

output is still too large.


Russell Cooper                                                       JoAo Ejarque
Department of Economics                                              Department of Economics
Boston University                                                    Boston University
270 Bay State Road                                                   270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215                                                     Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
    Financial Intermediation and Aggregate Fluctuations: A Quantitative Analysis
 I. Introduction

           The goal of this paper is to understand the quantitative implications of models hi

 which shocks to the financial intermediation process generate aggregate fluctuations. Our

 interest in this exercise stems from recent theoretical advances concerning the role of

 financial intermediation as both a source of aggregate fluctuations and a vehicle for their

 propagation and magnification.

           In an important contribution to this literature, Bernanke [1983] studies the interwar

 years and finds that the post-1930 financial crisis is key to understanding the depth and

length of the U.S. Great Depression. We argues that banbuptcies and bank runs disrupted

the links between savings and investment and that this increased cost of intermediation

propagated the initial downturn in real economic activity. In a related vein, Hamilton [1987J

argues that contractionary monetary policy in the late 1920's led to unanticipated deflation

which, operating through balance sheet effects, disrupted the process of financial

intermediation after 1930. Again the emphasis of the analysis is on the increased costs of

intermediation as a basis for the prolonged depression in economic activity.

          Building upon these observations, theoretical models have been constructed to study

the interaction between financial intermediation and real economic activity operating through

the structure of lending arrangements.' Empirical work on the importance of balance sheet

effects has complemented these theoretical developments. Our purpose here is to understand

the implications of these models for key aggregate correlations.

      S.. Gatier l988J (or. .arvcy otihi. work sad Bcnink. Ocaler sad Ojicluig [1993J lots rccc't .yathe.i. oitheorctk,J sad
.açidcal d.nlopin.na.

                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                          2


          To do so, we consider two models which have a common ingredient: fluctuations are

associated with variations in the costs of intermediation. In the first, fluctuations in the

economy axe a consequence of shocks to the process of intermediation. To construct such a

model, we build upon the framework of King, Plosser and Rebelo [1988] and introduce

disturbances into the intertemporal production process that creates capital from investment.

We interpret these as intermediation shocks reflecting variations in the processes of matching

savings and investment, project evaluation and project monitoring.2 While this structure does

not have the richness of the contracting models that have been constructed to analyze

incentive problems and balance sheet effects, this is a useful first step in determining whether

the broad class of models encompassed in this framework have quantitative implications that

broadly match observations of the aggregate economy. In particular, the specification is

consistent with the arguments of Bernanke [1983] that variations in the real costs of

intermediation lie at the heart of financial crises underlying the propagation of the Great

Depression.

          On this score, we find that the model with intermediation shocks fails to match a

number of key macroeconomic observations. First, these shocks produce a negative

correlation between consumption and investment. In times of productive intermediation,

consumption is reduced and investment increased in an effort to build up the capital stock.

In many ways, shocks to the intermediation process operate as taste shocks, as in the work of



      Greenwood. He,cowjiz sad ffuffmsa (19*3) model the effect. of ipvezafl ç.CiAC shocks Ia s dynamic Moch.sk fmacwort.
Thwjts the economic iMerpnt.tioas differ, the models sit tiler Ia many reç.cta. As we proceed throtagh the pre.es*atio. of ate fiz*

which them en eqWpuw.aiiwea,nen speciflc technology    fl.
economy, the ztletiomhlp between the models will be made clear. Oreenwood, Henowit and Knssefl (19943 cosIne a related model in
                                                                  Dicz-Qjryáorz a .1. 119921 arialpa a dynamic gennel equilibrium model
with banking and provide me basic fact. about the role of iatannedistioe In the U.S. economy. They do nut Mien the irriportace of
uncenairsy arising from the iSnI,edIaIiOO pioce.e nor the ImplieMione of the model for business cycle..
                                                                                                                                       3

Baxter and King [1991], in that they lead to negative comovements in consumption and

investment. Second, the volatility of the capital stock relative to output is unreasonably

large. Finally, the real interest rate is procycical, contnry to the evidence provided by

Beaudry and Quay [1992]. Thus the view that intermediation shocks are the only source of

fluctuations seems inconsistent with the broad characteristics of aggregate fluctuations.

Economies in which there axe multiple sources of fluctuations, including intermediation

shocks, match observations better if the intermediation shocks are of secondard importance.

           A second model, built upon the theoretical models of Bryant [1987] and Well [1989],

also stresses financial fragility as a source of fluctuations. In contrast to the first class of

economies, there are no fundamental shocks to the process of intermediation. Instead,

fluctuations emerge from extrinsic uncertainty regarding the returns to saving and investment.

To model this, we examine an infinite horizon economy with capital accumulation and use

the arguments of Bryant and Weil to construct sunspot equilibria in the neighborhood of the

multiple steady state equilibria.' The multiplicity, in turn, reflects a strategic

complementarity in the intermediation process. The model is intended to capture the banking

instability that was prevalent during the Depression period.' Our model allows us to

evaluate modeis of financial instability due to variations in investor confidence by focusing

on the processes of capital accumulation, output, investment, consumption and employment.

          The economy exhibits fluctuations induced by sunspots that mimic certain features of



    • Thus our minapat equilibfl cc' similar in tho.e coodnjcled by Osaueijee, Cooper and Ravikumar (1993) for a dynamic model with
crazy and exit. In coamat, Farmer and Quo (1993) enluaue tile behavior of an economy in which ainqiot equilibria ewt thie to local
ability of. steady ate.
   •  The model displays regime tifta that may also be conaitni with poat WWII evidence on regime thift. reported by Hamilton (1959)
for output and by 0.reia and Pence (1993) for real unrest nun.
                                                                                                                                   4

U.S. data. In particular, output, employment, consumption and investment are all positively

correlated. In addition, these fluctuations are persistent. Further, the net return on savings,

which would correspond to the deposit rate in a decentralized setting, is counter-cyclical.

This is an important feature of the model. Though times in which savings is put into

intermediaries yields high marginal returns, the average returns (which the deposit rates

reflect) are less responsive due to the nonlinear return stream. Consequently, for some

parameterizations the model produces the pattern of counter-cyclical real interest rates

observed during the Great Depression.3 A second aspect of the behavior of interest rates

during this period is the dramatically increased gap that arose between the yield on corporate

debt and government debt, reflecting perhaps a desire for liquidity and safety by investors.'

We illustrate how our model accounts for this gap.

          These results do appear though to require relatively large fluctuations in the stock of

capital. In particular, the variance of the capital stock is often four times more than that of

real output. Given this, the pattern of correlations produced by the model mimics the

correlation pattern found along the transition path of the neoclassical growth model.

Intuitively this makes sense since a relatively permanent shock to the intermediation process

leads to the accumulation (deaccumulation) of capital as the economy heads back to the

steady state associated with the current intermediation shock.7


       Friedman sod Scbnt (1963. pg. 3O4 indicate. cbs beiweem 1929 and 1933. the yield on eoponle bond. ir.cnatd, the yield on
govetnaes bond. sayed consaei while the coamietcW p.pet rate fell. Once then nominal yield. an deflated by the actual rate of
inflation, the teal tetorna all tin througb this period. Huthhon (1987, Table 21 conçule. the tips teal linen nit ning thor term
goveznmenibond, and find. that the rate. wegt 7.4%, 11.3%, 11.3% and 5$ % for the 1929-i2peñod. Their pod real nit. Win
r.egmiv. horn 1933-36.

    see Bemanke j1983j and Ftiedn,an and 5cbw.r (19631 for a di.cuaaion of this gap.

      since the economy ha. uaiJ4M needy Males, a penises exteinaic thock will lead to the eounire of the economy 10 the needy
gala suocialed with that th,ock i.rgjj the sinspet nnable change. again. Then dynamic. art di.played in no.ne detail below.
                                                                                                    5

 H. Stochastic Capital Accumulation

 (i) Basic Model

         In this section of the paper we evaluate a model in which the accumulation
                                                                                    of capita]
 is stochastic. While the model does not include any particular fonnalizatjon of the

 intermediation process, it encompasses a variety of such models.

         In the incentive based theories of intermediation, studied by Bernanke and
                                                                                    Gertler
 [1989] among others, variations in the wealth of borrowers influences the costs of borrowing

 and lending. These costs of intermediation reflect the need to monitor the activity of

 borrowers. Bernanke and (Jertler [1989] specify a capital accumulation process of


                                                                                              (1)

 so that the capital stock in period t+ 1 depends on period t investment (iJ times the return per

unit investment. This return includes a constant x less the costs of monitoring in period t,

h17.   Thus in their model, variations in costs of capital accumulation reflect fluctuations in

the frequency of monitoring a representative project captured by h. Much of their analysis
is then concerned with the determination of this probability. Our formulation studies the

same accumulation process but views the returns to intermediation as an exogenous stochastic

process. Bernanke [1983] provides further discussion of this point that variations in the real

costs of intermediation underlie aggregate fluctuations.

        Alternatively, the model represents shocks to the process of intermediation. Further,

variations in financial regulations, such as the enforcement of capital requirements or reserve

requirements, will directly influence the real costs of intermediation independently of any

incentive problems underlying the structure of intermediaries. A convenient representation of
                                                                                                                                       6

this is to assume that the cost, in terms of current consumption foregone, of obtaining a

given amount of capital in the future is stochastic.

           To be more precise, consider an economy in which a representative agent lives

forever.' Utility over consumption (c.) and leisure (I.) in period t is given by U(c,,lJ, which

is assumed to be strictly increasing and quasi-concave. Assume that intertemporal

preferences are given by E7..1 fi' U(c,L), where $E(O,l) is the discount rate.

          The individual faces three constraints. The first is a time constraint that labor input

(it) plus leisure time cannot exceed the time endowment: ;+ I, 1. The second constraint

requires that total output plus the undepreciated capital is either consumed or invested, i.e.

                                            c    +      = A,F(K,,n)        +
                                                                               (1—6)4                                            (2)

where Se(O,l) is the rate of capital depreciation, ç is the period t level of consumption and

I, is the period t level of investment. In this constraint, the production function detennines

total output (y1) from the inputs of labor, capital (K) and a stochastic production parameter

that is common to alt agents, A,. We assume that F(K,n) is strictly increasing in both of its

arguments and is strictly concave. The third constraint is that the capital stock evolves

according to

                                                                  =
                                                                      JO,

In this accumulation equation, 0, is the shock to the intermediation process that is the focus

of this exercise. Note that the specification of the accumulation process reflects a putty-putty



     We adopt S npteaenadv, ag.s tomwlation a convenience. Ir,uoduc ing heuro1tneky So a model in which borrowing
conn.rgs ISa borrowing sad lending i..0 obvioa.ly io,po.un eflei.sion of the model, rubs, (19943 analyze. the affect, of mons,y
uhock, in an onomy with credil market hrçethction. itpedlng firma ptoducir.g irgem,edi.t. goods. Thai model introduce. belnoganeity
across borrow.,. and expikidy model. th. action, of dcpo.itoa and boerewen.
                                                                                                                                       7

view of capital. In each period, undepreciated capital and the current flow of output are

identical so that the capital stock for the following period must come from investment today

and hence is subject to intennediadon shocks. Further, the timing is such that the shocks to

intermediation are known at the time of investment. Alternative specifications might imply

that only current investment flows are influenced by the state of the intermediation process

and/or would require the agent to make choices prior to knowing the returns on investment.9

          Substitution of the constraints leads the representative household to choose

{ç,n1,K,LJ7_0 to maximize S, ffu(ç,nJ subject to (2) and (3). The first-order conditions

from this problem, given a sequence of shocks (A1, OJ are given by:



                                                     /_ '
                                                  u/c 1-n) = AF(K,n)
                                                  Uc.,C,.
                                                                                                                                 (4)



                          u(c,, 1—n) = u(c,,1, 1—n,41) [A,41F1(X,11n,41)+(l —ô)]6,                                               (5)


                                                                         = A,F(K0n)                                              (6)

          Our analysis of this system follows King,Plosser and Rebelo [1988]. This involves

the log linearization of these conditions around the steady state using a certainty equivalence

approach so that future (random) variables are replaced by their conditional expectation. The

functional forms used in this approximation, again following King, Plosser and Rebelo,

ensure that the low frequency observations of the economy are consistent with observations

on per capita hours and real interest rates. We assume that U(c,l)=log(c) + ulog(l) and



     Thu.. .scM tucSon of the model I. to siam.. diii only cu,rerg additions to the c.pitd mock an put through the intermediation
proc... so this iç., - lc(1-1) + IA. W. con'a,eig on this .xlen.ioe Anther below. Thi. is the .ppro.eb taken by Greenwood. Heito'.t
and Huffmsn (198$J. Mated sad Marimon (5992j .dopt • simiIn ccificmion in their .dy of growth and liasneW arrangement. though
they asatme that the shock ii sot Lion site ihne of the invenineid decision.
                                                                                                                                        S


that the production function is Cobb-Douglas with constant returns to scale: y, =

(ii) Calibration

          The parameterization of the economy is quite standard and again follows King,

Plosser and Rebelo [1988] to facilitate a comparison of results. Labor's share in national

income is used to calibrate the production function: i.e. 1-a=.65." The parameter u in the

utility function is set so that the avenge amount of time allocated to work is .2. As in King,

Plosser and Rebelo, the annual rate of depreciation is set at 10% and discount rate is set so

that the steady state real rate of return is 6.5%.

          There are two parameters that we add to this model: the standard deviation and serial

correlation of the intermediation shock. At this point, the standard deviation of the

intermediation shock is set at the same level as the total factor productivity shock in King,

Plosser and Rebelo)2 Since our interest is in understanding the pattern of correlations

produced by this type of disturbance, the magnitude of its standard deviation is not critical.

The serial correlation of the intermediation shock is used as a treatment variable.

(iii) Results

           In evaluating this economy, our goal is to obtain a better understanding of the

workings of the theoretical model. We summarize the behavior of the economy through a

variety of moments and impulse response functions. In addition, we compare the model


    •   Is cofl, Orecawood, Ncrcowt and Hstben 119*11 named that U(c,a)*O(o)) wbsn i.() Is ricdy iacre.ing .5 zicdy
coaYs and O(') is g&dy lasasEng .5 nñcdy coonx. ThIs çecircstioo mcli.. thai lbs m.rgiasl nit of aibLwiioo baween
consznrç6on and hairs ii independent of conssurç'ios .ahitb has Mroog irçlicstioca for Us behavior of hair.. Fuither, their pmduci1oo
Ainction .11gw. for v.rialion in lb. .niImzatioe of eaphal, • point we discuec fiinhn .ftn pre.citng air reaths.

  " Hen, in fact, we follow mog of lbs real huMan, cycle )ltnstrn. .5 —t labor's thisn at .65    land of the nastier than asasmed by
mag, flosses end Rebelo.

   o Th. naimed gandard deVIsIiOO is .1075.
                                                                                                                                       9

economy against important features of U.S. data, such as the cross-correlations of

consumption, investment, employment and output and the standard deviation of the capital

stock relative to output. We take the statistics for U.S. data reported in King, Plosser and

Rebelo (1988] as our benchmark. Note though, as in Greenwood, Hercowitz and Ruffman

[1988], that the capital stock series derived for the U.S. is not consistent with a model

emphasizing shocks to the accumulation process.'3

          The quantitative aspects of this economy are summarized in Tables 1-2 and Figure 1.

The rows of Tables 1 and 2 correspond to two treatments. The first is the traditional real

business cycle model in which fluctuations are due to total factor productivity (TFP) shocks.

The second row corresponds to the case of iid intermediation (TNT) shocks. For Table 1 the

shocks are assumed to be serially uncorrelated while for Table 2 the shocks were assumed to

have serial correlation of .9 The columns of this table represent various statistics for key

macroeconomic variables computed for our model economy.

          As is well understood, the real business cycle model with lid shocks (see the first row

of Table 1) corresponds in some but not all ways to observations of U.S. data. In particular,

consumption smoothing is quite apparent as is the fact that investment is more volatile than

output. Further, employment, consumption, investment and productivity are all positively

correlated with output. Note though, from the first row of Table 1, that the standard model

has little endogenous propagation of shocks since the serial correlation in output is quite

small.

          The treatment with intermediation shockc, reported in the second row of Table 1, is


    "We deal with this mea.jre.nes isaje in our .econd ecoaomy by creating • capital mock attic. s. meawr.4 in cutnnz U.S. dai, from
our simulations.
                                                                                                                                      10


quite different and in many cases inconsistent with observation. Here we see that there is

substantial serial correlation in output of .75 even though the intermediation shocks are

serially uncorrelated. The endogenous propagation is a consequence of substantial

movements in the capital stock. For this treatment, the standard deviation in the capital

stock is about five times that of output. In contrast, for the case of serially uncorrelated

technology shocks, the capital stock is about one third as volatile as output. For the post-

War U.S. economy, the capital stock, as currently measured, has a standard deviation about

    of that for output.

          The intermediation shock treatment also produces some counterfactual implications for

the behavior of consumption and investment. In particular, while consumption is positively

correlated with output, investment and employment are negatively correlated with output. In

fact, the correlation between consumption and investment for this treatment is -.89. Further,

there is no evidence of consumption smoothing here in that both consumption and investment

are more volatile than output. Finally, the real interest rate (i.e. the real return on equity) in

this economy is highly procyclical in contrast to observation.'4

          To better understand the behavior of this economy, Figure 1 presents the impulse

response to a temporaiy intermediation shock that increases the return on investment by 1

percentage point. Here we see that the increased return to intermediation creates a burst of

investment at impact. This investment is 'fmanced in two ways. First, there is an increase

in overall economic activity as output goes above its steady state. Second, consumption falls



       S.. Bea.&dq sad Gi.ay 119921 for a di.cusaion of lb. cyclical p,vpcnie. of can nit. relative to the implications of ttal busiocu
cycle model.. They find that porn er U.S. dais iniply • .lighdy negative coaelaliaa bnwe.a ouqM end the cx pod teal ret. of irnren ot
i•mop Trcamny Bill..
                                                                                                                                         11

below its steady state level. In subsequent periods, the neoclassical adjustment process takes

over starting from a value of the capital stock that is now above its steady state. Along this

path, which is detailed in King, Plosser and Rebelo [1988], investment is below steady state

since the capital stock is falling over time. Output and consumption though are above steady

state since the stock of capital provides an opportunity to produce more output. Finally,

employment is less than its steady state level reflecting both wealth effects and the relatively

low real interest rates (due to the large accumulation of capital) along the transition path.

           The correlations reported in Table 1 for the intermediation shock treatment reflect

both the response of the economy to an intermediation shock and the comovements produced

by the transitional dynamics. In particular, the negative correlation between investment and

output, as well as that reported between employment and output, reflect the transition path.

          Table 2 considers the case in which the technology and intermediation shocks are

serially correlated. For the standard real business cycle (TFP shock treatment), we see many

basic features of the business cycle emerge In contrast with Table 1, the model also exhibits

substantial serial correlation in output due to the correlated technology stocks.

          From the second row of Table 2, in response the serially correlated intermediation

shocks, consumption smoothing is still not evident in that consumption is more volatile than

output. Further, investment is slightly negatively correlated with output and remains

negatively correlated with consumption.15 Finally, as in the case of uncorrelated shocks,

employment remains negatively correlated with output.




       One might think that thu I. • consequence o(thc amount oft ,i.'. correlation In the iteimediation .hock since a permanent shock
will Iced los bigt.er level of both conmnIion and the capital lock. The negative conel.tion of hivelineg and con.anplio. iapreaes
even if the serial correlation of the inlecusediatiot, shock ii .98.
                                                                                                12


(iv) Additional treatments
       Thus far, our results indicate that intermediation shocks alone produce a negative

correlation between consumption and investment arid create excessive volatility of the capital

stock relative to output. While we have not undertaken a complete comparison of the model

with U.S. data, these two features of the model are clearly at odds with observed time series.

Given that, we consider variations on the model to deal with these problems. These

variations are of interest as well as they illuminate some additional properties of an economy

with intermediation shocks.

       As discussed by Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huffman (1988], this first property is an

almost immediate implication of the model as long as consumption and leisure are normal

goods: shockc to the returns to one activity (investment) create an incentive to substitute

away from another (consumption). Their solution to this problem was to allow for

variations in the utilization rate of the capital stock so that output could respond to increased

returns to investment and consumption would then increase as well. As discussed below,

ours is to allow for a form of social returns to scale, advocated by Bryant [1983] and brought

into quantitative macroeconomics by Baxter and King [1991].

       As for the excessive volatility of the capital stock relative to output, consider the

production function (the variables are all in logs):

                                        =
                                            a1+ak+(l-c)n,.
In the absence of variations in total factor productivity and holding labor supply fixed, the

standard deviation of output must be less than the standard deviation of capital. If labor

varies and has a positive covariance with capital, then it might be possible to have the
                                                                                                                      13

standard deviation of output exceed that of capital. In fact, the covariance of labor and

capital was negative for the treatment with lid tNT shocks.

       There are a number of additional treatments of this model which might bring the

implications closer to observations. In particular, are there variations in parameters and/or

the stochastic process which might produce a positive correlation between consumption and

investment and reduce the variance of the capital stock?

       First, one might consider a pararneterization in which labor supply is more elastic

than the case explored thus far. This is particularly relevant for reducing the relative

standard deviation of the capital stock. To explore this, we considered our baseline

treatment with an iid intermediation shock in which labor supply was infinitely elastic. The

lid case was chosen since this would create the most intertemporal substitution. The results

of this exercise were: (i) the capital stock was still more volatile than output and (ii)

consumption and investment were negatively correlated.

       A second alteration to our model, motivated by Baxter and King [1991], is to

introduce a production externality into the specification of the technology for the

representative agent." In particular, suppose the agent's production function is given by:

                                                         -
where V represents the average level of output in the economy in period t and y

parameterizes the extent of the externality. A conservative estimate of                             is .23, as discussed

by Baxter and King [1991). Using this specification of technology and this estimate of                           ', the
Nash equilibrium of the dynamic economy is characterized by a system of first order


    Bq.S tl93I ('wont. this   te   of production enem.City in the context of. coordination model.
                                                                                                                                              14

 conditions, not unlike those stated above, derived from the optimization of a single agent

 taking the evolution of the aggregate output measure as given. These conditions are then

 linearized and the moment implications of the model are determined. This procedure is

 discussed in detail by Baxter and King [1991].

           The relevance of this exercise relates to the relationship between our model of

 intermediation shocks and a model with taste shocks. Baxter and King argue that in the

presence of a production externality, shocks to the marginal rate of substitution between

consumption and leisure can produce fluctuations that have many business cycle

characteristics, including consumption smoothing and the positive comovement of

consumption and investment with output. The role of the externality is clear: without this

effect, taste shocks produce a negative correlation between consumption and investment and

consumption smoothing is not evident. Through the externality, the increased activity

resulting from the intermediation shocks creates an endogenous increase in total factor

productivity for the individual producer and this leads to an increased production of

consumption goods." Thus one might conjecture that introducing production externalities

into the model of intermediation shocks might have similar effects to the extent that the

intermediation shock is acting like an intertemporal taste shock.

           Our results indicate that for y=.23, the economy with the production externality and

serially correlated intermediation shocks continues to exhibit negative correlation between

consumption and investment and the capital stock is still more volatile than output. Raising


    °Oreenwood H.rcowitz and Huffima 1198S1 allow (or variable wIizatio. of capital as eodogcnou. depreciation. In their n.odcI.
productivity of 'ha capital sock is increased .h.a there is. positive innovation to the retire on invenn,erg sine, .gens will choose to ork
their capital hardu to increase ita depncia,ion. Thu. both ralatio..c,..tsa baa.. (or increased production in re.ponae to the
moot
                                                                                                                                  15

the production externality above this level (y=.375) combined with infinitely elastic labor

supply implies that consumption is smoother than output and consumption, investment and

labor productivity are all positively correlated with output." Still, the standard deviation of

capital to output is about 1.5, well above that observed in U.S. data.

           Third, we consider a setting in which both real and intermediation shocks exiSt.

Since the model with productivity shocks alone has some desirable characteristics

(consumption smoothing and capital less volatile than output) it is not surprising that an

economy with both productivity and intermediation shocks can produce these effecLs simply

by appropriate parameterization of these two sources of uncertainty. The issue, of course, is

to evaluate the behavior of the economy for the actual relative standard deviations and

variance/covaflajce matrix for these shocks. Oe approach then is to identify the

intermediation shocks from the Euler equation. The other, which we pursue here, is to

provide some idea about the relative importance of the shocks such that the model has certain

properties.

          In particular, consider a version of our baseline economy in which both real and

intermediation shocks coexist and are, by assumption, uncorrelated. Assume further that

both sources of fluctuation have a serial correlation coefficient of .9. Given this stnicture,

we searched over the standard deviation of the intermediation shock relative to that of total

factor productivity to determine when the correlation of consumption and investment was

zero and when the standard deviation of the capital stock was about equal to that of output.

The results are quite surprising. If the standard deviation of the intermediation shock is 3%


     " Evea for hi. high v.1st of y, the e.dy Mate I. Mill uddlc-p.th MabM. Sec the dinuio. im Fanner and Gt.o t19931 about the
rtlationahj between altetustive pnrneteriradon. of thu economy end debility.
                                                                                                16

of the total factor productivity shock, then the correlation between consumption and

investment is nearly zero. For larger relative values of the standard deviation of the

intermediation shock, the correlation of consumption and investment is negative. Further,

the standard deviation of the intermediation shock must be reduced to .5% of the standard

deviation of the total factor productivity shock before the standard deviation of the capital

stock nearly equals that of output. This exercise suggests that a mixed model can indeed

bring the model's implications for the standard deviation of capital relative to output and the

correlation between consumption and investment closer to observation but that this requires a

parameterization with an extremely small role for the intermediation shock.

       Alternatively, as described by Bernanke and Gertler [1989], perhaps the

intermediation shocks as modeled here actually follow productivity shocks instead of being

independent. For example, an initial productivity decline reduces the wealth of borrowers

and thus reduces the productivity of the intermediation process. Thus, initial productivity

shocks are propagated through the intermediation process. Thus, we experimented with an

economy in which a temporary technology shock is positively correlated with a serially

correlated intermediation shock. The issue, once again, is the magnitude of the link between

the productivity shock and the resulting intermediation shock.

       To study this issue, we parameterized the response of the intermediation shock to the

iid productivity shock and then computed the correlation between consumption and

investment as well as the standard deviation of the capital stock relative to output. We found

that if a 1% innovation to total factor productivity was followed by a .05% innovation to the

intermediation shock, the capita] stock was slightly more volatile than output and the
                                                                                                  17

correlation between consumption and investment was negative. One could of course reduce

the relative innovation to the intermediation variable further but the point is clear: only when

the innovation to intermediation induced by a real shock is quite small will the predictions of

the model match up with observation.

(v) Summary

       In summary, our first model attempts to capture the spirit of a wide range of models

in which aggregate fluctuations are associated with variability in the intermediation process.

In our analysis, we thus consider the impact of shocks to the accumulation process on the

aggregate economy. These shocks represent variations in the cost today of acquiring a given

level of capital in the following period. We see that the types of correlations produced by

this model are at variance with basic features of economic fluctuations. In particular,

consumption and investment are often negatively correlated, the capital stock is quite volatile

relative to output and real interest rates are procycical. The model with social increasing

returns remedies some of these problems if the production externality is sufficiently large.

       At an extreme, these results indicate that a model of the intermediation process in

which variations in the costs of accumulation are a lcey component is likely to produce

correlations that are inconsistent with basic features of aggregate data. In particular,

intermediation shocks alone seem to produce correlations at variance with observations on the

U.S. economy. Further, the mixed models do better only when the intermediation effects are

of secondary importance.

ifi. A Model of Financial Fragility

       In this section of the paper we consider a model in which fluctuations reflect strategic
                                                                                                        Is

uncertainty with regard to the returns to intermediation. Relative to the experience of the

U.S. economy during the Depression period, our model is intended to represent the strategic

uncertainty underlying many accounts of financial crises. The model relies on a thick

markets externality such that the returns to participating in financial markets increases with

the level of activity in that market. Thus the model captures, in an extreme way, the

breakdown of the intermediation process (bank failures and depositors search for liquidity

and safety) during the Depression period.'9
       The economy we construct is an infinite horizon version of the two period models

considered by Bryant and Well. In those models, two period lived agents made a savings

decision where the return to savings was an increasing function of the overall level of

savings. As shown by Bryant and Weil, this form of social returns to scale can lead to

multiple equilibria of the game played by the savers. In our formulation this returns to scale

is modeled through an assumption of a fixed cost to the process of intermediation, reflecting

the processes of loan evaluation, monitoring, outstanding obligations of the intermediary and

other transactions costs. Diamond [1984] argues that a key role of intermediaries is to

efficiently monitor the behavior of borrowers. Our model assumes that agents who join the

intermediary share in the fixed cost of its operation. This fixed cost creates a participation

externality (a form of strategic complementarity, emphasized by Cooper and John [1988])

which underlies the multiple equilibria. In one equilibrium, the avenge savings level is low

so that the representative agent chooses to save little reflecting the low return. This savings

is associated with non-intermediated investment, which may include flows to the government



    Th. aodel is exutina in IbM during • period of penimiw,, tU .ctivide. thiusgh im.,mSiaric. cents.
                                                                                                                                       19


and   firms with high credit ratings. In the other equilibrium, the avenge saving level is high

and the resulting high returns promote high savings by the individuals as well as an active

process of intermediation.

          Our economy differs from the papers by Bryant and Well in two ways. First, we

represent this interaction across savers in an infinite horizon economy so that this "savings

gainC is played each period. Second, we assume that the resolution of the strategic

uncertainty can be represented through a sunspot process. That is, there is assumed to be a

correlation device that determines the outcome of the 'savings game" in each period. Our

focus is on the dynamiós induced by the capital aotumulation process in the presence of

extrinsic uncertainty.20

          This model captures a key element of financial fragility found in the models of Bryant

and Weil as well as the bank run models of Diamond and Dybvig [1983]. Profitable

intermediated activities requires the participation of others who share confidence in the

viability of the intermediaries.2' This confidence leads agent to deposit resources in these

institutions (Bryant and Weil) and to leave them there (i.e. to avoid the runs stressed by

Diamond and Dybvig).

          The approach outlined for the previous model of linearizing around a steady state is

not sufficient here due to the presence of the nonlinearities induced by the sunspot variables.

So, we model this dynamic economy by determining the policy function of a representative

agent assuming that the set of agents is in a symmetric Nash equilibrium (induced by the


   'mc dynamic. an thus snoci.tcd with fluctuation. in the neighbod,ood of the Iwo ne.dy nil.. of the infinitely rtpc.1e4 rage pm..

   'Ryca imtrmedi.ry. we at. thinkinz of • coalition ofapeat. that take. depo.il.. make. lout, and then liquidate. the pmc.ed. aa
unlike the nnwture set kni, by Boyd and Pie.coU (19871. Not, that thi. inches thai the Intermediary hi. no capital to mak, offer, to
depoallon which might ovenome the coo.din.Iioa problem..
                                                                                                                         20

extrinsic uncertainty) in each period. The policy function, in turn, is determined from a

value function iteration procedure. More formally, consider the following dynamic

programming problem for a representative agent:

                            flK,0) — max U(flK,n) +(1 —6)K-I(t,0),n) +


                                where                                                                                  (9)
                                                                   K'/(l+r)           if 0=0,
                                              1(K',0)
                                                                                      if 0=0g.

In this problem, the current state for the representative agent is given by the current capital

stock (K) and the state of the sunspot variable (0). Given these state variables, the

representative agent chooses a level of work (n) and the capital stock for the next period

(K'). The current consumption level is determined by the total resources available from both

current production and the undepreciated capital stock less the investment level, I(K',D). The

key to the dynamic programming problem is this investment function?2

        In keeping with the spirit of Bryant and Well, the intermediation process can be in

one of two states: i.e. DE {O, Oj where 8 represents optimism and 0 is the state of

pessimism. When optimism occurs, each agrit believes that other will save through the

intermediary so that each is willing to incur a fixed cost (F) to obtain a marginal return of

(l+. In the state of pessimism, other agents do not frequent the intermediary and the

representative agent does not either thus avoiding the (large) fixed cost of operating the

intermediat.on process alone and earning a lower marginal return of (1 +rJ. As discussed



    No.. that iaytsn,cot ben I. the .mo.arg of giants ailpin phia the undepnciated ctpiiai sock thai I. no. conajnd.
                           -                                                                                                                21

below, this model thus rests on the existence of multiple equilibria for each point in the

capital state space. In one equilibrium, participation at the intermediary is high and at the

other intenrediation is absent.

         To establish the existence of sunspot equilibria through (7) two conditions must be

met. First, there must be a solution (a function V(K,O)) that satisfies the functional equation,

(7). Second, we must demonstrate that for all values of the capital stock K in the relevant

state space, there exists an indeterminacy about the form of intermediation that the realization

of U resolves. We summarize our findings in the following two propositions.



Proposition 1: There exists a V(K,9) that satisfies (7) for KEx.

PropositIon 2: There exists a value of F such that an equilibrium exists with
                         for KEx.


         Proofs of these propositions are in the appendix. Note that these propositions hold

for the capital stock in the set K. As argued in the proofs, the set K is the interval of capital

stocks that lie between the steady state associated with permanent pessimism (K,) and the

highest obtainable capital stock under optimism (K,,)? To verify the second proposition, we

set F so that at K=K, the representative agent is indifferent between accumulating through

the intermediary and utilizing the non-intermediated technique to obtain K, in the following

period. Since the desired capital stock is increasing in K, this implies that for K> K,, the

representative lender will prefer the intermediary when all others save in that fashion as well.

 Thus the optimistic equilibrium always exists. The pessimistic equilibrium always exists as


    " These n.iablea.n dermed pieci.ely in the   appendix and we pove. in an addidonal pvopoaiuon. that if the capiul flock is in the set
a. Shea I will remain ii. .......
                                                                                                22

long as the cost of operating the intermediary by a single agent is, as we assume, prohibitive.

       Given these propositions, the quantitan characteristics of the economy are

determined by the two policy functions which map from the state, (K,9) into the future

capital stock and the current level of employment, K'(K,9) and n(K,9). There are three

important properties of these policy functions that are important for our simulations. First,

K'(K,O) is an increasing function of K given 0. This reflects consumption smoothing and is

the underlying property of the neoclassical model that generates convergence. Further, the

desired capital stock is higher in states of optimism: i.e.K'(K,0J >K'(K,0) for all K E .

Second,   for the preferences we specify, n(K,0) is decreasing in K and increasing in 0. The

first effect, described above and in King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988], reflects wealth effects

and response to interest rates as the capital stock varies. Finally, as noted above, K'(K,OJ

and K'(K,0) lie between the policy functions that characterize the capital accumulation

process for the two extreme economies in which O=9 for all t and the other in which 9=0,,

for all t. We use this property to characterize the sunspot equilibria.

       From these two policy functions, all other variables of interest for the representative

household (and thus for the macro economy) are determined. In particular, the production

function determines the level of output, the resource constraint determines consumption from

investment and output. In addition, given an initial stock of capital one can calculate a

capital stock series in exactly the same manner as done for U.S. data. This allows us to

address the implications of our model for the relative volatility of capital without an

measurement problems.

       In addition, there are two interest rates that can be determined. One is the return on
                                                                                                                                  23


the marginal unit of investment: the marginal product of the capital which the investment

produces plus the undepreciated increment to tnt capital stock, R.M Second, there is the

interest rate on deposits that a competitive intermediary would offer per unit invested, ?.

From the intermediary's liquidation constraint, r=(1-(F/l))R for a current investment level

of I. Note that the cyclical behavior of P. reflects, among other things, variations in the

marginal pioduct of capital. Further, the behavior of r4 reflects not just that of R but also

the size of the fixed cost relative to the amount of investment that is being undertaken. As

we shall see, this implies that the correlation of R and r may in fact be negative.

         For common variables, the paranieterization of the model is close to that of King,

Plosser and RebeloY The critical variables are the returns on investment in the two states

and the fixed cost. As discussed earlier, we set F so that at K, the representative agent is

indifferent between the two techniques of producing future capital. We set [=0 and i=.03

and assume that Prob{8,+1=O0IO=O,}Prob{O,.iO,IQ6}.9 implying a considerable

amount of persistence in the sunspot process. Numerically, the method of value function

iteration converg& to a value function which solves (7)26

          The results from this exercise are given in Table 3 and Figures 2 and 3. Table 3

provides a summary of the behavior of some of the key macroeconomic variables in our

economy. The statistics in Table 3 were computed from a 2000 period simulation of the




   "OII7, R(P + (14)rfl+r(6)) wben repretS. the cune wn.pa ma..
   "Thus, a.65. flS and 6'.l.
   - Of c.ne, this convespac. 1. not exact but reRata the maximal difference acion iteration. which we .et at .001. The program
coavet7e. an less than 100 Paadoa..
                                                                                                                                 24

economy while the paths given in Figures 2 and 3 represent a subperiod of the simulation."

           As with the model investigated in the previous section, it is still the case that large

variations in the capital stock lie at the heart of our results. The standard deviation of the

capital stock relative to output is 4.3, still well above the observed ratio of standard

deviations. As noted above, we can calculate the capital stock series using the initial value,

the assumed rate of depreciation and the simulated level of investment as if they were no

shocks to the intermediation process: i.e. we can replicate the calculation used to construct

the measure of the U.S. capital stock. Even for this alternative capital series, we find that

the standard deviation of the capital stock far exceeds that of output.

            In contrast to the previous model of real intermediation shocks, both consumption

and investment are positively correlated with output and the relative volatilities are in accord

with observed U.S. macroeconomic behavior: consumption is less volatile than output while

investment is more volatile. Note too that in this model labor is positively correlated with

output: when there is a change in regime, both output and employment move in the same

direction and this effect dominates. Thus this model does a better job of matching observed

patterns of correlations from U.S. data.

           Figures 2 and 3 display the outcome of the simulation of the economy that underlies

the statistics reported in Table 3•21 These figures play a similar role as the impulse response

function for the earlier model in that intuition about the behavior of this economy is best



    " Note that though air economy ii highly non4lrmsr with ngime. ta.nge., the i.Sk. were coirçute4 ssf the data tenenüng
procea. wu linen. ml. polni I. di.cuned ftniher below. Mao, i. hole. 3 .S 4, 'NW I. defined n output len connrnçtion., Wa. the
can for T.ble. I and 2.

   — The mathtic. rtposd In Tab)) are derived from • thwhdon of the model w4tilc thc ati.tics given ii. Table. I and 2 an
coniputed a. population atatlnic. from the linearized model.
                                                                                                25

developed through them. From Figure 2, note the response of the economy to a change in

regime shown in period 30. When a pessimistic sunspot occurs (the sunspot variable equals

0 in Figure 2), agents do not save through the intermediary and the economy begins to move

toward the pessimistic steady state. Along this transition path, the capital stock is falling

along with output and consumption.
       In terms of financial variables, recall that there are two variables of interest: the

marginal product of an additional unit of investment (R) and the return to deposits (rd). For

our economy we find that there is a positive correlation between R and y. In the initial

period of optimism, output expands and the return to investment increases as well. Within

the optimism regime, the economy accumulates capital so that output increases while R falls.

The positive correlation reflects the dominant effect associated with the change in regime.

       Figure 3 outlines the behavior of interest rates. At the time of the pessimistic shock,

the marginal efficiency of investment falls, implying that R falls as well in period 30.

However, the reduction in the capital stock that follows leads R to rise during the transition.

For our economy, the fall in both output and R that occurs at impact dominates in

determining the positive correlation between these two variables. In contrast, the correlation

between output and the deposit rate is negative. This is due to the fact that when a period of

pessimism begins, the decrease in R is not reflected in d since the end of the intermediation

process implies that the fixed cost of intermediation is not incurred. As a consequence,

deposit rates do not decrease to the extend that R does though deposit rates do rise, along

with R, during the capital deaccumulation process. Overall then there is a negative

correlation observed between deposits rates and output.
                                                                                                                         26

          To the extent that real interest rates on relatively safe investments (which is our

interpretation of the alternative to the intermediation process) were quite high during the

Depression, this is in accord with observation. Further, during periods of pessimism, a gap

does emerge. Consider the return that could have been obtained in the event that the

intermediation process was in fact utilized? .\s our economy is extreme in that

intermediation ceases in the event of pessimism, there is actually no investment taking place

at this higher rate. In reality, there was intermediated investment during the Depression

period (i.e. not all banks closed) which could be measured by the yield on corporate debt.

We interpret the rate of return from the (non-functioning) intermediation process as a proxy

for the return on this activity. Given this, one can construct the differential between the

return on intermediated and non-intermediated investment. This gap is positive during a

period of pessimism reflecting the relatively high yield projects that go unfunded due to the

breakdown of the intermediation process.

           Contrasting the two economies, recall that in the model with fundamental shocks,

consumption smoothing was not observed and consumption was negatively correlated with

investment. In contrast, for the sunspot economy, there is consumption smoothing. Further,

in the fIrst economy, employment was negatively correlated with output while in the second,

it was positively correlated with output. These differences seem to stem from two sources.

          First, the real deposit rate is countercyclical in the second economy but strongly

procyclical in the first. Thus the response of labor supply and consumption to variations in

real returns is one factor that might distinguish the two economies. In fact, if we simulate


   - mit pp ii gino by the 'flam on dcpo.iia thañng s p.t4od of peuimitm Cr) and the mitt thai would have been paid if
knennediaflon hid occured at the given level   of the capital sack.
                                                                                                27

the second economy allowing for regimes changes but assuming a zero fixed cost of

intermediation, employment is again countercyclical and the deposit rate is procyclical.

Further, without the fixed cost of intermediation, consumption smoothing disappears. Thus

the presence of the fixed cost, which underlies the multiplicity of stage game equilibria, has

implications for the behavior of interest rates and thus employment and consumption.

        Second, the pattern of correlations reported in Table 3 reflects the shifts in regimes as

well as variations within a regime. This nonlinearity may also be imporunt in distinguishing

the two economies. To investigate this point, Table 4 presents the regime contingent

correlations from the simulations while Figure 4 shows the simulated series for investment,

along with consumption and output.'° Comparing these results with those in Table 3, note

that within each regime, both investment and employment are negatively correlated with

output. Thus the positive correlation of these variables with output for the overall simulation

is a consequence of their behavior across regimes. Further, within regimes, consumption

smoothing disappears as both investment and consumption are more volatile than output.

Thus, the economy driven by sunspots has many of the same statistical properties of the first

economy once one conditions on regime. This is perhaps not too surprising given that the

pattern of correlations is largely driven by the neoclassical adjustment process, contingent on

a regime in the case of the second economy.

        To what extent are the statistics reported for our model economy a consequence of the

fact that both new investment and undepreciated capita] are assumed to go through the

intermediation process? To address this issue, consider a variation on the basic model such



  "The ,n sep. ot coon., b in conçsr. these moment. .g.ioae eon-line., npn..natioe cC US. üu.
                                                                                                                                    28

that   only savings out of cunent output passes through the intermediation process. That is,

instead of (3) suppose that

                                                           =
                                                               K/l—8)+J,O,.

Using this accumulation equation in the dynamic programming problem, we can follow the

steps taken for the previous model." The resulting statistics for the overall sample are given

in Table S. Comparing these with those repoi'4 in Table 3, the same basic patterns of

behavior emerge. Also, for this economy the ratio of the standard deviation of capital to that

of output is 3.76. Thus our earlier findings appear robust to altering the specification so that

only new investment is intermediated.

IV. Conclusions

           The goal of this paper was to provide a quantitative assessment of models in which

variations in the process of intermediation play a central role in aggregate fluctuations. This

was accomplished by looking at two somewhat different models. The first attempts to

capture the spirit of a number of models which focus on variations in the cost of creating

new capital due to disruptions in the intermediation process. To study this, we introduced

intermediation shocks into an otherwise standard real business cycle model. The results from

this exercise were: (1) investment was not positively conelated with output, (ii) consumption

was more volatile than output and (iii) the capital stock was more volatile than output. In

these three respects, the behavior of the model economy is at variance with observed

aggregate fluctuations. Further, interest rates and output were strongly positively correlated,



       Sine. we do n ploY. Propo.ifiou I and 2 forth;. em4romnenl, the c.utiou. reader thould thk.k o( tM. czeni.en exploring the
effect, of. fundamental thock to the iornmediaior, proce.. rather than. aJO4.
                                                                                                                     29

in contrast to observadon.

        The second model introduced financial fragility through extraneous uncertainty which

influenced the perceived return to saving through an intermediary. As in Bryant and Weil,

multiple equilibria arise in the static interaction between savers in their choice of technique

for converting goods today into capital tomorrow. This indeterminacy was resolved using a

sunspots approach and the quantitative features of the resulting economy evaluated. This

economy exhibits large fluctuations and is best interpreted as a model of the Depression

period in which the process of intermediation was almost shutdown.

        As in the case of the model with real intermediation shocks, the capital stock was

quite volatile. However, in the model with extrinsic uncertainty, consumption smoothing

was evident and both consumption and investment were positively correlated with output.

Furthermore, due to the presence of fixed costs in the intermediation process, deposit rates

were negatively correlated with output, as observed during the Great Depression.

        From these results, it appears that the behavior of both economies are driven by the

effects of the returns from the intermediation process on the capital stock. The economies

had different implications for correlations across macroeconomic variables due to the

presence of fixed costs aM nonlinearities in the sunspot economy.

         In our analysis, we do not derive a series of intermediation shocks from observables.

While it seems possible to use the errors from an Euler equation to generate an

intermediation shock series, the identification assumptions necessary for such an exercise

seem quite strong. Instead, we plan to study particular historical episodes in some detail,


   •   No's &AIfl n hen — rth..rs flip of det.i4ng S irmen.ed'i.tioo uboch ad cb.cking their cotwisGoc. with stied
nit., whob i. the cazsap.n o( S .xenin pafonned by Baudq sad Cu.; (ImI.
                                                                                                            30

such as the banking crisis during the Great Depression, to evaluate the implications of our

model relative to U.S. experience.

       Two other exercises are motivated by our findings. First, the intermediation process

modeled here has no direct implications for the cost of borrowing to obtain consumption

goods. Yet, purchases of durables are an important aspect of variations in the intermediation

process and the model should be expanded to include this feature. In fact, Romer [1990]

finds that at the lime of the onset of the Depression purchases of consumer durables fell

while purchases of some non-durable actually rose. Perhaps this reflects the fact that many

consumer durable purchases (e.g. cars) were financed and hence were subject to

intermediation shocks.

        Second, the financial fragility model can be used to evaluate the gains to financial

reform and stabilization. One interpretation of the period since the Depression is that

financial reforms (most notably deposit insurance) have eliminated some of the strategic

uncertainty over intermediated investment, In principle, one could use a more carefully

calibrated version of our model to evaluate the welfre gains from this type of intervention.33




  - DinOItn6nna .2. (19921 p.mmeltrize their model iaiog low trtque.icy ob,ernlioo. to. the U.S. ecooomy.
                                                                                           31

                                         References

Baxter, M. and R. King, "Productive Externalities and the Business Cycle," Institute for
       Empirical Macroeconomics, Discussion Paper #53, November 1991.

Beaudry, P. and A. Ouay, "What do Interest Rates Reveal about the Functioning of Real
      Business Cycle Models?," mimeo, 1992.

Bernanke, B., "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
      Depression," American Economic Review, 73 (1983), 257-76.

Bernanke, B. and A. Blinder, "Credit, Money and Aggregate Demand," Americaji Economic
      Review, 78 (1988), 435-39.

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler, "Agency Cost, New Worth and Business Fluctuations,"
      American Economic Review, 79 (1989), 14.31.

___________________,"Financial Fragility and Economic Performance," Ouarterlv Journal
      of Economics, 105 (1990), 87-1 14.

Bernanke, B., Gertler, M. and S. Gilchrist,"The Financial Accelerator and the Right to
       Quality,"mimeo, October 1993.

Boyd, J. and E. Prescott, "Financial Intermediary Coalitions," Journal of Economic Theory,
       38 1986), 211-232.

Bryant, L,"A Simple Rational Expectation Keynes-Type Model," Ouarterlv Journal of
       Economics, 97 (1983), 525-529.

_______"The Paradox of Thrift, Liquidity Preference and Animal Spirits," Econometrica, 55
      (1987), 1231-36.

Chatteijee, S., Cooper,R. and B. Ravikumar, "Strategic Complementarity in Business
      Formation: Aggregate fluctuations and Sunspot Equilibria," Review of Economic
      Studies, 60 (1993), 795-811.

Cooper; R. and A. John, "Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Models,"
      Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 103 (1988)441-64.

Diamond, D. "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," Review of Economic
      Studies, 51(1984), 393-414.

Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig, "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity," Journal of
     Political Economy, 91 (1993), 401-19.
                                                                                          32

Diaz-Giménez, I., B. Prescott, T. Fitzgerald and R. Alvarez,"Banking in Computable
       General Equilibrium Economies," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 16
       (1992), 533-59.

Farmer, R. and J.T. Guo, "Real Business Cycles and the Animal Spirits Hypothesis,
      mimeo, 1993.

Fisher, J., "Credit Market Imperfections and the Heterogenous Response of Firms to
       Monetary Shocks," Research Report 9410, University of Western Ontario, May 1994.

Friedman, M. and A. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.
      Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J., 1963.

Garcia, R. and P. Perron, "An Analysis of the Real Interest Rate Under Regime Shifts,"
       mimeo, Universite de Montreal, February 1993.

Gertler, M., "Financial Structure and Aggregate Economic Activity: An Overview," Journal
       of Money. Credit and Bankins, (1988), 559-88.

_________ "Financial Capacity and Output Fluctuations in an Economy with Multi-period
      Contracting," Review of Economic Studies, 59 (1992), 455-72.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz and G. Huffman, "Investment, Capacity Utilization and the
     Real Business Cycle," American Economic Review, 78 (1988), 402-17.

Greenwood, I., Z. Hercowitz and P. Krusell, "Macroeconomic Implications of Investment-
      Specific Technological Change," inimeo, 1994.

Greenwood, J. and B. Jovanovic, "Financial Development, Growth and the Distribution of
      Income," Journal of Political Economy, 98 (1990), 1076-1107.

Hamilton, J. "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression," Journal of Monetary Economics,
      19 (1987), 145-69.

____________ "A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series
     and the Business Cycle," Econometrica, 57 (1989), 357-84.

King, it, Plosser, C. and S. Rebelo, "Production, Growth and Business Cycles: I. The Basic
       Neoclassical Model," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21(1988), 195-232.

Marimon, R. and A. Marcet, "Communication, Commitment and Growth,"Journal of
     Economic Theory, 58 (1992), 219-49.

Romer, C. "The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression," Ouarterlv Journal of
                                                                                       33

      Economics, 105 (1990), 597-624.

Stokey, N. and R. Lucas, Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard University
      Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1989.

Weil, P. lncreasing Returns and Animal Spirits, American Economic Review, 79 (1989),
      889-94.
                                                                                            34

                                    Table 1

                             Linearized Model
                            Impact of lID Real Shocks


TREATMENT     Con. wfth Y               Standard Deviation Relative to   Statistics for Y
             Concos                                 Output




:::         :1 ;Z               s: 'E'                                              ;
                                     Table 2

                             Linearized Model
                       Serially Correlated (.9) Real Shocks


TREATMENT     Con. with Y               Standard Deviation Relative to   Statistics for Y




                     :
             Con tcrnpomneous                      Output




     t      .7224               71J5                            :2                   :?
                                                                                                35




                                            table 3
                                   Sunspot Equilibrium




                                            Table 4
                                   Sunspot Equilibrium


JnthY$ZZvetosflY
                                     Statistics by Regime


                  Cotztemporanoous                          Output



            .98      95       94                                                          LO
Pessimism   .98      -.94     94                                1.33                      1.0




                                            Tabie 5
                                  Sunspot Equilibrium
                            Shocks to New Investment Flows Only




     11TTttTff
INT&mspots 14'
                             mv      Prod      C

                  l.63I.7_I.62l •731 .211.9512.581
                                                      His
                                                            Ouut
                                                                mv     Prod    ad

                                                                              .0081   J   1.0
                                                                                                                   36


                                                  Appendix: Proof,

         As discussed in the text, x[Iç,KJ. MercK, is the unique steady stale level of capital for the
 economy with perpetual pessimism. It is determined from the two first order conditions to the accumulation
 problem: the intritemporal first-order condition and the Euler equation at the steady state values for employment
 and the capiI.l stock. K is the largest value of K that satisfies: K=(flC,l)P)(1+r)/(l.(l.1)(1+o). Thus it
 represents the highest level of the capital stock that can be reproduced if the agent has zero leisure and zero
 consumption.

Proposition 1: There exists a VQC,9) that satisfies (7) for KEc.

Proof: The proof uses Proposition 9.6 from Stokey-Lucas (19891. To make use of their result, we note that
the return function is bounded and continuous for KEc, the feasible set is non-empty, compact valued and
continuous and that our problem has discounting.

Proposition 2: There exists a value ofF such that an equilibrium exists with v(K.OJv(K,9,) for all KEr.

Proof LetK fori—o,pbethesteady statelevelofcapitai stockiftheeconomywas instate81inall periods
with certainty. From the steady state of the Euler equation, it is easy to see that I>K,. Choose F so that at
K-K,. the cost to the agent of obtaining K,of capital tomorrow is the same whether the accumulation is
through the intennediary (assuming that all other agents are going to the intermediary) or through the non-
intermediated technology. Thus, F satisfies:


                                       F=FaK(   I
                                            ' (l+)
                                                                  —
                                                                       I,
                                                                      (1+)
                                                                                                             (Al)

So at K=K,, the returns to intermediated accumulation are at least as large as non-intermediated accumulation
as the agent could choose a capital stock not equal to K.,through intermediated investment and thus be no wont
off. For K> K, and this value of F, it is clear that the intermediated technology is more efficient than the non-
intermediated one. Thus, if all other agents go to the intermediary for K>K,, the remaining agent will do so as
well. Hence for each K>K,, there is always an optimistic equilibrium. Further, as long as the fixed cost to
intermediation is sufficiently large, if all other agents accumulate using the non-intermediated technology, the
remaining agent will not have an incentive to use the intermediated accumulation process.

Proposition 3: If F-p, then K'(K',9)K, and                     for all 9.

Proof: To see that X'QC',O)K, for all 8, suppose that K'(K,8)cIç. Given that F=K, the agent will then
accumulate capital using the mattress technology. Since K, is the steady state of the economy with perpetual
pessimism, the agent could have done no worse by setti'' K'(K',8)=K,. In a similar way, suppose that
K'(K',0j<K,, Again, from F=F, the best to accumu ?3 is through the mattress. Once again, the capital is
below K, and the welfare of the agent, by revealed preference, cannot exceed that from remaining at K, and
using the mattress accumulation technology. Thus, K'(K',6)K, for all 0.

        To see that K'&..o)çforafl 8, note that it is feasible to remain at the capital stock K when 6"0,
but it is not feasible to have K> K under optimism as then consumption would be negative. Given that the
maximal capital stock is higher under perpetual optimism than under perpetual pessimism, K,>K,. So, using
the fact that F-p, we know that the mattress is a less efficient storage technology at K so that under
pessimism it c impossible to have K'(lc,0,)>K, without consumption being negative.
          lID Return Shock
                  Impulse Responses

 2
 1



..,
-2            I    I   I   I    I           I        I   I


      0   2       4        6        8      10       12       14       16
                                Period


  - Consumption — output                        -- Investment
                                                                  I




                               r;n,.rc I
              Real Variables
                 sunspot equilibrium
1.6
14 --.--—____
         ___________
                    czr— ________________
                       S

                         .—..•  S..—'.




                    tIIIc
 •

1.2'
     '1

0.8        ________                      __________
0.6
0.4
0.2
     0•
          1 1121 31 41 51 61 71 8t 91
                             Period
               -—
                    output          Capital
              [-4--
                    sunspot state — consumption




                           Figure 2
              Financial Variables
                 sunspot equilibrium
1.16                                                      1



1.14                                                      0.8

1.12                                                      0.6

 1.1                                                      0.4

1.08                                                      02

1.06                                                      0
       1   11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 91
                           Period

   [—- R          — rd                 -- sunspot state




                         Figure 3
Cons., Invest, and Output
                              sunspot equilibrium
 I
0.8

0.6 .cCT_. —J—-—'——-——-——
      •




0.4
0.2   •
          4I'4i+44.__j_j_j II 11111111111                      1111111111111111 1111111



 0
      1 .11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 91
                                              Period

                               [—output--c             ——Y-c      I




                                            Figure 4
