                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  THE TAX UNIT AND
                                HOUSEHOLD PRODUCtION



                                         John Piggott
                                        John Whalley




                                  Working Paper No. 4820



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1994




We arc ,rateful to seminar groups at the Universiti of Melbourne, Sydney and Western Ontario
for comments, and would like to thank Pecar Vujanovich for outstanding research assistance, and
Alan Powell and Alan Woodland for helpful discussions. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed ax-c those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by John Piggott and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission pmvided that full credit,
including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4820
                                                                                 August 1994

                                   THE TAX UNIT AND
                                 HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTION

                                          ABSTRACT

       The conventional wisdom is that taxing individuals rather than households is superior

from an efficiency point of view under progressive income taxation. This is because it leads to

secondary workers, whose labour supply elasticity is high, being taxed at a lower marginal rate

than primary workers, whose labour supply elasticity is low. But once household production is

taken into account, things are more complicated since tax design should also not distort the input

use of family members' time in household production.

       We use a simple general equilibrium model of household production parameterized using

Australian data whose results clearly show that welfare effects can be either positive or negative

when changing an existing income tax from an individual to a household basis. In so doing, we

are able to investigate the comparative static effects of changing the tax unit from an individual

to the household basis in a richer model than that used thus far in the literature, since we capture

both Ramsey considerations from differential labour supply elasticities, and factor input

distortions into household production. Our results challenge conventional wisdom, and suggest

that household unit taxation deserves more sympathetic consideration than is currently the case.


John Piggott                                                        John Whalley
School of Economics                                                 Department of Economics
University of New South Wales                                       University of Western Ontario
Sydney, New South Wales                                             London, Ontario
AUSTRALIA                                                           CANADA
                                                                    and NBER
                                          1


1.    INTRODUCTION

      Whether the income tax should apply to individuals or households has been

an issue in public finance ever since the tax was introduced. Early arguments

centred on notions of equity and tax-neutrality with respect to marriage

decisions.1 But since Boskin (1973) (and later Boskin and Sheshinski (1983)). an

efficiency argument in favour of using the individual as the tax unit has been

widely accepted.2 A simple Ramsey (1927) rule (ignoring cross elasticities)

suggests that an individual with a high labour supply elasticity should face a lower

marginal tax rate than one with a low elasticity. Econometric estimates of labcur

supply elasticities are higher for secondary than for primary workers. Given that

secondary workers on average earn less than primary workers, taxing individuals

under the income tax with a progressive rate structure is superior from an

efficiency point of view, whereas household based taxes are not.3

      In this paper we argue that this conventional wisdom is more fragile than

has been previously portrayed in the literature. This is because taxing on an

individual basis under a progressive income tax also distorts the primary-secondary


   'Bittker (1975) traces the development of U.S. income tax legislation with
respect to the tax unit.

   2This argument is also either asserted or derived from an explicit model in
Rosen (1976, 1977. 1978); Brazer (1980); and Munnell (1980).
    3Beyond these efficiency considerations in the choice of tax unit, there does
not appear to be any clear relationship between progressivity and the tax unit
asserted in the literature. Kakwani (1977), for instance, compares the
progressivity (with respect to individuals) of the Australian, Canadian, U.K. and
U.S. systems, of which the first two at the time had individual filing. He found the
U.K. system to be the most progressive and the U.S. system least progressive.
                                            2

worker input ratio in household production. In a model with market and household

(non-market) production and with primary and secondary labour, individual-based

taxes imply a distortion of input decisions by primary and secondary workers into

household production. The costs of this distortion can outweigh the benefits of

setting different tax rates for individual members to reflect market labour supply

elasticities. Two effects - differential labour supply elasticities and distortions in

household production - rather than one, need to be taken into account in evaluating

the choice of tax unit.

      To analyze how the incorporation of household production affects the choice

of tax unit, we use a numerical general equilibrium model since an analytical

formulation of the comparison across tax units is not tractable for the cases we

discuss later. Numerical simulation we view as inevitable if richer models than

have thus far been used in analytical literature are to be employed. The model

incorporates market and household production, each of which use primary and

secondary labour as inputs. It is parameterized using Australian data drawn from

time use surveys covering married couples. We use the model in counterfactual

mode to evaluate income taxes based on alternative tax units.

      Our results show that, depending upon values of labour supply and other

elasticities to which the model is calibrated, and the form of household unit used, a

switch from an individual to a household basis can lead either to an aggregate

welfare gain or loss; although gains are the more common outcome across the

cases we consider. Model results thus provide clear counter-examples to the
                                          3

current presumption in favour of individual-based taxation outlined above, and

suggest household taxation could more likely be preferred.



2.    A SIMPLE GENERAL-EQUILIBRIUM MODEL WITH MARKET AND

       HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTION

      To investigate how incorporating household production changes the

conventional analysis of the choice of tax unit, we use a simple applied general-

equilibrium model with two factors of production, primary and secondary labour

UP and LS). These are inputs in the production of both a single market good, M,

and a vector of household-specific non-market goods, N. There is no trade in non-

market goods, and the non-market good consumed by each household is produced

using only the labour supplied by members of that household.

      We keep the model structure parsimonious so as to explore the tax unit

issue in as transparent a structure as possible. Because trade occurs between

households in the market good, we consider a two-household model formulation as

our central case. This, however, allows for redistribution between households

under tax unit changes; and to abstract from this, in sensitivity analyses we also

consider a one-household (or identical households) version of the model. We also

consider a one-household version of the model without household production to

confirm that the model supports conventional wisdom without the extra household

production component we emphasize above.
                                         4
      Each of the two household types identified in the central case variant of the

model is assumed to comprise two individuals, one of which is endowed with

primary labour, and the other with secondary labour. These endowments are

allocated by these individuals between market supply, non-market production and

leisure, the last of which takes the form of direct consumption of the

corresponding labour type. The household division most easily available from the

data we use is of two adult household groups, one with and the other without

children. This also has the advantage of generating household groups with

differing market supplies of secondary labour in the data.

      Figure 1 outlines how labour allocation and market and non-market

production enters the central case variant of the model, There are two

households, two labour types (primary and secondary), and two forms of

production (market and household). Because each household cannot supply more

than their own labour for the production of their own household good, labour types

by household need to be separately identified. Hence, labour types supplied to the

market by the two households are combined into composite labour-type inputs

(primary and secondary) for market production; if the substitution elasticities here

are high, effectively homogeneous labour types occur for market production.4

Using this formulation also helps in the later analysis of alternative tax schemes,




   4Our later model simulations use high values of 25.0 for these elasticities;
which approximates a treatment of homogeneity across each of the two labour
types supplied to the market by the two households.
                                          FIGURE 1


                Structure of the General Equilibrium Household Production Model
             (2 households; 2 household-specific non-market goods; 1 market good)


Market                                                              Non-market
Activity                        labour Endowments                     Activity


                                      Primary



                                                  Leisure




                                                  Leisure




                                                                                 Household 1
    Market                                                                       Non-market
    Good                                                                            Gocd




                                                flieisure   I




                                                  leisq$e
                                           6

since each individual's labour income can then be taxed either at a separate

(individual) rate or at a combined household rate in different model simulations.

      More formally, the labour endowments CL) of primary P) and secondary

(S) labour of the households, h,    (Lb', L:, are allocated to market labour

supply CL,?, L}, non-market labour supply (W, W'), and leisure CEA Er). Each

household is assumed to maximize a utility function

                                = u(E,    Eh',Mh,Nh)                                (1)



subject to a household income constraint and separate time constraints for the

labour types within the household. Eh' and E: represent leisure consumed by

primary and secondary workers in the household, M is the household consumption

of the market good, and N is the hrh household's non-market good consumption.

We use nested CES utility functions to represent Cl).

      On the production side, the market good. M, is produced according to a

constant returns to scale CES function,

                                   M = M(L,L5}                                      {2)

where L and U are the market supply of primary and secondary labour,

aggregated across households.

      LP and L' are, in turn, CES aggregates of the market supplies of the

household labour types:

                                   L'=L'CLf,L;)                                     (3)


                                   L'=L '(L.L;)                                     (4)
                                               7

as discussed above.

         Each household also produces its own non-market good, Nh, with production

also characterized by a constant returns CES function:

                             Nb =   Nh(Wh,Wh), h         1,2                               (5)


         Equilibrium in a no-tax version of the model is given by wage rates for the

two composite labour types (primary and secondary), and a price for the market

good, such that

         (ii Demand equals supply for the market good, and



                                                                                           (6)



         (II) Time allocation constraints hold by labour type by household,



                          = E° +      + w:         ,h=1,2                                  (7)




                                                   ,h=1,2                                  (8)




where the superscripts P     and    S refer to primary and     secondary labour. Market

factor   supplies, Li',   L' and the non-market factor inputs for each household will

satisfy   Pareto efficiency conditions given in    the   no-tax case, equilibrium prices for


primary   and secondary labour and the market good. Thus, in effect, the non-

market segment of the model operates as a fully priced competitive sub-system for
                                         8

each household, allowing the whole model to be solved using general equilibrium

computational techniques (see Shoven and Whalley (1992fl.

      Income taxes are introduced into the model on either an individual or

household basis, using the general equilibrium tax structure set out in Shoven and

Whalley (1973, 1992). For simplicity, we return all tax revenues to the

households paying income taxes as lump sum transfers, with weights reflecting the

taxes they pay under the income tax in the base-case equilibrium data. As in

Shoven and Whalley (1973), in the presence of taxes government budget balance

holds in equilibrium. We parameterize the model using calibration to a benchmark

equilibrium data set (see Mansur and Whalley (1984)), using the model, in turn, to

perform counterfactual equilibrium analyses under different tax arrangements.

Calibration reflects the requirement that when used in the model, the parameter

values generated yield an equilibrium solution to the model which replicates

benchmark data.

      The benchmark equilibrium data set we use builds on information collected

in a time use survey of Australian households conducted in 1974 as a companion

to a wider Multinational Time Budget Studies program.5 Table 1 reports average

household time allocations throughout the day from this survey for each adult in

the two main household types in the model. This information is then combined




   5See Juster and Stafford (1991) for a recent survey of time use studies in other
countries.
                                            9

                                      IAJ
                  The Allocation of Daily Time Among Alternative
                     Uses by Household Type. Australia, 1974

Household             Household      Market     Non-market
Type1                  Member        Labour2      Labour3       Leisure4    Total5

Type 1                Primary         7.7          1.1           4.2        13.0
(with children)
                      Secondary       1.5          4.5           4.4        10.4


Type 2                Primary         6.2          1.4           5.1        12.7
(no children)
                      Secondary       1.7          4.4           5.6        11.7


Source: McNair Anderson Associates (1974).


1.       Household 1 has dependent children; household 2 does not.

2.       Includes travel time to and from work, and regular breaks (lunch, etc.).

3.       Includes "domestic work", "care of children", and "purchase of goods and
         services".

4.       Includes "social activities and entertainment", "active leisure" and "passive
         leisure".

5.       The amount of time not allocated to the categories listed in notes 2-4
         varies between household members and across households. We assume
         this to be non-discretionary time; this does not enter explicitly into the
         calculations using our model.
                                         10

with data on 1973-74 Australian tax rates6, and survey data on component

household incomes to provide the input benchmark equilibrium data for model

calibration.

       The income, consumption, and tax data used as the benchmark for the

model are given in Table 2. Consumption data in Table 2 reflects both information

from Table 1 and conditions that market good purchases equal money income for

each household, and that non-market consumption exhausts non-market

production, since non-market goods for each household are, by assumption, not

traded. By construction, all model equilibrium conditions are satisfied in this data

set.

       Figure 2 sets out the nesting structure used in household preferences in the

model, and Table 3 sets out both the elasticity specification used in the central

case variant of the model, as well as the model sensitivity variants we consider

later. We later consider both structural and parametric sensitivity analyses with

the model; with the former focusing on model variants first with only one

household, and then without household production.




   6See Australia (1975). p.63.
                                                        11

                                                 TABLE 2

     Benchmark Data on Household and Individual Incomes (including transfers),
                Personal Taxes and Production used in the Model
                        (1974 data for Australia in A$)
A.       Income and Tax Data

                                  (1)                  (2)                (3)              (4              (5)

                                Gross of
                              Tax Income                              Personal                          Marginal
Household                      from Paid         Transfers                Tax             Total          Tax
Type                              Work           Received'            Payments     IC 1) + (2)-(3)]       Rate2
                                   $                    $                  $                $


Type 1            Primary        6901              )                   1592           )                    37.9%
(with children)                                    1)621                              17826
                  Secondary       925              1                      29          I                    4.9%


Type 2            Primary        5527              )                   1091           I                    33.3%
(no children)                                      I 156                              )6802
                  Secondary      1279              )                      65          )                     7.2%


B. Consumption Data

                                                                                 Primary              Secondary
Household                               Market               Non-market          Worker                Worker
Type                                    Good                   Good              Leisure               Leisure

Type 1 (with children)                  7826                   3258              2338                   2557

Type 2 (no children)                    6806                   3904              3030                   3910


1. In the benchmark data, total transfers received equal taxes paid for consistency with
     government budget balance.

2. For primary workers, this is the tax rate associated with the average income for each household
    type. For secondary workers, this is a weighted average of the average of the tax rates for
    secondary workers and a zero rate for non-labour-market participants.
               12

            Figure 2

    Nesting Structure Used in
     Household Preferences



                            CT



                                      Lp



                                 Ls



M                      N
                                                   13
                                               TABLE 3

              Central Case Elasticity Specification and Model and Elasticity
                         Variants used In Sensitivity Analysis
A. Central Case         Demand Side                                CT             Ca.t.
                        Household 1 (no children)               0.1              0.15              0.5
                        Household 2 (with children)             0.1              0.4               0.5
                        Production Side                 o'          CM           o'j.
                                                        1.5           1.5    High (25.0)       High (25.0)

                        Implied tjncompensated Household 1                   Household 2
                        Labour Supply Elasticities (no children)            (with children)

                                       Primary          0.1                      0.1
                                       Secondary         1.5                     1.5

B. Structural Sensitivity Variants

                       Variant                  Execution
                       1. Equivalent Single     Elasticity specification as in Central Case.
                          Household model       Benchmark data on consumption/production
                                                aggregated across two households. Tax rates set at
                                                comparable weighted average tax rates across labour
                                                types.

                       2. Equivalent Single  As above for equivalent single household model,
                          Household model    with, in addition, benchmark data on household
                          with no household production and inputs of primary and secondary
                          production         labour reallocated as leisure consumption. This
                                             effectively removes household production from the
                                             model.

C. Elasticity Sensitivity Variants

                       1. Alternative values of production side elasticities 0M' c considered in
                          combination.

                       2. Combinations of demand side elasticities c, which vary by household.

                       3. Changes in implied uncompensated labour supply elasticities used in
                          model calibration.
                                          14

      The elasticity values used in calibrating the model draw largely on

econometric studies of labour supply, our procedure being to choose model

parameters (elasticities of substitution in preferences, and substitution elasticities

in household production) so as to be consistent with literature-based labour supply

elasticities. In our calibration, we place major stress on these elasticities since

these have been central to previous arguments in favour of individual-based

taxation.

      Over the years, studies have produced a wide range of elasticity estimates

for both primary and secondary labour, with estimates sensitive to both data and

econometric procedure; Killingsworth (1983) and Killingsworth and Heckman

(1986) both provide comprehensive surveys. For primary workers, our calibration

assumes uncompensated labour supply elasticities of 0.1 across our household

types and, for secondary workers, elasticity values of 1.5, comparable to those

reported in the most recent Australian study for the total supply elasticity (that is,

hours and participation); due to Ross (1986). This study uses a methodology close

to that which Killingsworth (1983) terms "second-generation," taking account of

sample selection bias introduced by non-participation. It. therefore, tends to yield

somewhat higher elasticity estimates than those of earlier studies.

      Estimates of substitution elasticities in production are also important for our

analysis, and are parametrically varied since direct empirical estimates are

unavailable. We use central-case elasticity values of 1.5 in both market and non-

market production, rationalized (somewhat indirectly) by noting that capital labour
                                         15

substitution elasticities in aggregate production functions differ approximately by a

factor of two depending both upon whether cross-section or time series estimation

is used, and the estimating equation (see Berndt (1976)). Higher values of around

1.0 are obtained for cross section. Our use of 1.5 in our central case reflects the

argument that substitution between labour types is likely easier than between

capital and labour.

      Two issues in using labour supply elasticity estimates in calibrating the

model are worthy of comment in passing, since these seem not to have been noted

previously in the literature. The first is that because the calibration procedure used

in the model requires that the model labour market supply response for a small

change in the wage be consistent with literature elasticity estimates, at least three

different forms of calibration can be used. The appropriate wage could be

increased holding all other prices fixed; the wage could be increased, and prices

allowed to adjust to satisfy zero profit conditions; or the wage could be allowed to

change as a result of a shock to the model (such as a change in a tax rate) and a

new equilibrium computed.

      The third of these is sharply divergent from current econometric

methodology, which only estimates preferences of the individual or household in a

partial equilibrium framework. The choice between the first two depends upon the

expectations assumed for households in the sample under study. If a household

does not anticipate that a wage change will be reflected in prices, then the first

formulation is appropriate (this is the procedure that most econometric studies
                                          16
use). If. on the other hand, households anticipate that a wage increase they

receive will be ref leáted in price increases, then the second formulation appears

more suitable. In our procedure, we calibrate parameters of household utility

functions to labour supply elasticities, assuming that households recognize the

change in the opportunity cost br imputed price) of non-market supplied labour

resulting from a wage change, but do not expect any resulting indirect changes in

the price of the market good.

      The second point is that in most calibration exercises, elasticities of

substitution between goods and leisure in the household demand functions are

directly determined by the labpur supply elasticity and budget share data used in

calibration. In the model used here, however, this information will only determine

combinations of household preference and production substitution parameters.

since choices about the supply of labour to the market will be influenced by the

household production technology as well as by household preferences. This is one

reason we perform parametric sensitivity analyses with the models in generating

the results discussed later.

      In concluding this section, it should also be noted that several potentially

complicating factors are ignored in the model. These include taxes other than

personal taxes; the incorporation of non-married couple households and single-

person households, both of which raise the question of how rate structures should
                                         17
be differentiated by marital status; and endogenous family formation.7 These

complicate the analysis if analyzed simultaneously within the structure we use, and

so we ignore them. Similarly, introducing capital into the model raises further

questions, including the tax treatment of owner-occupier housing and its role in

household production.



3.    MODEL RESULTS AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS

      We have performed a number of experiments with our model, each designed

to explore the implications of moving from an individual basis in the income tax (as

in the base-case data) to an alternative household based tax unit. In each

experiment, art equilibrium under anew tax regime is computed and benchmark

and counterfactual equilibria compared. The net revenue yield is preserved in real

terms in the new equilibrium, and as in '.me benchmark, revenues are passed back

to households in the form of transfers. The value of transfers received by each

household is thus held constant in real terms between the benchmark and

replacement equilibria.

      We consider three alternative household-based income tax arrangements.

each of which represents a different way of changing the individual unit prevailing




   7See Haurin, Hendershott and Kim (1993) for a recent discussion of this issue,
and Feenberg and Rosen (1994) for recent discussion of the related issue of the
marriage tax.
                                         18

in the benchmark case to a household unit.9 In each case, household unit

treatment involves both members of the household facing the same marginal tax

rate. Household production-based efficiency considerations are removed by the

choice of tax unit in all three of these cases because differences in marginal rates

across household members are removed. Cases thus differ in how these common

marginal tax rates are set.

      In the first, the existing legal income tax structure (the Australian income tax

in 1974) is applied to combined household income rather than individual income.

As this is a progressive tax, it retains the same rate structure as the benchmark

individual-based tax, and hence marginal tax rates on combined income exceed

those on sepaiate individual incomes. In implementing this household unit tax

replacement in the model, we make further proportional adjustments to both

average and marginal tax rates for each household type relative to the base case

so as to preserve revenue neutrality.

      In the second case, we allow household members to split their income

equally for tax purposes, and apply the existing (Australia, 1974) rate schedule to

each. This achieves an outcome in which members of the household face the

same marginal tax rate, but with a progressive base-case tax, rates are lower than

in the first case. This "income averaging" treatment also differs from the "existing



    °The base-case equilibrium is as reflected in Australian data, and hence while
having considerably different marginal tax rates for primary and secondary labour
within each household, does not necessarily correspond to a setting of optimal tax
rates by household.
                                          19

schedule" tax unit charge of the first case, in that the ratio of the marginal to the

average tax rate is different across members of the household.9 In this case, tax

schedules by household are again scaled to preserve tax yield.

      In the third case, we no longer use existing rate schedules to move to a

household unit, and instead use marginal tax rate equivalence as the basis for

household unit replacement. In this, we use the weights of market incomes of

primary and secondary labour in benchmark data to compute a weighted average

household marginal tax rate which we use as the household unit tax replacement.

This procedure is used to remove variations in the level at which marginal tax rates

are set as part of the tax unit change. In these cases, final tax rates are again also

determined by a scaling to achieve revenue neutrality.

      Table 4 reports welfare impacts from these three tax unit changes for the

central case variant of the model. We report Hicksian equivalent variations both by

household and aggregated across households,10 Their striking feature is that the

aggregate welfare measure, the sum of EVs across households, is negative for the

existing schedule case and positive for the income averaging case. As these both

relate to tax unit changes using existing (1974) tax schedules, the outcomes

across cases / and 2 are consistent with the pattern of marginal rate changes



   9This ratio was proposed by Slitor (1948) as a measure of tax progressivity, but
as Kakwani (1977) points out, this measure is also sensitive to the point on the
schedule being considered.

    10As Kay (1980) has pointed out, multiple equilibria comparisons are more
easily carried out using EVs rather than CVs, because the same set of "Old" prices
is used for all calculations.
                                                 20
                                              TABLE 4

                          Welfare Implications of Adopting the Household
                                 as the Taxation Unit in the Model

                                               Household 1'        Household 2'        Total
                                                Equivalent          Equivalent      Equivalent
                                                 Variation'          Variation'      Variatipn

A. Central Case Results

   1. Applying Existing Tax Schedule
      to combined household income
       (with scaling for equal yield')
                AS (1974)                            -3.1             -65.9            -68.9
                as % of income                      (-0.02)            (-0.39)        (-0.22)

   2. Income Averaging Within Households
       (with scaling for equal yield1)
               AS (1974).                           63.8                -7.0          56.8
               as % of income                       (0.42)             (-0.04)         (0.18)

   3. Equivalent Marginal Tax Rate Household
       Base Regime (with scaling for equal yield')
               AS (1974)                           -26.1               34.5              8.4
               as % of income                       (-0.18)             (0.20)         (0.03)




   Both average and marginal rates in the replacement income tax structure are proportionally
   adjusted to ensure equality of tax yield in the replacement.
   These are money metric measures of welfare changes between equilibria, calculated as Hicksian
   equivalent variations.
   Household 1 has no children; Household 2 is with children.
                                         21

discussed above. Table 4 also reports results for equivalent marginal tax rate

changes which also show an aggregate gain. Taken in combination, and ri

particular with the change in sign across tax replacements, these results therefore

challenge the conventional wisdom, emphasized in the introduction, that the

individual tax unit is to be preferred to the household unit on efficiency grounds.

      Effects across households suggest that gains are also larger, or losses are

smaller, in the first two cases for the no-child households who supply more

secondary labour to the market. This result is reversed under the equivalent

marginal tax rate change, since with proportional equal-yield scaling in this case

they pay more taxes. Hence, legal and marginal rate tax unit changes differ in this

respect.

      Because the movements between individual and household tax units based

on existing (1974) tax schedules in Table 4 involve different changes in marginal

tax rates which differ, and hence affect the overall gain or loss from the switch

between tax units, we have also performed a series of model sensitivity runs. For

simplicity of presentation, these are all performed on a marginal rate equivalent

basis,11 with results reported in Table 5. We also use these runs as a basis for

exploring the sensitivity of results to model structure by moving to a one-

household model, and then also removing household production.




    "As we explain above, these cases preserve weighted average marginal tax
rates and hence equivalent labour supply distortions.
                                               22
                                            TABLE 5

                          Model Structure Comparisons Using Marginal
                               Tax Rate Equivalent Model Runs


                               Welfare Impact of Adootina Equivalent Household
                                 Marginal Tax Rate' ji-ticksian EVs in 1974$)

Model Form'

1.     Central Case (2 household,
       with household production)                  8.4
                                                  (0.03%)

2.     1 Household model, with
       household production                         3.57
                                                  (0.01%)

3.     1 Household mode!, without
       household production                     -30.0
                                                 (-0.14%)




   Calculated using incomes of labour types in benchmark data as weights.
2 The three model variants maintain parametric comparability by calibrating to the same labour
   supply elasticities, and similar substitution elasticities elsewhere in the model.
                                          23

       In Table 5, results reiterate the aggregate gains in moving to a household tax

unit on a marginal rate equivalent basis as in Table 4, reflecting the presence of

household production distortions under an individually based income tax. The size

of the gain is little different in an equivalent one rather than two-household model,

suggesting that efficiency aspects of the tax change are little affected by inter-

household income distribution effects in the two-household model. But gains

become losses in the no-household production model, since distortions of

household production are absent. This confirms the intuition we stress above as to

the effects of household production on the tax unit issue.

       The size of the aggregate welfare change when moving from an individual to

a household basis in these cases depends not only on the form of the tax

replacement, the parameter specification used in the model is also important. The

role of a number of key parameters in our earlier result is explored in results

reported in Table 6. Results in Cases 1, 2 and 3 of Panel A, jointly suggest that

variations in the market production substitution elasticities (CM) have little impact

on aggregate welfare effects, while there is considerably more sensitivity to

changes in household production elasticities (UN). This corresponds with the

intuition above that it is household production effects which are key to any

challenge to conventional analysis of individual versus household tax unit issues.

Results in Panel B show increasing losses for existing schedule changes as 0Mfi is

both sset at higher values for households with no children and increased.
                                                    24
                                                 TABLE 6

                                 Sensitivity of Central Case Model Results
                                            to Elasticity Changes

A.   Joint Sensitivity to Market and Non-Market Production Elasticity Changes

1.   Welfare Impacts' of Applying Existing
     Tax Schedule to Combined Household Income
     (as in Table 4)

                                                              1.0                       1 .5             2.0
                                                     1.0    99.2                     -99.3            -99.0

                                              °W 1.5        71.3                     -68.9            -66.5
                                                     2.0    23.8                     -16.1            -10.7
2.   Welfare Impacts' of Income Averaging
     Within Households
     (as in Table 4)

                                                                                            °M
                                                              1.0                       1.5              2.0
                                                      1.0   50.7                      50.8             50.8

                                              0N            54.5                      56.8             58.4
                                                     2.0    58.6                      65.0             69.8
3.   Welfare Impacts' of Equivalent Marginal
     Tax Rates Regime
     las in Table 4)

                                                                                         0M
                                                              1.0                       1.5              2.0
                                                     1.0    -4.0                       -5.8             -6.9
                                                      1.5    7.6                        8.4              9.3
                                                     2.0    27.2                      32.9             37.2

B.   Varvino SubstitutIon Elasticities in Preferences Between Market and Non-Market Goods
     Across Households

1.   Existing Schedule Replacements' (higher
     elasticities for households with children')
                                                            Household I           Household 2      Aggregate
                                                            (No children)        lWth children)   Wellare Impact
                                                                0Me                    c_it
                                                              0.3                       0.5            -58.0

                                                              0.5                       0.5            -68.9
                                                              0.5                       0,7            -83.6

     Thee. are Hiclceien equivalent variations in AS 1974; see Footnote   2   to Table 4.
     See text for explanation.
     In the Central Case c_ — 0,5 I or both households.
                                          25

4.       CONCLUSION

         Conventional wisdom suggests that taxing individuals rather than

households under progressive income taxes is superior from an efficiency point of

view, since this will lead to secondary workers, whose labàur supply elasticity is

high, being taxed at a lower marginal rate than primary workers, whose labour

supply elasticity is low. We suggest that household production also needs to be

taken into account, since not distorting input decisions by family members in

household production instead suggests taxing on a household not an individual

basis.

         Here we use a general equilibrium model of household production

parameterized using Australian data to investigate the comparative static effects of

changing the tax unit from an individual to a household basis in a richer model than

used thus far in the literature. Our results clearly challenge conventional wisdom.

In our central-case model results, welfare effects from changing the income tax

from an individual unit to a household unit basis can be positive or negative.

depending on the replacement tax regime and the elasticity parameters chosen for

the model. This is because of tax distortions of household production neglected in

previous literature.

         We also find that when the existing tax regime is maintained, changing 10 8

household basis from an individual basis is more likely to be a welfare-gaining

proposition under a higher production elasticity specification. Households

providing relatively more secondary labour to the market tend to fare better, since
                                          26

they benefit from the elimination of dispersion in marginal tax rates. Simulations

carried out for alternative elasticity specifications give further insights on how

changes in substitution parameters in demand and household production affect

these results.

      The model we use is highly stylized in a number of ways. It ignores non-

married couple households and income from capital. It also treats the househod

as a single optimizing agent, when in fact the behaviour and preferences of

individuals within the household also have considerable influence over household

behaviour. We also ignore effects on endogeous family formation, which in

practice are likely to be important. Nevertheless, our model results strongly

suggest that the superiority of the individual tax unit on efficiency grounds may

not be as clearly established as existing literature seems to suggest.
                                        27
                                   REFERENCES

Berndt, E.R. (1976). "Reconciling Alternative Estimates of the Elasticity of
   Substitution." The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.58 (February),
   pp.59-68.

Bittker, 6. (1975). "Federal Income Taxation and the Family.t' Stanford Law
    Review, 27, pp.1389-1463.

Boskin, M.J. (1975). "Efficiency Aspects of the Differential Tax Treatment of
  Market and Household Economic Activity." Centre for Research in Economic
  Growth, 20, pp.281-297.

Boskin, M.J. and Sheshinski, E. (1973). "Optimal Tax Treatment of the Family."
  Memo 143, Centre for Research in Economic Growth, Stanford University.

Boskin, M.J. and Sheshinski, E. (1983). "Optima; Tax Treatment of the Family-
  Married Couples." Journal of Pub/ic Economics, 20, pp.281-297.

Brazer, H.E. (1980). "Income Tax Treatment of the Family" in Aaron, H. and
   Boskin, M. (eds.), The Economics of Taxation, The Brookings Institution,
   pp.223-246.

Feenberg, 0. and H. Rosen (1994). "Recent Developments in the Marriage Tax."
  NBER Working Paper 4705, April. National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Haurin, D.R., P.H. Hendershott, and 0. Kim (1993). "The Impact of Real Rents
  and Wages on Household Formation." The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  Vol.LXXV, No.2, May, pp.284-293.

Juster, F.J. and F.P. Stafford (1991). "The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings,
   8ehavloural Models, and Problems of Measurement." Journal of Economic
   Literature, Vol.XXIX, June, pp.471-522.

Kay, J. (1980). "The Deadweight Loss from a Tax System." Journal of Public
  Economics, Vol.13, No.1, pp.111-120.

Killingsworth, MM. (1983). Labor Supply, Cambridge University Press.

Killingsworth, M.R. and J. Heckman (1986). "Female Labor Supply: A Survey" in
    0. Achenfelter and A. Layard (edsi, Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol.1,
    pp.103-204. North-Holland, Amsterdam, New York.
                                        28
Kakwani, N. (1977), "Measurement of Tax Progressivity - An International
  Comparison." Economic Journal, March, pp.71-80.

Munnel, A. (1980). "The Couple versus the Individual under the Federal Personal
  Income Tax" in Aaron, H. and Boskin. M. (eds.), op. cit.

McNair Anderson Associates (1974). Australian's Use of Time, Albury-Wodonga
  and Melbourne, 1974.

Ramsey, F.J. (1927). "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation." Economic
  Journal, March, 37, pp.47-61.

Rosen, H. (1976). "A Methodology for Examining Tax Reform Proposals."
  Journal of Pub/ic Economics, 6, pp.105-121,

Rosen, H. (1977). "Is it time to abandon joint fiIing?' National Tax Journal,
  December, pp.423-428.

Rosen, H. (1978). "The Measurement of Excess Burden with Explicit Utility
  Functions." Journal of Political Economy. April, pp.51 21-Si 35.

Ross, R. (1986). "Analysis of the 1980 Sydney Survey of Work Patterns of
  Married Women: Further Results." Economic Record, 62, September, pp.325-
  337.

Shoven, J. and J. Whalley (1973). "General Equilibrium with Taxes; A
  Computational Procedure and an Existence Proof." Review of Economic
  Studies, Vol.XL, No.124 (October), pp.475-489.

Shoven, J. and J. Whalley (1992). Applying General Equilibrium. Cambridge
  University Press.

Slitor, A. (1948). "The Measurement oiProgressivity and Built-in Flexibility."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 62, pp.309-313.

Wales, T.J. and Woodland, A.D. (1976). "Estimation of Household Utility
  Functions and Labor Supply Response." International Economic Review,
  Vol.17, No.2, pp.397-410.

Wales, T.J. and Woodland, A.D. (1977). "Estimation of the Allocation of Time for
  Work, Leisure, and Housework." Econometrica, Vol.45, No.1, pp.ll5-l32.
