                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE IMPACT OF MONETARY
                         POLICY ON BANK BALANCE SHEETS




                                      Anil K. Kashyap
                                      Jeremy C. Stein




                                  Working Paper No. 4821


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         August 1994



This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy1 held in April
1994. The paper could not have been written without the very generous assistance of the Federal
                                                                                       Kenneth
Reserve Bank of Chicago, particularly Nancy Andrews, Elijah Brewer, Charles Evans,
        and Peter Schneider. ".'e also thank Kip King and John Leusner for research  assistance,
Kuttner.
                                                                                     for the
and Maureen O'Donnell for help in preparing the manuscript. Finally, we are grateful
comments and suggestions of Marvin Goodfriend, Glenn Hubbard, Peter Kienow, Allan Meltzer,
Julio Rotemberg and Mike Woodford. This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation, and by the International Financial Services Research Center at M.I.T. This paper
is part of NBER's research programs in Corporate Finance and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

   1994 by Anil K. Kashyap and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4821
                                                                                 August 1994


                              ThE IMPACT OF MONETARY
                           POLICY ON BANK BALANCE SHEETS


                                          ABSTRACT



       This paper uses disaggregated data on bank balance sheets to provide a test of the lending

view of monetary policy transmission. We argue that if the lending view is correct, one should

expect the loan and security portfolios of large and small banks to respond differentially to a

contraction in monetary policy. We first develop this point with a theoretical model; we then

test to see if the model's predictions are borne out in the data.




Anil K. Kashyap                                             Jeremy C. Stein
Graduate School of Business                                 Sloan School of Management
University of Chicago                                        Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Chicago, IL 60637                                            Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                                     and NBER
       1. Introduction

       When the Federal Reserve tightens monetary policy, it exchanges bonds for bank

reserves. A longstanding question is whether this interaction with the banking system has any

effects beyond those on bond-market interest rates. That is, in addition to the textbook "money"

channel, does monetary policy also work in part through a distinct "bank lending" channel?

       Over the last few years, there has been a resurgence of interest in this question, and it

has generated a good deal of both new research and controversy. In this paper, we propose to

attack the question from a quite different angle than has other recent work, by examining what

the so-called "lending view" has to say about cross-sectional differences in the way that bank

balance sheets respond to a monetary policy shock. More specifically, we argue that if the

tending view is correct, one should expect the loan and security portfolios of large and small

banks to respond differentially to a contraction in monetary policy. We first develop this point

with a theoretical model; then we then test to see if our predictions are borne out in the data.

       By focusing on disaggregated bank data, we can most directly address what skeptics seem

to think is the weakest part of the case for the lending view: the proposition that the Fed can,

simply by changing reserves, affect banks' loan supply schedules. A number of authors have

argued that this proposition is theoretically dubious. For example, Romer and Romer (1990)

emphasize that banks can always, if needed, finance themselves with non-deposit sources of

funds. Thus even if contractionary Fed policy can reduce the deposit financing available to the

banking sector, banks can simply and frictionlessly make up the shortfall by issuing, say, large

denomination CD's, medium-term notes, or some other security. The bottom line, according

to Romer and Romer (1990) and others, is that bank loan supply is effectively completely


                                                1
insulated from Fed policy.

       This argument is just an application of Modigliani-Miller logic to the banking firm. In

an M-M world, shocks to the liability side of a bank's balance sheet should not affect its "real

side" behavior, namely its willingness to supply loans for a given interest rate. Therefore, in

order to make a convincing case for a lending channel of monetary policy transmission, one has

to establish that the M-M argument does not apply to banking firms in this context. That is, one

has to show that because of capital market imperfections, shocks to banks' deposit base cannot

be frictionlessly offset with other sources of financing, and therefore translate into "real" effects

on their lending behavior.

       We attempt to do so in two basic steps. First, we develop a theoretical model that is

designed to: I) illustrate how the existence of capital market imperfections facing the typical

banking firm can generate a lending channel; 2) highlight the cross-sectional differences between

banks with different degrees of access to non-deposit financing that arise when there are such

capital market imperfections. Perhaps the most important thing to emphasize about this model

of the banking firm is that it is exactly the same sort of model that has been widely applied to

study the implications of capital market imperfections for non-financial companies.

       Our second step is to begin to test the cross-sectional implications of this model

empirically. Again, the types of tests that we use are very closely analogous to those used to

study the investment behavior of non-financial firms. Loosely speaking, we test the following

sort of prediction of our model: Fed tightening should have a disproportionately large impact

on the lending behavior of smaller banks, who are more likely to have difficulty substituting into

non-deposit sources of external finance. This directly parallels the empirical strategy in the


                                                2
literature on non-financial firms, where the test is typically of the following sort: shocks to

internal liquidity should have a larger impact on the investment behavior of smaller companies,

who are more likely to have a hard time accessing external sources of finance.

       We stress the close relationship between our work here on banking firms and previous

work on non-financial firms that face capital market imperfections, because of what we see as

a curious dissonance in the recent literature on monetary policy. On the one hand, as we discuss

below, even most skeptics of the lending view have been very willing to embrace the importance

of capital market imperfections at the level of the non-financial firm. However, at the same

time, these same skeptics have implicitly tended to dismiss--often without any real direct

evidence--the possibility of similar imperfections at the level of the banking firm.

       In our view, there is no a priori reason to think that capital market imperfections should

be less important for banking firms than for non-financial firms. Indeed, one might well expect

them to be          pronounced,   to the extent that these imperfections have their roots in

information asymmetries between firms and their external capital suppliers. After all, banks

specialize in holding portfolios of hard-to-value assets--assets for which information asymmetries

tend to be substantial.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present a brief

overview of where the debate on the lending view now stands, and use this to motivate in more

detail why our focus on the behavior of different types of banks can be helpful. In Section 3,

we develop our model. Section 4 describes the data to be used in the empirical work, and

Section 5 presents our empirical results. Section 6 concludes.




                                                3
         2. Where the Debate on the LendinE View Stands

         In this section, we provide a very brief sketch of the current state of play in the debate

over the lending view of monetary policy transmission. Our aim is not to be exhaustive, but

rather to give a quick idea of what sorts of empirical strategies have been adopted thus far.'

This will help to motivate why we take the particular approach we do in this paper.



        2.1 A Definition of the Lendin2 View

        For the purposes of clarity, it is useful to begin by defining exactly what we mean by the

lending view. It is perhaps easiest to do so by contrasting the lending view of monetary policy

transmission with the simpler and better known, 'money" view. In what we take to be the

polar, pure money version of the transmission mechanism, there are only two assets--money and

bonds, and a single interest rate. This interest rate is taken to be a summary statistic for all

credit market conditions. That is, it is to be thought of as simultaneously capturing the return

on government bonds, banks loans, real capital, etc. The textbook IS-LM model's version of

monetary transmission is one example of what we would call the pure money view.2

        There is a long literature that takes issue with the notion that a simple two-asset/one-

interest-rate model is sufficient to capture the workings of monetary policy. In response to this

perceived shortcoming, Brainard (1964), Tobin and Brainard (1963), Tobin (1970) and Brunner

and Meltzer (1963, 1972, 1988) propose general equilibrium, multi-asset models which feature


    'See Kashyap and Stein (forthcoming) for a detailed survey.

    2Note however, that as we have defined the pure money view of the transmission mechanism—solely
by reference to its simple two-asset feature—there are a wide range of alternative formulations that capture
its essence. In addition to the lS-LM model, these include the dynamic equilibrium cash-in-advance
models of Rotemberg (1984) Grossman and Weiss (1983) and Lucas (1990).

                                                    4
imperfect substitutability amongst a number of assets, and hence allow in principle for a number

of different interest rates. We follow Bernanke and Blinder (1988) and interpret the lending

view as a specific special case of these multi-asset models. In particular, in the lending view,

there are flow exactly three assets--money, bonds, and bank loans--that differ from each other

in meaningful ways and must be accounted for separately when analyzing the impact of monetary

policy shocks.

       In this three-asset world, monetary policy can work not only through its impact on the

bond-market rate   of interest,   but also through its independent impact on the supply of bank

loans. For example, even if a contraction in policy has little effect on the bond-market rate,

it can in some circumstances have a very significant effect on the spread between loans and

bonds, and therefore on the investment of those firms that rely on banks for financing. This

latter effect is what we would call the lending channel in action.

       Bernanke and Blinder's model makes it clear that there are two necessary conditions that

must both hold for there to be a distinct lending channel of monetary policy transmission:

1) some firms must be dependent on bank loans--i.e., some firms must be unable to frictionlessly

substitute between bank loans and other forms of finance; 2) the Fed must be able, simply by

conducting open market operations, to shift banks' loan supply schedules.' As we noted in the

Introduction, and as we will discuss in more detail momentarily, it is the plausibility of the latter

condition that seems to be most in doubt.




    'In addition, like alt models of monetary non-neutrality, there must be some form of imperfect price
adjustment.

                                                   5
        2.2 Tests UsinE Aagreate Data

        An important empirical paper that helped to rekindle interest in the lending view is

 Bernanke and Blinder (1992). Their approach is simple and commonsensical: they look to see

 how aggregate bank balance sheet variables respond to changes in the stance of monetary policy,

 as proxied for by changes in the fed funds rate. They find that when the Fed tightens, bank

 deposits drop immediately. Bank holdings of securities also fall immediately. Bank loans

 respond with something of a lag, but they too eventually decline. Finally, measures of aggregate

 output also respond to monetary impulses with a similar lag, thus declining roughly
contemporaneously with bank loans.

        While the Bernanke and Blinder (1992) findings are certainly consistent with the lending

view, they also admit other interpretations. For example, one way to read their results is that

tight monetary policy operates solely through the standard money channel to depress economic

output and to reduce the demand for credit. Thus there can be induced correlations between

monetary policy, bank lending and overall activity even if there is no lending channel.

       In an effort to resolve this identification problem, Kashyap, Stun and Wilcox (1993),

henceforth KSW, consider the relative fluctuations in bank loans and a leading substitute for

bank loans: commercial paper. They find that when the Fed tightens, commercial paper issuance

rises sharply, even while bank loans are falling.4 This makes it more likely that what has taken

place is an inward shift in loan jjpjy, as suggested by the lending view, rather than just an
inward shift in loan demand.




    'As Friedman and Kuttner (1993) emphasize, there is an asymmetry in the movements of the two
variables: the commercial paper response is both faster and stronger than the loanresponse.

                                              6
          However, not everyone has accepted the 1$W results as completely decisive either. The

gist of the objections, as put forth by Oliner and Rudebusch (1993) and others is this: KSW
achieve identification of loan supply effects under the implicit assumption that monetary policy

shocks affect the demand for funds in a homogeneous fashion. But suppose instead, that for

some unspecified reason, declines in aggregate demand fall disproportionately on the shoulders

of smaller firms. If this is the case, small firms' demand for credit may fall mr than large

firms' demand for credit. Hence commercial paper volume, which largely reflects large firm

borrowing, may rise relative to bank loans, even in the absence of a movement in bank loan

supply.

          These sorts of objections suggest that it may be hard to completely settle the debate using

aggregate data. Unless one is willing to impose some a priori restrictions on the nature of

credit-demand side shocks, it seems unlikely that one can unambiguously identify loan supply

effects with the sort of aggregate "mix" variables used by KSW—almost any movement in the

composition of external finance can be explained away by appealing to a sufficiently creative

story about heterogeneity in credit demand.



          2.3 Tests Using DisagEregated Data on Non-Financial Firms

          Given the inherent ambiguities associated with relying exclusively on aggregate data, a

natural next step is to use disaggregated data to explore some of the cross-sectional implications

of the lending view. In particular, the lending view predicts that tight monetary policy should

pose more of a problem for small firms, who rely primarily on banks, than for large firms, who

typically have greater access to non-bank sources of external finance.


                                                   7
        A number of recent papers provide evidence that is consistent with this prediction, among

 them Gertler and Hubbard (1988), Gertler and Gilchrist (forthcoming), Kashyap, Lamont and

 Stein (forthcoming), and Oliner and Rudebusch (1994). Loosely speaking, all these papers can

 be interpreted as showing that after a tightening of monetary policy, liquidity constraints become

 significantly more pronounced for small firms.

        Again, however, while these findings fit very nicely with the predictions of the lending

 view, they also are open to other interpretations. Specifically, it may be that the decline in

economic activity that follows a contraction in monetary policy leads to an erosion of the value

of small firms' collateral. In a world of information and/or agency problems, such a "collateral

shock" will make it harder for small firms to raise external financing of any sort. Thus the

increased liquidity constraints may not reflect an inward shift in just bank loan supply, but rather

a more general deterioration of small firms' creditworthiness. In other words, the evidence

strongly rejects the implications of a frictionless capital market, but does not necessarily pinpoint

the nature of the deviation from perfect markets.

       Indeed, most of those who have been skeptical of the pure bank lending view have

embraced the collateral shock interpretation of the data. A noteworthy example is Oliner and

Rudebusch (1994), who refer to this as a "broad credit channel"; see also Ramey (1993) for an

endorsement of this view. What seems slightly odd is that in advancing, this so-called broad

credit channel, these authors are explicitly emphasizing the importance of capital market

imperfections at the level of the non-financial firm. At the same time, in dismissing the

narrower bank lending view, they are implicitly rejecting the importance of exactly the same sort

of imperfections at the level of the banking firm.


                                                8
        2.4 Our Auproach: Tests Using DisaEreated Data on Banks

         As the above suggestc, it now seems to be quite widely accepted that capital market

imperfections at the level of non-financial firms can play a role in shaping the transmission of

monetary policy. Thus debate on the lending view has boiled down to the following question:

can   the Fed, merely by altering reserves, alter the loan supply behavior of banks? Or are banks,

as Romer and Romer (1990) suggest, M-M creatures whose lending is unaffected by changes

in their deposit liabilities?

         To address this question most directly, one needs to look at how banking firms respond

to   changes in the stance of monetary policy. To oversimplify slightly, our empirical strategy

can be thought of as a disaggregated version of that in Bernanke and Blinder (1992). Like they

do, we will look at how bank deposits, securities holdings and loans respond to shocks in

monetary policy.       Unlike in their paper, however, our focus will be on cross-sectional

differences in these responses across banks of different sizes.

         Before proceeding, we should emphasize that such a disaggregated approach has both a

benefit and a cost. The benefit is that we can hopefully make more progress on the specific

question articulated just above, namely: are banks M-M creatures with respect to Fed-induced

deposit shocks?       The cost is that our data is not appropriate for gauging the aEErezate
                                                                              even if we find that
importance of any deviations from M-M at the bank level. For example,
Fed tightening leads to a pronounced contraction in bank loan supply, we cannot with our data

                                     investment at the level of non-financial firms. Perhaps
say how much this ultimately impacts

 the non-financial firms can switch to alternative sources of funds at relatively low cost, so the




                                                  9
overall impact on investment is only modest.3



          3. The Model

          This section develops a model of bank portfolio behavior. As stated above, the main

goals are: 1) to show how capital market imperfections at the bank level can generate a lending

channel of monetary policy transmission; and 2) to derive cross-sectional predictions about how

such capital market imperfections differentially shape the portfolio response of large and small

banks to a monetary shock. These cross-sectional predictions can then be used to test the model.

          It should be noted that the model is only partial equilibrium in nature. Since we are only

making cross-sectional comparisons, we do not tie down the Treasury market rate, but rather

just fix it exogenously. Also, we adopt a very simplistic view of how monetary policy affects

individual banks' deposit bases. In our model, when the Fed tightens, all banks see their

deposits fall by the same amount, and they can do nothing to offset this fall. That is, we do not

allow for inter-bank competition for deposits. The model can be generalized to allow for such

inter-bank competition, but this does not alter the basic cross-sectional predictions that we focus

on.

          We begin by specifying banks' asset and liability choices, taking the return on bank loans

as exogenous. We then close the model with two alternative specifications of loan demand.




      However, there is a substantial literature that suggests that bank loans are in fact "special" for some
tirms, so that such switching would not be frictionless. See Kashyap and Stein (fonhcoming) for a
discussion and references.

                                                      10
          3.1 Bank Asset and Liability Management

          Our model has two time periods. As will become clear, this is done as a minimalist way

of generating a "precautionary", or "buffer stock" motive for banks to hold securities in the first

period.

          In each of the two periods, a bank's balance sheet has two items on the asset side, and

two on the liability side. On the asset side, the bank can make loans of L at time 1. These

loans yield a return of r. For the time being; r is taken as exogenous; it will be endogenized

below when we develop the loan demand side of the model. Once made, these loans cannot be

liquidated at time 2. Thus the bank must hold loans of at least L at time 2. Indeed, to make

things especially simple, we assume that no new lending opportunities arise at time 2, so the

loan balance remains exactly at L at this time.

          This formulation is more extreme than it needs to be. All that matters for our results is

that banks face some cost in liquidating loans early.6 We are simply taking the polar case

where this cost of early liquidation is infinite.

          The bank can also invest an amount S in securities at time 1. These securities, which

can be thought of as Treasury bills, yield a return that is normalized to zero. Thus the yield on

loans, r, is really a measure of the loan-security spread. In this sense, r is a pure measure of

the lending channel of monetary policy. That is, if a monetary contraction increases r in our

model, this will be a manifestation of the lending channel in action. Conversely,           if r is

endogenously determined to be equal to zero at all times, this means that the lending channel

does not exist.



    °This assumption is a standard one—see. e.g., Diamond and Dybvig (1983).

                                                    11
          The key difference between loans and securities is that securities can be costlessly

 liquidated at time 2. As will become clear, it is because of this better "liquidity" that banks will

 in equilibrium choose to hold securities at time 1 even when they offer an inferior return to

 loans--i.e., even when r > 0.

           On the liability side, one important source of financing for banks is demand deposits.

 At time 1, deposits are M1, and at time 2, they are M2. We assume that M1 and M2 are out of

 the control of individual banks, and are determined by Federal Reserve policy. That is, by

tightening policy at time 1, the Fed effectively creates a net funding shock for the typical bank.'

          Our principal focus below will be on the effect of a change in M1 on a bank's holding

of loans and securities, L and S respectively. However, this effect will depend on the stochastic

structure of shocks to M3 and M2 . In particular, we need to specify both 1) the extent to which

a shock to M1 is persistent or temporary; and 2) the degree of uncertainty at time 1 surrounding

the realization of M2.

          To do so, we pick the following simple formulation. Once M1 is realized, it is common

knowledge that M, is distributed as follows:




    'This is obviously a gross oversimplification. What we have in mind is that by controlling reserves,
the Fed can control the anre2ate amount of reservable deposits. In general, of course, this does not
mean that it can directly control the deposits of any given individual bank. However, if banks are
prohibited from competing amongst each other for deposits (say because of interest rate ceilings) no
individual bank will be able to take any action to offset an erosion of its own deposits. In this case, when
the Fed tightens, the typical bank will experience an exogenous shock to its deposits of the sort that we
assume.
        In a world without interest rate ceilings on deposits, things are somewhat more complicated.
Now any individual bank can react to a tightening in Fed policy by competing more aggressively for
deposits, so it does not view its level of deposits as exogenous. However, the empirical predictions that
we focus on continue to hold in such a setting.

                                                    12
       M2 is uniform on [pM1 +      (l-p)M - 7/2, pM1 + (l-p)M + 7/2]                       (1)



Thus M2 is uniformly distributed with a mean of pM1 + (1-p)M. The parameter p is a measure

of the persistence of monetary shocks--the larger is p, the more permanent are the shocks. The

parameter y is a measure of the variance of these shocks.

       Finally, in addition to deposits, banks can also finance themselves by raising non-deposit

external finance at both times 1 and 2. We denote the incremental amounts raised at these times

by E, and E2 respectively.     Thus at time 2, the total amount of non-deposit finance on the

bank's balance sheet is B1 +B7.

       The model captures the notion that, when the Fed tightens, banks have alternative ways

to raise funds--they are not limited to simply cutting loans or securities. Our variables E1 and

E2 can be thought of as a catch-all category for any sources of bank funding that are outside the

control of the Fed's reserve policy. This would include large denomination CD's--if such CD's

are not subject to reserve requirements--as well as many other funding vehicles such as medium-

term notes, subordinated debt, equity issues, etc.8

       Our entire model hinges on the assumptions we make about the costs of raising non-

deposit external finance. We assume that the costs at time 1 are given by a1E12/2, and

analogously, the costs at time 2 are given by a2E22/2. The specific functional form is not

critical, but the fact that there are increasing marginal costs of external finance clearly is.



    'In practice, CD's have been completely exempt from reserve requirements since 1990. However,
even before then, CD's were typically subject to much lower reserve requirements than demand deposits.
As Romer and Romer (1990) observe, reserve requirements on demand deposits have typically been in
the 10 to 20 percent range during the postwar period; while the requirement on large denomination CD's
of short maturity has ranged from 3 to 6 percent.

                                                 13
        In the polar case where a1 = a3 = 0, external finance can be raised in perfectly elastic

supply at the security-market interest rate of zero. This is essentially the Modigliani-Miller style

assumption made by Romer and Romer (1990). As will be seen shortly, this assumption is

sufficient to shut down the lending channel completely—it implies that r          = 0 always.

        However, our working hypothesis--and this is what we will be seeking to test below—is

that the assumption that a = a7 = 0 is likely to be unrealistic. In other words, the M-M

proposition does not hold, and there are imperfections in the market for non-deposit external

finance. Take for example the case of large denomination CD's that is emphasized by Romer

and Romer (1990). Given that such CD's are not federally insured, investors purchasing them

must concern themselves with the quality of the issuing bank. If there is some degree of

asymmetric information between the bank and investors, the standard sorts of adverse selection

problems (see, e.g., Myers and Majluf 1984) will arise.9 These considerations will tend to

make the marginal cost of external financing an increasing function of the amount raised.

        Indeed, rather than simply assuming the form we do for costs of external finance at times

1 and 2, we could derive our results in a multi-period adverse selection model. A companion

paper, Stein (1994), sketches exactly such a model. While this sort of adverse selection model

is expositionally much more cumbersome than the simple quadratic-cost formulation we adopt,

it yields all the same basic predictions. Thus the quadratic-cost version we present here is best



    'The notion that investors are concerned with the default risk of large CD's—and have less-than-
perfect ability to assess such risk—is consistent with the facts that I) bank CD's are evaluated by no less
than five rating agencies; and 2) the rates paid by different quality issuers can vary considerably. More
generally, evidence that commercial banks face adverse selection problems in raising external finance is
provided by the event study results of Keeley (1989), Poloncheck, Slovin and Suslika (1989), Wansley
and Dhillon (1989), and Cornett and Tehranian (1994). All of these papers document that stock issues
by banks are taken as "bad newC—they are greeted with significantly negative stock-price reactions.

                                                   14
thought of as a heuristic device that communicates the main points of the more elaborate adverse

selection model, illustrates the logic behind our empirical work, but spares the disinterested

reader some of the technical details.

       Of course,   adverse   selection is not the only way to generate increasing marginal costs of

external finance. As much recent work in corporate finance and macroeconomics makes clear,

this property is shared by a number of other models involving agency and/or information

problems. To take just one other example, Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1993) demonstrate

explicitly how a variant of the costly-state-verification model due to Townsend (1979) and Gale-

Hellwig (1985) leads to a convex cost function for external funds. Thus all we are really doing

with our quadratic cost formulation is imputing to banks—in shorthand form--a generic version

of the sort of capital market imperfection that is by now standard in the literature on non-

financial firms)°

        Even if information or agency problems are not present, there may be other reasons why

a bank effectively has increasing costs of replacing lost deposits. In a costly search type setting,

potential investors in a bank's non-deposit liabilities may not all be aware of the return

opportunities offered by that bank. In order to draw in more investors, the bank might therefore

have to spend more, either by advertising, or by raising its rates relative to those on well-known

alternatives such as T-bills.

        The bottom line of this discussion is twofold. First, there are a number of reasons why



     '°ln terms of applications of this paradigm to banking finns, our model is perhaps most closely related
to recent work by Lucas and McDonald (1992), who explicitly adopt an asymmetric informationmodel
of bank portfolio choice. Although they do not focus on monetary policy, their model shares with ours
the feature that imperfections in the market for non-deposit external finance give rise to a precautionary
demand for securities.

                                                    15
it seems plausible that banks, like non-financial corporations, might have increasing costs of

external finance. Second, as with non-financial corporations, it seems likely that these costs

would be more pronounced for small banks than for large banks. That is, it seems reasonable

to hypothesize that    and a2 would be larger for small banks. This latter observation wilt be

the basis for our cross-sectional tests.

        Having spelled out our basic assumptions, we are now in a position to characterize a

bank's portfolio choice at times 1 and 2. It is easiest to work backwards from time 2. The bank

enters this period with loans of L, securities of S, and non-deposit financing of E1 already on

the balance sheet. The time-2 value of demand deposits, M2, is then realized. We can

distinguish among two cases:

       Case I: E1 +     M2   > L.   In this case, the bank can continue to fund its illiquid loan

portfolio without resorting to any new external finance at time 2, simply by drawing down on

its buffer stock of securities. Note that it will always prefer to draw down the securities first,

since this is effectively a zero-cost way of making up any funding shortfall.

       Case 2: B1 + M2 c L. In this case, even after liquidating all of its securities holdings,

the bank is still short of funds. Thus it has to make up the rest with new external financing, E2.

       The net result is that E2 is given by:



           = max(O, L-E1-M2)                                                               (2)



       The costs associated with this new external funding are given by cv2E22/2. From the

perspective of time I, the ex-arne expectation of time-2 funding costs is given by:


                                                16
         Expectation(a2E22/2) = a2(L -          - pM - (l-p)M + 7/2)2/6                     (3)



         We are now in a pOSittCfl to formulate the time 1 optimization problem. At time 1, the

bank chooses L and E1 (and hence implicitly also chooses S = M1 + E1 - L) to maximize:



          max: rL -    cx1E12i2 -      -   - pM1 - (1-p)M   + y/2)I6                        (4)




         The solution to this problem is given by:



              = 1/a1                                                                         (5)



          L =   rice1 + 3r1a2 + pM1    + (1-p)M - 7/2                                        (6)




          S=M1+E1-L                 -3r/a2+(1-p)(M1-M)+7/2                                    (7)




          The results have an intuitive interpretation. First, the amount of external funding at time

1, E1,   is simply set so as to equate the marginal cost of obtaining an additional dollar of funds,

a1E1,    to the marginal return on an additional loan, r.

          Second, loan supply is positively influenced by the value of M1, as well as by the loan-
                                                                                         In the
security spread r. The closer are a1 and a2 to zero, the more responsive are loans to r.

limiting case where either a1 or a2 is zero, any positive value of r generates an inflnite loan



                                                  17
supply. Finally, loan supply is negatively influenced by which is a measure of the conditional

variance of M2. This is because the more uncertainty there is about M2, the less inclined banks

will be to hold illiquid loans, as opposed to liquid securities.

        Finally, securities holdings are positively related to both M1 and the conditional variance

of M2, and negatively related to the loan-security spread r. Also, since banks hold securities to

avoid having to raise external funds at time 2, those that find external financing particularly

costly--i.e., those with higher values of cr2--will hold more securities. One important piece of

intuition that will play a role later on is this: a bank's portfolio mix between loans and securities

is informative about the spread r that it is facing at the margin. Thus if we see a bank shift

towards holding a greater ratio of loans to securities, this indicates that it has experienced a rise

in r.



        3.2 Equilibrium with a Homogeneous. Comnetitive Loan Market

        The simplest way to close the model is by assuming that there is a single, homogeneous

economy-wide loan market. In this loan market, demand shouldbe a function of the loan rate

r, as well as general economic conditions, which we denote by Y. A linear representation of

aggregate loan demand is thus:




        L9     Y-kr                                                                           (8)



        Market equilibrium is then determined by equating aggregate loan demand to aggregate

loan supply, where aggregate supply is the sum of the supplies of the individual banks, which



                                                 18
are given by (6). Of course, these individual banks can each have their own values of a, and

a2.

       The key empirical implications of the model flow from these differences in a, and a2.

To illustrate these implications most cleanly, let us assume that changes in the stance of

monetary policy have an equal effect on the deposits of all banks. That is, for any two banks

i and j,   dM1'   = dM1." This allows us to summarize the stance of policy simply by an

unsuperscripted M,.

       We can now differentiate (6) and (7) to obtain the following expressions for any bank i:



       dL'/dM, =      p+     (1/cr,' + 3/a21)drIdM1                                             (9)




       dSVdM,      = (I - p) -    (3/a2)dr/dM,                                                  (10)



       Given the nature of loan demand, one can show that the effect of monetary policy on the

loan-security spread, dr/dM,, has the form:



       dr/dM, = adY/dM1 - b                                                                      (11)



where a and b are both positive constants. So long as the direct effect of monetary policy on




    "We are making this assumption only to illustrate the logic of our tests more transparently. We will
be careful to check that it does not color our empirical work below.

                                                  19
loan demand, dY/dM1, is not too large, it will be the case that dr/div!1 C 0—i.e., that monetary

policy works in part via a lending channel. In this case, equations (9) and (10) yield the

following testable predictions:



       Prediction 1: The lending volume of small banks (those with larger values of a1 arid a2)

declines more rapidly in response to a given contraction in deposits than does the lending volume

of large banks.



       Prediction 2: The securities holdings of small banks decline more slowly in response to

a given contraction in deposits than do the securities holdings of large banks.



       These predictions follow immediately from (9) and (10), in conjunction with the

observation that, in a single economy-wide loan market, there is a single loan rate, so dr/dM1

is the same for all banks. The intuition for the lending volume result is straightforward. Since

we have assumed that all banks are hit by the same deposit and loan demand shocks, cross-

sectional differences in lending volume must reflect differential loan supply responses. And if

small banks find it costlier to make up for a monetary-policy induced shortfall in hinds, they will

in fact cut their loan supply by more.

       The securities result is slightly subtler. All else equal, the more a bank cuts it securities

at time I, the more it may be forced to seek external finance at time 2. Because small banks

find this possibility more daunting, they value securities more at the margin, and hence are less

willing to cut them.



                                               20
       Thus if one is willing to maintain the assumption of a single, homogeneous loan market,

testing the model is fairly straightforward. However, the maintained assumption required to do

the test may not be very appealing. To see why, suppose that the evidence does in fact support

both predictions. A natural skeptical reaction might be: "This doesn't necessarily prove that

the monetary contraction had more of an effect on small banks' loan supply. Rather, it might

be that the change in policy had more of an effect on small banks' loan demand. Perhaps small

banks tend to lend to smaller, more recession-sensitive customers. Thus when there is a

tightening of policy, and aggregate demand falls--say due to the textbook 'money channel' in

action--the loan demand curve facing small banks shifts in more than the loan demand curve

facing big banks. Given this inward shift in loan demand, small banks will naturally tend to lend

less and invest more in securities relative to large banks."



       3.3 Hetero2eneous Loan Demand

       In order to entertain this possibility, one obviously has to consider a situation where

banks can face heterogeneous demand conditions. The simplest wayto do so is to treat each

individual bank as a monopolist, facing its own individual demand curve for loans. Although

this is obviously extreme, it is sufficient for the present purposes. Moreover, the notion that

banks have some degree of market power with their customers—due, possibly to informational

"lock-in" effects--is supported in recent theoretical and empirical research. (See, e.g., Sharpe

(1990), Rajan (1992) and Petersen and Rajan (1992)).

        We now assume that each bank i now faces its own loan demand schedule of the

following form:


                                                21
       LD' = Y'-k?                                                                        (12)



Thus each bank's loan demand schedule may be shifted differently by contractionary monetary

policy. That is, Y, and hence dY'/dM1, may vary systematically across banks. This allows us

to consider the possibility that, say, the loan demand facing small banks is harder-hit by a

monetary-policy-induced recession than is the loan demand facing large banks. Also, each bank

now has its own loan-security spread t

       In this case, the banks portfolio decisions are of the form:



           =    (r + Lr'(L))/cr1                                                          (13)



       L = (1/a1 + 3/a2)(r + Lr'(L)) ÷        pM1    + (l-p)M - y/2                       (14)



       S = M1 + E1 - L =           -3(r + Lr'(L))/a2 + (1-p)(M1 - M) + 7/2               (15)



       These equations are of exactly the same form as (5) - (7)   above, except that (r +Lr'(L))

has replaced r everywhere. This is a consequence of the fact that banks now behave as

monopolists, rather than price takers. Note that by virtue of our linear demand assumption,

r'(L) is simply given by -Ilk.

       Correspondingly, the reaction of bank i's loan volume and securities holdings to a change

in monetary policy are given by:




                                                22
       dL1/dM1 = tip + (1/a1' + 3/a2)drYclM1)                                              (16)




       dS'/dM1      =   1   - gp -   (3f/a21)dr'/dM1                                       (17)




where f =    11(1   + l/kc1' + 31ka21) and g = (1 + 1/ka1)I(1 + lIka1' + 3Ikcr2) are both

between   0 and 1 The expression for loans is of the same form as (9), with two differences.
First, it has been modified to take account of the effects of monopoly power--this accounts for

the presence of the new parameter f. In the limiting case as k becomes infinite--i.e., as loan

demand becomes perfectly elastic--f converges to one, as in the competitive case. Second, and

much more important for our purposes, dr'/dM1 can now vary across banks.

       It is easy to show that dr'/dM1 has the following form:



       drYdM1 =         a(a11,   a2')dY'/dM1 -   b(a11, a21)                               (18)

where what is important to now note is that both a(a1, a21) and b(a11, a21) are increasing

functions of a1 and a21. One implication of (18)is that if dY/dM1 is close to zero, so that loan

demand shifts do not play an important role, then the loan rate for small bankswill be more

sensitive to monetary policy than will the loan rate for large banks. This makes intuitive sense:

it is harder for small banks to offset a loss in reserves by raising external funds; thus they wish

to cut lending by more and will do so until the loan rate rises by more. On the other hand, it

is also possible that in equilibrium the loan rate for small banks will be less sensitive to


                                                       23
monetary policy. This can happen if loan demand for small banks is more procyclical—i.e., if

dY/dMJ is significantly greater for small banks.

       Equations (16) and (18) therefore make precise the criticism raised earlier. One can no

longer unambiguously identify loan supply effects of monetary policy simply by comparing

dLJdM1 across banks. On the one hand, dLIdM1 could be larger for small banks because of the

loan supply effect--small banks' supply schedule shifts in by more when the Fed tightens. On

the other hand, dL/dM1 could also be larger for small banks because of a loan demand effect—

that is, because the demand for small bank loans is more procyclical than the demand for large

bank loans.

       While one may no longer be able to achieve identification by considering just the

differential movements in lending volume across banks, it may be possible to do better by also

considering movements in securities holdings.       Intuitively, the presence of simultaneous loan

demand and supply shocks implies that information on loan volume alone is insufficient, but that

information on lending ra would be very helpful. For example, if loan demand falls for some

subset of banks, then their lending volume will fall and their loan rate r will fall too. If on the

other hand, loan supply falls, then lending volume will fall, but the loan rate r will rise. Even

though movements in r are not observable, they might in principle be inferred by looking at

movements in securities.

       Unfortunately, using securities movements to infer movements in r is somewhat tricky.

This can be understood by examining equation (17). There are now two competing effects.

First, as in the homogeneous demand case, the direct effect of a large a2 is to make securities

holdings      sensitive to monetary policy for small banks. However, this may be offset if



                                               24
dr'/dM1 is larger in absolute magnitude for small banks. If the latter effect is strong enough,

it may even be possible to have a situation where small banks cut their securities holdings by

rnr than large banks in the wake of a contraction in monetary policy.
       The intuition for this sort of result is as follows. A contraction in monetary policy

initially leads a given small bank to cut loan supply. If the loan demand schedule facing the

bank is more or less unchanged, and this demand schedule is relatively inelastic, there will be

a sharp increase in the bank's loan-security spread. This will lead the bank to favor loans in its

portfolio relative to securities, and hence to be more willing to cut securities in order to maintain

lending volume.



       Prediction 3: A given contraction in deposits can cause securities to fall more for small

banks than for large banks, but only under certain conditions. In particular, drVdM1 must be

significantly larger in absolute value for small banks, which in turn requires that: 1) loan

demand shocks not differ too much across banks; and 2) loan demand be sufficiently inelastic

(i.e., that k be relatively small).   If these two requirements are not both satisfied--as, e.g., in

the perfect competition/homogeneous demand case, where 2) fails to hold--then the prediction

will be reversed.



       The upshot of this is that the relative movements in securities holdings across large and

small banks may be able to provide a decisive test for loan supply effects. If we were to find

that small banks cut their securities by more than big banks after a contraction in monetary

policy, this could only be explained by the loan supply story. Indeed, such a finding would


                                                 25
directly contradict the competing hypothesis that small bank loan demand is more procyclical.



       However, such a test is a potentially very stringent one. This is because the data has to

be able to jointly reject kcth: 1) the null hypothesis that there are no loansupply effects; as well

as 2) the hypothesis that loan demand is fairly elastic. Therefore,   we may well fail to find the
evidence that we are looking for, even if loan supply effects are in fact very important.

       The overall message to take away from the model is that we have two basic types of

cross-sectional tests to consider. The first is to simply compare the evolution of large and small

bank lendinE volume in response to a monetary shock. Our theory predicts that small bank

lending will react more strongly. The potential problem with this test is that it may not be

stringent enough, in the sense that it may not adequately discriminate between loan supply effects

and heterogeneous demand shocks.

       The second test is to compare the evolution of large and small bank security holdings in

response to a monetary shock. If small banks react more sensitively along this dimension too,

we would consider this to be strong evidence in favor of our model. However, if large banks

react more sensitively, the interpretation is ambiguous--such a finding would certainly fit with

the homogeneous demand version of our model, but could also be ascribed to heterogeneous

demand shocks.



       4.fl
       4.1 Data Sources

       The data on loans, securities and deposits that are used to test the model axe taken from



                                                26
the quarterly regulatory reports that all federally insured banks must submit to the Federal

Reserve. The primary advantage of drawing on the "Call Reports" is that they provide a nearly

comprehensive survey of banks operating in the United States. The main disadvantage is that

the reports are designed to provide information for regulatory purposes. Because of this

regulatory focus, the same information is not necessarily collected for all banks -- big banks are

required to provide more information. Similarly, as the banking industry evolves the type of

information that is collected changes, so that constructing long time series is often difficult.

       These general characteristics of the Call Reports constrain our empirical work in two

ways. First, a consistent format for the reports to which we had access is only available starting

in 1976. So our sample begins in 1976, and runs through 1992 Q2. Even starting at this point,

we are still only able to track series that are collected for all banks. To ease some of the

regulatory burden on large banks, large banks are only required to supply data on a consolidated

basis, i.e. aggregating foreign and domestic data. As a theoretical matter, it is not obvious

whether it makes more sense to use consolidated or domestic-only data—this would in principle

depend on the extent to which banks' domestic and foreign offices operate separately from each

other.'2 However, because of the data collection convention we have no choice but to study

the consolidated data.

       A second significant constraint in using the Call Reports is that a major overhaul in the

format of the reports occurred in the first quarter of 1984. At that point, banks were asked to

provide much more detailed aa and the definitions of many series were adjusted. For instance,

the breakdown on the types of securities that were required to be reported was adjusted. Prior



   12 We do, however, limit the sample to domestically chartered banks.

                                                27
to 1984, holdings of various types of U.S. Government securities and state and local securities

were separately reported. Following 1984, these securities were lumped together into a single

series that also included holdings of all other bonds, stocks and securities. Thus, it is impossible

to reliably track disaggregated types of securities. While smaller typesof data definition changes

occur almost continuously, the 1984 Qi shift was so significant that it affected almost all series,

so in our empirical work we include a dummy variable to account for this shift.

       A final consideration to note is that we are using data on banks, not bank holding

companies. In many cases, a single bank holding company may own several of the banks in our

sample. This distinction matters when we assign banks to size categories. For example, it is

possible that we will assign a given bank to the "small" category, even if it is a subsidiaiy of

a very large bank holding company. Again, it is not obvious what the theoretically correct thing

to do is here. However, the important point to recognize is that any misclassiflcations will

only have the effect of making our empirical tests more conservative--they will make it harder

to identify any differences across size categories that do in fact exist.

        The remaining data on inflation, interest rates and output growth are taken from the

Citibase data bank. A complete description of the Citibase series and the Call Report data are

provided in the data appendix.



        4.2 Formation of Size Categories

        A first step in our analysis is to sort banks into categories that reflect differences in the

costs of raising external funds. We partition banks based on their total assets, reflecting the

hypothesis that large banks face lower costs of external financing. We then study the time series


                                                28
movements in the different categories. A potential problem with this type of exercise is that our

series could be affected by banks that drift across categories. For instance, if several small

banks merge to form one big bank, then at the time of the merger the total assets of the big"

category will surge and the total assets of the "small" category will drop.

       To avoid these sorts of problems, we adopt the following procedure.           In any two

adjacent quarters, say 1986 QI and Q2, we identify all the banks that have not undergone a

merger and that have complete data for both quarters      therefore banks that fail or are newly

born are also excluded. We then rank all banks by their total assets in the first quarter (i.e.,

1986 QI) and use this ranking to assign them to a particular size category. We then form 1986

QI and 1986 Q2 aggregated balance sheets, summing up over all the banks in a given size

category. Using these aggregated balance sheets, we can then compute for each size category

the growth rates for the variables of interest -- e.g loans, securities, etc. We then repeat the

entire procedure for the next pair of quarters, 1986 Q2 and 1986 Q3. Thus we reconstruct our

size categories from scratch every quarter in order to compute a careful set of growth rates for

that quarter.

       The main advantage of this procedure is that it prevents banks' crossing between

categories from influencing the growth rates. This approach also allows us to use the maximum

amount of data, since in any quarter when a bank is not involved in a merger, it will be included

in one of the size categories. Unfortunately, by focusing on growth rates we lose the ability to

recover the levels for the data -- although changes in data definitions already would impair our




                                               29
ability to consistently track the levels of most series.'3



          4.3 A Snapshot of Bank Balance Sheets for Different Size Categories

          Table 1 gives some basic information on what bank balance sheets look like for different

size categories. We focus on a date roughly at the midpoint of our sample period--l984 Q2--and

report balance sheet data for six different size categories: banks below the 75th percentile by

asset    size; banks between the 75th and 90th percentiles; banks between the 90th and 95th

percentiles; banks between the 95 and 98th percentiles; banks           between the 98th and 99th

percentiles; and banks above the 99th percentile.

          Several regularities emerge. On the asset side, larger banks hold significantly less in the

way of cash and securities, and make more loans. This fits with the basic spirit of our model—

we argued above that smaller banks need bigger buffer stocks of cash and securities, because

of their inability to raise external finance easily on short notice. Within the category of loans,

larger banks tend to focus relatively more heavily on C&I lending, while small banks tend to

concentrate relatively more on agricultural, real estate and consumer lending.

          On the liability side, the smallest banks have a very simple capital structure—they are

Financed almost exclusively with deposits and common equity. In contrast, larger banks make

significantly less use of deposits and also tend to have substantially less equity)4 The

    13
         The   cumulative growth rates that are implied by our procedure may also be systematically
understated if banks that engage in mergers tend to grow faster than average. This is another reason why
any levels compiled from integrating our growth rates would need to be interpreted with caution.

    'Ihe differences between large and small bank equity underscores thefact that our use of bank size
as a proxy for external market access is an imperfect one. All else equal, one might expect that better
capitalized banks would have an easier time raising external hinds. For example, the better capitalized
is a bank, the less of a problem asymmetric information poses when it attempts to raise funds with

                                                  30
difference is made up by a number of other forms of borrowing. For example, the largest two

percent of banks make heavy use of the fed funds market to finance themselves; the smallest

banks do virtually no borrowing in the fed funds market. Given that fed funds are a form of

unsecured borrowing, this difference again fits with the spirit of our model--small banks seem

to find it harder to raise financing with instruments where credit risk is an issue.



        5. Empirical Results

        5.1 The Response of Bank Deoosits to a Monetary Shock

        Before testing our model's predictions regarding the response of bank loans and securities

to a monetary shock, we first do some preliminary runs with bank deposits. The idea here is

just to check a basic premise of our theory--namely, that a tightening in monetary policy does
in fact lead to a contraction ; the deposits available to bQth large and small banks. That this

relationship holds for the aggregate banking sector has already been established by Bernanke and

Blinder (1992); however, we want to make sure that it holds across all different size classes of

banks. As suggested in Section 3, we have no a priori reason to believe that the effect should

be stronger for any particular size class.

        We follow Bernanke and Blinder (1992) and others by using the change in the fed funds




uninsured debt liabilities such as large CD's, or subordinated debt. Thus the stronger capital positions
of small banks may well be--like their larger holdings of cash and securities—an endogenous response to
capital market imperfections. If so. this would tend to attenuate any observable differences between large
and small banks, thereby making it harder for us to find the sorts of results we are looking for. Clearly,
if we were to further disaggregate the data, it would make sense to control separately for both a bank's
size and its capital position.

                                                   31
rate as our primary indicator of changes in the stance of monetary policy.'5 In all cases, the

dependent variable is the growth rate of nominal 'core deposits" for a given size class, where

"core deposits" are defined as total deposits less any deposits in denominations greater than

$100,000. We exclude these large "wholesale" deposits because, as suggested by Romer and

Romer (1990) they have been subject to low reserve requirements, and may in principle be used

by banks to offset Fed-induced shocks to core deposits. Thus in the language of our model,

Romer and Romer might argue that wholesale deposits are really a part of B, not M. However,

as it turns out, the results that we present in Table 2 are little changed if we instead use total

deposits (as did Bernanke and Blinder 1992) instead of core deposits.

        In our first specification in Table 2, we regress the growth rate of nominal core deposits

against four lags of the change in the fed funds rate, as well as four lags of the growth rate of

the CPL'6 (In every specification that we report below, we also always include four lags of

the dependent variable, four quarterly dummies and a dummy for 1984 QI, when some of the

data definitions were changed slightly.) We repeat this specification for each of five size

classes: BIG represents the largest 1% of all banks; SMALL98 represents the smallest 98%;

SMALL 95 represents the smallest 95%; etc.

        The results of the first specification suggest that a contraction in monetary policy has a

quite similar effect on core deposits across size classes. In particular, in each of the five cases,


   "We also experimented with using the Romer (1989) dates as an indicator of monetary policy. See
Section 5.4 below for more details.


    '61n all our tables, we work with nominal variables, and include the growth of the CPI as an
additional right-hand-side variable. An alternative, slightly more restrictive specification is to work with
all real variables, and to omit the growth of the CI'! from the equation. This yields very similar results,
as we discuss in Section 5.4 below.

                                                    32
the sum of the coefficients on the funds rate is negative--as expected—and of roughly the same

magnitude. (Although the sum is somewhat smaller for the BIG class.)               The sum is also
strongly significant for all but the BIG class, where it is marginally significant.

          In our second specification, we add four lags of the growth in nominal GDP as an

additional control variable. The results are not much different; now the sum of the coefficients

on the funds rate looks to be virtually identical across size classes, with the largest and smallest

classes   having sums of -3.82 and -3.84 respectively. Since the data are annualized, these

estimates imply that a one percent increase in the funds rate eventually leads to a decline in

deposits on the order of four percent. The only other noteworthy point is that the addition of

the GDP control tends to reduce the statistical significance of the fed funds coefficients
somewhat.

          Overall, we draw the following two conclusions from Table 2: First, it seems clear that

a contraction in monetary policy does indeed lead to a decline in core deposits for banks of all

size classes. Second, it does not seem that the magnitude of this effect varies in any systematic

way across size classes. Figure I illustrates our basic results. It plots a cumulative response

of core deposits to a fed funds shock for the two extreme size classes—BIG and SMALL75. The

responses are calculated using the coefficient estimates from the second specification (which

includes the GOP control) and an orthogonalization of the vector autoregression where the shock

to the funds rate is ordered last.'7




     '71n other words, the picture is drawn under the assumption that the Fed has information about
movements in the current quarter's inflation, GDP. and deposits. In this case, the shock to the finds
rate will be uncorrelated with any other disturbances in the VAR. We follow this convention in all of
the subsequent figures in the paper.

                                                33
        5.2 The Resoonse of Bank Loans to a Monetary Shock

        We now focus on the most direct test of our theory: is the lending volume of smaller

banks more sensitive to monetary policy than the lending volume of large banks? The results

are presented in Table 3. The structure of Table 3 is analogous to that of Table 2, except that

the dependent variable is now the growth rate of nominal total loans in any given size category.

Indeed, the first two specifications in Table 3 are exactly the same as those in Table 2: we use

changes in the fed funds rate as our monetary policy indicator, and we run the regressions both

with and without an additional set of nominal GDP controls.

        The results uniformly support the predictions of our model. For example, in the first

specification, the sum of the coefficients for the BIG category is 1.25, and is completely

insignificant. The point estimate suggests that a contraction in monetary policy actually

increases large-bank lending in the short run.'8 In contrast, the four SMALL categories have

coefficients with sums that decline monotonically from -2.00 to -2.83, all of which are

statistically significant.

        Similar results obtain when we move to the second specification, which adds the nominal

GDP control.      The sum of the coefficients for the BIG category is now negative at -1.20, but

still completely insignificant. The coefficients for the four SMALL categories have sums that

continue to be substantially larger in absolute magnitude, ranging from -2.95 to -3.48; these

sums are still strongly significant as well. Thus an increase in the funds rate apparently has

much more of a dampening effect on the lending behavior of small banks.


   1'Other recent papers (e.g., Bernanke and Blinder 1992, Romer and Romer 1990, and Christiano,
Fichenhaum and Evans 1994) have also found some tendency for certain measures of aggregate lending
volume to react sluggishly or even increase in the short run in response to a monetary contraction. As
will become clear, our work suggests that this is primarily due to the behavior of the largest banks.

                                                 34
       The table also tries two additional specifications, numbers three and four. In both of

these, we use as a measure of the monetary impulse the growth in nominal core deposits for the

size category in question. Thus for example, when studying the BIG category, the key right

hand side variable is the gro y.h in nominal core deposits for the BIG banks. So rather than

using an economy-wide measure of monetary policy such as the fed funds rate1 we are now

allowing each size category to have its own measure. In a sense, this sort of specification is

much closer in spirit to the regressions seen in the literature on non-financial firms, where firms'

investment is regressed on some measure of their n cashflow--own core deposits can be

thought of as a direct analog to own-firm cashflow.

       Of course, this change in specification should not make a big difference if, as suggested

by the previous Table 2, shocks to the fed funds rate have a roughly equal-sized impact on BIG

and SMALL core deposits. Nonetheless, we thought it was important to try it this way also,

as a way of assessing the robustness of our results.

       As before, we estimate four coefficients on the monetary impulse variable. The one

minor difference is that we begin in this case with the contemporaneous value of the growth in

own core deposits, and then add lags one through three. We do this since it seems likely that

a shock to deposits in any given quarter might have an immediate impact on loan volume and/or

securities holdings. However, because the inclusion of this contemporaneous deposit term could

in principle lead to a simultaneity bias, we run the regressions using instrumental variables, with

four lags of the change in the fed funds rate serving as an instrument for the contemporaneous




                                                35
deposit term)9

       The results from specifications three and four echo those from the earlier ones. The sum

of the coefficients on the own core deposits variable is substantially higher for banksin the

SMALL categories. For example, in specification three, the sum of the coefficients for the BIG

banks is -.03 and completely insignificant. For the SMALL bank categories, the sum ranges

from .69 to .84, all of which are very strongly significant. In specification four, which adds the

nominal GDP control, the sum of the coefficients for BIG banks rises to .58, but is still not

statistically significant. Meanwhile the sum for the SMALL banks ranges from .78 to .95, all

of which are again very strongly significant.

       Overall, we read the results in Table 3 as providing quite strong support for the model's

predictions regarding loan volume. Figure 2 provides an illustration of these results, plotting

the cumulative impulse response of loans to a shock in the funds rate, for the extreme size

categories. (As in Figure 1, we use our second specification to generate the impulse response

function.)

       However, one possible objection is that since we are looking at IQI1 loans, our results

may be driven in part by aggregation effects across loan categories. As was seen in Table 1,

banks in the BIG category concentrate in different types of lending than the banks in some of

the SMALL categories--for example, the larger banks tend to do relatively more C&I lending,

and relatively less real estate lending. One troubling possibility is that what we are picking up

is just differences in the demand-side behavior of these different types of loans. For example,



    'We also tried re-running the regressions with OLS. As it turns out, this changes none of our
conclusions. We also find qualitatively similar results if we drop the contemporaneous deposit term
altogether, but in this case the magnitudes are much smaller and the standard errors are larger.

                                                36
it may be that C&l loan demand responds less to a monetary contraction than does real estate

loan demand; if this is the case, we might get our results for total loan volume even if BIG and

SMALL banks behaved identically within the C&I loan class.20

       This possibility can be at least partially addressed by looking at the behavior of C&I loan

volume, rather than total loan volume. This is done in Table 4. The table is exactly the same

as Table 3, except that we have replaced the total bank loans with bank C&I loans.

       Overall, the table suggests that even within the C&I loan class, there are clear-cut

differences across banks in the different size categories. Indeed, the results in Table 4 parallel

those in Table 3 very closely. In each of the four regression specifications, the point estimates

for the sums of the coefficients imply that loan volume is much more sensitive to monetary

policy for banks in the SMALL categories than for BIG banks. Moreover, most (though not all)

of the SMALL-bank regressions yield significant t-statistics. Thus we conclude from Table 4

that our results from total loan volume in Table 3 were probably not driven by aggregation

problems across different loan classes.

       Interestingly, as with total loans, BIG-bank C&I loan volume actually appears to increase

somewhat in the short run in response to a monetary contraction for two of the four

specifications. Thus to the extent that prior research has documented a tendency for aggregate

measures of loan volume to respond sluggishly—or even in the "wrong direction—to monetary

policy, this would appear to be due in part to the differential behavior of large banks, and more

specifically, to the differential behavior of large-bank C&I lending. (Although we should be



    This is really nothing more than a variant of the heterogeneous loan demand story sketched in
Section 3. Ciertler and Gilchrist (l993a, 199Th) present some evidence that suggests that C&I lending
volume responds more sluggishly to monetary shocks than other fbnns of lending.

                                                37
cautious with this conjecture, since none of the results for the BIG class are even close to being

statistically significant)



       5.3 The Resoonse of Bank Securities Holdings to a Monetary Shock

       We now turn to our final, most stringent set of tests. As discussed above, the strongest

evidence for our theory would be if we found that: 1) not only are SMALL-bank loans more

sensitive to monetary policy; but 2) SMALL-bank securities holdings are as well. What makes

this test a stringent one is that in order for us to find the evidence we are looking for, not only

must our theory of loan supply effects be true, but individual banks must lice relatively inelastic

loan demand schedules.

       Table 5 presents the evidence. The structure of Table 5 is identical to that of Tables 3

and 4. The first two specifications--those using the change in the fed funds rate as a measure

of the monetary impulse--yield results for securities holdings that parallel those for lending

volume. In both cases, the point estimates suggest that SMALL-bank securities holdings are

indeed more sensitive to monetary policy than BIG-bank securities holdings. Moreover, the

sums of the coefficients on the funds rate are statistically significant in all the SMALL-category

regressions, and are completely insignificant in the BIG-category regressions. Figure 3 provides

a graphical illustration, tracing out the impulse responses for the extreme size categories; as

before, the impulse responses are computed using our second specification.

       The results from the third and fourth specifications are more ambiguous. In the third

specification, the point estimates suggest that BIG-bank securities holdings are actually more

sensitive, although the standard errors for the BIG category continue to be quite large. In the



                                               38
fourth specification, the comparison is reversed, so that SMALL-bank securities holdings again

appear to be more sensitive.

        On balance, the evidence in Table 5 would appear to favor the notion that SMALL-bank

securities holdings are in fact more sensitive to monetary policy than BIG-bank securities

holdings. However, this conclusion is a tentative one; the results for securities holdings are not

as clear-cut as they were for lending volume.

        Even if the results are not totally decisive in favor of the proposition that SMALL-bank

securities holdings are more sensitive to monetary policy, there is also no real evidence to

support the converse proposition--that SMALL-bank securities holdings are J sensitive to

monetary policy. This is an important point. If our earlier lending volume results are to be

explained away by an alternative hypothesis based on heterogeneous loan demand, that
alternative hypothesis would also unambiguously predict that SMALL-bank securities holdings

would be less sensitive to monetary policy.2' Since we do not find this to be the case, we must

conclude that there is no positive evidence in favor of the alternative hypothesis.

        In contrast, our theory does not tie down the relative sensitivity of SMALL and BIG-bank

securities holdings--recall that this comparison turns on the elasticity of loan demand.

Therefore, even if the empirical results for securities holdings are interpreted as a dead heat

between SMALL and BIG banks, this would seem to be more damaging to the heterogeneous

loan demand alternative hypothesis than to our theory.




     21To remind the reader of the intuition: if smaller banks' loan volume goes down by more in the wake
of a monetary contraction, and if this is due to a disproportionate decline in the loan demand facing small
banks, then one should expect small banks to shift their portfolios towards securities. Thus small banks
would, under the alternative hypothesis, cut securities by ij in response to a monetary shock.

                                                   39
       5.4 Robustness Cheeks

       In addition to the specifications reported in the tables, we tiled a number of other

alternatives, to ensure the robustness of our results. A brief summary is as follows.



       5.4.A Romer dates as an alternative indicator of monetary policy

       We reran all the regressions corresponding to our first two specifications, substituting a

"Romer dummy" variable for the change in the fed funds rate as our measure of the monetary

impulse. We did so in large part to be consistent with much recent work (including our own)

that has used the Romer (1989) dates as an indicator of monetary policy. Unfortunately, in this

case, our shorter time series only includes three such dates. Moreover, two of these dates—the

August 1978 and the October 1979 ones--are sufficiently close to each other that they cannot

really be considered independent observations. The bottom line is that one should probably

expect any regressions using Romer dates in our sample to be extremely noisy. And indeed, this

is what happens--many of the estimated coefficients are far from being statistically significant.

       Nonetheless, it is interesting to note that if one just looks at the point estimates for the

sums of the coefficients, they all tell the same story: total loans, C&I loans and securities all

are cut more by SMALL banks than by BIG banks in the wake of a Romer date. This is true

both for the specifications that include a nominal GDP control and those that do not. Thus

while the results may not be very precise, they all go in the direction of supporting our theory.



       5.4.B Cutting off the sample in 1989 because of the "capital crunch"

       We also redid all the tables completely, with the sample period ending in 1989 QI rather



                                               40
 than in 1992 Q2. We did so because of a concern that our conclusions might be affected by the

 so-called "capital crunch" that arose as capital-deficient banks struggled to meet the new Basle

 standards that were being phased in through 1992. (See, e.g., Bernanke and Lawn 1991 for a

discussion.) If the capital crunch did indeed affect bank portfolio behavior, and if these effects

varied systematically across size    classes--as     well they might, since smaller banks are
systematically better capitalized-- then our regression results could conceivably be affected.

        As it turns out however, truncating the sample period in this way does not
                                                                                   markedly
affect our results. For total loans and C&I loans, we still find that SMALL banks react more

sensitively than BIG banks to changes in the stance of monetary policy, for every one of our

specifications. Indeed, in most specifications, the parameter estimates are almost identical to

those shown in Tables 3 and 4. And when this is not the case, the differential between SMALL

and BIG banks actually appears to be slightly         pronounced when we use the shorter sample

period. Thus it seems clear that our results for total loans and C&I loans are not in any way

driven by capital crunch effects.

       The one specification where changing the sample period makes a noteworthy difference

is in the second specification for securities holdings. Using this specification in the longer

sample period, we saw in Table 5 that SMALL banks appeared to cut securities by more than

BIG banks in response to a monetary shock; moreover, the sum of the coefficients on the funds

rate for SMALL banks was (marginally) statistically significant. This result disappears when

we truncate the sample in 1989. Now the sum of the coefficients for SMALL banks falls below

that for BIG banks, and becomes completely insignificant. Thus if we focus on the shorter

sample period, the results for securities become overall very ambiguous--it is hard to conclude


                                                41
that there are clear-cut patterns in any direction.



       5.4.C Real. rather than nominal specifications
       Finally, we also redid all the tables, using real rather than nominal values of deposits,

loans, securities and GDP, and omitting the CPI terms from the regressions. This can be

thought of as a slightly more constrained variant of the specifications described above. The

findings here parallel those frm our previous robustness check with theforeshortened sample.

In particular, the results for total loans and C&I loans are impervious to the change in

specification; every regression continues to show that SMALL banks' lending volume is more

sensitive to monetary policy than that of BIG banks. The results for securities holdings, on the

other hand, again seem to be somewhat more sensitive to the specification used--now three out

of the four regressions actually show securities being more sensitive for BIG banks. This is

essentially the opposite of what we found in Table 5.



       The bottom Une from our various robustness tests is this: the results for total loans and

C&l loans appear to be extremely robust. In contrast, the results for securities holdings appear

to be more sensitive to the specification used. When combined with the fact that our baseline

results for securities in Table 5 were already less than completely clear-cut, this leads us to

conclude that it is hard to say anything very confidently about the relative sensitivity of SMALL

and BIG-bank security holdings.

        Again, however, it is important to keep the ambiguous results for securities holdings in

perspective. While they may not allow us to decisively reject the heterogeneous-loan-demand


                                                 42
 alternative explanation for our loan volume results, they also do not provide any positivesupport

 for this alternative explanation either. Moreover, the ambiguous results for securities are also

 completely consistent with a version of our theory in which loan demand is relatively elastic.



        6. Summary and Conclusions

        The basic theme of this paper has been that banking firms may be subject to the same

sort of capital market imperfections as their non-financial counterparts. One implication of this

view is that monetary policy will work in part through a lending channel: when the Fed drains

deposits from the system, banks cannot frictionlessly make up the funding shortfall by raising

non-deposit external finance. Consequently, their lending behavior is affected, and so in turn

is the investment spending of those non-financial firms that rely on banks for funding.

        Overall, we interpret our empirical evidence as being clearly consistent with this story.

At the same time, we recognize some of its limitations. Given the level of disaggregation and

the relatively short time series that we were working with, our tests were not as powerful as one

might have liked. Thus while the point estimates tend to line up with the predictions of our

theory, the statistical significance is not always overwhelming.

       The natural next step is to further disaggregate the data, in an effort to increase the

power of the tests. For example, we could use the call report data to perform individual bank-

level regressions that are similar in spirit to our size-category regressions. In addition to

increasing the precision of our estimates, this would allow us to control much more carefully

for a number of other factors that might affect individual banks' ability to make loans--e.g., their

capital ratios, etc. We plan to attempt this in future work; at the very least, the results in this

paper are sufficiently encouraging to make such further work worthwhile.



                                                43
7.    References

Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder 1988. "Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand",

      American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedines 78, pp. 435-39.

                                                                    Channels of
_____________________________ 1992. "The Federal Funds Rate and the

      Monetary Transmission", American Economic Review, 82, pp. 901-921.
                                                                        Papers on
Bernanke, Ben S. and Cara S. Lown 1991. "The Credit Crunch", BroolcinEs

       Economic Activity, pp. 205-239.

Brainard, W.C. 1964. "Financial Tntermediaries and a Theory of Monetary    Control", flk

       Economic          4, pp. 431-482.

Bruner, K., and Meltzer, A.H.      1963.     "The Place of Financial Intermediaries in the

       Tramsinission of Monetary Policy. American Economic Review, 53, pp. 372-382.

____________________________ 1972. "Money, Debt, and Economic Activity", Journal of

       Political Economy, 80, pp.95 1-977.

_____________________________ 1988. "Money and Credit in the.Transmission Process",

       American Economic Review Paoers and Proceedins, 78, pp. 4.46-451.

 Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles L. Evans 1994. "The Effects of

       Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds" Working Paper, Federal

       Reserve Bank of Chicago.

 Cornett, Marcia Millon and Hassan Tehranian 1994. "An Examination of Voluntary versus

       Involuntary Security Issuances by Commercial Banks: The Impactof Capital Regulations

       on Common Stock Returns", Journal of Financial Economics, 35, pp. 99-122.



                                              44
 Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig 1983. "nk Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity",

       Journal of Political Economy, 91, pp. 401-419.

Friedman, Benjamin M. and Kenneth N. Kuttner 1993, "Economic Activity and Short-Term

       Credit Markets: An Analysis of Prices and Quantities"1 Brookins Papers on Economic

       Activity, pp. 193-266.

Root, Kenneth A., David S. Scharfstein and Jeremy C. Stein 1993. "Risk Management:

       Coordinating Corporate Investment and Financing Policies", Journal of Finance, 48, pp.

       1629-1658.

Gale, Douglas and Martin Hellwig 1985. "Incentive-compatible Debt Contracts I: The One

       Period Problem', Review of Economic Studies, 52, 647-664.

Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist 1993a. "The Cyclical Behavior of Short Term Business

       Lending: Implications for Financial Propagation Mechanisms", Working Paper, Federal

       Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.

______________________________ 1993b. "The Role of Credit Market Imperfections in the

       Monetary Transmission Mechanism: Arguments and Evidence" Working Paper, Federal

       Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.

                                      "Monetary Policy, Business Cycles and the Behavior of

      Small Manufacturing Firms", Ouarterlv Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Gertler, Mark and R. Glenn Hubbard 1989. "Financial Factors in Business Fluctuations", in

      Financial Market Volatility: Causes. Consecuences. and Policy Recommendations,

      Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, MO.




                                            45
                                                                            of the
Grossman, Sanford and \Veiss, Lawrence A. 1983. "A Transactions-Based Model
                                                                      871-880.
      Monetary Transmission Mechanism", American Economic Review, pp.

Kashyap, Anit K.,
                  Jeremy C. Stein and David W. Wilcox 1993. "Monetary Policy and

      Credit Conditions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance" • American

      Economic Review, March, pp. 78-98.

Kashyap, Ath1 K. and Jeremy C. Stein. "Monetary Policy and Bank Lending", in MonetarY

      Policy, edited by Gregory Mankiw, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Kashyap, Anil K., Owen Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein. "Credit Conditions and the Cyclical

      Behavior of Inventories", quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Keeley, Michael C. 1989. "The Stock Price Effects of Bank Holding Company Securities

      lssuance",Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review, PP. 3-19.

Lucas, Deborah J. and Robert L. MacDonald 1992. "Bank Financing and Investment
      Decisions with Asymmetric Information About Loan Quality", RAND Journal of

       Economics, 23, pp. 86-105.

Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1990). "Liquidity and Interest Rates", Journal of Economic Theory,

       April, pp. 237-264.
Morgan, Donald P. 1992. "Monetary Policy and Loan Commitments", Working Paper,

       Federal Reserve Bank c'f Kansas City, Kansas City, MO.

Myers, Stewart and Nicholas MajIuf 1984. "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions

       When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have", Journal of Financial

       Economics, 13, pp. 187-221.




                                            46
Oliner, Stephen and Glenn Rudebusch 1993. "Is There a Bank Credit Channel for Monetary

       Policy?", Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.

_____________________________ 1994. "Is There a Broad Credit Channel for Monetary

       Policy?", mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C.

Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram 6. Rajan 1992. "The Benefits of Firm-Creditor
       Relationships: A Study of Small Business Financing", mimeo, Graduate School of

       Business, University of Chicago.

Polonchek, John, Myron B. Slovin, and Marie E. Sushka 1989. "Valuation Effects of
       Commercial Bank Securities Offerings: A Test of the Information Hypothesis", Journal

       of BankinE and Finance, 13, pp. 443-461.

Rajan, Raghuram     1992. "Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice Between Relationship and

      Arm's Length Debt", Journal of Finance, 47, pp. 1367-1400.

Ramey, Valerie 1993. "How Important is the Credit Channel of Monetary Transmission",

      Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, pp. 149-213.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer 1989. "Does Monetary Policy matter? A New Test

      in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz", in Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer,

      eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Cambridge, MA: The M.I.T. Press, pp. 121-

      183.

_____________________________ 1990. "New Evidence on the Monetary Transmission

      Mechanism" Brookins Parers on Economic Activity, pp. 149-213.

Rotemberg, Julio 1984. "A Monetary Equilibirum Model with Transactions Costs", Journal

      of Political Economy, pp. 40-58.


                                            47
Sharpe, Steve 1990. "Asymmetric Information, Bank Lending and Implicit Contracts: A
      Stylized Model of Customer Relationships", Journal of Finance, 45, 1069-1087.

Stein, Jeremy 1994. "An Adverse Selection Model of Bank Asset and Liability

      Management with Implications for the Transmission of Monetary Policy", mimeo, M.I.T.

Tobin, James 1970. "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory", Journal of

      Money. Credit and Bankins, 2, pp. 461-472.

Tobin, James and William C. Brainard 1963. Financial Intermediaries and the Effectiveness

      of Monetary Control", American Economic Review, 53, pp. 383-400.

Townsend, Robert M. 1979. "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State

       Verification", Journal of Economic Theory, 21, pp. 265-293.

Wansley, James W. and Upinder S. Dhillon 1989. "Determinants of Valuation Effects for

       Security Offerings of Commercial Bank Holding Companies", Journal of Financial

       Research, 12, pp. 217-234.




                                            48
 8.     Data Apoendix

        Throughout the analysis our size categories are formed by sorting the bankson the basis

 of their total assets -- call report item rcfd2l7O. We construct four main series from the call

 reports that are used in the empirical work. As mentioned in the text, most of the series in the

 call reports were defined differently before and after March of 1984, so most of our series must

 be spliced in the first quarter of 1984.

        The data for total loans after March 1984 come from item rcfd2l2S in the call reports.

 This series is defined as "loans and leases net of unearned income, allowance and reserve. In

March of 1984, the series was changed to include lease financing receivables, therefore
                                                                                            prior
to March 1984 rcfd2l2S and rcfd2l6S (lease financing receivables) must be summed to insure

comparability. Starting in March 1984, transfer risk reserve is also being netted out. Prior to

that time this type of adjustment does not appear to have existed, so there isno way to avoid a

slight discontinuity.

       The data for commercial and industrial loans after March 1984 come from item rcfdl76ó.

Prior to March 1984 we use item rcfdl600. Unfortunately, rcfdl600 includes some bankers'

acceptances that are not included in rcfdl76o, but there is no way to make the two series

comparable because the relevant acceptance numbers are never separately reported.

       The data for securities after March 1984 are taken from item rcfdO39O. The definition

of this series was changed in March 1984 to include holdings of corporate stock. This

redefinition causes a discontinuity because prior to 1984 it is not possible to separately add up

all of the items that are now included item rcfdO39O. As an approximation we sum items

rcfdO400 (U.S.Treasury Securities), rcfdOoOO (U.S. Government Agency and Corporate



                                              49
Obligations), rcfdO900 (Obligations of States and Political Subdivisions) and rcfdO3SO to get a

comparable series. The data on securities is added to data on cash holdings (item rcfdOOlO) to


get an overall series for cash and securities.
       Finally, we construct estimates of small deposits. This series is constructed by removing

large deposits (the sum of item rcon6645, certificates of deposits of denominations above

$100,000, and item rcon6646, open time deposits of over $100,000)from total deposits (item

rcfd2200). Detailed information on deposits is generally only available for deposits of the

domestic operations of banks. So although the total deposit data may include deposits held
                                                                                available for
outside the U.S. for some banks, information on large or small deposits is only

banks' domestic operations.

        For the snapshot of the data given in Table 1 we looked at several other series. The

numbers for Federal Funds Sold and Securities Purchased Under Agreements to Resell come

 from item rcfd 1350. The data on real estate loans, loans to depository institutions, agricultural

 loans, loans to individuals and other loans are taken from items rcfdl4lO, rcfdl4S9, rcfdlS9O,

 rcfdl975 and rcfd2O8O respectively.

        Regarding the liabilities data in Table 1, the information for transactions deposits and

 brokered deposits comes from items rcon22l5 and rcon2365 respectively. The data on Federal

 Funds Purchased and Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase are from item rcfd2SOO.

 The numbers for equity and subordinated debt are taken from items rcfd32l0 and rcfd3200. The

 data shown for other liabilities is constructed to assure that total assets and total liabilities

 balance.

        The data on nominal gross domestic product, the consumer price index (not seasonally

 adjusted) and the federal funds rate are variables ()DP, PZIJNEW, and FYFF from Citibase.



                                                 50
                                                             Table I
                                             Composition of Bank Balance Sheets
                                                       as of 1984 Q2




                                                  Asset Cutoff used to Determine Size Category:

                                Below             Between              Between          Between      Between      Above
                                75th              75th and             90th and         95th and     98th and     99th
                                                  90th                 95th             98th         99th
                                percentile        percentile           percentile       percentile   percentile
Number                          10710             2142                 714              429           143          142
  of    Banks
Mean Assets (S millions)         27.2             96.6                 199.6            454.7        1213.5       8523.5
Median Assets (S millions)       23.6             92.1                 191.5            411.1        1165.9       3743.7
Fraction of Total                .13!              .093                 .064             .088         .078         .545
 System Assets




Fraction of rota.' Assets in Size Qztegwy

Cash & Securities              .386               .374                 .354             .339          .318        .248
Fed Funds & Repos Lent         .050               .047                 .G4              .050          .050        .031
Total Loans                    .519               .535                 .556             .566          .585        .621
  RealEstateLoans              .187               .207                 .212             .191          .181        .115
  Loans to Depos. Inst.        .002               .004                 .007             .011          .023        .051
  Agricultural Loans           .076               .030                 .014             .008          .007        .006
  C&ILoans                     .126               .153                 .172             .187          .188        .281
  Loanstolndiv.                .122               .129                 .132             .137          .140        .075
  Other Loans                  .011               .010                 .014             .018          .025        .073




Total Deposits             .882                  .880                  .864             .830         .800         .729
  Transaction Dep.         .235                  .240                  .239             .250         .250         .172
  Large Deposits           .101                  .118                  .131             .140         .144         .123
  Brokered Dep.            .002                  .002                  .003         .   .002         .011         .019
Fed Funds & Repos Borrowed .010                  .020                  .037             .066         .100         .100
Subord. Debt               .001                  .001                  .002             .003         .004         .005
Other Liabilities          .018                  .021                  .025             .031         .034         .118
Equity                     .089                  .078                  .072             .070         .062         .048




                                                             SI
                                                   Core Deposits Regressions
                                          (S nominal core deposits is dependent variable)

Specit'cation              Measure of                           Other r.lt.s.        Coefficients on Monetary
                           __________
                           nç1ary Impulse                       _____
                                                                variabl&             Impulse at lag                    Sum
                                                                                     1       2.               4

1. BiG                     Med funds                            4CPI               -1.04 -1.17      -.47     -.34       -3.02
                                                                                                                       (-1.53)

1. SMALL 98                Med funds                             4CM               -2.23    -.89 -1.53        .25       -4.40
                                                                                                                       (-2.37)

I. SMALL 95                Med funds                             ACPI              -2.22 -1.08 -1.56          .17       -4.60
                                                                                                                       (-2.63)

I. SMALL 90                Med funds                             CPI               -2.17    -.92    -1.49     .19       4.38
                                                                                                                       (-2.68)

                                                                                                                        -4.26
                                                                                                                       (-2.90)


2. BiG                      Med funds                            Angdp. aC?I       -2.05 -2.06       -.19     .48       -3.82
                                                                                                                       (-1.24)

2. SMALL 98                 Med funds                            Angdp, ACPI       -2.68    -.08     -.79     .61       -2.94
                                                                                                                       (-1.02)

2. SMALL 95                 Med funds                            dngdp, ACPI       -2.72     -.34    -.92     .51       -3.46
                                                                                                                       (-1.29)

2. SMALL 90                 Med funds                            4ngdp, SCM        -2.65     -.32    -.90     .46       -3.41
                                                                                                                        (-1.36)

2. SMALL 75                 Med funds                            Migdp, CPI        -2.63     -.51    -.96     .27        -3.84
                                                                                                                        (-1.69)

 A11 spifica1ions also include four lags of the dependent variable1 tour quasledy dutnndcs. sad a dummy corresponding tot 1984 Qi change
in certain data defleiLiona. Both spccWicationa land 2 an estimated by 01-S.
                                                                         Table 3
                                                                  Loans Regressions
                                                        (S nominal loans is dependent variable)

Sneciflcpiion                     Measure of                         Other r.h.s.         Coefficients on Monetary
                                  Monsrv Imnulse                     varkibles'           Impulse at lag                      Sum
                                                                                          1         2       1       4


I. BIG                            Sf5 funds                          ACM                 -.39      .15      .55     .94        1.25
                                                                                                                              (0.79)

1. SMALL 98                       Med funds                          AC?!                -1.64    -.48     -.11     .23       -2.00
                                                                                                                             (-2.05)

1. SMALL 95                       Med funds                          ACM                 -1,85    -.56     -.36     .37       -2.39
                                                                                                                             (-2.54)
1. SMALL 90                       Med funds                          AC?!                -1.89    -.64     -.42     .34       -2.60
                                                                                                                             f2.62)
1. SMALL 75                       Med funds                          aCPI                -1.99    -.56     -.55     .27       -2.83
                                                                                                                             (-2.74)


2. BIG                            Med funds                          Angdp, ACPE         -1.48    -.77      .18     .87       -1.20
                                                                                                                               (60)
2. SMALL 98                       Med funds                          Angdp, INCH         -1.96    -.87    -.36      .23       -2.95
                                                                                                                             (-2.42)
2. SMALL 95                       Sf5 funds                          Angdp, INCPi        -2.15    -.88    -.49      .38       -3.15
                                                                                                                             (-2.68)

2. SMALL 90                       Sled funds                         Angdp, SCPI         -2.17    -.99    -.52      .32       -3.36
                                                                                                                             (-2.68)
2. SMALL 75                       MS hinds                           INngdp, ssCPI      -2.29     -.90    -.61      .32       -3.48
                                                                                                                             (-2.63)
 AJ1 quiricatiooa aS include four lag, of the depandent veneble four qusnedy dummies, and a dunuuy cvntepooding to a 1984 QI change
In cent data definitions. Specification, I and 2 are imsed by OLS, specifications 3 and 4 are estimated by IV, wing lagged changes in the
fed funds rate as an inetnimnit for the contemporaneous own core depoeita variable.
                                                                 Table 3 (conCd.)
                                                                 Loans Regesniona
                                                       (S nominal loans is dependent variable)

Specification                Measure of                                 Other r.hs.              Coefficients on Monetary
                             __________
                             Monetary Imnulse                           _____
                                                                        variables'               Impulse at lag                       Sum
                                                                                                 Q         s       a        a

3. DIG                       Aown core dep.                             ACPI                      .18    -.27      .04      .02         -.03
                                                                                                                                       (-.06)

3. SMALL 98                  a own core dep.                            ACP1                      .64     -.05    -.06      .15             .69
                                                                                                                                      a.92)
3.SMALL95                    aowncoredep.                               aCPI                      .77     -.03    -.08      .1!             .77
                                                                                                                                      (3.01)

3.SMALL9O                    Aowncoredep.                               ACPI                      .79      .00    -.15      .14             .79
                                                                                                                                      (3.00)

3. SMALL 75                  6 own core dep.                            6CPI                      .79      .09    -.19      .15         .84
                                                                                                                                      (3.12)


4. 131(1                     S own core dep.                            Sngdp. ACPI               .95     -.30     .01     -.08         .58
                                                                                                                                      (1.66)

4. SMALL 98                  S own core dep.                            Angdp, ACPI               .66      .03    -.02      .11             .78
                                                                                                                                       (3.28)

4. SMALL 95                  A own core dep.                            angdp, ACPI               .71      .05    -.04      .08          .86
                                                                                                                                       (3.32)

4. SMALL9O                   Sown coredep.                               Sngdp,SCPI               .79      .08     -.11     .13          .90
                                                                                                                                       (3.27)

4,SMALL75                    Sowocoredep.                                Angdp.ACfl               .81      .16     -.17     .15          .95
                                                                                                                                       (3.26)
•Al1 sptfleations also include four lags of lbs dependent variable, four çitnmiy dummS. ends dummy conesponding tot 1984 Qi cbange
is oatelu data definitions. Specifications I and 2 eta eclimsled by 01.3, specifications 3 sod 4 are estimated by IV, using lagged cbsngn
is the fat funds nls is so inatnunad for the enslatnpotsoaosa own come deposits variable.
                                                                            Table 4
                                                                   C&1 Loans Regressions
                                                        (A nominal CAl loans is dependent variable)

_________
Sithtica1ion                      Measure of                         Other r,h,s.             Coefficients on Monetary
                                  ?'lcrnctary Impulse                                         Impulse at lag                     Sum
                                                                                              1        2                 4       Euus)

1. BIG                            Med funds                          ACM                     2.72     3.41   -1.03     3.44         8.54
                                                                                                                                   (0.73)

I. SMALL 98                       Med funds                          ACPI                   -1.28      .33      .41      .04         -.50
                                                                                                                                    (-.38)

1. SMALL 95                       Med funds                          ACPI                   -1.39      .36      .06     -.04       -1.01
                                                                                                                                    (-.83)

1. SMALL 90                       Med funds                          ACPI                   -1.11      .61     -.48     -.09       -1.67
                                                                                                                                  (-1.38)

1. SMALL 75                       Med funds                          ACPI                   -1.54      .31     -.53     -.04       -1.80
                                                                                                                                  (-1.47)


2. BIG                            Med funds                          &sgdp, CPI             -1.42 -6.73 -2.39          8.09        -2.45
                                                                                                                                  (-0.18)

2. SMALL 98                       Med funds                          Angdp, ACPI            -2.24     -.70     -.37     -.04       -3.35
                                                                                                                                  (-138)
2. SMALL 95                       Med funds                          Angdp, CP1             -2.27     -.47    -.47     -.12        -3.33
                                                                                                                                  (-1.91)

2. SMALL 90                       Med funds                          Angdp. aCM             -2.49     -.18    -.99     -.20        -3.86
                                                                                                                                  (-2.24)

2.SMALL75                         Ma! funds                          angdp,ACPT             -2.22     -.40    -.86     -.17        -3.65
                                                                                                                                  (-2.07)
 A11 specification. also include four lags of the deps4set variable, four qusrtaly dumuda, and a dummy corresponding to a 1914 QI change in oestiin
data definitions. Specifications I and 2 an admitS by 012, qxciflations 3 and 4 are estimated by IV, sndng lagged changa in the fed fimds rate
man instrument for the coeianipcnnmis own con drpndts variable.
                                                              C&1 loan Regressions
                                                    (a nominal C&i loan is dependent variable)

                             Measure of                             Other r.b.s.              Coefficients on Monetary
5cjflcathn                                                          variabln                  Impulse at lag                      Sum
                             Monetary Imnulse
                                                                                              Q          x      a       a

                             a own core dep.                                                -1.65       .63     .72 -1.38           1.68
3. 1316                                                                                                                            (-.46)

                                                                     1CP1                     .50       -.21    -.08    .45
3. SMALL 98                  a own core dep.
                                                                                                                                  (1.88)

                                                                     aCPI                     .56       -.16    -.12    .51          .80
3. SMALL 95                   a own core dep.
                                                                                                                                   (2.29)

                                                                     aCPI                      .61      -.13    -.13    .56          .91
3. SMALL 90                   a own core dep.
                                                                                                                                   (2.52)

                                                                                                                                     .95
                                                                                                                                   (236)


                              a own core dep.                         Angdp, aCPI            2.01       -.18     .17 -1,52           .48
4. BIG                                                                                                                               (.22)

                                                                                                                -.02     .41         1.24
 4. SMALL 98                  S own aire dep.                         angdp, aCPI              .92      -.07
                                                                                                                                    (2.95)

                                                                                                  .89    -.01    -.06    .50         1.31
 4. SMALL 95                  Lowitcoredep.                           angdp, aCPI
                                                                                                                                    0.13)
                                                                                                          .00    -.11    .56         1.19
 4. SMALL 90                   a own core dep.                        Angdp, acPi                 .74
                                                                                                                                    0.07)
                                                                                                  .70     .08    -.07       .51      1.22
 4.SMALL75                     Sownairedep.                           Sngdp,SCPI
                                                                                                                                    (2.89)
                                                                                                                                1984 Ql change
   A11 specifications also include four lags of the dependent vanable. tour qusitarty dummies, and a dummy conesponding to a
                                                                    by OLS. specifications 3 and 4 amstimatcd by IV, using lagged changes in the
  in certain data definitions. Specifications I and 2 iso estimated
  fed funds rate as an Instrument foe the eonternpoaneoua own cots deposits variable.
                                                                      Table S
                                                          Cash and Securities Regressions
                                                 (S nominal cash & securities Is dependent variable)

Sneciflcation            Measure of                             Other r.h.s.                    Coefficients on Monetary
                         Monetary inmutse                       vari4bleC                       Impulse at lag                     Sun
                                                                                                1        2       a        4
I. BIG                   Med funds                              AC?!                           -.65    -.11     -.32 -1.71          -2.85
                                                                                                                                    (-.85)

I. SMALL 98              Med funds                              ACP!                          -2.16 •I.56 '1.74          -.39       -5.85
                                                                                                                                   (-3.42)

I. SMALL 95              Med funds                              ACPI                          -2.22 -1.66 -1.79          -.31       -5.99
                                                                                                                                   (.3.41)

I. SMALL 90              Med funds                              AC?!                          -2.13 -1.5$      -1.82     -.32       -5.88
                                                                                                                                   (-3.38)

I.SMALL75                Afedfunds                              SC?!                          -1.99    -1.44 -1.90       -.44       -5.77
                                                                                                                                   (-3.39)

2. BIG                   Med funds                              Angdp, ACP1                    -.65     .33     1.18   -1.15         -.29
                                                                                                                                    (-.06)
2. SMALL 98              Med funds                              Angdp, SCM                   -2.24     -.63     -.95      .07       -3.75
                                                                                                                                   (-1.90)

2. SMALL 95              Afed funds                             Angdp, ACPI                  -2.31     -.61     -.94      .19       -3.67
                                                                                                                                   (-1.83)

2, SMALL 90              Med funds                              Angdp. SC?!                  -2.20     -.55    -1.01      .12       -3.64
                                                                                                                                   (-1.81)
2. SMALL 75              Med funds                              Sngdp, ACPI                  -2.11     -.44    -1.11     -.07       -3,73
                                                                                                                                   (-1.81)
tUl specifiarious also include flnr lap of the dependent variable, four quastesty dummies, and a dummy conteponding to a I9MQI change
in certain Ma definitictia. Specificationa I and 2 are sin.t.4 by 01.3, apedficadow 3 and 4 an estimated by IV, itheg lagged changre in the
led hinds rate., en instrument for the contemporaneous own core deposits variable.
                                                            Table 5 (coot'd.)
                                                 Cash and Securities Regressions
                                         (a nominal cash & securities is dependent variable)

                            Measure of                         Other r.h.s.                     Coefficienls on Monetary
çiIication                                                                                      tmpulse at lag                       Sum
                            Monetary Imjtuise                  yatiahltC
                                                                                                Q        1        2        1

                             6own core dep.                    SCPI                            1.93     -.22     -.07    -.23        1.41
3. BIG
                                                                                                                                    (1.64)

                                                               SCPI                              .89     -.14     .12    -.18          .68
3. SMALL 98                  4 own core dep.
                                                                                                                                     (2.76)

                                                               SCPI                              .94     -.18     .21    -.22          .74
3. SMALL 95                  Sown core dep.
                                                                                                                                     (2.67)

                                                               SCPI                              .91     -.15     .21    -.21          .77
3. SMALL 90                  Sown core dep.
                                                                                                                                     (2.58)

                                                               ACPI                              .90     -.12     .26     -.27         .76
3. SMALL 75                  Sown core dep.
                                                                                                                                     (2.48)

                                                               Sngdp, SCPI                       .91     -.15    -.24      .07         .59
4. BIG                       S own core dep.
                                                                                                                                      (.97)

                             S own core dep.                    4ngdp SCM                        .81     -.03     .17     -.05         .90
4. SMALL 98
                                                                                                                                     (3.70)

                                                                                                  .86    -.07     .26     -.07         .99
4.SMALL95                    aowncoredep.                       Sngdp,SCPI
                                                                                                                                     (3,67)

                                                                                                  .84    -.05      .29    -.05        1.02
4.SMALL9O                    aowncoredep.                       Sngdp1SCPI
                                                                                                                                     (3.59)

                                                                Sngdp,SCPI                        .83    -.07      .36    -.12         1.00
 4.SMALL7S                   Sowncoredep.
                                                                                                                                      (3.32)

   A11 apecifiatiums also include tour lags of the dependent variable, four quartesly dumudea, and a dummy conespcmding tot 1984 QI change
                                                                                                                               thangc* in the
 in cestain data definitions. Spcciflatiocs land 2 ue estimated by OLS, specifications 3 and 4am estimated by IV, using lagged
  tat funds sate as an instnsment for the contsmposan4 own cost deposits variable.
                                            Figure 1
        Simulated Response of Large and Small Bank Core Deposits
                       In crease the Funds Rate by 100 basis points
I00.0



99.9



99.6



99.7



99.6



99.5



99.4



99.3


99.2
            0     1       2          3          4         5           6   7   8
                                         quarters
                                       Figure 2
        Simulated Response of Large and Small Bank Loans
                   lncwasa the Funds Rate by 100 basis points
100.0




99.8




99.6




 99.4




 99.2




 99.0




 98.8
         0     1       2         3          4       .5          6   7   8
                                     quarters
                                             Figure 3

            Simulated Response of Large and Small Bank Securities
                                                                           -
                         Increase the Funds Rate by 100 basis points
1002 -


100,1



100.0 -


        -                           ——
 99.9



        -
99.8



99.7 -



99.6                                              'a




 995                                                                           small banks

                                                                               Ilarga banks

 99.4 -
               0     1       2           3         4         5         6       7          8
                                          quarters
