                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              OPTIMAL REGULATION OF
                          MULTIPLY-REGULATED INDUSTRIES:
                          THE CASE OF PHYSICIAN SERVICES




                                        John A. Rizzo
                                       Jody L. Sindelar




                                  Working Paper No. 4822




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         August 1994


Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the 1993 meetings of the Southern Economics
Association and the 1994 meetings of the American Economics Association. We thank Tom
Abbott, Michael Crew, Doug Staiger, and an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments and
suggestions. This paper is part of NB ER's research program in Health Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


   1994 by John A. Rizzo and Jody L. Sindelar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                      NBER Working Paper #4822
                                                                                   August 1994


                               OPTIMAL REGULATION OF
                           MULTIPLY-REGULATED INDUSTRIES:
                           ThE CASE OF PHYSICIAN SERVICES


                                            ABSTRACT


       This paper models the physician services market which is regulated by two government

agencies. The Health Care Financing Administration (I-ICFA) sets Medicare physician fees

through the newly implemented Resource Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS). The Agency

for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) sets practice guidelines for quality.

       We analyze welfare losses which occur when agencies fail to coordinate their regulatory

activities. Specifically, we consider the welfare impacts for cost, quality, practice characteristics,

and quantity of care.

       Perceived ills in the market for physician services, such as excessive expenditures and

overly intensive treatment, may be traced to coordination failures. Thus, even if physicians were

to act as perfect agents for their patients, and even if moral hazard were to be eliminated.

coordination failure could cause the critical problems associated with the physician services

market to persist. Although the model is applied to the market for physician services, it can be

readily generalized to other settings involving multiple regulators.



John A. Rizzo                                                 Jody L. Sindelar
Yale University School of Medicine                            Yale University School of Medicine
P.O. Box 208034                                               P.O. Box 208034
New Haven, CT 06510                                           New Haven, CT 06510
                                                              and NBER
Motivation

          This paper models physician services as a market regulated by two governmental agencies,

each concerned with a different aspect of market performance. One branch of the government, the

Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), currently sets Medicare reimbursement rates while

another branch, the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR), sets practice or quality

standards for physicians' services. While the standards set are merely guidelines, not rules, there are

potentially costly implications to physicians from ignoring the guidelines.

          An important type of regulatory failure occurs when agencies neglect to coordinate their

actions. A growing body of research has found that coordination failures confound government

efforts to implement optimal public policies (Coate 1992; Hansen and Stuart 1989: Kotlikoff 1987;

Veafl 1986; Baron 1984). These studies have typically focused on coordination failures between the

public and private sectors.' Our analysis examines coordination failures among regulatory agencies

involved in different aspects of regulation within a given industry; respectively, price and quality

regulation.

          Given the varied institutional contexts in which multiple regulation occurs, formal

representations may be most insightful when tailored to the specifics of each industry (Bernheim and

Whinston 1986).2 In the case of the regulation of the physician services market, coordination failures

occur when two agencies, one charged with price regulation. the other with setting medical practice

guidelines, fail to take full account of each other's actions and goals. Although the basic model may

be generalized to a number of settings, the physician services industry provides a particularly vivid

example, given the current policy concerns about the cost and quality of medical care.



         Baron (1984) is an exception to this pattern. He examines coordination failures between
   an agency concerned with regulating pollution emissions of a firm (the Environmental
   Protection Agency) and a public utility regulator who sets the firm's price.
      2   Bernheini and Whinston investigate issues of the nature and existence of equilibrium in a
  purely abstract model of multiple regulation. However, as the authors note, 'this task is made
  difficult by the proliferation of highly varied institutional contexts in which common agency
  appears" (p. 925).
          The remainder of the paper is divijed into 5 parts. Part 1 discusses the current regulatory

environment under Medicare. Part 2 presents a model of optimal practice guidelines and physician

reimbursement. Part 3 solves the model for the socially optimal case. Part 4 compares outcomes

under coordination failure to the social optimum. In particular, the implications of coordination

failures for cost, quality, medical practice characteristics, and quantity of care are derived. These are

the salient outcomes of concern for health care regulatory agencies and for society. Part 5

summarizes the results and discusses their policy implications.


1.        Institutional background

          Medicare payments to physicians are now set by HCFA according to the receruly

implemented Resource Based Relative Value Scales (RBRVS). Practice guidelines are continuing to

be developed by AHCPR. These guidelines set standards and try to affect the quality and

appropriateness of care.

IA.       Frzdice tuidelines

          With the establishment in 1989 of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (A}ICPR),

the federal government made the development of practice guidelines an important component of health

care regulation. AHCPR has initiated work on 16 practice guidelines. The Institute of Medicine and

many other health care organizations are concurrently involved in guideline development3.

          Guidelines may be developed in a variety of ways. AHCPR is funding research on outcomes

assessments to aid in the development of guidelines for specific procedures. More common methods

than engaging in original research to develop guidelines are use of literature reviews of available

scientific evidence and/or expert panels.




           Over 50 health care organizations are actively involved in the development of practice
     guidelines. These organizations include professional groups, third-party payers, hospitals.
     academic medical centers, health maintenance organizations, independent researchers, and
     malpractice insurers (Physician Payment Review Commission 1992, p. 222).

                                                    2
        Guidelines may focus on diagnosis (diagnostic guidelines), evaluation of individual services

(service guidelines), or appropriate treatment regimens for specific conditions (management

guidelines).4 The first two types of guidelines identi' illness and evaluate specific medical

technologies or services, respectively. Management guidelines, however, prescribe appropriate

treatments for an entire episode of care for a patient with a given medical condition. At present,

AHCPR is devoting the vast majority of its efforts to the development of diagnostic and management

guidelines (Physician Payment Review Commission (1992).

        Such guidelines may have significant effects on physician behavior. First, they may lead

physicians to rethink the type and level of care deemed appropriate. Second, deviations from the

guidelines may impose costs on the physician, such as anxiety or increased malpractice exposure.

lB.     Rein burrement

        The Resource Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS), effective as of January 1, 1992, is part

of Medicare's recent effort to implement a physician fee schedule. The RBRVS computes 'relative




          The three main types of guidelines. diagnosis, management, and service, have been
   described in a recent Physician Payment Review Commission Report to Congress (1992) as
   follows:

           Diagnostic guidelines are targeted at evaluating patients with particular symptoms (such
           as chest pain) for the presence of diseases that would benefit from intervention (such as
           angina or esophagitis). They are also used to guide the screening of asymptomatic
           populations for early stages of disease (to detect, for example, hypertension or
           diabetes).

           Management guidelines cover the evaluation and treatment of patients who are known
           to have certain conditions. Examples are guidelines dealing with low back pain or
           benign prostatic hypertrophy.

           Service guidelines are organized around particular diagnostic and therapeutic procedures
           (such as chest X-ray, colonoscopy, appendectomy, or administration of hepatitis
           vaccine), presenting appropriate and inappropriate indications for their use (Physician
           Payment Review Commission 1992, p. 214).



                                                   3
values" of physicians' services across specialties. It factors into the relative values the physician's

time, the complexity of services, practice costs, and opportunity costs of medical training.

          The RBRVS approach is designed to base reimbursement on the costs of providing care,

rather than on actual charges, which was the previous approach (Hsiao 1988; Hadley 1991). By

itself, the RBRVS is not a fee schedule. However, once relative values have been computed, an

actual fee schedule is obtained by multiplying the RBRVS by a conversion factor. Although intended

to address market imperfections in the physician services market, RBRVS has drawn considerable

criticism from economists.5


2.        A model of reimbunement and orcefice ruidelines

          The model presented below applies to the physician services market, especially with regard to

the Medicare sector. Physician fees (prices) are set by HCFA, while AHCPR establishes practice

guidelines. In this initial formulation of the model, government agencies engage in non-cooperative

behavior. Cost control is a common objective of each agency.6 For the price setter (HCFA),

practice attributes that affect patient access to and satisfaction with care are additional concerns; for

the guideline setter (AHCPR), quality of care matters in addition to cost.




            I4oll (1991), for example, has argued that such problems as the arbitrary nature of
     allocating joint costs, and reliance on "an administrative process to construct a competitive
     equilibrium in the structure of physician prices' (p. 381) renders the RBRVS approach highly
     questionable.

        6 Cost control has long been a prominent objective of the Health Care Financing
     Administration. Garber and Wagner (1991) have argued that cost containment should be an
     important component in the development of practice guidelines as well. They argue that the
     public

                expects that the resulting guidelines will not only improve the quality of medical
             care but will also reduce health care costs. (p. 53)

     The authors also illustrate how failure to take cost considerations into account will lead to
     wasteM health care expenditures.


                                                      4
        Each agency is assumed to take the physician's profit maximizing behavior into account in

setting price and guidelines. The implications of this model are then compared to the social optimum.

In the social optimum, both agencies cooperate to promote quality and other characteristics, while

controlling cost.

         We assume that there is a single payer, Medicare,7 which sets the reimbursement rates for

physician services and pays the entire bill for Medicare patients.' As patients incur no out-of-pocket

expenses for their care, their demand for care is insensitive to price. This simplifying assumption is

reasonable given that: 1) the vast majority of physicians accept Medicare reimbursement as payment

in fill, 2) copayments are relatively small and 3) balance-billing amounts are smaller still.9

        We further assume that patients have difficulty judging the appropriateness of medical

treatment. Thus, the physicians alone determine the course of treatment in our model.

2A.     Search model

        In this model of the physicians' services market, there are many (M) physicians who compete

for patients, and numerous (N) consumers who search for appropriate physicians. As the cost of


           Although there is a single payer, Medicare does not exercise its potential monopsony
   power. Instead, it sets price with a view to constraining costs while promoting access.

           Alternatively, our model applies to the case where a national health insurance system is
   introduced, so that there is only one payer (government), but separate governmental branches
   set prices and establish practice guidelines. This is a likely situation in some of the health care
   reform scenarios.

        Gillis, Lee, and Willke (1992) report for example that almost 83% of Medicare Part B
  claims are accepted on assignment, so that no balance billing occurs in these cases. The
  authors also note that avenge copayments per claim were less than 28 dollars (in 1991 dollars),
  while balance billing amounted to less than 7 dollars per claim.

  In reviewing balance billing during the mid-1980s, Zuckerrnan and Holahan (1991) concluded
  that "balance billing is likely to impose little, if any financial burden on the vast majority of
  Medicare beneficiaries" (p. 166). Under the recently implemented Medicare fee schedule, the
  amount by which the balance bill may exceed Medicare covered charges is restricted. Thus.
  the importance of balance billing has fallen further since the time period examined by
  Zuckerman and Holahan. While 2 percent of Medicare beneficiaries incurred total annual
  balance bills over $500 in 1988, virtually no patients will incur balance bills of this amount
  under the Medicare fee schedule (Physician Payment Review Commission 1992).

                                                    5
care is paid for entirely by Medicare there is no price competition. Physicians compete for patients

through non-price competition, in this case, by offering practice attributes that consumers value.'0
These attributes enhance the attractiveness and accessibility of the physician." This search model is

based on an earlier model due to Satterthwaite (1979. 1985). As in Satterthwaite (1979), we assume

that physicians and consumers are homogeneous. However, consumers have different preferences

over the attributes offered by physicians. One consumer may prefer physicians j; another will prefer

physician i. However, instead of Satterthwaite's price competition, our model has non-price

competition in the form of medical practice attributes.

        The model posits physicians as being in short run equilibrium.'2 In this steady state,

however, patients may leave their current physician in favor of alternative ones. Patients may leave

for demographic reasons such as individuals changing their area of residence. Sonic patients may also

search for new physicians because they are not satisfied with the attributes of their current physicians

and want to search for ones who will appeal to their particular tastes.

        For an equilibrium to exist, for each physician, the expected number of patients entering the

practice equals the expected number departing. Following Satterthwaite (1979, 1985). define v as the

probability that a randomly selected consumer from physician i's current practice will come to the

physician for an office visit within a week." We assume that v, is an increasing function of the


       10
          That patients seek desirable attributes is supported in the literature. Surveys indicate
   that consumers desire attributes such as convenient location of practice, the availability of a
   physician answering service or other coverage at all times, an accessible and friendly demeanor
   by the physician toward his patients, good condition of facilities, and so on (Crane and Lynch
   1988; MacStravic 1987).

            While certain of these attributes may serve as indicators of the physician's technical
   skills, they are unlikely to be particularly informative signals of quality. For attributes to serve
   as quality signals, the marginal cost of producing attributes must fall the higher is physician
   quality, so that higher quality physicians would typically provide more attributes. However,
   this does not necessarily seem to be the case in this market.

            The short run is defined as a period of time during which physician supply is fixed.
       '    The time horizon is arbitrary.

                                                    6
 attributes physician i provides, A1. The physician i therefore expects to have v1N1 patient visits per

 week.

         Define s as the probability that a randomly chosen member of physician i's practice will

decide to leave that practice in any given week, and w1 as the probability that a randomly chosen

consumer who has quit another's practice wilt join physician i's practice. It is assumed that s IS

decreasing in A1, and increasing in the attributes offered by alt other physicians. Further, w1 is

increasing in A1, and decreasing in all A save for the ith physician. This leads to the equilibrium

condition:


(1)      s1N1
                =   w1_s.
                     j=1
                     j=i

Satterthwaite (1979) has shown that this equilibrium condition implies that the number of patients

physician i expects to receive, N1, is a decreasing function of his or her price. A symmetric argument

implies that N1 is increasing in attributes A1.

28.      Physician behavior

         We model physician behavior as consisting of sequential stages. In the first stage, physicians

set the level of attributes to attract patients. In the second stage, given that the attributes level is

already determined, physicians observe their patients' medical needs and decide how to treat them.

         Provision of Attributes. In deciding upon the level of attributes to provide, the physician

considers the cost of and expected return on various levels of attributes. Attributes are costly to

provide and costs are increasing in the level of attributes. The expected return from providing more

attributes is two-fold: first is the increased probability of visits (v.) per patient and second is the

expected increase in the number of patients (N.). Each additional visit that the physician provides is

valued by the physician at the rate of profits per visit, ir, that he or she expects to receive. Profits

per visit will depend positively on the price P the physician receives under Medicare. Profits will


                                                      7
also depend upon the level of treatment the physician expects to provide to patients, 1'. With new

patients arriving and some established patients leaving, the physician is uncertain in advance as to

what level of care wilt be needed. We assume that the physician bases the expected treatment level

on the treatment level currently provided to established patients)4 Thus, we may write expected

profits per visit as r = ,r(P,fl.

           Given expected profits, the representative physician'5 chooses attributes to:

(2)        max r(P,V)[v(A)N(A)] -
           (A)

           where N(A)              the perceived number of patients the physician can obtain as a
                                   function of attributes A, dN/dA>0; and

                   g(A)            costs of providing attributes, dgldA >0, and other terms are as
                                   defined above.


           Maximizing (2) with respect to A yields A as an increasing function of P." Individually,

the physician perceives that he can obtain more patients, the higher the level of attributes offered.

Since physicians are identical, they all increase attributes in response to a price increase in the same

way. Because the stock of patients is fixed, however, a higher price does not lead to a higher number

of patients treated per physician in equilibrium. in equilibrium, physicians treat an equal, fixed




          '  Since, as noted earlier, all patients are identical in our model save for their preferences
      over physician attributes, physicians' ex-ante expectations about the treatment levels required
      will equal actual treatment levels chosen ex-post.
          "
          Since all physicians are assumed to be homogeneous, subscripts denoting specific
   physicians are deleted from the remainder of the analysis for notational convenience.
          "The second order sufficiency conditions for a maximum guarantee that DA/dP >0. To
   see this, define Ti'    r(P,Tt)[v(A)N(A)] - g(A). Derive the first-order condition for
   maximizing Ti', and differentiate this expression with respect to A and P. Rearranging terms
   yields: dAJdP = -(dTT/dAdj')/(d2fl/dA2). The denominator is positive by the second order
   condition for a maximum, while d2Tr/dAdP = (dir/dP)(dv/dA)(dN/dA) > 0. Hence, dA/dP
    > 0. This formulation is similar to that of Dorfman and Steiner (1954), where attributes in
   this model plays a role similar to advertising in their model.

                                                       8
number of patients (N/M). The only effect of the price increase is to raise the equilibrium
                                                                                        level of

attributes provided.

        Since each physician is providing a level of attributes that maximizes his or her net income,

given the attributes provided by every other competitor, this is an equilbrium solution. Also,

because we assume symmetry among physicians and patients, the equilibrium will preserve such

symmetry, as Satterthwaite (1979) has noted.

        Treatment levels. Given the physician's patient load and level of attributes, physicians now

observe patient illness severity and decide how to treat them." Physicians are assumed to choose

the level of care that maximizes profits per patient visit. The level of care they choose is a function

of, among other things, the price that HCFA sets arid the guideline that AFICPR sets. Thus, the

physician's objective may be written as:

(3)     max [(P - c)T - m(T - Tt)'JvNIM,
         (1)
        where T         =       quantity of care per visit provided by the physician;

                V               quantity of care per visit prescribed by the practice guideline;

        m(T -           =       the internal costs imposed upon the physician from violating the
                                guideline;

                c       =       theconstant marginal cost of providing a unit of service, T; and
                                other terms are as defined above.




             Once physicians have obtained their patients, they may have the incentive to renege on
   the attributes they offered to entice them. To the extent that attributes take the form of capital
   investments, they may be sunk costs which cannot be recovered. Even if it were possible to
   renege on promised attributes, however, physicians depend on long term relationships with
   their patients, and value their reputations in the community. Breaking their implicit contract
   with patients to provide a certain set of attributes is unlikely to be a wise strategy, as it may
   cause them to lose patients and send a bad signal to other potential clients. Thus, we assume
   that physicians to not renege on their offered attributes cx post.

                                                   9
The first term in brackets in equation (3) is simply revenue less production cost per visit)8

Physicians receive fee-for-service payment at a rate of P per unit ofT. The second term measures

the practice costs imposed upon the physician from violating the standard. The number of patients

served is fixed in equilibrium (recall that only attributes increase with price).

            Costs to the physician that arise from deviating from the standard can come in many forms,

including psychic costs of deviating from delivering the best or most appropriate level of care,'9

increased office-related expenditures (e.g., engaging in additional recordkeeping to justify their

departures from the guidelines), increased involvement in medical malpractice litigation, and costs

of responding to managed care inquiries (e.g., filling in extra forms and talking to managed care

representatives). In addition, there may be opportunity costs incurred in the form of foregone

benefits associated with compliance, such as exemption from utilization review or other regulations.

The implications of practice guidelines for medical malpractice is a subject of growing concern

(Physician Payment Review Commission 1992).

        The solution to (3) gives the physician's profit maximizing level of services as a function of

price, practice guidelines, and other parameters:

(4)     T=         (P-c)/s + T1', where for notational convenience we define s = 2m.




       IS
         The physician also has fixed expenses in the form of providing attributes (g(A)). This
  term would merely drop out of equation (2), as fixed costs do not affect the physician's
  decision at this point. Thus, we omit such costs for ease of exposition.
       '  See McGuire and Pauty (1991) for a discussion of psychic costs associated with
  demand inducement. Coleman (1990), more generally, discusses internal sanctions that
  individuals place on themselves if they deviate from social norms.

          Evidence suggests that physicians engage in a significant amount of defensive medicine
  (Reynolds, Rizzo, and Gonzalez 1987; Institute of Medicine 1989a, 1989b). It is also
  conceivable that physicians whose practice patterns deviate substantively from guidelines may
  be subject to greater malpractice insurance premiums.

                                                    10
XL Rerrslaton' objectives
          AHCPR's objectives. AHCPR is charged with setting practice guidelines (TR) to promote

quality of care; it does so by establishing guidelines on quantity of care per visit. Increasingly,

however, the Agency is being urged to take cost considerations into account when setting the

guidelines (Garber and Wagner 1991; Physician Payment Review Commission 1992).21 Hence, we

assume that AHCPR seeks to minimize costs from providing less than the maximum quality of care

and    treatment costs per patient served. This goal may be written as:

(5)       mm T(P,Tt) - fl2 ÷ vrP,TR).
           crR)

          where     'r    =       the quantity of care that gives the maximum quality:


          T(P,TR)         =       the physician's profit maximizing I obtained from equation (4)
                                  above;

                     -    =       the social cost from providing less than
                                  the maximum quality; and

          PT              =       program costs per patient visit.                       -




          AHCPR recognizes that quality of care does not increase with quantity of T over the entire

distribution of treatment intensities. While increasing in quantity at first, beyond some point r.

quality declines as problems such as iatrogenic infections, unnecessary surgical procedures or overly




             Recently, the Physician Payment Review Commission has explicitly recommended that
      A1-ICPR pay attention to cost considerations as well as quality in guideline development:

             Practice guidelines should be constructed to help improve the value of health care by
             addressing its cost as well as quality. The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research
             (AHCPR) should give greater priority to developing practice guidelines.., that could
             potentially reduce the amount of resources spent on unnecessary medical care. AHCPR
             should specify the elements that should be incorporated in guidelines so that they can be
             used to improve both the effectiveness and the efficiency of care. All federally
             sponsored guidelines should be required to contain these elements to the greatest extent
             possible (Physician Payment Review Commission 1992).

                                                    11
invasive diagnostic tests occur. A variety of such problems have been found to be associated with

increases in delivery of care beyond a certain point (Brook and McGlynn 1991).

           Thus, T° is that level of services which maximizes quality of care. This is the gold-standard

for quality of care— the quality of care that consumers would desire if services were costless to them.

Losses to society from less than the maximum quality of care relate to detioris of T from the

quality maximizing level of care (fl. To capture these features while retaining analytical tractability,

we specify a quadratic loss function.

           As noted earlier, T represents the quantity of services per medical visit (i.e., the number of

tests, treatments, or medications). As each service is reimbursed at the rate P, PT equals cost of the

care and the charge to Medicare per visit.

           Equation (5) says that A}ICPR seeks to minimize the sum of program expenditur& and the

social costs from providing less than the maximum quality. These social costs are higher the further

away is T from T°.

          HCFA 's objectives. We assume that HCFA desires to control costs while maximizing

physician accessibility and patient satisfaction. HCFA sets the reimbursement rate, P. knowing that

attributes that patients value 'increase in P. but that costs rise as well. These objectives may be

expressed as:

(6)       mm     (P - P + PT(P,TR).
           (p)

          where P°         =      the price that elicits the utility maximizing
                                  level of attributes; and




               Since the total number of patients treated by all physicians is fixed, nothing is gained
      by multiplying (5) by the fixed number of patients treated. Without loss of generality, we may
      regard (5) as setting this number equal to 1. With M physicians treating N/M patients each.
      total program costs will be found by multiplying PT by the constant N.

                                                      12
            (P -          =     the one-sided social cost function from providing less than the
                                utility maximizing level of care.

   We refer to the expression (P - P°)1 as a one-sided loss function because only the range 0 c p <

P° is relevant: given that HCFA is concerned about cost control in addition to service quantity Pwill

always be less than P°.

        This specification, while simple, captures the essence of the tradeoff faced by HCFA.'4 In

the case of Medicare, cost containment is undeniably an important consideration. Equation (6) says

that HCPA seeks to minimize the sum of losses to patients from receiving less than the utility

maximizing level of attributes, and treatment costs. As stated above, it is the cost consciousness

guarantees that HCFA wilt always select a price below P°Y

        When price is below F, however, social costs arise because attributes fall below the utility

maximizing level, which occurs when P=P°. Moreover, the further P is below P°. the greater the

shortfall between actual and desired attributes, and the higher the social costs.




           All prices and costs are taken to be expressed in terms of some numeraire good. If we
   were to drop this assumption, the square of the difference between dollar-denominated prices
   would be in units of dollars-squared. We assume that the square of this difference is instead
   expressed in terms of a nuzneraire. Thus, P. F, and all other parameters and variables in this
   model should be thought of as pure numbers, not as dollar-denominated quantities.

             Note that this loss function does no: measure the full social costs of non-optimal
   delivery of care, however. The full social costs include losses from receiving less than the
   maximum quality (given by the expression (T(P,TR) - 'P)2 described above) as well from
   receiving less than the utility maximizing level of attributes. The term (P -p0)2 only measures
   the latter social costs, which result from UCEA's pricing decisions.

       25
              may be regarded as a 'bliss' point. Beyond this point, the marginal utility of
   attributes is zero, or even negative (negative attributes could occur with fawning physicians and
   nurses, or information overload).

                                                    13
 3.        Sobin, the model

 3L The social opthnznn

          Society is concerned about the provision of attributes, quality, and the cost of care. In the

 non-cooperative game, each agency is concerned about costs yet otherwise their goals diverge. In the

 cooperative game, agencies coordinate their behavior to minimize the sum of program costs, and

 social costs from providing less than the quality maximizing quantity of care and less than the utility

 maximizing level of attributes per patient served.

          In the cooperative case, given physician behavior described by (4), P and TR are chosen to:

(7)       mm        (P - fl + (r(P,TR) - 1')2 + PT(P,TR).
          (P,D)

Substituting from (4) for T,and minimizing with respect to P and TR gives the optimal levels for P



(8)       Y         =

(9)       1R'       = c/s   + (4s+2)r13s -(4+2s)P°/3s,
where V denotes the equilibrium price for the cooperative game and T denotes the equilibrium

guideline. Substituting (8) and (9) into (4) gives the equilibrium level of care:
(10) V = 2(21' - fl/3.
Note that positive values for V and 'r require that P°>T°/2 and T°>P°12. This we interpret as a

requirement that F and 'P are "not too far apart".1'

4.       Coordination failure

         This section compares the effects of coordination failures to the social optimum.

Coordination failure stems from non-cooperative behavior between agencies. A}-ICPR seeks to



                2    Notice that V will always be less than 1". To see this, note from equation (10)
     that T' achieves its maximum value as P° approaches its minimum permissible value, which
     must exceed 'P12. When F = 'P/2, V = 'P. For alt values of F greater than T°12, we must
     have V <'P.
                                                    14
minin'Jze (5) while HCFA seeks to minimize (6). Each agency observes the solution to the

physician's problem (4).

         In choosing price, HCFA substitutes for T from equation (4) arid then minimizes (6) with

respect to P. taking 1R as given. The solution to this minimization problem gives FICFA's price as a

function of Ta. This is HCFA's reaction function:

(11)     p = (2sP°+c)12(1+s) - sT'V2(1+s).

         In setting its guideline, AHCPR substitutes for T from (4), and then minimizes (5)with

respect to Ta, taking P as given. The solution to this problem yields AHCPR's reaction function:

(12)    TR =     c/s   +   r-   (2+s)P/2s.

        The Cournot equilibrium is found by solving (11) and (12) for P and 'P, respectively:

(13)    P° =     2s(2P°-fl/(2+3s)

(14) T= c/s + 4(1+s)T°k2+3s) - (4+2s)P°/(2+3s),
where the superscript "C0' indicates the equilibrium solution given coordination failure. Substituting

(13) and (14) into (4) gives the equilibrium actual level of care:

(15)    T<' = [(4s+2)r-2sP°]/(2+3s).

        Having derived the equilibrium levels for price, and the actual level of care provided, we are

ready to compare the implications of coordination failures for the outcomes of interest.

4A...   Prke/Altributes

        The effects of coordination failure on price and hence attributes may be found by subtracting

equation (8) from (13) yielding:

(16) r-- =             4(2P°-T°)13(2+3s)     <0.
Thus, coordination failure leads to a lower price and fewer attributes than are socially optimal. The

reason is that, under non-cooperative behavior, HCFA fails to recognize the indirect effect of price on

the attributes associated with the provision of care. HCFA chooses a lower price than is socially

optimal because it fails to recognize that a higher price increases the patient-desired attributes of care.


                                                     15
The lower price in the noncooperative case increases the social costs from providing less than the

utility-maximizing level of attributes of care.2'

4B. QygUliv
        The net effect of coordination failure on quantity of services is the difference between

equations (15) and (10):

(17)    'r--'r =     2(2P°-fl13(2+3s) >0.

Thus, with coordination failure, the quantity of services exceeds the social optimum.

        The changes in price and practice guidelines under coordination failure relative to the social

optimum exert competing influences on the actual quantity of services provided. On the one hand,

the lower price under coordination failure decreases the amount of care provided, ceteris paribus. On

the other hand, the lower price increases the need to set a high practice guideline, and in fact the

guideline under coordination failure is higher than in the cooperative case.Th The higher guideline

exerts a positive effect on actual treatment levels. The latter effect dominates, so that quantity of care

is higher in the cooperative case.

4C Oualiiv
        The implications of coordination failure for quality of care are straightforward. First, observe

that T° is always less than r. This, together with the fact that Tc > T (see equation (17)), implies

that the quantity of care is closer to r under coordination failure than under cooperation. Thus,


       '  Under cooperative behavior, the indirect effect of HCFA's pricing decision is taken into
   account: HCFA realizes that a higher price raises the profit maximizing intensity of care, as
   can be seen from equation (4). Since D is always less than r (see footnote 26), a higher price
   also raises quality of care under cooperative behavior. Thus, in the cooperative situation,
   HCFA realizes that a higher price serves the socially valuable function of lowering the social
   costs from inappropriate care. This creates an additional incentive to raise price in the
                                          -
   cooperative case.
       a Subtracting the socially optimal practice guideline (9) from the equilibrium guideline
   under coordination failure (14) and siinpliring terms yields: (4+2s)(2P°-fl/3s(2+3s) > 0
   (recall that positivity of P requires that P°> r/2— see equation (8) in the text).


                                                    16
coordination failure increases the actual quality of care received, but raises it above the social

optimum, r.

41). Qg
           Straightforward calculations yield:

(18)       Pr - PT = 4[2P°-T°][P°(4+12s) - T°(8+l5s)J/9s(2+3s)2.
Whether cost exceeds or falls short of the social optimum depends upon the ratio P°/T°: high values

of this ratio lead to excessive cost relative to the social optimum, while low values lead to the

opposite result?9 In particular, we have:

(19)       P''T° - PT > 0 as pop >        (8+15s)I(4+12s).°
                                 <

        Thus, if society desires a high level of attributes per unit of medical treatment, P°/V will be

high and coordination failure will lead to excessive expenditures. On the other hand, if attributes are

little valued, coordination failure leads to insufficient expenditure relative to the social optimum. One

interpretation of this has interesting implications. It seems likely that attributes will be much more

valued in advanced economies (FIT° will be relatively large), than in underdeveloped ones, where no

frills medical care is de rigueur. This, in turn, suggests that coordination failure may work

differently in developed and underdeveloped economies, leading to excessive health care expenditures

in the former, but insufficient spending in the latter. An interesting issue is how different reform bills



          High values of P°/T° may be considered to represent a high value placed on desirable
  attributes of care relative to medical quality of care. Thus low P'/T° may represent the 'no
  fringes' provision of health care while higher values of p°ir represent higher provision of
  attributes relative to medical quality per se.
       X      Notice that, as a becomes arbitrarily small, the range of permissible values for F/T°
  for which P'T - PT >             0 becomes. smaller and smaller. There will always be a permissible
  range for P°/T° over which ptC1c > PT, however. This is because the second order
  conditions for a social optimum require that s > 0. But s > 0 allows P"T1' > VT' for
  values of P°/T° between 1.25 and 2 (the precise cutoff point depending on the value of s),
  which is in the permissible range for P°/T°.


                                                    17
would value attributes relative to medical quality as this would, under the likely scenario of

cootdination failure, affect expectations about expense.


5.      Conclusion

        The model we have presented examines coordination failures arising when two different arms

of government implement policies designed to affect the physician services market. Coordination

failure among govenunental agencies has implications for price, attributes, quantity, quality, and cost

of care. For example, coordination failure raises the quantity and quality of service above the social

optimum, while price and patient-desired attributes of care are less than their socially optimal levels.

        Although excessive costs and treatment levels are popularly attributed to moral hazard and/or

self-interested behavior by physicians, our model traces such problems to coordination failure among

regulatory agencies as well. Thus, even if physicians were perfect agents and health insurance

contracts were to eliminate moral hazard, problems of excessive costs and an over provision of care

could persist.

        The basic approach of the model, which emphasizes social costs of coordination and

information failures, applies well to other health care markets. For example, some health care

markets— such as the market for renal dialysis— are regulated by both state and federal governments.

yielding the same sorts of issues posed here (Brown, Smith, and Sindelar 1992). Other industries to

which the insights of our approach would apply include public utilities, banking, and agriculture.

        The results of our model suggest that cooperation and information exchange among regulatory

branches should be pursued. Cooperation may be promoted through informal channels or more

format arrangements such as consolidating the activities of regulatory agencies into larger

departments. With dramatic changes in the organization and finance of health care on the horizon,

these issues may assume even greater importance.




                                                   18
References

Baron D. (1984). "Noncooperative regulation of a nonlocalized externality.' Rand Journal of
       Economics 16, 553-568.

Bernheirn B., and Whinston M. (1986). "Common agency." Econornetrica 54, 923-942.

Brook R. and McGlynn B. (1991). 'Maintaining quality of care.' In: Health Services Research:
      Key to Health Policy (B. Ginzberg. ed). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Brown B., Smith D., and Sindelar J. (1992). 'Can we regulate the quality of care?: the case of
      dialysis in Connecticut." American Journal of Kidney Disease 19, 609-613.

Coate S. (1992). 'Altruism, the samaritan's dilemma, and government transfer policy." Working
       Paper. Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

Coleman 1. (1990). Foundations of Social Theory Cambridge. MA: Harvard University Press.

Crane F. and Lynch J. (1988). 'Consumer selection of physicians and dentists: An examination of
       choice criteria and cue usage.' Journal of Health Care Marketing 8. pp. 16-19.

Dorfman, R. and Steiner, p. (1954). "Optimal advertising and optimal quality' American Economic
      Review 44, pp. 826-36.

Garber A. and Wagner 1. (1991). 'Practice guidelines and choLesterol policy.' Health Affairs 10,
       pp. 52-66.

Gulls K., Lee D., and Willke R. (1992). 'Physician-based measures of Medicare access." Inquiry
       29, pp. 321-331.
Hadley J. (1991). 'Theoretical and empirical foundations of the Resource-Based Relative Value
       Scale.' In: Regulating Doctors' Fees (H. Frech ed). Washington, DC: AEL Press, pp. 97.
        125.

Hansen L. and Stuart C. (1989). "Social security as trade among living generations.' American
      Economic Review 79, pp. 1182-1195.

Hsiao W. et al. (1988). "Resource Based Relative Values." Journal of the American Medical
       Association October 28, pp. 2347-2360.

Institute of Medicine. (1989a). Medical Professional Liability and the Delivery of Obstetrical Care,
        Volume 1. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Institute of Medicine. (1989b). Medical Professional Liability and the Delivery of
         Obstetrical Care. Volume 2. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Kotlikoff L. (1987). 'Justifying public provision of social security.' Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management 6, pp. 674-689.



                                                  19
References, cont.

MacSuavic R. (1987). "Manageable evidence in medical care marketing." Journal of Health Care
        Marketing 4, pp. 52-59.

McGuire, T. and Pauly M. "Physician response to fee changes with multiple payers" I. of Health
       Economics 10, 1991, pp. 385-410.

Noll R. (1991). "On regulating prices for physicians.' In: Regulatin2 Doctors' Fees (H. Frech ed).
       Washington, DC: AET Press, pp. 381-386.

Physician Payment Review Commission. (1992). Annual Report to Congress. Washington, DC.

Reynolds R., Rizzo I., and Gonzalez M. (1987). "The cost of medical professional liability.'
      Journal of the American Medical Association 257, pp. 2776-2781.

Satterthwaite M. (1979). "Consumer information, equilibrium industry price, and the number of
        sellers." Bell Journal of Economics 10, pp. 483-502.

Satterthwaite M. (1985). 'Competition and equilibrium as a driving force in the health services
        sector," pp. 239-267. In: Managing the Service Economy: Prosects and Problems (R.
        Imnan, ed). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Veall M. (1986). "Public pensions as optimal social contracts." Journal of Public Economics 31,
       237-251.

Zuckerman S. and Holahan I. "The role of balance billing in Medicare physician payment reform."
      In: ReEulating Doctors' Fees (H. Fredi ed). Washington, DC: AEI Press, pp. 143-169.




                                                20
