                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         YOUNG WORKERS, OLD WORKERS,
                              AND CONVERGENCE




                                      Michael Kremer
                                       Jim Thomson




                                  Working Paper No. 4827




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  August 1994




We thank Robert Barro, Jess Benhabib, Olivier Blanchard, Greg Mankiw, Kiminori Matsuyama,
and Nancy Stokey for helpful comments. This paper is part of NBER's research programin
Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Michael Kremer and Jim Thomson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4827
                                                                               August 1994

                           YOUNG WORKERS, OLD WORKERS,
                                AND CONVERGENCE


                                         ABSTRACT


       The human capital of young and old workers are imperfect substitutes both in production

and in on-the-job training. This helps explain why capital does not flow from rich to poor

countries, causing instantaneous convergence of per capita output If each generation chooses

its human capital optimally given that of the previous and succeeding generations, human capital

follows a unique rational-expectations path. For moderate substitutability, human capital within

each sector oscillates relative to that in other sectors, but aggregate human capital converges to

the steady state monotoriically, at rates consistent with those observed empirically.




Michael Kremer                                              Jim Thomson
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
M.I.T.                                                      University of Melbourne
E52-251C                                                    Parkville 3052
Cambridge, MA 02139                                         AUSTRALIA
and NBER
                                                                    1


1. Introduction


        In this paper, we examine how the optimal level of human
capital for each generation depends on the human capital of the
previous and succeeding generations. For a moderate degree of
substitutability between the human capital of young and old,

human    capital   within each sector of the economy oscillates

relative to that in other sectors. Aggregate human capital,
however, converges monotonically to the steady state, at rates

consistent with those observed empirically by Barro and Sala-i-
Martin [1992a] and DowriCk and Nguyen (1989]. Iierfect
substitutability between the human capital of young and old

workers can thus help explain why per capita output does not
converge instantaneously, as predicted by the open-economy,

neoclassical growth model.
        The human capital of young and old workers are likely to be

imperfect substitutes in production because young and old workers
have comparative advantages in different, complementarY tasks.

Thus young workers are computer programmers. production line
workers, and football players, whereas'old workers are managers,
foremen, and football coaches. In general, managers are likely
to be older due to a need for experience, the ability to command

respect from younger workers, and gradual learning about manager

quality.   The human capital of young and old workers are also

likely to be imperfect substitutes in training new workers.


                                                  July   27. 1994
Convergence
                                                                  2

Formal education may prepare people to learn the specific skills
required in production that are actually taught through on-the-

job training by older workers. Hence people with more formal
education also receive more on-the—job training. Lawyers and

doctors, for example, generally obtain extensive formal education
and on-the—job training, whereas gas-station attendants usually
obtain little of either.
       Empirical evidence supports the view that the human capital

of young and old workers are imperfect substitutes. At the macro
level, Murphy and Welch (1992] find that an increase in the

number of young college—educated workers in the U.S. has either a
small negative or a positive effect on the wage of old college-

educated workers.     At the micro-level, Pierce [1990] finds that

an increase in the number of young lawyers has a positive
(although not statistically significant) effect on the wages of
old lawyers. While these estimates must be treated with caution

given the short length of available time-series and the possible
presence of other confounding factors, the differing movements of
returns to young and old human capital provides evidence that

they cannot be perfect substitutes. Prom 1979 to 1987, for
example, the wage differential between U.S. high school and
college graduates increased by 31 percent among young workers,

but by only 5 percent among old workers (Katz and Murphy, 1992].'

                                                           in
        An alternative explanation of the small movements
        1

education differentials for older workers is provided  by the
                                                    (continued...)

                                               July 27. 1994
 convergence
                                                                    3


Similarly, Goldin and Margo (19921 find that the increase in the

supply of young educated workers in the 1940s reduced their
relative wage much more than that of old educated workers.

      We take this imperfect substitutabilitY between young and
old human as given and explore how it affects the dynamic path of

human   capital.   Since each generatiOflS optimal level of human

capital depends on that of the previous and succeeding

generations. the rational_expectations path of human capital
satisfies a second—order difference equation.
                                               Assuming there are

decreasing returns to accumulable factors, this path will be

unique and will converge to a steady state. We argue that for a
moderate degree of complementaritY between young arid old human

capital, the path of aggregate human capital will converge
rnonotoriicallY to the steady state, but that human capital in each
                                        relative to that in other
sector of the economy will oscillate

sectors.
        This contrast arises because increases in old human capital
within sri individual sector will tend to reduce the price of that
sector's output and thus reduce the return to young human

capital in that sector. For example, if there are more old
                                 services will increase, and this
doctors, total output of medical
                                     services, causing the wage
will drive down the price of medical


          .continued)                        (19751, in which
 'active labor market" hypothesis of Freeman
 older workers are insulated from labor market changes by unions,
 seniority rules, and firm-specific human capital.

                                                July 27. 1994
 cor,vergence
                                                                    4

for competing young doctors to fall. Thus, within an individual
sector, the optimal amount of human capital for any generation is

likely to fall with the human capital of the previous and
succeeding generations. As Pierce [1990] has pointed out, this
will tend to generate cycles in the level of human capital within

particular sectors. (Freeman [1975a, 1975b, 1976] argues that
the behavior of human capital in law, physics, and engineering is
consistent with cycles, though he interprets this in terms of a
cobweb model, rather than in terms of a rational—expectations

model.)
      This effect does not arise at the level of the aggregate
economy, however, since an increase in old human capital spread

across sectors, rather than concentrated in a particular sector,

will not reduce the relative price of any good. If young and old
human capital are complements in production, higher aggregate
human capital of the previous and succeeding generations will
increase the incentive for the current generation to accumulate
human capital. The better the professors in the last generation,
the greater the incentive to become a research assistant, and the
better the next generation of research assistants, the greater
the incentive to become a professor. We show that this
complementarity implies that aggregate human capital will

converge to the steady state monotonically.
       The model can thus help explain why per capita output does
not converge immediately, as predicted by the standard open-


Convergence                                   July   27.   1994
                                                                   5

economy, neoclassical model. Under the standard neoclassical
model, capital would flow instantaneously from rich countries,

where its marginal product is low, to poor countries, where its
marginal product is high. Under imperfect substitutability,
however, convergence is not immediate because it is not optimal
to invest too heavily in young human capital or physical capital
given a fixed supply of old human capital. Thus, for example,
Kenya would not wish to suddenly train thousands of chemical
engineers because fresh-minted chemical engineers would have low
productivity without supervision from more experienced engineer-
managers. Imperfect substitutability can be interpreted as
slowing convergence by creating a form of adjustment cost in
human capital, since under imperfect substitutability total

output depends positively on each generations human capital, but
negatively on the change in human capital between generations.
As Alwyn Young has suggested in comments on Barro, Mankiw, and

Sala-i-Martin [1992a], adjustment costs in human capital may help
explain slow convergence.
       This approach to explaining slow convergence can be
contrasted with that of Cohen and Sachs [1986] and Barro, Mankiw,
and Sala-i-Nartin [1992], who explain the failure of per capita

output to converge instantaneously through capital-market
imperfections that make countries behave like closed economies.
In their models, some share of investment has to be financed from

domestic saving, so consumption smoothing causes gradual


convergence                                   July 27,   1994
                                                                           6

convergence     to the steady state, just as in the closed—economy,

neoclassical model. Capital market imperfections certainly exist
and slow convergence. However, they do not seem sufficient to
explain the huge income differences between rich and poor
countries. Under the neoclassical model these differences would
imply large differences in the marginal product of capital, and
it is not clear why mechanisms would not develop to allow greater
capital flows. In 1913, 48% of Argentina's capital stock and 20%
of Australia's capital stock were foreign owned [Taylor, 1992),
suggesting that capital-market institutions capable of handling

large flows can arise given sufficient incentives. In contrast,
Indian external debt constituted less than 10% of its capital

stock in 1988.       It. seems unlikely that Haiti's per capita output
would converge instantaneously to that of the U.S. if Haiti

adopted U.S. law, giving it the same steady-state income as the

U.S., and the U.S. Marine Corps enforced debt contracts. Per
capita output was not equalized between countries in the days
when loan contracts were enforced by gunboats,           and   Puerto Rico's

output    per   capita   remains   substantially below that of the rest of

the U.S., despite substantial fiscal transfers.
       This paper is related to previous work. Benhabib and
Rustichini [1991] discuss how non-exponential depreciation can
lead to cycles in investment, as capital is periodically
replaced. Pierce [1990] examines the impact of imperfect
substitutability between the human          capital   of young and old


Convergence                                            July 27. 1994
                                                                    7

lawyers on the decision to obtain legal education. He estimates

that young and old lawyers are poor substitutes, with an
elasticity of substitution of about 0.25, and develops a
rational-expectations model of cycles in the acquisition of human

capital in law.    We differ from Benhabib and Rustichini in

allowing for complementarity between differed vintages of capital

and from Pierce in using a general—equilibrium analysis to
examine the path of economy—wide, as well as sectoral, human
capital. In particular, we argue that there may be cycles in
human capital within sectors, and gradual convergence of

aggregate human capital.
      This paper also follows Chari and Hopenhayn [19911, who show

that diffusion of technology will be gradual when there is

complementaritY between experienced and inexperienced workers in
each technology. They solve for the steady-state distribution of
workers across various vintages of technology. This paper, on
the other hand, focuses on the dynamic path of investment in
human capital outside the steady state, and on the determinants
of the speed of convergence to the steady state. In fact,
transition periods of several generations seem more relevant to

the process by which poor countries become rich than to the
diffusion of a particular new technology within an advanced

country.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.     In

section two, we present a basic, aggregate model with imperfect


                                               July 27, 1994
Canverqence
                                                                  8

substitutability between the human capital of young and old
workers in production. In section three, we examine the movement
of human capital at the sectoral level, and in section four we

integrate aggregate and sectoral dynamics. In these sections, we
identify the parameter values for which there will be cycles in

human capital at the sectoral level, and monotoniC convergence to
the steady state at the aggregate level. In section five, we
argue that, for reasonable parameter values, imperfect
substitutability of young and old human capital can generate
convergence at speeds consistent with those empirically observed

by Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992a) and Dowrick and Nguyen [1989].
Section six concludes with a discussion of implications for
investment in human capital, focusing on the case of African
countries which have rapidly expanded human capital from a low

base.



2. Aggregate Dynamics


        In this section, we investigate the path of aggregate human
capital in a simple model in which young and old human capital
are imperfect substitutes in production. We show that if there
is complementarity between young and old human capital in the

sense that an increase in the supply of old human capital will
cause an increase in the wage of young human capital, holding
constant the quantities (rather than prices) of other factors,


                                               July 27, 1994
Convergence
                                                                     9

then there will be monotonic convergence of aggregate human
capital, whereas if there is substitutability, there will be
gradually dampening oscillations. This section thus follows the
work of Pierce [1990]. In the next section, we show that, if

there is sufficient complementarity between goods in consumption,
there will be cycles in human capital in individual sectors, even

though there is monotonic convergence of aggregate human capital.


2.3. The Coznpetitive-Equilibriufll Path of E,,mn Capital



       Consider a small, open economy with a large number of

sectors, each containing a large number of perfectly—competitive
firms producing a single, non-storable good. There are a large
number of identical workers, each of whom lives for two periods

and supplies one unit of labor in each period.
       Assume that production in period t depends on three inputs:

human capital of the young (those born in period t); human
capital of the old (those born in period t-1); and a third factor
that is in fixed supply for the economy as a whole, and which
might represent land or raw labor.2 We normalize the supply of
the fixed factor to one. Technology is characterized by the




       When we calibrate the model in section five, we allow for
       2

physical capital, technological progress, and population growth.

Convergence                                    July 27, 1994
                                                                  10

constant returns-to-scale production function:



                           =
                               f(H,H_,L)   ,                    (1)

where Y is aggregate production, }L is young human capital used
in period t, H1 is old human capital used in period t (as well
as young human capital in period t-1), and L=l is the quantity
of the fixed factor. We assume that f has continuous second
derivatives, and that output is increasing and concave in human

capital (f1>0, f2>0, f11<0, f22<0, and f11f—f132>0) arid in the fixed
factor. As we shall see below, the cross-partial derivative of
the production function with respect to young and old human

capital (f) is a key quantity, and its sign determines whether
the path of aggregate human capital is monotonic or exhibits

oscillations.
       The supply of human capital is chosen by workers given the
expected returns to investment in human capital. While
imperfections in international capital markets certainly exist,
we shall abstract from them in order to focus on the effect of
imperfect substitutability in slowing convergence. Hence we
assume that workers can borrow to finance human capital




Convergerce                                    July 37. 1994
                                                                  11

investment at a fixed world interest rate, r,3 subject to a no—
Ponzi-game constraint.4 Workers have perfect foresight; each
worker chooses a level of human-capital investment when young,

and this determines the human capital he supplies in both periods
of his life.5 In equilibrium, the discounted return to human-


        We have assumed that human capital is financed by
borrowing on international capital markets subject to a no—Ponzi—
game constraint. Assuming altruistic links between generations,
the old could finance the education of the young in the steady
state. Out of the steady state, when intercountry borrowing is
reQuired, a generation in a less developed country, when young
could borrow from the old of a more developed country, and then,
when they were old, repay the loans to the lenders children. We
might, alternatively, suppose that each generation lives for
three periods, borrowing to acquire education as "children", and
repaying loans when young. This would add an additional interest
rate term to equation (2), but otherwise leave our model
unchanged.
        Every country will be subject to this no-Ponzi-game
constraint because countries that have converged to steady-state
levels will be prepared to lend only finite amounts, and any
country that had unbounded growth would need to be a net
borrower. The presence of the fixed factor implies that if human
capital grows faster than the interest rate, then human-capital
investment will eventually exceed current output and borrowing
must also eventually grow faster than the interest rate.
Therefore, the discounted value of human capital must also be
non-positive in the limit as t goes to infinity. If utility were
concave, and many countries were below the steady—state level of
human capital, then we would expect those countries that had
already converged or that were closest to the steady state to be
net lenders, and those countries that were farthest from the
steady state to be net borrowers. The interest rate would be
above the level implied by the intertemporal discount rate of
households, and would fall as the countries of the world
approached their steady states. Here we focus on the simple case
of a small country facing a constant world interest rate.
     5We assume that workers that workers can invest in education
only when young. However, even without this assumption, workers
would ordinarily choose to do all their investment when young in
any case, so that they could reap the benefits in both periods of
their life rather than only in the second period of their life.

Convergence                                  July 21, 1994
                                                                   12

capital investment must equal   the   cost, which we normalize to one

unit of output. That is:

                                                                 (2)



where q arid q are the wages paid to young and old human capital,
and 6 is the value of one dollar one period ahead, which in turn
equals 1I(l+r), where r is the world interest rate. The return

on human  capital when young, plus the discounted return on human
capital when old, must equal one, the marginal cost of human
capital investment.
     Since agents can borrow in perfect capital markets, it is
unnecessary to consider agents intertemporal preferences in
analyzing production. They simply maximize the value of wages
minus education costs, discounted at the world interest rate, and
then allocate consumption over time based on their own
intertemporal preferences.
     Profit maximization and free entry imply that each factor
will be paid its marginal revenue product. Thus the equilibrium
condition for human capital investment can be rewritten as the

second-order difference equation:

               at          1) +       at        1)    1          (3)




That is, the marginal revenue product of education when young,
plus the discounted marginal revenue product when old, must equal

convergence                                      July 27, 1994
                                                                             13

one, the cost of education. This second—order difference
equation defines the path of aggregate human        capital.         The unique

steady-state level of human capital is the value, 2,            that    solves

                                                                           (4)
                        f1(H,H,1)+ôf2(H,H,l)l.


2.2   Equivalence to the Social Plaxiners Problem


      The path of human capital in the decentralized economy will

be the same as that chosen by a social planner. To see this,
note that a social planner seeking at time t to maximize the
present discounted value of output net of the cost of education

will choose values of H, H.1, H.2, ...       , to   solve:


                     MAX E    [f      H__1, 1) —         ..
                                                                           ()
subject       to a no-Porizi-game condition on the economys borrowing

from the rest of the world.
       Since the social planner's problem is concave, the first-
order conditions are necessary and sufficient for a maximum,

given the no-Ponzi-game condition, and the maximum will be
unique. The first-order conditions are the same as those given

by equation (3) and the no-Ponzi-game condition on the social
planner is equivalent to the no-Ponzi—game condition on each
agents' borrowing in the competitive equilibrium.             Thus the

competitive_equilibrium outcome and the solution to the social


                                                     July 27. 1994
Convergence
                                                                             14

planners problem are identical; for any positive initial level
of human capital of the old, there will be a unique path of

aggregate human capital, and along this path, aggregate human

capital will converge to its steady-state level.'


2.3 MonotofliC versus Oscillatory Convergence


       The path of aggregate human capital converges inoriotonically

or exhibits damped oscillations depending on the sign of the
cross-partial derivative, f, that is, on the degree of
complementarity between young and old human capital in
production. Further, since output is strictly monotonically
increasing in the levels of both old and young human capital,

income will show the same pattern of convergence as human

capital.


Proooition 1: If f, > 0, then      aggregate   human   capital      converges

monotonically to the steady state; if f12 < 0, then         the    path of

aggregate human capital exhibits daxred oscillations.7



     6
       We thank Kiminori Matsuyama for suggesting this approach
to the proof of uniqueness.
        Whether human capital converges monotonically or exhibits
damped oscillations depends on the sign of f12 for levels of human
capital on the equilibrium path: it is a sufficient, but not a
necessary, condition that f12 has the same sign for all possible
levels of human capital. As we note below, for the CES
production function, f13 does have the same sign for all levels of
human capital.

Com'.xg.zc.                                       ItalY 27, 1994
                                                                           15



Proof:8        The social planners problem can be rewritten as9
                    v(H1)      MAX
                                     [f(x.   H, 1) —x+ôv(x)]s             (6)


             where v(H1) is the present discounted value of future
        output net of the cost of investment in human capital. If
                                        — x, then g(,) has
        we define g(x,H1) E f(x,H..1,1)
        continuous second derivatives, is strictly concave, and is
        strictly increasing in H. Thus, v()is continuously
        differentiable, strictly increasing, and        strictly
                                                          concave.'0
                                                    maximization
             Now, the first-order condition for the
        problem is g,(H,H.,)+6V'(H)O. and in the steady-state,
        g,(ILH)+6V'(H)O. Both g and v are concave, so g,, and v' are
        negative.
             Thus, if g,2>O, then a higher value of H, implies a
                                      — H4 and          H>1.
        higher value of H, and H,<H
        Conversely, if g,<O, then a higher value of     implies a
        lower value of H, and     ,<R   H.>II and H.>1 H.4. Thus,
        if g,2(H,H1)>O for all t, then H converges  monotonically to
        IL and if g12(H,H,)<O for all t, then Hwill converge
                                                 exhibits damped
        oscillations about 1LU  Since  g,2f,,, H
        monotonicallY  if f, is positive, and H will exhibit damped
        oscillations if f,2 is negative.     I



     Note that the production function can be interpreted as
incorporating a form of adjustment cost. It canbe rewritten in


        8
             We thank Jess Benhabib for suggestions on this proof.

             See Stokey and Lucas [1989], section 4.1.
        '°See Stokey and Lucas [1989], TheoremS 4.11, 4.7, and 4.8.

              To show monotonic convergence, we need toWeshow that if
        ''

                   for all t and        then              know  that
             Suppose that         Then because the social  planner's
H>iI.
problem is        recursive,            and by induction,
             That is, if             then the sequence of values of H would
not converge. By an  analogous argument, if H,<H, then H.,<H<H.
Thus, convergence must be monotofliC. For the case in which
g,2(H,Hj)<O for all t, we can use a similar argument to show
that H,1 is closer than H, to IL so that oscillations are damped
all along the equilibrium path

 Converge!We
                                                        July   27. 1994
                                                                            16
 terms of young human capital in the current period, H., and          the
 change in human capital between cohorts,                        as
 f(Hr,H,.Ht,l) .    In   the absence of adjustment costs, young human
 capital in period t would jump to the steady-state level (a),          the
 level at which the marginal benefit from an extra unit of young
 human capital in period t equals the marginal cost of acquiring
 human capital. With adjustment costs, the marginal benefits and
 costs would no longer be equal for the steady—state level of
 human capital. For example, if f12>O and H4 (so that AH>O),
 then f1 would be lower than if H.1=L and the marginal benefit of
young human capital would be less than the cost. Equilibrium
would thus imply a value of H below the steady-state level of

human capital. Conversely, if f12<O, then f1 would be higher than
if H=f, and equilibrium would imply a value of H above the
steady-state level of human capital.

        An example of a production function with the properties we
have assumed is one that is Cobb-Douglas in the fixed factor and
in a CES aggregate of young and old human capital:12


              1(H,H1,LC)   =A[aH +
where p. the reciprocal of the elasticity of substitution,
represents the degree of complernentarity between the human
capital of the young and that of the old. When p=O, they are



     12 We assume that A is large enough to make production
worthwhile.

Convergence                                      July   27.   1994
                                                                  17

perfect substitutes. Taking the limit as p -.1 gives the Cobb-

Douglas case, and taking the limit as p      gives a L.eontief

production function in young and old human capital (that is, they

are perfect complements)
      For this CES production function, the cross-partial

derivative is given by:

                                                                 (8)
               f12(H,H1,1)

and has the same sign as p-l+O. Thus, if p >(l-O), the share of
the fixed factor, then convergence to the steady state will be
monotonic. If the initial level of human capital is less than

the steady-state level, human capital is monotonical]-y

increasing.'3 If p = 0, so young and old human capital are
perfect substitutes, there will be cycles in human capital.      If p

=   1, so the production function is Cobb-Douglas jIl young and old
human capital, there will be monotonic convergence. Young and
old human capital are complements within the human capital
aggregate, but they are substitutes in that they compete to work
with the fixed factor. Thus, the more important the fixed factor



       '   the case of a CES production function, it can also be
              In
shown that the growth rate is monotonically decreasing. This
means that if human capital starts out below its steady-state
level, it will increase generation by generation gradually
getting closer to the steady-state level, but the rate of
increase in human capital will slow over time as the steady—state
level is approached. Conversely, if the initial level of human
capital is greater than the steady-state level, human capital
monotonically decreases, and the growth rate inonotoniCallY
increases.

Convergence
                                               July   27, 1994
                                                                 18

(the larger 1-0), the more likely young and old human capital are
substitutes and the path of human capital exhibits oscillations.



3.   Inerfect substitutability Between Young   and Old U"n
Capital in production: Sectoral Dynamics


      In this section we consider the behavior of human capital at
the sectoral level. We show that human capital within each
sector may cycle relative to that in other sectors even for

parameter values that generate monotonic convergence in aggregate
human capital. In the next section, we integrate aggregate and
sectoral dynamics and show that, for a moderate degree of
substitutability, human capital in individual sectors will cycle

about a monotonically converging path of aggregate human capital,

at least close to the steady state.
      Consider a small, open economy with a large number of
sectors, each containing a large number of perfectly—competitive
firms producing a single, non-storable good. We assume that
human capital is sector-specific, and we normalize both the
aggregate supply of the fixed factor and the number of sectors to
one.'4 Technology is identical across firms and sectors and is

characterized by the constant returns-to—scale production

function:



     14
        We can think of there being a continuum of sectors
indexed on the closed interval (0,11.
                                               July 27, 1994
Convergence
                                                                                 19


                        Yj,
                              =
                                  f(h,,,hj._111j,)     ,                    (9)


where y is production of good j, h is young human capital
used by sector j in period t, h1 is old human capital used by
sector j in period t, and            is the cuantity of the fixed factor

used by sector j. We assume that f has the same properties as in

section two.
        Suppose that agents instantaneous preferences over the
output of the various sectors are identical and have the Cobb-

Douglas form:

                         1og(u)          ].og(cj,) ,                       (10)

where         is consumption of the good produced by sector j.             (We

present below results for the more general case of a CES utility
function, which allows for an arbitrary degree of complementarity
between goods.) Given this Cobb-Douglas utility function, we can
measure aggregate output, Y, in terms of a Cobb-Douglas index of

output in individual sectors:

                         1og(Y) =log(yj,) .                                (11)

We can think of this index as measuring output in terms of a

composite good.
        As in the case of aggregate human capital in the previous
section, the path of human capital in each sector in the
decentralized economy will be the same as that chosen by a social


Convergence                                                July 27, 1994
                                                                           20

planner.15      16
                     The social planner will choose values of h,,,. to
maximize the present discounted value of output net of the cost

of education, that is, to solve:


        MAX
                                                                —        (12)




ll
subject        to a sequence of constraints on the fixed factor, L

          for s=O, 1, 2, ...      , and   a no—Ponzi—game condition on the

economy's borrowing from the rest of the world.
       The first-order condition for the social planner's problem

is:


                         _____ ____ + 6           "1     = 1.            (13)
                                                 Yj,.i


This implicitly defines              the path of human capital in sector

j, given aggregate output (Ye) and the amount of the fixed factor

in sector j.
       Since the social planner's problem is concave, the first—
order conditions are necessary and sufficient for a maximum,

given the no-Ponzi-game condition, and the maximum is unique.
For any positive initial level and distribution of human capital


     ' Strictly, this is true up to a subset of sectors of
measure zero, but this of technical, rather than economic,
relevance.
        The argument is the same as in the previous section: the
first-order conditions for the social planner's problem are the
same as the human_capital-investment equilibrium condition in each
                                                               the
competitive economy, and the no-Ponzi-galfle conditions facing
agent are equivalent to the one facing the social planner.

convergo7lce                                             JUlY 27, 1994
                                                                                      21

of the old, there will be unique paths of human capital in each

sector, and along these paths, sectoral human capital will

converge to the steady-state level.
      Under the assumptions that preferences are Cobb-Douglas
across goods, and the production function has the CES form,

                                                                                    (14)
       f (h, , h,          i, )   =   A [ahjt +    iji.1.j 4 .zJ°,
and is the same in all sectors, whether human capital in each
sector oscillates relative to other sectors depends on the sign

of f12 —      f1f2/f.

Pr090sition 2: If the sign               of   f12-f1f2/f is the same    for   all

values of young and         old   human    capital,    then a sector that uses

more human       capital   of generation t-l than          another   sector will

also use more hurna.n       capital      of generation t if f12-ff2/f>O; and           a
sector     that uses more human          capital   of generation t-l will use

less human       capital   of generation t if f1,-f1f2/f<O.


Proof: With Cobb-Douglas preferences and the CES production
     function, demand for the fixed factor is independent of the
     level of human capital in the sector,'7 and we can follow the
     same approach as in the proof of Proposition 1. The social
     planners problem for sector k, given the path of aggregate
     output, can be written as:




     ' This result does not hold for all production functions
that exhibit constant returns-to-scale in young and old human
capital and the fixed factor.

convergence                                                   July 27. 1994
                                                                           22


                                                                      (15)
           vk,t(hk,t1)

      where Yk   fi (x, hk   1) and the time subscript on the value
      function  indicates    that  it is conditional on the path of
      aggregate  output    from the current generation forward.1' The
      first-order condition for the maximization problem is:

                                               —l+ö+(hkt) = 0.           (16)
                            f(hk,' hkt—1' 1)

      If the derivative of the term f1Y/f-l with respect to hkt..j
      is positive, then lowering hkt..1 while holding hkt fixed
      would make the left-hand side of the equation less than 0.
             the left-hand side is decreasing in hkt, this implies
      that a sector with less human capital of generation t-l
      Since
      would also have less human capital of generation t. with
      Conversely, if the derivative is negative, a sector
      less human capital of generation t-l will have more human
      capital of generation t. Now, the derivative is
                     so its sign is determined by the sign of f12—
      flf2/f.         I

      If the amount of young human capital demanded          by each sector
is increasing in the amount of       old human   capital   used by the

sector, then a sector that has higher human capital relative to
another sector in one period will have higher human           capital in
the   next and all subsequent periods. As in the aggregate case,

demand for young human      capital is influenced by the amount of         old

human capital through the degree of complementarity between young

arid old human capital     in   production, which is reflected by f.

              Since each sector's demand for   labor is    independent of
its level of human capital in this case, and the number of
sectors is normalized to one, each sector's use of labor must              be
l=l.
convergence
                                                     Ji1y 27, 1994
                                                                                 23

However, at the sectoral level, demand for young human                 capital   is

also influenced by the amount of old human capital through its

effect on the price of the sector's output, which is reflected by

—flf2/f.

       Thus,       if f12-f1f2/f is positive, then the rank order of human

capital across sectors will be preserved over time. If, on the
other hand, f-f1f2/f is negative, then the rank order of human
capital across sectors will be reversed each period.1' Thus, like
Pierce [1990], we find possible cycles at the sectoral level. If
human capital is high in generation t-1 and young and old human
capital are substitutes, then generation t has little incentive
to accumulate human capital. But, if generation t chooses low
human capital, that will provide generation ti-i with an incentive

to choose high human capital, and a new cycle will begin. For
example, a large number of people entered academics after World
War II, so few people entered in subsequent decades. Now that a
large number of professors are retiring, more people are again
entering academics. In the case of a tradable good, these
dynamics will take place at the level of the world economy,
whereas in the case of non-tradable goods they will take place
within each national economy.
       Note that for the CES production function, f-f1f2/f has the
same sign as p-l. Thus, if the degree of complexnentarity between



       "      If
           f12-f1f2/f equals zero, then after the initial period,
human capital will become identical across sectors.

convergence                                          July 27.   1994
                                                                   24

young and old human capital is greater than one, then the rank
order of human capital across sectors will be preserved, and if
the degree of complementaritY is less than one, the rank order

will be reversed each period.
      Table 1 summarizes the behavior of sectoral and aggregate
human capital for various values of p, the degree of
complementaritY between young and old human capital, relative to

0, the share of capital.
Table 1. Sectoral and Aggregate 1DynaiicB for Cobb-Douglaa
Preferences

                           Sectoral Dynamics   Aggregate Dynamics

 p < 1-0                     oscillations         oscillations

 1-0 < p      <   i          oscillations           monotonic
                                                   convergence

 p > 1                         monotorliC           monotoniC
                              convergence          convergence



       For a more general, CES utility function of the form


                                    C•l,                         (17)



where ti measures the degree of complementarity between goods in
consumption, the rank order of human capital across sectors will
be reversed if p<r/(6+T(l-0)). Thus, rank reversal is more

likely if goods are close complements in consumption (i is



                                               July 27, 1994
convergence
                                                                       25

high) •20 When good j is a close complement for other goods (t         is
high), production of good j will move closely with the path of
aggregate production so that a relatively low level of human
capital in sector j in one generation will be followed by a high
level of human capital relative to other sectors in the next

generation.21
      Our results should not be taken to imply that human capital
either converges monotonically in every sector, or oscillates in

every sector. Most sectors goods may be reasonably close

substitutes (TI   low),   and young and old human capital may be

complementary for most sectors (p       relatively    high), so that

human capital converges moriotonically in these sectors, but human

capital may exhibit oscillations in those sectors in which young

and old human capital are less complementary, or whose output is
strongly complementary with other goods in the economy.
       Table 2 summarizes the behavior of sectoral and aggregate

human capital for various values of p      in   the case of general CES



     20 This can be shown using the same approach as in the proof
of Proposition 2. With non—Cobb-Douglas preferences, however,
the use of the fixed factor by a sector depends on the level of
human capital in the sector, so it is necessary to solve for the
use of the fixed factor in terms of human capital and the wage to
the fixed factor. Details are available from the authors.
     21 The condition for damped oscillations can be met only if
p<l/(l-O), that is if young and old human capital are
sufficiently close substitutes in production of good j. If they
are very close complements, then each generation will choose a
level of human capital close to that of the previous generation,
even if that level is considerably different from the levels of
human capital in other sectors.

Convergence                                          July 27, 1994
                                                                            26

preferences between goods with degree of complementarity indexed

by r.



Table 2. Sectora]. and Aggregate Dynamics      for   CES Utility

                             < pO/(l—p(l—O)]          > pO/[l—p(l-O}]

   p < 1-0                Sector: monotonic              Sector:
                             Aggregate:               oscillations
                             oscillations              Aggregate:
                                                      oscillations

 p > i-0                  Sector: monotonic             Sector:
                              Aggregate:              oscillations
                               monotonic              Aggregate:
                                                       monotonic



        We do not know the values of the parameters, but the absence
of cycles at the aggregate level indicates that p is greater that

1-0.     Evidence of cycles within at least some sectors from
Freeman [l975a, l975b, 1976] suggests that t is greater
than pO/[l-p(l-0)] in those sectors.


4. Integrated Sectoral and Aggregate Dynamics Near the Steady-
State


        It is possible to analyze sectoral and   aggregate       dynamics
simultaneously by linearizing around the steady state. We
consider the case of the CES production function and begin by
aggregating across sectors and examining the equilibrium path of


convergence                                      July 27. 1994
                                                                                                 27

human capital for the economy as a whole.                Then we show that the

paths of sectoral human capital can be interpreted as movements

about the path of aggregate human capital.
       The equilibrium condition for human capital in each sector,

given aggregate output at t and t+1, is given by equation (13).

If we use the definition of the aggregate output index in
equation (11), and take a first-order Taylor series approximation
of this first-order condition, we get a linear second-order

difference equation in F and ftc, the deviations of sectoral and
aggregate human capital from their steady-state levels:

                                                                                              (1.8)
                                      +                                              =   0,

where

                              cgec   aP (1÷ô) + (2+26)                                        (19)
                                          6(p—l)
and                 (a2+6Z)/(ap6). Summing over sectors eliminates the
      Cg
terms in F1, the sectoral deviations, and gives a difference
equation that defines the path of deviations of aggregate human
capital from the steady-state level:


               ft   .1 — [ ap (1+6)
                          [
                                    + (a2+26) (1—0) ft
                                 a6(p—1+0)
                                                          +
                                                              6'
                                                              .2.ft              a            (20)

        Since        this is a second-order, linear—homogeneous difference
equation, its solution has the form B1(A1) + B2(A2)t, where A1                                 and

A2   are   the roots of the corresponding characteristic equation

and B1     and      B2   are constants determined by the initial value of

                                                              July    27, 1994
 Convergence
                                                                             28

aggregate human capital and the condition that human capital must

converge to its steady-state level. The product of the roots is

the coefficient on         that   is, 1/8 >   1.   Thus the two roots

have the same sign, and one root (A2, say) will be greater than
one in absolute value. Convergence requires that A1 is less than
one in absolute value, and that the coefficient on the other root

(B2)   is   zero. The sum of the roots is the negative of the
coefficient on f. Thus, A1 will be positive if the term in
square brackets in (20) is positive. That is, as we found
before, convergence of aggregate human capital will be monotoniC
if p>l-O. Conversely, human capital will exhibit damped
oscillations about its steady-state level if p<l-O.
       Substituting the solution for the path of aggregate human

capital (B1A1t) back into equation (18) gives a second-order
difference equation in deviations of sectoral human—capital from

the steady-state level:


                                   +                              =   a.   (21)


This has solution          bAt    + B1A1t, where A, is the smaller root

in absolute value of the characteristic equation corresponding to
the left-hand side of equation (21), b is determined by the
initial level of human capital in sector j relative to aggregate

human capital, and b = 0.          Thus, close to the steady state,

the path of human capital in any sector is equivalent to the sum

of two terms; one in A1 representing the path of the aggregate

convergence
                                                     July 27,   l94
                                                                       29

economy; and one in A representing the path of the individual
sector relative to aggregate human capital.
       Human capital in sector j will exhibit damped oscillations

about the path of aggregate human capital if ). is negative. For
Cobb-Douglas preferences, this occurs when p<l. Thus, when 1-
O<p<l, close to the steady state, human capital in each sector
will exhibit damped oscillations about a path of aggregate human
capital that is converging monotonically to its steady-state
level. This strengthens our earlier global result that the rank
order of human capital across sectors will be reversed each

period if p<l.
       For the more general, CES utility function, human capital in
Sector j exhibits damped oscillations if p<1/t6+TI(l-O)] —      that
is, if t >    pO/[l-p(l-O)].   Thus, if good j is sufficiently
complementary with other goods in the economy and if young and
old human capital are not too complementary in production — such
as in the case of log utility —     then there will be a unique
sequence of human-capital levels in sector j that converge to the
steady-state level, but that exhibit damped oscillations about
the steady state.22 This is illustrated in Figure 1.
       It is difficult to work out analytically what happens
further from the steady state, but we conjecture that the further
from the steady state, the more aggregate production is reduced



     22
        This implies that total human capital in the sector also
exhibits damped oscillations.

Convergence                                     JUly 27, 1994
                                                                      30

by the imbalance in human    capital   between sectors. Thus, far

from the steady state, the aggregate growth rate will be boosted
by the reduction in imbalances between sectors.
      Note that for this be consistent with to explain the path of

consumption, as well as production, capital markets cannot be
completely perfect. If they were perfect, poor countries would
want to borrow to smooth their consumption. In reality, it may
be difficult to borrow for consumption purposes and to pass the
debts on to one's children. If enforcement mechanisms rely on
trade sanctions that reduce income, they may be ineffective in
enforcing repayment of consumption loans. Habit formation in

consumption might also help explain why countries spread
consumption growth over time, rather than borrowing to raise
consumption instantaneously to its steady-state level.
       In addition to its implications for convergence, the model
carries implications for relative wages and for migration. Since
human   capital   is scarcer in poor regions, and capital earns the
same return everywhere, unskilled labor will be relatively
abundant in poor regions and will therefore earn a lower return.
Furthermore, since human capital increases more rapidly in poor
regions than in rich ones, the human capital of the young will be

relatively abundant in poor countries, and     hence,   will earn a

lower return. The model is thus consistent with migration of
unskilled labor and young human capital from poor countries to
rich countries. The model also predicts that old human capital


Convergence
                                                 July 27, 1994
                                                                   31

will be scarce in poor countries, and will earn a high return.

Thus old educated people will have an incentive to migrate from
rich to poor countries. To some extent, this is observed.
Multinationals post experienced older managers from developed
countries in developing countries, and some people emigrate from

developing countries when young and return when old. In the real
world, however, the tendency for old educated people to migrate

to poor countries is mitigated in two ways.    First, older

migrants would leave behind families and established networks of
business and social contacts and would need to adjust to a
different culture. Second, the reason that old human capital is

highly valued is because old workers are needed to work with
young workers, but cultural and language differences with young
workers might make this difficult.
       Nevertheless, the implication that old human capital will

earn a higher absolute wage in poor countries than rich countries
seems an unattractive feature of this model. However, models of
capital-market imperfections such as Barro, Mankiw, and Sala—i—
Martin [1992], yield the similar implication that educated

workers will earn a higher absolute amount in poor countries than

in rich countries.


5. ConvergenCe Ifl a Generalized Nodal


        In this section, we extend the model of section two in order


 Convergence
                                               July 27,   1994
                                                                  32

to determine speeds of convergence of young and old human
capital. We extend the CES production function to allow for

physical capital, technological progress, and population growth.
Then, we examine how the speed of convergence is related to the
parameters of the model. In particular, we show how the speed of
convergence in general decreases as the degree of complementarity
between young and old human capital (p) increases, and as the
share of human capital in production (0) increases relative to
the share of raw labor.
      In extending the model, we identify the fixed factor with
raw labor and we assume that the number of workers born each

generation grows at a constant rate, ri, so that L=L0nt. We

suppose that there is labor—augmenting technological progress, at
intergenerational rate g, and we introduce physical capital (Kb),

which we assume is rented on the world capital market at the
constant rate r+d, where r is the world interest rate, and d is

the rate of depreciation of physical capital.
      With these extensions, the aggregate production function for

goads in the economy is given by:


                                                0+y+4.,         (22)
              =
                  A{aH' +H1?]-'KJ (L0ntgc)$
where H represents young human capital in period t, and }i is
old human capital in period t. As before, the competitive-
equilibrium outcome is the same as the solution to the social

planners problem. The social planner chooses a path of human


                                                July 27. 1994
Convergence
                                                                            33

capital to solve


                           MAX     6 [ Ye., —                             (23)


This   yields the first-order condition:



 a[cZ+ p(!1)1]+ 136 (ng)9[Ztl                   (;)l_PjY1 [x;d]-i
                                                                          (24)

where Z E H/(L0gtn) is aggregate human capital per efficiency

unit of labor, and vEO/[(l—p)(l—y)I.
       As in the case of the basic model of section two, for each

initial level of human capital per efficiency unit there is a
unique path of human capital that converges to the steady-state
level, and this path will be chosen by the economy.23 The path is

monotonic if p>/(O+) and exhibits damped oscillations if
p<4/ (O÷4)     .   Note that 4/ (O÷$) is the share of the fixed factor
relative to the fixed factor plus human capital.             Thus

convergence is "more likely" to be monotoniC if the share of the
fixed factor is small, and will always be monotonic when p is one

 (or greater) .       The share of physical capital does not affect the
speed of convergence, because physical capital adjusts to the




     23 The argument is the same as for the economy in section
two. The conditions for the competitive equilibrium are the same
as for the social planners problem, which is concave and thus
has a unique solution.

 convergence
                                                       July 27,   .1994
                                                                                        34
  level of human capital.24

             We can calibrate the model and compare the results with

  empirically observed rates of convergence. In calibrating the
 model, our aim is to illustrate some of the effects and                   get   a
 sense of their quantitative magnitude, rather than to test the
 model. We calibrate the model assuming no capital—market
 imperfections and no adjustment costs other than those created by
 intergenerational complementarjties. In reality convergence will
 be further slowed by these other factors as well. The most

 plausible configurations of parameter values are therefore not
 ones that generate the speeds of convergence observed
 empirically, but values that generate somewhat faster
 convergence.

         To determine rates of convergence close to the steady state,
we derive a linearized version of the model using the same
procedure as in section four. Close to the steady state,
deviations of human capital from their steady-state level                   (EZ_
) satisfy the second—order difference equation;


             -                                  El+öng]
    2                                                     2 +1         2     =o
                                                                ông
                              aPon[P_ oJ
                                                                                 (25)
The solution to the difference equation has the form                   = BAt.        If

        24
                 This   is also true in Earro, Mankiw, and   Sala—i—Nartin
(1992)

Convergence                                            July 27. 1994
                                                                       35
  young and old human capital are close substitutes (p is small),
  then A is negat.ive and human capital per efficiency unit will

  exhibit damped oscillations about the steady-state level; if
  young and old human capital are sufficiently complementary

  (p>/(O+)), then A is positive and human capital will converge
  monotonically to the steady-state level. We discuss the
  relationship between convergence and the parameters in our model
  in greater detail below.

         We adopt the following baseline values for parameters: We
 assume a population growth rate of 1% a year, a productivity
 growth rate of 2% a year, and a discount rate of 4% a year. We
 assume people join the labor force at 19 and leave at 65,
 spending the first half of this period as young workers and the

 second half as old workers, so the length of a period is 23

 years. The share of physical capital (y) is assumed to be 0.3.
The relative weights of old and young human capital ( and ) are
both set to 0.5. This choice is somewhat arbitrary, but it is

consistent with empirical observation of higher wages for older
workers, since in the presence of population growth and

technological change, old human capital is scarcer than young
human capital.
       The two most important free parameters are p. the degree of
complementarity between young and old human capital, and 0, the
share of human capital. Although Murphy      and   Welch (1992) have
attempted to   estimate   some elasticities of substitution (lip)


Convergence
                                                   July 27. 1994
                                                                    36
  between different types of labor, as noted in section one, their
  results are sensitive to the specific assumptions that they make.

 The minimum wage has been used to calculate the share of human

 capital [Barro and Sala-i-Martjrj, 1992b], but this provides only
 a lower bound since even workers with no formal education have
 human capital in the form of training from their parents. Barro

 and Sala—i-Martjn argue that a total share for physical and human
 capital of about 0.8 enables a closed—economy, neoclassical

 growth model to generate observed speed of convergence, but this
 gives no guidance as to the appropriate share of capital in this
 adjustment-cost model. The fact that we observe a wide range of
 income levels in the world points to a high share of accumulable
 factors, which would allow small differences in tax rates or

 corruption, for example, to produce large differences in steady-
 state income.

        In the top panel of Table 3 below, we show the speeds of
convergence close to the steady state of human capital and income
 (both per efficiency unit of labor) for a range of plausible
values of the share of human capital (0), and the degree of

complementarjty (p) •25     Recall that the share of physical capital
is   assumed to be .3,    so that the share of the fixed factor equals



        The speed of convergence is the percentage of the
difference between human capital per efficiency unit of labor,
Z,, and its steady-state level, Z, or between income per
efficiency unit of labor and its steady-state level, that is
eliminated between periods t and t÷l, expressed at an annual
rate.

Convergence                                      July 27, 1994
                                                                                    37
  .7-0. The speed of convergence falls as the share of human
 capital (0) rises, and as young and old human capital become

 stronger complements (p increases)



 Table 3: Speed of Convergence in % per Year for Various Values
 of p and 0

                  0 —    0.4       0 —   0.5   0 — 0.6      0 — 0.65 0 — 0.69
                      Speed of Convergence Near Steady State for Human
                                     Capital and Income
   p = 0.5            12.93         7.90        4.68          2.99          1.06
   p   1.0             6.10         4.57        2.91          1.88          0.63
   p — 1.5             4.58         3.51        2.27          1.45          0.47
                      Speed of Convergence at 50% of Steady-State for
                                       Human Capital
  p — 0.5             12.11         7.13        4.05          2.51         0.84
  p — 1.0              5.24         3.86        2.40          1.52         0.48
  p — 1.5             3.89          2.95        1.86          1.17         0.35
                  Speed of Convergence at 50% of Steady-State Human
                                 Capital for Income
  p — 0.5                                       3.19          2.01         0.70
  p — 1.0             5.04          3.62        2.17          1.33         0.43
  p • 1.5             4.32          3.15        1.81          1.08         0.32

        *     Initial   income is not defined because the speed of convergence of
              human   capital is so high that it implies a negative value for old
              human   capital.

       Away from the steady state, the linearizations are less
accurate, and the speeds of convergence of income and human
capital are no longer identical. Simulations using multiple
shooting suggest that convergence of human capital is a little
slower away from the steady state. For example, the middle and

Convergence                                                July 27. 1994
                                                                     38

 bottom panels of Table 3 show rates of convergence of young human

 capital and income, respectively, for human capital per
 efficiency unit at 50 percent of the steady-state level.2'

        It is possible to make some general observations about the

relationship between the rate of convergence and the values of
 the parameters in our model.21 First, the rate of convergence
slows as the relative share of human capital compared to the
fixed factor 01(04) rises, and the rate of convergence does not
depend on the share of physical capital, y. The intuition for
this can be seen by considering the human capital decision of the
young. To the extent that the share of raw labor, /(04), is
high, the relative returns from choosing a level of human capital
close to the steady-state level of human capital are also high,

and convergence to the steady state will be fast.
        In general, the rate of convergence declines monotonically
in the degree of complementarity, but it need not do so. It is
easiest to consider the effect of p on convergence by first
considering the case without population growth or technological
change. In this case, we get the intuitive result that, the
greater the degree of complementarity between young and old human
capital, the more the young tend to choose a level of human



     26 Income is defined as gross output less the sum of the
rental cost of physical capital and the cost of education during
the period.

        We merely state the results and discuss the intuition
here. Details of the derivations are available from the authors.
Convergence                                    July 27. 1994
                                                                     39
 capital close to that of the old, and the slower is convergence
 For ng > 1, however, the speed of convergence increases with p at
 high levels of p. With ng > 1,         the effective size of each
 cohort is larger than that of the previous cohort. To take an
 extreme example, if p were infinite, and the production function
 were Leontief in young and old human capital, then in the steady
 state each cohorts human capital would be in excess supply and
 earn nothing when it was young, but would appropriate all returns
 to human capital when it was old. Hence the optimal choice of
human     capital   for the young would not be affected by the level of
human capital for the old, and the economy would move to the

steady state immediately. In general, for ng > 1, there will be
some level of p that minimizes the speed of convergence. For our
baseline parameter values, this level of p is between 2.9 and
3.1. With higher values of n and g, a smaller value of p would
minimize the speed of convergence.

        Convergence is faster when either a, the relative share of
young human capital, or ,       the   relative share of old human
capital, is close to one, and slower when the relative shares are
more equal. If, for example, the share of young human capital
was one, any cohorts return to human capital would be received
entirely when young, and the return would be independent of the
human capital of the previous cohort, so the human capital
investment would move straight to the steady-state level. A
similar argument applies when =1. In the simulation reported


Convergence                                        JUly 27. 1994
                                                                   40
 above, the rate of convergence is minimized for a around 0.39

 when p is 0.5, 0.47 when p is 1, and 0.64 when p is 2. However,
 the speeds of convergence for these values of a    are not markedly
 different from those in the simulations reported.

       The effects of changes in population and productivity
growth, n and g, on convergence are identical but neither they,
nor the effect of changes in the value of income one period
ahead, ô, are easy to sign analytically. However, for the
parameter values we have chosen, the rate of convergence

increases as n and g increase, and as ô increases (and r, the
interest rate, falls.) For example, when p=i, 0=0.6, and r=4%
 (as in Table 3), the speed of convergence close to the steady
state is 2.91% each year. If r=2%, the speed of convergence
would be 3.90% each year, and if r=6%, the speed of convergence
would be 2.25%.

       Since the open-economy, neoclassical model without
adjustment costs predicts immediate convergence, the results we
report above can be taken as indicating that adjustment costs
created by complementarity between old arid young human capital
significantly slow convergence.
       It is instructive to compare these speeds of convergence to
those found in empirical research. Barro and Sala-i-Martin argue
that U.S. states may be taken as having similar steady states,
and find that they converge at around 2% a year. OECD countries
converge at around 1% a year unconditionally [Dowrick and


Conve-ence                                    July 37,   1994
                                                                           41

Nguyen, 1989] .       Barro and Sala-i-Martin interpret this lower
 speed of convergence as indicating some difference in steady
states among these economies, but it could also be due to lesser

mobility of capital (in the neoclassical model) or labor (in this
model) between countries than within countries. Countries of the
world do not converge unconditionally, and under either our model
or a closed-economy version of the neoclassical model, this would
be interpreted as evidence that they do not have the same steady
states. Earro and Sala—i-Martin find that countries of the world
converge at around 2% per year after controlling for human
capital, and interpret human capital as a         proxy     for steady state
income. However, if human capital was interpreted as the value
of a state variable, conditional convergence would be difficult
to interpret within the neoclassical model. Conditional
convergence might be at least qualitatively consistent with the
model of this paper, since it predicts that countries that have
rapidly growing human capital would have high ratios of human
capital to income. This could cause a growth regression to
generate a negative coefficient on income and a positive
coefficient on human capital.



6.     Conclusion


       We have argued that complementarity between the human

capital       of young and old workers can   explain   why output per


Convergence                                            Jtz1y 27. 1994
                                                                 42

 capita does not converge instantaneously across countries. We
 have concentrated on complementarity that arises from young and
 old workers    playing different roles in the production process,
but complementarity also arises because workers with extensive
 formal education receive more on—the—job training from old
workers. Under either type of complementarity, each generatiOn's
optimal human capital depends on the human capital of previous
and succeeding generations, and there is a unique path to the
steady-state level of human capital along which each generation's
human capital is optimal given that of all other generations.
For a moderate degree of substitutability, the path of human
capital within individual sectors, such as law or academics, will

display gradually dampening cycles. Aggregate human capital,
however, will converge to the steady state monotonically. A
linearized version of the model can generate empirically relevant
speeds of convergence.
       Although this model is similar to models of credit
constraints, such as Barro, Mankiw, and Sala—i-Martin [1992], in
predicting slow convergence, it is driven by a fundamentally
different mechanism. Under credit constraints, growth is slowed
by the desire to smooth consumption; whereas under imperfect
substitutability, growth is slowed by a form of adjustment costs
in production.2


        We have considered adjustment costs in a decreasing
returns-to-capital case, but in Kremer and Thomson (1992) we
                                                   (continued...)

convergence                                   July 27, 1994
                                                                 43

        The welfare implications of imperfect substitutability
between young and old human capital differ sharply from those of
imperfect credit markets. Models driven solely by imperfect
credit markets imply there are large potential welfare
improvements from policies that relax credit constraints and
allow a rapid expansion of education. However, the view that
credit constraints are all that prevent instantaneous convergence

of human capital and per capita output between rich and poor
countries is difficult to reconcile with the poor performance of
many countries with substantial oil and mineral wealth.

Moreover, the experience of many African countries suggests that
there may be substantial adjustment costs in rapidly expanding

education. Starting from a low base, sub-Saharan Africa had a
much higher growth rate of education than developing countries as
a whole. From 1965 to 1990 primary enrollment as a percentage of
the relevant age group increased 65% in sub—Saharan Africa,

compared to a 33% average among developing countries. Secondary
enrollment increased 8.5 times, compared to 2.75 times in
developing countries as a whole. Tertiary enrollment grew 100%
as opposed to 40% in developing countries as a whole [World Bank
1987, 1993]. Yet, Africas rate of economic growth has been
dismal relative to other developing countries.


              .continued)
examine the case in which there are constant returns to physical
and human capital taken together. In this case, adjustment costs
lead to a steady-state growth rate rather than a steady-state
level of income.

Convergence                                    July   27. 1994
                                                                       44

        Kenya provides an instructive example. Some 30,000 students
were enrolled in secondary schools in 1963, on the eve of
 independence. Ten years later the number had increased more than

 five-fold, to 175,000, and by 1978, Kenya had 15 times the number
of secondary school students it had 15 years earlier [Killick,
1981] .       Higher education grew even more dramatically: in 1963,
370 Kenyans were enrolled in East African universities; twelve
years later there were 5104, for an annual growth rate of 24.5%
 [Lockhart, 1981]. By 1976, 12% of measured GDP and nearly 30% of
Kenya's population were students [Todaro, 1981]. According to
government figures, 30% of the national budget went to education
[Lockhart, 19811 •29      Yet with this tremendous increase in
education came an increase in unemployment among the educated.
At the beginning of the 1980's the education system was producing
200,000 school leavers a year, including primary—school
graduates, but employment in the modern sector of the economy was
expanding by only about 40,000 jobs a year [Lockhart, 1981]. At
least according to some researchers, there was little evidence
that education significantly improved productivity for those
remaining in agriculture [Hopcraft, 1974]. As education
expanded, the estimated rate of return dropped. In a study of
over 4000 workers that controlled for ability as measured by test
scores, Thias and Carnoy [1972] found that the social return to



        The World Bank reports a 20% share of education in
government expenditure, however.

Convergence                                       July 21. 1994
                                                                       45

 primary education dropped steadily from 14% in 1960 to 5% in
 1966.        (This may overstate the true decline, however, since a
 large part of the calculated decline is due to increasing
unemployment, which was also affected by business cycle
 factors. 30>

         The experience of Africa and of mineral—rich countries
suggests that much of the new growth literature may have
exaggerated the importance of credit-market imperfections in
slowing growth and been overly optimistic about the short-run
benefits of rapid expansion in human capital. It thus suggests
that intergeneration complementarity and other forms of
adjustment costs, as well as to credit constraints, may prevent

rapid convergence between poor and rich countries.




       °Some have suggested that Kenyas education system is ill-
suited to the needs of the country, and indeed Kenya has
instituted a series of educational reforms to re—orient the
System towards technical and agricultural skills. But,
unemployment is high among graduates of technical schools as
well. For example, one informal study cited by Lockhart (1981)
found that, a year after graduation, 58% of graduates of
technical secondary schools were still looking for work.
Convergence                                        July 27, 1994
                                                                  46
 References

 Barro, Robert J., N. Gregory Mankiw and Xavier Sala-i-Martin,
      "Capital Mobility in Neoclassical Models of Growth"
      unpublished paper. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. (1992)
 Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, "Convergence," Journal
      of Political Economy, 100:2 (1992a)
_________ "Economic Growth," 1992b. Manuscript. Cambridge, MA.
     Harvard University.
Benhabib, Jess and Aldo Rustichini, "Vintage Capital, Investment,
     and Growth," Journal of Economic Theory, 55:2, December
     1991, 323-339.

Chari, V.V. and Hugo Hopenhayn, "Vintage Human Capital, Growth,
     and the Diffusion of New Technology," Journal of Political
     Economy, 99:6, 1142-1165. December 1991.

Cohen, Daniel and Jeffrey Sachs, "Growth and External Debt under
     Risk of Debt Repudiation," European Economic Review, 78,
     December 1986, 1138—1154.

Dowrick, S. and D. Nguyen, "OECD Comparative Economic Growth
     1950-85: Catch-Up and Convergence," American Economic
     Review, 79, December 1989, 1010—1030.

Freeman, Richard B., "Overinveatment in College Training?"
     Journal of Human Resources, X (Summer, l975a), 287-311.

             'Supply and Salary Adjustments to the Changing Science
       Manpower Market: Physics 1948-l973,"American Economic
       Review, 65 (1975b): 27—39.
_________ "A Cobweb Model of the Supply and Starting Salary of
     New Engineers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 29
        (1976) : 236—248

Goldin, Claudia, and Robert A. Margo, "The Great Compression: The
     tRIage Structure in the United States at Mid-Century,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 1992.
Hopcraft, Peter N., Hurna.n Resources and Technical Skills in
     Agricultural Development: An Economic Evaluation of
     Educative Investments in Kenya's Small Farm Sector, PhD.
     dissertation, Stanford University, 1974.

Katz, Larry and Kevin N. Murphy, "Changes in Relative Wages,
     1963-87: Supply and Demand Factors," Quarterly Journal of

Convergence                                   July 27, 1994
                                                                    47

        Economics, February, 1992.

 Killick, Tony (Ed.), Papers on the Kenyan Economy, 1981,
      Heinemann Educational Books: London.


 Kremer, Michael and James Thomson, "Complementarity arid
      Substitutability of Human Capital of Different Generations,"
      unpublished paper, 1992.
Lain, David, 'Population Growth, Age Structure, and Age-Specific
     Productivity,' Journal of Population Economics, 1989:2.
Lockhart, Lawrence, 'The Economics of Nine Years Education For
     All," in Tony Killick (Ed.), Papers on the Kenyan Economy,
     1981, Heinemann Educational Books: London.

Murphy, Kevin N. and Finis Welch, "The Structure of Wages,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992. Vol. CVII No.
        1.

Pierce,    Wayne Brooks, Occupational Choice: the Market for
        Lawyers, Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
        Economics, University of Chicago, 1990.
Prescott, Edward C. and John H. Boyd, "Dynamic Coalitions:
     Engines of Growth,' American Economic Review, May 1987, Vol.
     77, No. 2.

Stokey,    Nancy L. and Robert B. Lucas, Jr., with Edward C.
        Prescott, Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, 1989,
        Harvard University Press: Cambridge.
Taylor, Alan M. ,  "External Dependence, Demographic Burdens and
       Argentine Economic Decline After the Belle poque," The
       Journal of Economic History, December 1993, Vol. 52, No 4.
Thjas, Hans H. and Martin Carnoy, Cost Benefit Analysis in
     Education: A Case Study of Kenya. Washington, World Bank
     Staff Occasional Paper No. 14, 1972. Johns Hopkins Press.
Todaro, Michael P., "Education and National Economic
     Development," in Tony Killick (Ed.), Papers on the Kenyan
     Economy, 1981, Heinemann Educational Books: London.
World Bank, World Development Report, various issues. Oxford
     University Press: New York.
              World Debt Tables, 1989-90.


Convergence                                    July 27. 1994
                           Figuic I: Path of Human Capital
        1.2




        I—I




11(t) 0.9
                   /
h(t)

       0.8




       0.1



       0.6




       0.5
              (I       2         4               6           S   10
