NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NEW ECONOMICS OF
TEACHERS ANI) EDUCATION

Frederick Flyer
Sherwin Rosen

Working Paper No. 4828

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1994

Paper originally presented at the Conference in Memozy of Yoram Ben Porath, Jerusalem,
october 17, 1993. We are indebted to the National Science Foundation and the Center for the
Study of the Economy and the State for research support. Criticism of Gary Becker, James
Coleman, Victor Fuchs, John Owen, Stephan Spurr and Yoram Weiss materially improved the
final product. We alone are responsible for remaining errors and interpretations. This paper is
part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

()

1994 by Frederick Flyer and Sherwin Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4828
August 1994

THE NEW ECONOMICS OF
TEACHERS AND EDUCATION
ABSTRACT

Rapidly growing Costs of elementary and secondary education are studied in the context

of the rising value of women's time. The three-fold increase in direct costs of education per
student in the past three decades was caused by increasing demand and utilization of teacher and

staff inputs, attributable to growing market opportunities of women and changes in the structure

of families. Substitution of purchased teacher and staff inputs for own household time in the
total production of children's education and maturation is a predictable economic response to

these forces. On the supply side, the "flexibility option," that female teachers who take
temporary leaves to raise children do not suffer subsequent wage loss upon reentry, is shown to

be an important attraction of the teaching profession to women. Other college educated women

suffer reentry wage losses of 10 percent per year of leave. The estimated value of flexibility in
teaching is 5 percent of life-cycle earnings and will fall as labor force interruptions of women
for child-rearing become less frequent. Both supply and demand considerations suggest that the

direct costs of education per student will continue to increase in the future, independent of
political and other organization reforms of schools.

Frederick Flyer
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003

Sherwin Rosen
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

Revised, July 25, 1994

THE NEW ECONOMICS OF TEACHERS AND EDUCATION
Frederick Flyer and Sherwin Rose&
New York University and the University of Chicago

I. INTRODUCTION
The explosion in direct costs of college education in the United

States has received much attention lately. Less well known is that the
rate of increase in direct costs of elementary and secondary education has

been larger and of much longer duration. From 1960 to the present, the
per student cost of higher education increased by about 50 percent in real
terms.

In contrast, elementary and high school costs per student

increased by about 180 percent, over three times as much. Average
annual per student expenditures in elementary and secondary schools

represented 6.4% and 12.0% of median family income in 1960. By
1990 these figures climbed to 11.7% and 17.8% respectively.
The large rise in costs of precollege education have been driven

by sharp increases in staff to student ratios. They have nearly doubled

in the last 30 years. The growth in the teacher-student ratio alone
accounted for over 60% of the increase in school costs since 1960.
Teaching services purchased per student climbed steadily throughout the

2
period despite dramatic demographic movements in school enrollments

and labor market activities of women. Aggregate school enrollment
fluctuated by 17%, female labor force participation rates nearly doubled,
and the number of females graduating college increased by about 500%.
This paper examines how changes in young women's labor force

commitments and human capital investment activity have influenced the

market for teachers, and ultimately the cost of precollege schooling. The

main point of the work is to show how the economics of educational

production is greatly effected by the value of women's time. The
expanded occupational opportunities and higher labor force participation

rates of women affect both demand and supply of teachers. The
evidence indicates that increasing labor market commitments of women

increased the demand for teachers and allied staff, as purchased school
services were substituted for household produced child services. On the

supply side, teaching is a predominantly female profession, so greater
market opportunities for women raise the supply price of teaching.

A model that emphasizes uncertainty about occupational
outcomes, expected time commitments to market activity, and varying

human capital depreciation rates across jobs is used to analyze the
attachment of women to the teaching profession.

Individuals who

anticipate devoting less time to market work over their life-cycle have

less incentive to search for favorable occupational matches, holding
constant initial human capital endowments, human capital accumulation

technologies, and search costs. These individuals act as if they are more

risk averse and choose initial occupations with less wage uncertainty.
They also have greater incentives to choose jobs that impose smaller

3

future wage penalties for time spent out of the labor force.

An economic structure that focuses on anticipated future life-

cycle work intensity is central to studying female labor supplied to
teaching, since female teachers spend considerably more time out of the
labor force than other college graduates. In NLSY data, female teachers

spent 42% more time out of the labor force than other female college

graduates and well over twice that of male college graduates. It is
known that leaving and reentering the teaching profession is a fairly
common practice and that only a small percentage of entrants to the field

in any given year are new to the profession (Murnane, et. al. (1991)).
Less is known about whether teaching provides more flexible movement

between the market and home sector relative to other occupations, and

if this "flexibility" option is valued. Another objective of this work is
to assess the value and importance of flexibility.

The paper is organized along the usual demand and supply
framework. The next section analyzes the recent demand forces at work

in the teachers' market. The increase in direct costs of elementary and
secondary education, and the rise in teacher-student ratios that ignited it,

are empirically documented and linked to increasing female labor force

participation rates. Changes in the structure of labor force activity in

families led to substitution of more purchased labor in the formal
education sector for less self-provided household labor in the informal

education sector. Increasing teaching costs are almost completely
explained by increasing teacher-pupil ratios. The standard Clark/Kuznets

argument of rising general real wages pressing against relatively slow
productivity growth in the service sector carries little weight here, since

4

the general level of wages in the economy didn't change much.

The second part of the paper addresses the supply side of the
market. An occupational choice model that incorporates anticipated life-

cycle market work intensity is applied to NLSY data. A panel of female

college graduates are tracked to determine whether transitions between

the home and market sector are less costly for female teachers than for

other female graduates.

The empirical findings are affirmative.

Teachers do not suffer wage penalties for time spent out of the labor

market, while other female college graduates (including female
dominated nursing and administrative support staff occupations) take
wage hits of roughly 9% for each year spent out of the market sector.
The estimated value of the flexibility option in teaching ranges between
one-half to a full year's income, depending on the assumed discount rate

and life-cycle work profile.

H. DEMAND FOR TEACHERS AND THE VALUE OF

WOMEN'S TIME
Real costs of elementary and secondary education increased by

300 percent between 1960 and 1990. Rising instruction costs were the
largest contributor to increasing costs, because the education industry is

so labor intensive. Teachers are the most important input by far. The
direct costs of elementary and secondary education by function appear in

table 1. Real instruction costs more than tripled during the period,
accounting for over 62% of the increase in total costs. Costs of other
services also grew rapidly. Administration costs for elementary schools

were more than 6 times greater in 1990 than in 1960. For secondary
schools they were more than 7 times greater.

5

Expenditures

devoted to student health, attendance, speech

pathology, and other student services increased more than ten-fold during

the 30 year period.

Administrative and other school service costs

accounted for approximately 14% of total elementary and secondary

school costs in 1990 but only for 3% in 1960. Costs associated with
nonlabor inputs grew more modestly. Imputed rent and depreciation
accounted for nearly 19% of total direct costs in 1960, but fell to less

than 11 % in 1990. The relative share of costs attributable to plant
operation and maintenance remained constant over the period at about

9% in both 1960 and 1990. Roughly 60% of plant operation and
maintenance costs in both 1960 and 1990 are attributable to labor inputs.

Aggregate school enrollment increased during the time period.

However, changes in the size of the school age population account for
less than 9% of the increase in real costs. Costs of precollege education

per student in the U.S. have risen dramatically. Table 2 shows the data
decade-by-decade. Changes in aggregate enrollment were small relative

to the threefold increases in expenditures per student.

The main cause of the increase in expenditures per student was
rising school staffs. Table 3 shows that the total staff-student ratio more

than doubled between 1950 and 1990, with the majority of this growth
occurring between 1960 and 1980. The largest increase was for support

staff and other instructional staff, including guidance counselors and
teacher aides.

But the ratio of classroom teacher to students also

increased sharply, by some 60%. The rise in the teacher-student ratio

in table 3 is a continuation of a trend that started at the turn of the
century. Figure 1 plots the time-series from 1900-1990. This upward

6
trend has accelerated since the mid 1960's, and is the primary factor
behind the rise in educational costs.2

A. Educational Production in the Household and Public
Sectors
The changing classroom dynamic of greater student exposure to

teachers, teacher assistants, and school counselors is associated with

rising female labor force participation rates during the 20th century.
Increased individualized attention by school staff substitutes imperfectly

for parents' time at home. For example, Fuchs and Reklis (1993) find
that controlling for household characteristics, such as mother's education

and marital status, and for such school characteristics as spending per
student, labor force participation of mothers indirectly decreases eighth-

grade math achievement scores, and teacher/student ratios directly
increase them. The correlation between changes in participation rates
and changes in teacher-pupil ratios across time illustrates this important
point. Substitution implies that teacher-pupil ratios should increase more

in periods where labor force participation rates for women increased

most. Evidence of this relationship is available from estimating the
following regression equation on state data between 1975 and 1990.

2Notice that special education and disability accommodation in

the public schools contribute only slightly to the trend in the
teacher-student ratio. This is only past of the substitution effect
stressed here. See Hanushek, et. al. (1993a) and Flyer and Rosen
(forthcoming) for elaboration. Accounting data on teacher-student
ratios are not entirely consistent with directly observed average
class size. See data appendix.

7

=

(1)

j + (LFP) • fi +

where j is a constant, t refers to the time period (each period is a 5 year
interval, e.g., 1975-1980), s refers to the state, EI'IP) is the change in
the teacher-pupil ratio in period t and state s, and L(LFP),g is the change

in labor force participation rates of females ages 20-50 in state s.
Female labor force participation rates by State are taken from the

CPS (see the data appendix). There are 50 states and 3 time periods, or
150 observations overall. The data and the regression line are presented

in figure 2. The coefficient estimate of 15' is .0364 and is significant at
the 1 % level (including time-dummies in the equation do not affect this

result). States that experienced greater growth in female labor force
participation experienced greater growth in the teacher-student ratio.
According to these estimates, the elasticity of the stock of teachers per
student to female labor force participation rates ranged between 0.3 and

0.5. These results are consistent with substitution of staff and teacher

time in school for parental time at home in the production of child
services .
B.

The Earnings of Teachers

Acceleration in the growth of teacher-pupil ratios in recent
decades was fueled by intensive hiring of young teachers in the 1960's

and 70's. New hires were necessary to teach the large number of

3The correlation between changes in female labor force
participation rates and changes in teacher-pupil ratios also holds
for aggregate U.S. data from 1900-1990. Using intervals of 10
years to measure theses changes yields a simple correlation statistic

of over .5.

8

students entering the system. However, they more than compensated for
rapidly growing enrollments and teacher-student ratios increased for the

baby boom cohorts. When the last waves of these cohorts flowed
through the school systems, hiring activity greatly diminished. The
average age of public school teachers rose dramatically during the late
1970's and throughout most of the 1980's,4 but the teacher-student ratio

continued to rise. These demographic movements occurred against a
background of expanded occupational opportunities for women. Rising

female labor force participation rates increased the demand for school

services, and also raised the market opportunity costs for female
teachers.

Despite the upward pressure on teacher salaries stemming from

an aging workforce and a rise in instructional services provided per
student, the real adjusted price of teachers' services did not increase

substantially between 1967 and 1989. Figure 3 plots real average
salaries (excluding fringe benefits) over the 1967-1989 period for
employed elementary and secondary school teachers, and for other
college graduates from the March CPS tapes. Real earnings for teachers
followed the well-documented pattern for all college graduates, declining

during the 1970's and rebounding during the 1980's.

Average earnings of teachers increased relative to average
earnings of college graduates between 1967-1989. However differential

4The NEA reports that the median age for female teachers in

1976 and 1986 was 33 and 41 respectively. According to CPS
data average age for female secondary teachers was 35.9 in 1974
and 41.4 in 1987.

9
changes

in the demographic composition of the teaching and college

graduate workforce accounts for virtually all of this: average education
and experience levels increased more for teachers than for other college
graduates. Index number adjustments (standardized comparisons) reveal

that the real wage rate for a unit of teaching human capital has actually

declined relative to the effective wage rate for college graduates.
Consider the following wage equation:

(2)

where

Iog(Y;J = B, X, + €,

Yg is earnings of individual i in year t, and vector X includes

controls for education, race, smsa, and an experience cubic.

This

equation is estimated separately each year (between 1967-89) for female

college graduates and female teachers using CPS data. A fixed X vector

is combined with the time-varying regression coefficient estimates to

project constant-weight log earnings in each year. Using the mean
values of X for female teachers in 1967, we impute

(3a)

(3h)

log 1'elem t

log '' , =

elem t Xecm

I%7

19ó7

and log 'i"01 t

scot

Xeiem iói

and log ''C,J 1= cOI t Xg 1967

The time-series on the log differences in imputed wages for
teachers and college graduates defined in equations (3a) and (3b) are

presented in figure 4. Similar results are obtained when the X's are

10

measured at their 1976 and 1989 means. The "true" real wage of
teachers has declined relative to wages for other college graduates,
especially in elementary schools. This relative decline largely occurred

during the late 1970's and early 1980's as schools faced dwindling
enrollments, after having recently built up their instructional staffs for

the baby boom cohorts. The relative wage for teaching services
increased from the late 1960's to the mid 1970's and has shown little
trend during the latter 1980's. During the entire period, the decline in
relative wages was over 15% for elementary school teachers.5

It is important to use a fixed X vector to project log earnings
across years for teachers and other college graduates because the slopes

of their age-earning profiles differ greatly. Figure 5 shows earnings
profiles of female teachers and other female college graduates, generated
with CPS 1983-199 1 data.6 Female college graduates have much steeper

5The fall in the relative wage of teachers assumes that
unobserved quality of teachers has remained constant. There is a
little evidence to the contrary. The NLS young women survey

provides IQ scores for 230 female college graduate in 1970,
ranging in age from 2 1-26. There are 104 teachers in this group

and their average rank is at the 53rd percentile of all female
graduates. The NLSY provides AFQT scores for 1064 female
college graduates in 1991, ranging in age from 26-33. Female
teachers in the 1991 cohort ranked at the 42nd percentile.

6An experience cubic is included in a log wage regression
estimated separately on female teachers and female non-teachers.

It includes controls for hours worked per year, race, smsa,
education, and year effects. Average earnings profiles in the
figure are generated for whites who live in an smsa, and work

11

earnings profiles than teachers, so relative earnings differences increase
both in absolute and in percentage terms with experience in the interval

between the two arrows. If a time-varying X vector is used to project

earnings (such as teachers' mean X's in each year), then estimated
relative wages of teachers will change just because different points in the

profile are being compared. In recent years teachers' average age has
increased, so teachers' relative earnings fall when time-varying X's are

used in the standardized comparison. A similar problem occurs with

teachers' average educational level, since returns to education differ
between the groups.

III. The Supply of Teachers
The decline in teachers' relative wages has had a predictable
affect on entry of recent female college graduates into the field. Figure

6 illustrates the dramatic decline in the percentage of female college
graduates who have entered teaching over the years. Teaching was far

and away the most frequently chosen occupation by female college
graduates 30 years ago, attracting nearly 50% of them. By 1990 the
percentage had dropped well below 10%. Although this downward trend

is evident in the 1960's and early 1970's, it accelerated after 1972. At
the same time the number of female college graduates increased nearly

six-fold between 1950 and 1990. Enrollment in elementary schools
peaked in 1970 at nearly 37 million students, up 38% from just 15 years

earlier. In that same period the number of elementary teachers grew by

55%, from 827,000 to nearly 1.3 million. The number of females

2000 hours per year.

12

graduating college climbed 236% between 1955 and 1970, though it was

relatively flat for many years preceding 1955.
The population bubble that entered the school system increased

the demand for school services. The resulting increase in teachers'
absolute and relative wages itself contributed to the explosive growth of
female college attendance, and fueled the growth in the stock of teachers

during the period.7 The growth in the teaching workforce more than
offset increases in elementary and secondary enrollment, and teacher-pu-

pil ratios steadily rose despite the wave of baby boom children that

flowed through the school system. By the mid 1970's schools were
facing dwindling enrollments, and could maintain the high level and ever

rising trend in teacher-pupil ratios without new hiring. Absolute and
relative wages for teachers dropped substantially from the mid 1970's
through the early 1980's and caused new entry into the field to decline,
both arithmetically and in percentage terms.

A. The Occupational Decision
Teaching remains a predominantly female profession, especially

at the elementary level. Nearly 85% of elementary teachers in 1990
were female. This percentage has changed little over the last several
decades, even with the recent decline in relative wages of female teachers

and the large inflows of female graduates into other occupations. We

7The supply reaction of more women graduating college (in

response to higher demand for teaching services) reinforces
upward pressures on the demand for teachers, since changes in

female labor force participation rates are positively related to
changes in teacher-pupil ratios.

13

analyze female attachment to the teaching profession with a model that
emphasizes uncertainty about occupational outcomes, anticipated future

household production, and varying rates of human capital depreciation

across jobs. The model shows that the particular occupation that
maximizes expected life-cycle earnings depends on expected worklife
intensity.

If uncertainty exists with respect to potential wages in different
job matches, and search costs are not strongly dependent on future work

intensity, individuals who expect to devote less time to market activity
in the future will act as if they are more risk averse in choosing an initial

occupation. The reason is that gains from wage search are greatest for

individuals who expect to work the most hours over their life-cycle,
assuming equivalent initial human capital endowments, human capital

accumulation technologies, and search costs. The model predicts that
women would tend to exhibit greater risk aversion in choosing occupa-

tions, since they work fewer hours per year and take more time out of
the labor market than men. The model also predicts that individuals who

spend more time out of the market sector will be more concerned with

relative human capital depreciation rates across occupations, and
consequently more willing to accept lower wages for lower rates of
depreciation.

The effect of human capital depreciation rates on

compensating wage differentials was first studied by Polachek (1981).

In the model there are two time periods and two groups of
occupations. Individuals know their potential earnings in one occupation-

al group with certainty, but are uncertain about their potential earnings
in the other group. Potential earnings within an occupational group are

14

determined by the product of the wage rate R and the person's units of

human capital K. Here Rb refers to an individual's wage rate in the

group with the uncertain outcome (the high variance occupation is
subsequently referred to as h), and R1 is the wage rate in the group with

the known outcome (the low variance occupation 1). In the absence of
occupational mobility, expected earnings associated with entering one of
these occupations is:

(4a)

expected earnings in occupation I =

OR1K

(4b)

expected earnings in occupation h =

5 ORhKf(Rh)dRh

where f(Rh) is the probability density function of prospective wage in the

high variance occupation, and 0 is the fraction of time devoted to work

activity. Investments in human capital are made in the first period.
Work occurs in the following period. The person's human capital stock
K is determined by:

(5)

K = (1 - q(1 - 0))41)

where us the amount invested in human capital, ic(I) is the usual human

capital investment function (Ben-Porath (1967)), with K'(I) > 0 and
ic"(I) < 0, and q is the human capital depreciation rate.

Occupational mobility is included by allowing individuals to
switch occupational groups once. The cost associated with a move is C.

Assume for simplicity that uncertainty of outcome in occupation h is

15

resolved immediately upon entering it, and experience in occupation I

provides no information about outcomes in h. Then expected net
earnings of initially entering occupation I and h are:

V=

(6)

(7)

Vh =

$ ORh

OR1

(1 -

(1 -

q(1

q(1

- O))K(I) - I

- O))K(I)f(Rh)dRh+

(S f(R)dR3[OR1(1-q(l- O))K(I) - C] - I
Income maximization requires entry into occupation h if Vh > V1. The

person stays in the risky occupation only if the Rh realized ex post is

greater than the reservation wage s (as usual, the reservation wage is
defined such that earnings associated with staying in occupation h equals

prospective earnings associated with leaving it).

The reservation wage

depends on human capital stock, the fraction of time devoted to market

activity, the depreciation rate, the wage rate in 1, and the cost of
switching occupational groups:

s=

(8)

R1

- [CIO(1 - q(1 -

O))ic(I)]

B. The Effects of Labor Force Attachment on Choice

The qualitative implications of this model are illustrated in the

following case.

There are 2 groups of individuals with identical

distributions of individual characteristics, with one group supplying a

larger fraction of their time to nonmarket activity (0 is lower). The
effect of a lower 0 for one group results in lower average human capital

16

investments, and a lower propensity to choose the high variance
occupation.
The positive relationship between 0 and human capital investment

I comes from the first order investment condition of equation 7 (or
equation 6 if the low variance occupation is chosen). Setting the partial

derivative of earnings (equation 7) with respect to investment (I) equal
to zero yields:

(9)

K'(l) = {0(1 - q +

Oq)[ J 1(R - RI)f(R)dRh

+ R1]}'

The right hand side of equation (9) is decreasing in 8. Since the optimal
value of K'(I) decreases with 0 and ,c"(I) < 0, the first order effect of

higher 0 is higher I. The result that higher levels of work activity over
the life-cycle lead to larger investments in human capital was emphasized

by Mincer and Polachek (1974). Also see Sandell and Shapiro (1980),

Nakamura and Nakamura (1985) and Gronau (1988). That it remains
central to economic research on the earnings of women is evidenced in

recent papers by Klerman and Leibowitz (1994), Shapiro and Mott
(1994), and Shaw (1994).
The increasing propensity to choose the high variance occupation
Ii as

0 increases is illustrated by subtracting earnings in 1 defined in

equation (6) from expected earnings in h defined in equation (7), and

differentiating the result with respect to 0. The difference between
equations (7) and (6) must be positive in order for individuals to initially

enter the high variance occupation, and the difference is increasing in 0.

17

(10)

ô(earnings difference, occupation h - occupation 1)/ôO =

(1

- q + 20q)K(i)[ J $ (R - Rf(Rh)dRJ

>

0

Equation (10) reveals that larger values of 0 in a population are
associated with larger propensities to enter high variance occupations.
Greater commitment to the workforce promote incentives to enter riskier

occupations, other things equal.

The model is expanded to incorporate varying human capital
depreciation rates by allowing both occupational groups to consist of jobs

that vary in q:

(11 a)

R1 =

(11 b)

Rh = R(q,u)

R1(q)

where u is an error term reflecting wage uncertainty in the high variance

occupational group. The wage and human capital depreciation rate are
positively related (both oR1Iaq and 3R/Oq > 0), since jobs with higher
q must offer higher gross returns to attract workers. Differences in lifecycle work intensity imply that females will be disproportionately located

in jobs with lower q. Polachek (1981) found that female dominated
occupations have lower human capital depreciation rates. The model is

applied to longitudinal data on college graduates in the next section to

examine the "option" aspects of teaching careers. The evidence is that
teaching is an occupation with a low human capital depreciation rate that

18

promotes mobility between the home and market sectors.

IV. Labor Force Activity of Teachers and College Graduates
Panel data are needed to examine the mobility option of teaching

careers. College graduates from the 1979-91 NLSY with no more than

18 years of education, who worked at least 500 hours in any year after
graduation, and who earned hourly wage rates between $3 and $50 (1990

dollars) form the data set. Summary statistics for female teachers,
female college graduates, and male college graduates in the sample are

presented in table 4. Female college graduates, whether in teaching or

not, spend considerably more time out of the labor force than male
college graduates (nearly double the time for a sample with an average

age of 30). But female teachers on average spend 42% more time out
of the labor force than female college graduates in other occupations.
Despite the longer portion of time spent Out of the labor force, teachers

have higher levels of occupational tenure than either male or other
female college graduates.

There is less occupational switching by persons who initially
enter teaching after graduation, compared with graduates who initially
enter other fields. Roughly 60% of women who entered teaching after
college did not switch 2-digit occupations as of the last year they were

observed in the survey, compared with 25% for other female college

graduates and 21 % for male college graduates. This is a dramatic
difference, especially in light of the fact that teachers in the sample are
both older and more experienced than other college graduates, and thus

had greater opportunity (more "exposure to the hazard") to switch
careers. Higher levels of occupational mobility may indicate greater

19

uncertainty associated with the initial choice, or it may just result from
poor classification of occupational categories. For example, individuals

may enter career paths after college that involve switching 2-digit

occupationally coded jobs, but represent nothing more than well
anticipated career promotional tracks.

Such distinctions cannot be

pursued with these data.8

A. Opportunity Costs of Exiting and Reentering
Teaching
The higher propensity of teachers to take leaves from work
suggests that teaching has relatively low rates of human capital deprecia-

tion, since individuals with lower 0 rationally choose jobs with lower
values of q. If teaching indeed has a relatively low rate of human capital

depreciation, then observed earnings losses for teachers who leave and

reenter the labor force should be smaller than equivalent losses for
college graduates in other occupations. We estimate relative earnings
losses associated with leaving the labor force using first differences to
eliminate fixed-effects:

(12) In(wlI+k) - ln(w1) = B XI÷k+ ô • OLF

+ aT + y ' OLF 'T + e.

8The NLSY is not a random sample. Elementary school
teachers outnumber secondary school teachers by more than 6:1.

Elementary school teachers earn substantially less than other
female college graduates: in 1988-9 1 the average hourly wage of
elementary teachers under 34 years old in the CPS is approximate-

ly $10.35 per hour, within 23 cents per hour of the wages of
NLSY teachers. Because of the disproportionate number of
elementary teachers in the data, the results found below may not
apply to secondary teachers.

20

Here i refers to the individual, t is the period when i takes her 1st job

after college graduation, t+k is the period when the last wage is
observed, X is a vector of personal characteristics that includes educa-

tion, race, smsa, and a quadratic in occupational tenure and total work
experience. OLF is time spent out of the labor force measured in years,

and e, is an individual specific error term. Also included in the regression is a teacher dummy (T) and the interaction of the teacher dummy
with OLF. Equation (12) is estimated on female college graduates only.

The estimates appear in table 5. In the first column the teacher
dummy is coded as 1 if the individual was a teacher in t+k (the last year
in which earnings are observed). The coefficient on OLF is significantly

negative. In the first specification it accounted for a 9.5% earnings loss
for every year female college graduates spent out of the labor force. The
coefficient on the interaction between the teachers dummy and time spent

out of the labor force is positive and significant: Teachers who spend
time out of the labor force are not penalized in future earnings growth.
Other female college graduates are penalized substantially. Even though

the interaction effect is larger than the coefficient on OLF, it is inappropriate to extrapolate this estimate since only a small portion of sample

teachers spent a year or more out of the labor force. The coefficient on

the teachers dummy is significantly negative, indicating that teachers

have flatter earnings profiles than female college graduates in other
occupations. These results are not greatly affected if males are included

in the sample, and hold over a variety of specifications. Estimating
equation (12) with teachers defined as individuals whose initial and last

observed job are both in teaching also yields the result that time in the

21

home sector does not adversely affect earnings growth. However, if the
teacher dummy is defined as the first occupation after college (in year t),
then the coefficient on the interaction term between OLF and the teachers

dummy is no longer significant. Teachers who leave the labor force and
reenter other occupations suffer wage loss for time spent out of the labor

force. These results led us to investigate whether other occupations
which are also disproportionately staffed by females have relatively low

depreciation rates. Equation (12) was estimated separately for NLSY
nurses and administrative support workers (Table 5), the other female
dominated occupations among college graduates. Estimated human capital

depreciation effects do not account for the attractiveness of these fields

to women. The coefficient on the interaction term is statistically
insignificant for these professions.

B. Biases Associated With Wage Growth Regressions
The estimated effect of time spent out of the labor force on wage

growth is biased if there are differences in the relative productivity of
teachers and other college graduates who spend time in the home sector.

The bias depends on the correlation between changes in unobserved

human capital with the level of productivity in the initial job. If the
individual specific residuals from a wage regression in the initial period

are positively correlated with observed and unobserved future human

capital investments, then the absolute value of individual residuals
increase over time and first differencing in (12) does not eliminate the
correlation between the right hand side variables and the residuals.
The point is illustrated in the followings equations:

22

(13a) logW = BX

+=

+ crtZa +

b+kOLF1t+k+ eI+k =B+kX +k+

(13b)

b+kOLF1t+ k+ a+kZ+k+ it+k

(13c)

(13d)

logW - log(W1) =
flit+k

= el+k

—

=

B+kX1t+k

{a+kZIL+k

- BX1 +bt÷kOLF÷k + flj(+k

—

}

+

{E11+k —

Again, t is the period when individual i starts her initial job after college,

t+k to the period when the wage is observed again, X is observable
human capital characteristics, B is the return on observable human
capital, OLF is time spent out of the labor force since the initial period

t, b is the wage loss associated with time spent in the home sector, and

e is an error term. The error term is decomposed into unobserved
human capital Z, with corresponding return a, and an individual, time

specific residual error .

The

difference in log wages in part (c)

corresponds to equation (12). The individual error term mt+k in the log

wage difference equation is affected by growth in unobserved human
capital.

Suppose observed and unobserved human capital are positively
correlated. Then earnings will fan out over time if: (a) individuals with
high ability in period t tend to invest more, or (b) if the monetary return
to human capital increases between t and t+k. This biases the regression

estimates if high quality teachers (relative to college graduates) are the
ones spending more time out of the labor force, because the fanning out

23

of cohort earnings distributions exaggerates the ability of teachers to
leave and reenter the workforce without penalty. There is evidence that

the returns to human capital increased during the 1980's, and that
earnings inequality grew within age, occupational, and educational cells

(Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce, 1993). This potentially effects the NLSY

wage growth estimates since members of that sample entered the
workforce in the early to mid 1980's and were last observed around
1990.

We compared wages of workers who spent extended time in the

home sector9 to wages of workers who had more continuous work
careers to examine the differences in the types of teachers and other

college graduates who leave and reenter the workforce (Table 6).
Female teachers and college graduates who spend extended time out of

the labor force are relatively low wage workers. Both groups earn low

initial wages after college and low wages after several years in the
workforce (relative to teachers and college graduates with more continu-

ous careers). However, just as the regression estimates in table 5 imply,

teachers who spend extended time in the home sector experience wage
growth similar to teachers who work continuously. Conversely, college
graduates who spend extended time out of the work force have substantially lower wage growth.

9An individual is defined as spending extended time in the
home sector if she is out of the labor force for 50 weeks or more.
Only women who worked 4 years or more after college
graduation are included in these comparisons. Occupational
classification in this context is based on the 1st job after college
where reported hours worked are greater than 500.

24

Average starting wage rates of female teachers who leave and

reenter the workforce earn $1.15 less than female teachers with
continuous careers. Their average last wage observed is $1.22 less than

teachers who work continuously. Other female college graduates who
leave and reenter the workforce have average starting wages and final

observed wages that are $.46 and $1.84 below female graduates with
continuous careers. These comparisons indicate that the differences in

unobservables between teachers and college graduates who leave the
labor force are small, and the potential biases in table 5 are likely to be
minor. Teaching allows for greater mobility between the home and work
sectors.

C. The Option Value of Flexible Market Entry and Exit in
Teaching
The estimated value of the flexibility option in teaching depends
on the timing and length of anticipated leaves from the work force, the
discount rate, the life-cycle earnings profile, and the dynamics of wage
losses.

Mincer and Ofek (1982) examined the experience of NLS

married women in all occupations and education categories who left and

subsequently re-entered the labor force in the 1970s. They found that
women had wage losses of between 3% to 9% per year spent out of the

labor force during their most recent exit. Their earnings growth after
reentering was approximately double the normal wage growth at that
stage of the life-cycle, so the long term effect of time spent in the home
sector eventually amounted to only a 1 % wage loss per year spent out of

the labor force. Wage losses due to market exit and reentry are not
permanent and the rebound after reentry must be incorporated into the

25

option value estimates.

The calculations are made for continuous spells of 2, 3, and 4
consecutive years out of the work force after teaching for 5 consecutive
years, and then working uninterruptedly over the remainder of a 40 year

career. The value of the option is estimated as the difference between

discounted lifecycle earnings without-and-with the wage penalty.
Discounted life-cycle earnings with wage penalties are calculated from
the table 5 estimate of wage loss for females college graduates in general

and Mincer and Ofek's estimates of the rebound. We assume that
teachers would have experienced 9.5% short-term wage losses for each
year out of the market in some other occupation, and double the normal

growth rate upon reentry until wages converge to the level predicted by
the uninterrupted experience profile. The experience profiles of teachers

are extrapolated from the CPS estimates used to generate figure 5.
The option value estimates for interest rates of 5 and 10 percent

appear in table 7. The estimates are $20,100 and $11,800 for a female

teacher who spends 3 years out of the labor force. This is 80% of the
annual earnings of female teachers under the age of 40 when the interest

rate is .05, and a little less than a half a year's earnings when it is .10;

or about 5 percent of discounted lifecycle earnings in both cases. It
would be smaller proportion of total human capital value for a two year

spell and a larger proportion for a four year spell.

D. Risk Aversion
Although young female college graduates on average spend more

time out of the labor force then their male counterparts, this difference
represents only one portion of the total difference in time committed to

26

the labor force. Time worked by employed female graduates in the
NLSY was near nearly 300 hours less in the last observation year than

time worked by male graduates. Differences in annual hours worked

combined with differences in time spent in the home sector yield
dramatic differences in total time worked over the lifecycle. Male
college graduates work nearly 25% more hours than female graduates
over their careers.1° If this difference in time commitment to the labor
market is anticipated by women in college, the model implies that female

graduates will tend to choose professions with more certain payoffs.
This proposition was investigated with CPS data from 1976, 1977, 1980,

and 1981. We estimate the correlation between percentage female and

the coefficient of variation of wages for all 2 digit occupations with at
least 25,000 women in them. The coefficient of variation of the hourly
wage is estimated using only females in the occupation with at least 16
years of education, who earned at least $2000 (1990 dollars), worked at
least 5 weeks, and were between 3 1-34 years old. It is regressed on the

percentage of females in the occupations for 1976-77 and 1980-81 in

table 8.

Percent female is significantly negatively related to the

coefficient of variation.

11>fhis calculation assumes that males and females retire at the
same age, and that differences between young males and females

in hours worked and portion of time spent in the home sector
remain constant over the entire work life. Undoubted there are
differences by sex in both of these parameters, but discounting
reduces most of their economic effects for the younger workers
studied here.

27

Earning distributions of college educated women who choose
occupations with high proportions of females are more concentrated than

are earnings distributions of female graduates who choose male
dominated professions. The simple correlation is about -0.4 in both sets
of years. There is a hint that the relation between percent female and the
coefficient of variation of wages has weakened somewhat in recent years.

Using a similar decomposition on 1989-90 CPS data yields regression
estimates that are no longer significant. We expect the variance of wages
in female professions to increase relative to male professions as women's

time commitments to the market continue to grow.

It is difficult to argue that differences in male-female ability
distributions account for the observed relationship between percentage of

females in an occupation and earnings variation, since variation only in

female wages are examined. Even if women are more homogenous in

terms of some underlying distribution parameters (controlling for
observables), this does not explain why male dominated occupations

apparently attract a broader array of females with respect to these
parameters. Nor does it explain why this relationship has been eroding

over recent years. The model presented here is consistent with both
aspects of the data.

IV. Summary and Conclusion
The empirical evidence assembled in this study strongly supports

the finding that the demand for teachers has increased over time and that

the supply price of successive cohorts of teachers has been rising. To
summarize:

Demand: The costs per student of elementary and secondary

28

education have increased for more than 30 years. The cost increase is
attributable to rising staff-student ratios, not to rising relative wages of
teachers. Teacher-pupil ratios have increased in a persistent, trend-like
fashion independent of total enrollments in the U.S. school system. Both

the trend and interstate differences in teacher-pupil ratios are positively

correlated with increasing labor force participation rates of women.
Gross relative earnings of teachers increased since 1967 because teachers

became more experienced and more educated over time. Standardized
comparisons reveal that the relative price of a "standard" teacher's time
was relatively flat over the period except for a decline in the late 1970s

to early 1980's.

Supply: The teaching profession traditionally has been the
primary skilled occupation of women, but that is changing over time.
Nearly 50 percent of women graduating college in 1960 entered teaching.

In 1990 less than 10 percent entered teaching. One of the attractions of

teaching careers to many women is the flexibility option, that wage
penalties due to labor force interruptions (associated with care of small

children) are small compared to other careers. We found that teachers
who took such leaves earned the same wage when they returned to work,

but that female college graduates taking leave from other occupations
suffered subsequent reentering wage penalties of almost 10% per year of

leave. Nurses and secretaries, two other occupations dominated by
women, are closer to other college graduates than to teachers in this
respect. The value of the flexibility option in teaching for an anticipated
3-year leave is estimated as about 5 percent of a teacher's human capital

value. We also showed that people who anticipate devoting less time to

29

labor market activity tend to rationally choose less risky occupations than

others. The proposition is supported by the finding that the relative
variance in the earnings distributions of women in female dominated

occupations is smaller than the earnings variance of women in male
dominated occupations.
We conclude with a few observations on the implications of this

research.

Teaching is one of the most attractive skilled occupations for
women desiring careers that accommodate family considerations. Yet the
value of flexibility is only 3-7 percent of teachers' lifecycle earnings, and

is not significant for nurses and administrative support staff. These
findings suggest that the flexibility option alone does not explain much

of the male-female wage differenital. Also, work schedules that are

complementary with child-rearing evidently play a large role in the
continued attraction of women to teaching. Finally, the value of career

flexibility to women has decreased as child-related interruptions have

become less frequent (Goldin (1990), Hill and O'Neil (1992)). This
trend is likely to continue.

The economics are best interpreted in the context of the
remarkable increase in the value of women's time in the past three
decades. Substitution of purchased teacher and staff inputs for parental

time in educational production is a rational response to the increasing
cost of own household time. Increasing labor market opportunities for
women will increase the quality-adjusted supply price of teachers in the
future. One observation that does not fit so neatly into this interpretation

is the decline in the real price of teacher's time in the late 1970's.

30

However, that temporary anomaly is explained by normal teacher market

response to the major demographic events that affected the educational

system in the 1970's. The build-up in the absolute stock of teachers
caused by the earlier enrollment bubble of the baby boom had to be
worked off when those cohorts left the system and total enrollments
declined.

The main alternative interpretation of growing expenditures is

built upon the political economy of changes in the organization and
control of public schools (Hanushek (1981), Hanushek, et. al. (1993b),
Peltzman (1993)). It traces the increase in school costs to the politics of
the shift in control of schools from parents to teachers, unionization and

the political process. Still, this interpretation does not account for the
drop in relative wages of standardized teachers to college graduates in
the late 1970's any better than the alternative, and raises other anomalies.

Teacher unionization jumped enormously between 1960-65 and was
relatively flat thereafter, while costs per student rose more smoothly and

uniformly. Nonteaching staff grew much more rapidly than teaching
staff in the past 30 years. Why would a self-interested union promote
greater growth of nonunionized administrative and other staff than of
teachers? And changing unionization is a poor explanation for interstate
differences in teacher-pupil ratios, but changing labor force participation

is a good one.
The two views are not mutually exclusive, but it is important for

the future quality of American education to gain greater understanding

of the true sources of recent changes in our public school systems. If
these changes have been largely political in nature, adopting policies that

31

enable parents to take back control of schools, offering greater school

choice, privatization and related reforms are attractive avenues for

improving the system. However, if as we think likely, the politics
mainly reflect changes in the structure of families, the value of time and
the structure of household production, such policies will be less effective

than advertised. Parents voluntarily transferring control to others is
rational when the labor market and the structure of families has changed

as it has. Teachers, staff and parents are imperfect substitutes in the
education of children. As parental time inputs into children decrease and

schools increasingly take on parental roles, the cognitive outcomes of

formal education are sure to be affected. Policies emphasizing only
administrative reorganizations of schools, without consideration of the

changing intereactions between schools and families, are likely to less
effective.

32

REFERENCES
Ben Porath, Yoram, "The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle

of Earnings," Journal of Political Economy 75 (Augst, 1967) 352-65

Cohn,

Elchanan and T. G. Geske, The Economics of Education (3rd

Edition), Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1990.
Flyer, Frederick and Sherwin Rosen, "Some Economics of Precollege
Teaching," in W. Baumol and W. Becker (eds.) Assessing Educational
Practices (MIT Press, forthcoming)

Fuchs, Victor and Diane M. Reklis, "Mathematical Achievement in
Eighth Grade: Interstate and Rational Differences," National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1993

Goldin, Claudia, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History

of American Women, New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1990.

Gronau, Reuben, "Sex-Related Differentials and Women's Interrupted
Labor Careers--the Chicken or the Egg," The Journal of Labor
ics, 6(Summer, 1988): 277-301

Hanushek, Eric A., "Throwing Money at Schools," Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 1 (no.1, 1981):19-41

Hanushek, Eric A., Steven G. Rivkin and Dean T. Jamison, "Under-

33

standing the 20th Century Explosion in School Costs," Univ. of
Rochester, June, 1992a

_____________________

"Improving Educational Outcomes While

Controlling Costs," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 37 (Dec., 1992b):205-238

Hill, M. Anne and June O'Nei!, "Intercohort Change in Women's Labor
Market Status," in Ronald Ehrenberg (ed), Research in Labor Economics

Vol 13, Greenwich: JAI Press, 1992.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Brooks Pierce, "Wage Inequality
and the Rise in the Returns to Skill," Journal of Political Economy 101
(June, 1993):410-442

Kierman, Jacob Alex and Arlene Leibowitz, "The Work-Employment

Distinction Among New Mothers," Journal of Human Resources. 29
(Spring, 1994):277-303
Mincer, Jacob and Haim Ofek, "Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation

and Restoration of Human Capital," Journal of Human Resources 17
(Winter, 1992): 1-23

Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek, "Family Investments in Human

Capital: Earnings of Women," Journal of Political Economy 82
(1974): 397-429

34

Murnane, Richard, J.D. Singer, J.B. Willett, J.J. Kemple and R.J.
Olsen, Who Will Teach? Policies that Matter Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1991

Nakamura, Alice and Masao Nakamura, The Second Paycheck: A
Socioeconomic Analysis of Earnings. Orlando: Academic Press, 1985.

Peltzman, Sam, "The Political Economy of the Decline of American
Public Education," The Journal of Law and Economics,36 (April, 1993,
Part 2):331-370.

Polachek, Solomon, Occupational Self-Selection: A Human Capital
Approach to Sex Differences in Occupational Structure," Review of
Economics and Statistics 63 (Feb, 1981): 60-69

Sandell, Steven H. and David Shapiro, "Work Expectations, Human
Capital Accumulation and the Wages of Young Women," Journal of
Human Resources 15 (Summer, 1980):335-353

Shapiro, David and Frank L. Mott, "Long-Term Employment and
Earnings of Women in Relation to Employment Behavior Surrounding
the First Birth," Journal of Human Resources 29(Spring, 1994):248-276

Shaw, Kathryn, "The Persistence of Female Labor Supply: Empirical
Evidence and Implications," Journal of Human Resources 29 (Spring,
1994):348-378

35

DATA APPENDIX
1) Cost estimates in table 1 are from the National Center of Education
Statistics (NCES) data.'1

Instruction - The NCES reports total number of fuiltime
equivalent (FTE) elementary and secondary teachers, their average
earnings, and total instructional costs for public schools. Average
earnings for both elementary and secondary teachers are multiplied by
the number of FTE teachers in each sector, and these earnings totals are
summed and subtracted from total instructional costs for public schools.
The remaining portion of instructional costs, not accounted for by teacher

salaries, are divided between the elementary and secondary sector based

on the ratio of aggregate earnings.

Imputed Rent and Depreciation - The social costs of tax
exemptions, foregone rent on school real estate, and depreciation on
buildings and equipment are imputed from Cohen and Geske's (1990)
estimates of school property values. We assume that capital user costs
are 10% of property values. Costs are allocated between elementary and

"In the decades 1960-1980 the NCES reported a separate
category called "fixed costs". The major components in this
category were pension and insurance costs. In order to make cost
statistics in these years comparable to 1990 statistics these costs
have to be allocated to other current expenditure categories. These
costs are divided between instruction, plant operation and maintenance, administrative, and other school services costs based on the
percentage of the total estimated wage bill that these categories
represented.

36

secondary schools based on the relative numbers of classrooms employed, calculated as aggregate enrollment at each level divided by the
published student-teacher ratio.

Cost of Plant Operation and Maintenance, Administrative and

other School Services are taken from the 1993 Digest of Education
statistics on public schools current expenditures. Classrooms employed

are also used to allocate these costs by school level. Expenditures on
custodial workers are not listed separately from expenditures on nonlabor

operation and maintenance inputs in the National Center for Education

Statistics data. An estimate of the labor component of operation and
maintenance costs is backed out of NCES estimates of plant operation
and maintenance workers, by assuming that their annual earnings in any

given year equal the average annual earnings for full-time employees in
all industries.

Transportation and School Supplies - Estimates of student-paid

transportation are extrapolated from cost data on school-provided
transportation in the Digest of Education Statistics, by assuming that
students who do not use school-provided services have the same average

costs as those who do. Student expenditures on books and school
supplies are estimated by assuming that secondary students purchase 12

books a year and that elementary students purchase 6 books a year. The

yearly cost per book comes from the National Center of Education
Statistics, Statistics of Public School Libraries I Media Centers, assuming

that the average cost of a book purchased by elementary or secondary

school libraries equals the average cost per book purchased by their
students.

37
2)

Staff-student ratios in table 3 are from the NCES Schools and

Staffing Surveys. Time series data in figure 1 are from the Department

of Education, National Center of Education Statistics. For about 30
years before the turn of the century, the teacher-pupil ratio steadily
decreased.

3) Class size: The increasing teacher-student ratios (from administrative

records) do not translate into equivalently decreasing observed average
class size. The National Education Association (NEA) reports 29 pupils

per elementary school class in 1961, and 24 in 1991. It reports average

high school class size of 28 in 1961, while the NCES School and

Staffing Survey reports average class size of 22.6 for teachers in
departments in 1990-91. These decreases in class size account for
roughly half the increase in teacher-student ratios. NEA data indicate

that teachers' average yearly class workloads have not diminished in
recent decades, and that average time spent in class by students did not
change. It is impossible to resolve these reporting discrepancies.
4) Changes in female labor force participation rates by state ,for equation

(1), are from the CPS March supplements 1976, 1981, 1986, and 1991.

Teacher-pupil ratios are taken from the NCES Digest of Education
Statistics, various issues.

5) CPS data used to estimate teachers and college graduates relative

earnings include observations ages 22-65, with 16 or more years of
education, and earnings over $2000 (1990 dollars).
6) The NLSY data in section III are college graduates with no more than

18 years of education, who worked at least 500 hours in any year after
graduation, and who earned wages between $3 and $50 (1990 dollars).

48,093.4
54,323.4
72,928.4

1970

1980

1990

44,32! 0
48,393.3

1980

1990
I

7,877.2

39,065.0

1970

7.512

6,616.9

15,635.6

4,144.9

15,456.9

13,897.7

13,298.1

9,861.2

4,655.7

4,187.7

3,235.8

1,643.6

12,326.2

8,909.4

8,285.9

5,534.0

Imputed Rent Transportation
and
Costs
Depreciation

1960

econdary School

24,381.0

1960

Elementary School

Instruction
Costs

TABLE I

I

2,022 4

2,416

2,522.1

1,637.1

2,087.8

2,368.9

2,536.4

2,164.7

5,350.5

2,856.9

1,999.4

749,3

11,009.2

5,040.4

4,018.3

1,782.8

6,632.1

6,060.6

4,150.8

2,053.9

13,646.2

10,692.5

8,342.3

4,886.8

4,326

1

1,893.3

847.2

342.4

8,901.4

3,340.3

1,702,6

814.8

Student
Administration
Plant
Other School
Purchased
Costs
Services
Operation and
Books and
Maintenance
School Supplies

Estimated Cost of Public Elementary and Secondary Education
(millions of 1990 dollars

78,892.2

69.6128

58,437.2

26,206.8

136,356.1

98,572.6

86,277.0

49,425.3

Total Costs

2,971

1980

Includes

281

370

597

226

177

370

281

226

177

528

462

445

464

438

362

315

Imputed Rent Transportation
and
Costs
Depreciation

and other

161

62

176

176

63

75

69

69

student services.

425

192

139

81

330

159

109

57

527

406

290

221

410

337

227

156

344

127

59

37

267

105

46

26

(1990 dollars)
Student
Administration
Plant
Other School
Purchased
Costs
Services1
Operation and
Books and
Maintenance
School Supplies

expenditures lbr health, attendance, speech pathoIog',

3,846

2,725

1970

1990

1,680

2,189

1960

Secondary School

1990

1,712

1,310

1970

1980

778

1960

ElementarySchool

Instruction
Costs

TABLE 2
Estimatedper Student Cost of Public Elementary and Secondary Education

6,270

4,667

4,076

2,816

4,093

3,106

2,350

1,577

Total Costs

TABLE 3

3.8
4.4
5.3

5.9
7.4
10.2
10.9

1970
1980
1990

0.2
0.3
0.3

0.2

0.2

1.2

1.4

0.4

0.1

00

0.2

0.2

0.1

0,1

0.1

2.2
3.0
3.4

1.7

1.2

Includes clencal personnel, transportation, food service, plant operation and maintenance, health,
and recreational staff members.

After 1950 includes librarians, and guidance counselors. Teacher aides were included
starting in
1970. Previously these employeeswere included under classroom teachers, however this does not
seriously
effect any of the numbers in 1950 or 1960 due to the small size of this group during those years.

5.8

3.6

5.2

1950
1960

Full.time Equivalent Staff per 100 Students in Public Elemantary and Secondary Schools
Year
Total Staff
Classroom Principals and
Other
School District Support Staff2
Teachers
Assistant
Instructional Administrators
Stall
Principals

TABLE 4

.27

1.72

5. 17

.154

Years Out of Labor
orce
Dccupational Tenure
years)
Work Experience (after
ollege graduation)

ercentBlack

709

'4urnheroi

lOt

Only observations with 16- 18 years of' education, reported wages between 3-S50, and
who worked at least 500 hours a t'tcr graduation are included.

711

292

204

\ge

)hservations

6,75

632

16.39

Education

300

227
107

.138

596

4.41

Percent not in SMSA
in last year observed)

.186

5.26

1,90

.68

.235

.369

.406

.ogWageDifference
1st and last job)
.48

10.12

12.66

Female Teachers

1479

Graduates
(excluding teachers)

Female College

WageofLastiob
in 1991 dollars)

Mate College
Graduates

Geometric Means of Selected Characterisics for NLSY sample

level in first

Interaction of OLI with
)ccupation dummy

)LF

.1836

.085
.1785
811

.1927

811

811

-.0638
-1.080)
1)123

.1762

)2.5l2(**

-.0700

-(1.032)

(2.357)

{3.773)*

-.0847
(-3 367(**

-.0524
.0374
(.420)

-.2685

{3,794)**

)ccupatlon dummy

-.0996

(.783)

.0323

(.586(

Its

ace-Oiswhite .

nonwhite

.845)

.0394

.0464

.05 tO

.0241

job

0162
(.398)

last

(1.317)

(.994)

and

.04 19
(.956)

.0444
(1.011)

.0575

(.852)
(.920)

.0417

-.1730
(-3.138)

.0451

-.1776

{3.213)**

-.1645

{2.995)**

-.0011

(-.557)

.0510

(-.56)

(-.46)

.0847
(3.344)**

(1.037)

-.0011

-.0008

.0836
(3.289}**

.0740
{3452)**

-.0069
(-2.710)

(1.557)

.0304

AdminstrativeSupport

(1.101

first

in education level

etwcen

hange

ducation

;msainfirstjob

msainlastjob

job

work experience)2

onwhite=l

total

otal work experience, after
:ollege graduation

-.0065

{-2.533)

-.0065

(2.532}**

occupational tenure)2

Nurses

.0300
(1.854)

.0360

Teachers

(I.854)

- 5% significancelevel

statistic in { ),
10% significance level

)ccupational tenure
in field

*

Regression Estimates of Log Wage Growth on Time Spent Out of the Labor Force

TABLE 5

TABLE 6

37

26

.163

7.87

8.34

431

.503

252

6.50

13.84

lOU

.360

2.34

6.64

12.00

Non-continuous
Careers

Careers

Continuous

OTHER COLLEGE GRADUATES

r more

Continuous career means that the individual was out of the labor force for less than 50
vecks, while non-continuous means that the nd,iduaI was out of the labor force for SO weeks

bservations

4umberof

og Wages

\verage Change in
.170

4.15

5.57

)ccupational Tenure
years)

7.61

7.36

10.39

9.17

7.31

8.46

Experience
years)

in 1991 dollars)

ast Wage

Starting Wage
in 1991 dollars)

Non-continuous
Careers

Careers

Continuous1

TEACHERS

Mean Wages in Starting and Last Jobs for Selected Groups of Female Graduates

$34,600

4

of a 40 year career uninterupted.

work force after working

It is assumed that teachers spend either 2, 3, or 4 consecutive years out of the
5 consecutive years initially, and then work the remainder

$18,000

$11,800

$20,100

3years

years

$7,200

$11,800

10% discount rate

2 years

Time Spent Out of the Labor Force

5% discount rate

The Option Value of Flexible Market Entrance and Exit for Teaching

TABLE 7

TABLE8

26
-.3982

-.40 14

.1585

.1612

28

.5186
{11.885)

2.170)**

{2.278)**
.4622
(lO,393}**

-.2034

-.2268

Data from 1980-81 CPS

nd work at least 5 weeks and at least 5 hours per week in the occupation.

Coefficient of variation of occupational wages are calculated using only college
ducated flmales, who earn at least $2000(1990 dollars), are between 31-34 years of age,

f Variation of Wages

percent Female and Coefficient

imple Correlation between

iumberof observations

onstant

ercent Female in Occupation

Data from 1976-77 CPS

Coefficient of Variation of Wages Regressed on Percent Female in Occupation'

4

2.5

0

f0 3.5..

a.

D

5.

6

10

I

20

I

30

I

40
year

50

I

III1
60

U.

Teachers per 100 Students in U.S. Public Schools 1900-9()

Figure 1

70

U.
—U.

U

80

90

U...

-0.04

U

V

I-

0

a

-0.02

U

-0.005

U

a

0.005

0.01

0.0 15

I

a

ajy
a

a
a
a
a

.

0.06

I. a
U
U

J8

a a

a

Change in Female LFP rates

a

a

0.1

0.12

0.14

State Data for 1975-199() (The arrow is the regression projection of equation (I), the coelicient on change in
female LFP rates is .0364, the t-statistic is 4.13, R-square=.104, and n=150)

Figure 2

0.16

25XYJ

35XQ

45000

65

.

4__

70

75
Yeac

80

85

Average Earnings of Teachers and College Graduates, (1990 dollars)

Figure 3

90

—Q—

1
elementary
—— secondary

—*•—college

Ui

Ci
Ui

C

0

0

C

0
0

O

0

-

0

cJ:
I—1-o
CO

-

o

0
0

0

0

0
o
o

0
0

°

0
0
0

0

0

0
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

.

0
0

0

0

0

L.J

0

.0
I

I

0

AdT1NI

(1

I

I

-,

—-

AdVONO33S

I

0

0

18000

19000

20000

21000

22000

23000

24000

25000

2o000

27000

28000
-

0

—

I

10

I

5

20
Experience

15

25

30

Earnings Profiles Generated with OPS 1983-1991 Data (females)

Figure 5

35

—0---

college graduates
teachers

0

0.1

0.2

0,3

0.4

0.5

o5

U

70

• •
U

75

I

U

•

Year

80

U

.

U

U.

85

U

U

U

• •

90

U

Percent of Female CollegeGraduates, Age 21-29 and Income> 2000$, Classified as
Teachers (CPS data)

Figure 6

95

