NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOME EQUITY INSURANCE

Robert J. Shiller
Allan N. Weiss

Working Paper No. 4830

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachuse Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1994

The authors thank Alvin KJevorjck, James
Mealey, Thomas O'Brien, and Debra Roberts for
helpful Comments. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any
Opinions expresseJ are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1994 by Robert J. Shiler and Allan N. Weiss. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not
to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4830
August 1994

HOME EQUITY INSURANCE

ABSTRACT
Home equity insurance policies, policies
of their homes, would bear some resemblance

vehicles. A menu of choices for the

insuring homeowners against declines in theprice

both to ordinaiy insurance and to financial hedging

design of such policies is presented here, and conceptual

issues are discussed. Choices include

pass-through futures and options, in which the insurance

company in effect serves as a retailer to homeowners of short

positions in real estate futures

markets or of put options on real estate. Another choice is a life-event-triggered
insurance
policy, in which the homeowner
pays regular fixed insurance premia and is entitled to a claim
if both there is a sufficient decline in the
real estate price index and a specified life event (such

as a move beyond a certain geographical

distance) occurs. Pricing of the premia to cover loss

experience is derived, and tables of break-even

policy premia are shown, based on estimated

models of Los Angeles housing prices 1971-91.

Robert J. Shiller
Cowles Foundation for Research
in Economics
Yale University
30 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8281
and NBER

Allan N. Weiss
President
Case Shiller Weiss, Inc.
1698 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

In this paper we describe insurance policies to enable individuals to

protect
themselves against the risks of declines in the price of their homes. As far as

we have been able to determine, there is no precedent for true insurance
policies on home price.1 And yet, despite the neglect of such home equity
insurance policies in the past, these policies could be extremely important. The

risk of decline in the market value of homes is far greater than the risk of fire

or other physical disaster; the potential significance of an insurance industry

that protects market value of homes is much larger than that of the existing
homeowners property insurance industry.
Since such insurance products have never really been attempted, there are

some fundamental problems to be worked out. There are two basic categories
of problems, which we will attempt to address here. The first is the economic

problem: creating policies that serve the particular needs of homeowners well.

We must make sure that the insurance policies cover as much of the homeowners' risk as possible without creating excessivemoral hazard problems, and

that the policies appropriately address the owners' uncertainties about selling
the home or otherwise making use of the home equity. The second is the
marketing problem, making the policies attractive to homeowners. Households

may have difficulties in dealing with speculative markets, difficulties in
confronting and managing speculative price movements. Policies that are
attractive to homeowners could be designed to minimize these difficulties. We

may also include under the category of marketing problems the preconceived

notions among the general public and regulators as to what constitutes a
credible insurance policy; the public will be more likely to buy a policy that
resembles others that they have learned to accept.

1There are innovative home equity assurance programs in the Chicago area,

see below. There are also shared-appreciation mortgages and risk-sharing

reverse mortgages.

1

At the lime of this writing, derivative markets for real estate are being
developed.2 It is appropriate at this time to consider how such markets could
be used to help insurance companies issue home equity insurance policies, by
allowing the insurance companies to manage the risks that they incur by writ-

ing the policies. Still, we think that home equity insurance might well be an
attractive product for insurance companies even if real estate derivative markets

fail to develop.

We do not believe that it is possible to settle at this time on a single kind

of insurance policy, and so we will here merely offer a menu of alternatives,
listing the advantages and disadvantages of each. Indeed, ultimately, a number

of different kinds of policies would likely be offered, to cater to the different
preferences and situations of different homeowners.

I. Basic Conceptual Issues
The insurance industry and the securities (and derivatives) industry are
essentially both in the same line of business — helping people manage risks.

And yet the institutions are fundamentally different in these two industries.
One important difference is in the payment structure of the risk-management

contracts. The insurance contracts traditionally pay out only when an unexpected casualty is incurred, usually a rare event. In contrast, holders of
securities contracts in effect see the value of their accounts change (positively
and negatively) whenever the market price changes, in principle every minute
of the day.

2Some private risk management policies for real estate have been imple-

mented. The London Futures and Options Exchange attempted to start a
futures contract in residential and commerciaJ real estate in 1991. Morgan
Stanley & Co., Inc. and Aldrich, Eastman and Waltclh, L.P., in 1993 completed

a swap of commercial real estate appreciation for an interest rate. We are
working with the Chicago Board of Trade to develop futures and options
products in real estate.
2

Business events affecting the value of securities, such as shares in

corpor-

ations, are usually not sudden and are not even objectively verifiable, and

so

traditional insurance contracts cannot be written on these events.
Thus, risk
management for owners of financial assets consists not of buying an insurance
policy against business risks to the finns issuing the financial instruments, but

of hedging in financial markets. The investor in a financial

asset may take a

short position in a futures market or buy a put option on the finaiic

asset

held. The price movements in the financial markets create an objectivity

to the

news, so that the owner of the financial asset can in effect receive

payment on

a "claim" whenever bad economic news reaches the market. Financial markets

thus in effect insure against bad economic news even though the

news itself is

not objectively verifiable.

Most economic risks to the value of real estate, like the risks to values of
shares in corporations, are everyday and hard-to-define events, and

are inher-

ently similar to these financial risks, rather than to risks that are traditionally
handled by insurance companies. Depending on how the contracts are structured, home equity insurance claims might tend, in effect, to come

every day,

like returns on speculative assets.
Because of the tendency for house prices to change gradually, traditional
insurance contracts cannot be written without some attention to the nature of
the time-varying information about the likelihood of claims. Consider insur-

ance policies insuring the risk of loss at time of next sale of the home for
which the homeowner pays a regular insurance premium. Such policies must
have some restrictions on the freedom of insurance companies to raise policy

premiums on existing policies. If insurance companies could raise premiums
on existing policies as much as they wanted whenever they wanted, then they

could raise the premium to such levels as to force cancellation whenever
aggregate real estate price indexes had declined enough to make claims appear

likely. The potential for such behavior of insurance companies would be to
3

negate the insurance function of the policies. Designers of insurance policies
would have to impose some rigidity on policy premia or else abandon the con-

cept of charging a regular premium for insuring the risk of loss on next sale
of the home. Imposing such rigidity on the policy premium makes the insurance contract share some characteristics of a put option, in which the cost of

insurance is settled at the beginning of the contract. As with the put option,
the insurance policy gains and loses value as the home price falls or rises.
Even though risk management via home equity insurance has resemblance

to risk management in financial markets, risk management for real estate is
different from that of many other speculative assets, in that the market for real

estate is very difficult to trade in, very illiquid. The result of this lack of
liquidity is that the real estate market is not efficient; real estate prices are
somewhat forecastable. A price decline in the real estate market may not be
"news," since price changes are partly known in advance. If a price decline is

already expected, then insurance companies cannot insure it.

Forecastablity of Real Estate Price Changes
For the purpose of clarifying the importance of the inefficiency of housing
markets for risk management,

we estimated a simple forecasting model for real
estate prices using Los Angeles annual price index data for each year 1971—

1991. The annual price index was the Case—Shiller quarterly price index for
the first quarter of each year. The estimated regression model is:

iMn(P)

0.037 +

0.635

iln(P_1) ÷

(0.028)
(0.209)
= 0.068 , R2 = 0.758

(1)
,

n = 19

Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Note that the coefficient of the
lagged dependent variable is significantly above zero, indicating that this price

series is not a random walk; rather, price changes tend to continue
through
time, therefore there is inertia in real estate prices. Such inertia in real estate
4

prices has been confirmed by Case and Shiller [1989, 1990], Poterba [1991]
and Kuo [1993] for the United States, and Ito and Hirono [1993] for Japan.
This simple model implies an unconditional mean annual log price increase

of 10.14% (computed from the above model as 0.0371(1 — 0.635)). It implies
that whenever the annual price change differs from that mean, then 0.63 5 (or

nearly 2/3) of that difference is expected to continue for the next year. This
autoregressive model can also be written in moving average form:3
Mn(P1) — 0.1014

c1 + O.635e + 0.6352cc z + O.63531 2 +

Since c1 is in this model serially independent, the variance of EilnP1 is the

(2)

sum

of the variances of the terms on the right hand side; this sum equals (0.06821(1
—

0.6352) or .0077. The one-year-ahead uncertainty about
MnF, however, is

due only to uncertainty about e, the lagged terms are already known. Thus,

the variance of the one-year-ahead

uncertainty about iMnP1 is only .0682, or

.0046, only about 60% of the total uncertainty of 0.0077. For this reason,
rolling over one-year risk management contracts may fail to insure a substantial

part of the total risk, unless the quantity rolled over is grossed up, as described

below. The situation is a little better with two-year contracts. At t—2, both c
and C1_1 are unknown; the total variance of these two terms is .0066, or 86%

of the variance of one-year price change. This is a substantial improvement

in the fraction of the variance that is insured; there is in this sense an
advantage to longer-horizon contracts.

With the particular stochastic process (1), it would still be possible for a
homeowner to hedge, even with short-term hedging vehicles, all of the risk of

31n using this model, we are disregarding measurement error in house price

indices, an error that introduces an errors-in-variables problem in the above
regression; see Case and Shiller [1989]. The annual changes in the Los
Angeles price index here, however, are very well measured, with standard
errors substantially less than one percent.
5

price changes in the home by grossing up the hedging, by hedging more than

one home. Note that it follows from (2) that the innovation at time t in
(natural) log price at time t+n, that is Eln(P+) — Etiln(P+), equals
((l—p')/(l—p))c. Regardless of n, the innovation at time t is proportional to

r' but the larger n the higher the constant of proportionality. The change in
the futures price between t—l and t is by many models directly related to the
innovation at time t in the price at the maturity of the

contract. Thus, shorter

horizon futures contracts could be used to hedge long horizon risk by just
hedging more (according to the constant of proportionality) in the short contracts than one would in longer contracts. However, stochastic models of price

other than (1) may not share this implication; if, for example, the model
implied that prices were fully known one period ahead, then one-year futures
contracts would be useless for hedging purposes.

The predictability of real estate prices has the potential to complicate the

process of hedging real estate risk beyond the level of complexity hedgers
already face in existing financial markets. This added complexity might also

make it difficult for insurance companies to explain home equity insurance
contracts, which are analogous to these financial hedging vehicles, to their
public.

Liquidity and Time—Manaement Problems

A conventional futures market requires that contractors (both short and
long) post margin, and see their margin accounts debited and credited on a
daily basis in response to changes in the futures price. Many people will find

it difficult to come up with the cash for a margin account under tothy's institutional arrangement. Moreover, the bother of having to deal with margin calls

is probably onerous for ordinary households. Homeowners could
escape
frequent margin calls by posting a high initial margin, but posting large

may be difficult for homeowners.
6

margin

Effective use of conventional financial hedging vehicles for risk man-

agement requires concentration and attention. For example, conventional
(American, exercisable on any date until the exercise date) put options have the

problem that the owner of the option must deal with the fact that it may be
advantageous to exercise early, and the same would be true with put options

on real estate. In those times when real estate prices are expected to rise
through time, since the strike price is fixed through time, the put is expected
to move out of the money, and holding a put option to maturity will generally

be a bad prospect; option holders must be prepared to exercise early. The
ability to exercise early creates problems for households, as they must then

monitor the put price and decide whether it is time to exercise early. The
problem could be prevented by making the put options European, i.e., specify-

ing that they cannot be exercised early as can American options. But this
solution might not be a good one unless the options effectively are marketable,

since a homeowner who decides to move will then want to get out of the
option contract. And if the options are marketable, then the household begins

to see problems that resemble those of other speculative assets; homeowners
would feel the need to consider whether the option should be sold for speculative purposes; the option creates burdens of time and attention for households.

A household may not be able, in times of high risk to real estate prices,
to afford the price of a put option initially, and would be forced to buy theput

on margin. But this would then mean that the household would perhaps be
unable to meet margin calls.
Ultimately, it must be recognized that homeowners are not likely to begin

to behave like financial managers; they do not have the training or mental set

to behave so. Any product that is sold to them must be in effect managed for

them; the product must be designed so that little or no initiative is expected
from the homeowner.
Because of the difficulty of managing hedging vehicles, it may be natural
7

for households to buy or sell contracts only at the time of purchase or sale of
the home, or at the time of refinancing of their mortgage. Given this, it would

be desirable to limit the risk management problem to one that appears only at
these times, and to combine the risk—management contracts with contracts that

are entered into at these times. At these times, the homeowner has legal
counsel and advice of others that would naturally be used to help make an
informed decision about risk management contracts as well. There are two

kinds of major contracts that a homeowner enters into at this time: the
mortgage contract, and the homeowners insurance contract; either could be
attached to a home equity insurance policy, or the policy could be a separate

product that is marketed at this time. If home equity insurance is attached to
mortgages, then it might serve marketing to sell only down-payment insurance

on mortgages, rather than price insurance on homes. This could mean that an
in-the-money put would have to be attached initially to the policy, and the put

would grow increasingly out-of-the-money, if only the downpayment is to be

insured, as the person pays off the mortgage. The homeowner would have
only the initial downpayment protected, not the amortization of the mortgage.

Restricting the policies in this way could bring down their cost, and facilitate

the marketing as part of a mortgage.
Making Insurance Contracts Assumable or Transferable

In the public mind, there is a sharp distinction between speculative assets

and insurance policies. A home equity insurance policy that too much resembles a speculative asset may not be accepted by the public, or regulators.

And yet, we want to avoid policy provisions that lock the homeowner into an
existing policy or home.

It is possible to make home equity insurance policies effectively marketable without turning them into speculative assets that the homeowner might feel

the need to buy and sell often: make the policies assumable by the next
8

purchaser of the home. If the insurance policy is assumable, then the new
homeowner would not have to pay any additional or higher insurance premiums

than were specified under the original policy. When home prices fall or are
expected to fall, the existing insurance policy may become more valuable, and

this extra value could become part of the package sold with the home.
Assumable fixed-rate conventional mortgages were widely available until
a 1982 U.S. Supreme Court decision (Fidelity Federal Savings v. DeJa Cuesta)

ruled that lending institutions may enforce due-on-sale clauses. These mortgages became unavailable then, but they have since reappeared in 1993. Their

attractiveness to homebuyers is certainly enhanced by the low current market

interest rates, and this attractiveness is now beginning to be exploited.4

Assumable mortgages and assumable insurance contracts are effectively
marketable by the homeowner only when the home is sold, and this feature of
the mortgages intertwines the marketing of the mortgage or insurance contract

with the marketing of the home. There is no appearance that any speculative
asset (other than the home) is being sold, and yet the selling price of the home
would generally be affected by the presence of an assumable policy, so that the

policy is effectively marketable as part of the home sale. An issue that would
arise, however, if these policies were marketable is that the new owner of the

home would have to come up with the purchase price equal to the intrinsic
value of the home plus the present value of the assumable policy. Therefore,
the buyer would need to convince lenders of the value of the policy if it is to

serve as part of the collateral for the loan.
The issue of assumability of home equity insurance policies mirrors that

of the assumability of mortgages. Assumability prevents a locked-in effect,
wherein a homeowner may sometimes feel that he or she cannot move without

4DMR Financial Services in 1993 started offering assumable fixed-rate
conventional mortgages for midwestern homebuyers.
9

losing a valuable contract. Making the policies assumable makes them serve

the homeowners' needs better, but on the other hand,

makes

the policy

premium higher. The public reception of the insurance policies might be
maximized by offering both assumable and non-assumable policies (the former

having a higher premium) and letting the homeowner choose between them.

An alternative to making the insurance policy assumable is to make it

transferable when the homeowner moves. There would then have to be a
mechanism, specified in the original policy, that determined the provisions of

the transferred policy, so that the approximate value of the existing policy is
transferred to the policy on the new home. This mechanism might be related

to prices in futures or options markets for real estate; even though such a
mechanism in the original policy connects the policy to speculative markets,
the relation is probably not one that would cause most homeowners to see their

policies as speculative assets.

Moral Hazard and Selection Bias Problems
In insuring the resale value of an individual home, the insurance company
must confront the fact that the value is influenced by a number of factors under

the control of the homeowner. Moreover, in insuring the value of an individual

home, the insurance company must worry that an unrepresentative sample of
homeowners will choose to become insured.

A homeowner who knows that all losses in value of the home are borne
by the insurance company will have much reduced incentive to maintain the
home properly; this is the moral hazard problem. To prevent this, there could
be terms in the insurance contract that allow the insurance company to reduce
payment on claims if there is evidence that the homeowner has not maintained

the property properly. S till, much of the value-maintaining activities that
should be undertaken by homeowners are not objectively verifiable. The dates

when many maintenance activities (such as painting the home or replacing the
10

roof) should be undertaken is a matter of judgment. Thus an insurance company may find it difficult to prove fault of the homeowner for not doing these
prior to sale of the home, even though failing to do these may adversely affect

the selling price of the home. A homeowner may redecorate or remodel the
home to idiosyncratic tastes, without concern for the resale value of the home,

and the loss of value on resale would be borne by the insurance

company.

There is a selection bias problem in that a homeowner who feels that he

or she paid too much for the home, and could not sell it for the same price,
would have a special incentive to buy home equity insurance, thereby putting

the expected loss onto the insurance company. The impact of this selection
bias problem could be reduced if the insurance company were to require one

or more independent appraisals of the home value at the time the insurance

contract is initiated. However, the appraisers cannot completely solve the
selection bias problem, since they do not know all the factors that contribute
to home value. The appraisers mistakes will then tend to result in losses to the
insurance company.

The combination of the moral hazard and selection bias problem could
potentially make for very large losses to the insurance companies. Home-

owners who have an incentive to take advantage of home equity insurance
programs could seek out such policies, and then poorly maintain their homes.
There could even be non-arms-length purchases and sales at nonmarketprices,

to defraud the insurance companies. Vigilance would have to be maintained
about all these potential problems, and such vigilance will impose costs on the
insurance companies.
Both the moral hazard and selection bias problems can be reduced, though

not eliminated, by coinsurance, by offering only policies in which the homeowner shares part of the loss. The selection bias problem can also be reduced
somewhat by making sure that policies are evenly geographically distributed,
and not concentrated in certain neighborhoods.
11

Another way of dealing with these problems is to offer insurance not on
the change in price of the individual home, but on the change in a real estate

index for the neighborhood in which the home is situated. The index could
also be made specific to the type (e.g., whether house or condominium) or size

of the home. This method ought to completely eliminate the moral hazard
problem and, so long as even geographical and type distribution is maintained,

the selection bias problem as well. Such policies would be very inexpensive
to offer, as no appraisals and no monitoring of the homeowner's behavior, are
needed. The insurance company might completely diversify risk in derivative

markets cash settled based on the real estate price indices. A disadvantage of
this method is that the geographical indices make some errors in predicting in-

dividual home price changes, so that the homeowner is not completely insured

against losses on sale of the home.
The two methods of dealing with these problems could also be combined:

there could be complete insurance of the price change that is due to aggregate
market conditions and coinsurance for the deviation of the home price from the

price change inferred by the index.
In what follows, we will assume that the home equity insurance policy is

based on the change in the real estate price index, and not on the price of the
individual home.

Cancelability of Policies
Conventional insurance policies can be cancelled at will by the purchaser.
It would seem natural, therefore, to make the proposed new policies cancelable

at any time too. However, making policies cancelable introduces a new element of uncertainty for insurance companies, that of predicting when policy-

holders will cancel. This uncertainty for insurance companies mirrors the
uncertainty that mortgage lenders face in predicting when homeowners will
prepay their mortgages. For mortgage lenders, prepayment uncertainty is a risk
12

that cannot be hedged well on conventional interest rate futures or options
markets. By the same token, cancellation uncertainty is a risk that cannot be
hedged well by insurance companies on real estate price futures or options
markets.

The uncertainty about cancellation of real estate price insurance policies

may be especially difficult to deal with because it may reflect strategic behavior on the part of homeowners. Homeowners may cancel theirpolicies just

when real estate price indexes have risen a lot, suggesting that it is unlikely
that they will have a claim under the original policy. They may also at times
suspect that real estate prices will rise; since real estate markets are essentially
inefficient, and since real estate prices show some inertial behavior as we have

seen, there may be times when they have good reason to know that they
should cancel. If insurance companies had previously contracted under
assumptions that people would not cancel, they may suffer a serious loss.
Indexation of Policy Premiums and Floors

Ideally, policies should be fully indexed for inflation, as measured by a

cost of living index such as the consumer price index. The policy should
insure against real, not nominal loss in value of the home, and the insurance
premium should be specified in real terms.

Now, most contracts today do not involve cost-of-living clauses, and so

one might imagine that the market is not ready for such clauses. But, the
importance of providing for changes in the cost of living is not so important

for other kinds of insurance as it is for home price insurance. The most
common risk that people face with their homes in an inflationary economy is

not that nominal home prices will fall, but that the nominal home prices will

not keep up with the cost of living. In, let us say, a period of 10% inflation

as measured by the cost of living, a homeowner whose property did not

13

increase would find that there were substantial real losses, that would not have

been insured by a policy on nominal prices.
Ideally, the indexation of policy provisions should be madepart of the first

standard policy that is offered, and not be made just an option. The general
public is likely to purchase the inflation protection only if it is presented as the

recommended choice, not just as another option. At a time of major
institutional change, we should try to get the initial contracts specified
optimally, so that imitators will be more likely to follow this course. On the
other hand, it may be harder to market indexed policies initially because they

will tend to have higher policy premia in an inflationary economy.

The importance of indexation to the homeowner may depend in part on

whether the homeowner has a fixed-rate or floating rate mortgage. With a
fixed rate mortgage, the debt is defined in nominal terms, and so it may be

more natural to insure the nominal value of the home. With floating rate
mortgages, where the interest rate responds to news about inflation, the debt

is more nearly defined in real terms, and then the homeowner may wish to
have an insurance policy defined in real terms.

H. Antecedents of Home Equity Insurance
We have not heard of any prior attempts to create comprehensive insurance

against declines home equity, but there have been attempts by local
governments in the Chicago area to offer insurance against part of the risks to

home equity.5 In 1978 the village of Oak Park illinois, a suburb of Chicago,

created an "equity assurance" plan in which participating homeowners who
have been enrolled for at least five years are reimbursed, when they sell their
5The shared-appreciation mortgages (see Ballew [1988]) and risk-sharing
reverse mortgages (see Scholen [1993], Passell [1994]) have aspects of home
equity insurance in them. Both are potentially important institutions for price
risk management; neither has yet become a nationally significant institution.
14

home, for 80% of the loss incurred if the home was sold for less than the

appraised value and if the loss was not due to an extended decline in the
metropolitan area. The participating homeowner is not charged any insurance
premium, and must pay only a $90.00 fee for the initial appraisal; the program

is financed by a small tax levy on all property owners in the village. This
program was created as part of a concerted effort by the village to prevent
neighborhood decline at a time of racial change, an effort that also included

such other measures as prohibition of for-sale signs, village inspections of
exteriors of homes, and laws against realtors' steering of homebuyers, see
Goodwin [19791.

A similar program, the "home equity assurance program" was created by

a voter referendum in the city of Chicago in 1987 and began in 1990. It
insures participating homeowners against all of the decline in value that is due

to changes in neighborhood conditions. With this program, any precinct that

voted to participate in the program has had an insurance fee, $6 to $25 depending oii appraised value, added to the tax bill of each resident. However,
only those homeowners in the precinct who have individually enrolled in the

program and paid for an appraisal (at $150) are covered by the insurance.

Those who enroll in the program have the right, after five years, to be
reimbursed for any loss due to decline in neighborhood conditions. As with

the Oak Park program, the program insures homeowners only against price
declines due to changes that are isolated to that neighborhood. The law that

created the program states that the program does not insure against any
municipal-wide decline in value. In a sense, the Chicago program (like the
Oak Park program) is the complement of, rather than substitute for, the index-

based home equity insurance proposed here: the program explicitly excludes

the risks that we propose to insure.

The Oak Park Program has never yet had a single claim; there has been
no major price decline in Oak Park since the beginning of the program. Since
15

the Chicago program has not existed for five years yet, there have been no

claims there either. The experience of these programs thus does little to
establish the viability of privately-issued home equity insurance.

The primary motivation for the Chicago area programs was to stem the
outflow of responsible residents due to declining neighborhood quality. The
hope was to break the vicious circle whereby an initial decline in neighborhood

quality causes people to try to sell for fear of home price declines, thereby
lowering the prices of homes, discouraging homeowner's investment in their
own neighborhood, and therefore generating more declines in neighborhood
quality. Such a vicious circle is widely held to be a mechanism whereby good

neighborhoods are converted into slums.6 As such, and with the very low
premiums, the programs are more naturally city, rather than private, initiatives.

The Chicago experience, while innovative, does not appear to be a reliable

model for private insurers to follow. Whether a home's price fell due to a
decline in neighborhood quality is a very subjective notion; there will inevitably be disputes. The Chicago programs have not been tested enough to
represent a valid precedent for other policies.

The Chicago programs have been a modest success in one sense: about

three percent of eligible homeowners in Chicago have participated in the
programs, about one to two percent of homeowners in Oak Park have partici-

pated. Still, while a few percent is enough of the population to make such
programs worthwhile, we might hope for more participation. The Chicago area

programs define the risks too narrowly, to exclude losses due to changes in

market conditions. The programs were not managed by professional private
insurance companies, and there are no financial incentives provided to realtors,

lawyers or mortgage lenders to enroll homeowners in the program. The
programs have no comniission salesmen; homeowners must themselves take the

6See Kelly [1991] for a discussion of these claims.
16

initiative to enroll. Many homeowners have been under the mistaken
impression that they are automatically enrolled. Moreover, some homeowners

have been deterred from taking action to enroll out of fear that having their
home reappraised might result in a higher assessed value and therefore higher

property taxes. The public demand for home equity insurance might be much

greater with policies marketed well by private insurers.

III. Pass—Through Futures and Options
The home equity insurance products that offer the least risk to the insur-

ance companies are those in which the insurance company is able to sell off

the risk that they incur in writing the policies. If, as we expect will happen

before too long, there are futures and options markets on real estate price
indices, then an insurance company could create insurance products that are

based on the contracts traded in such markets passed through to the homeowner. While at the present time there are likely to be regulatory obstacles to
insurance companies serving as retailers of futures and options products, it is

still important to consider the concept of such policies, leaving regulatory
issues to later discussion.
The simple pass—through futures and options insurance policies would con-

stitute the marketing, by the insurance companies, of the kinds of real estate

contracts that we envision may shortly be trading at the Chicago Board of
Trade. If the insurance companies are essentially selling market-traded contracts to the public, then they may completely hedge, in the options markets,
their underwriting risks related to these insurance policies.
With the pass—through futures, homeowners will see their accounts debited

or credited every day depending on the change in the real estate futures price
on which their policy is based. Such insurance policies would get homeowners

completely out of price risk on their homes, both on the upside and the down17

side. Such insurance contracts are potentially useful to homeowners, but there
may be some resistance among homeowners to giving up the upside potential

of their homes, resistance to paying money to the insurance company if the

values of their home increase. Such policies sound very unlike existing
insurance policies.
With the pass—through options, homeowners keep the upside potential for

appreciation of their homes, and are effectively insured against losses.
Homeowners may be offered by their homeowners insurance company, or via
their mortgage lender at the time that they buy their home, put options on real

estate price indices in their city, in proportion to the purchase price of their

home. Let us suppose that the put options have a maturity of two years. At
the end of two years, the payout by the insurance company would be exactly

the decline in value of their home (as inferred using the price of the home at

the time the insurance policy was written and the city-wide index of home

prices) below the exercise price, or floor, of the option. If the price of the
home (inferred by the index) did not fall below the floor, the homeowner
would not have a claim. The payment would be made ultimately by the writer
of the option, not the insurance company, which only passes through the pay-

ment. Thus, the insurance company incurs no risk in writing these policies.

The two-year maturity for the option was suggested for this example
because, as seen with our simple forecasting model equation (1), most of the
two-year-ahead price change is unknown today. This time horizon also seemed

a good choice for our example, since most people would not want to sell a
home in much less than two years from the time of purchase, and two years
represents something like the time frame for planning whether to move or not.

Of course, there is no reason why they would not want a longer insurance
horizon than their planning horizon, but the two-year (or perhaps three- or four-

year) horizon may have a sort of intuitive attractiveness to it, we think, and this

is what matters for marketing purposes. Many existing market-traded options
18

are traded with two-year horizons.

The pricing of options on real estate price indices introduces some diffi-

culties not encountered in pricing options on securities. We cannot use the
conventional Black—Scholes [1973J option pricing formula or its analogues
to price these, since these formulas rely on the fundamental assumption that the

price of the underlying asset is a Markov process. With the Black—Scholes
formula, the price of the option depends only on the current price, not lagged

price, of the underlying asset, but clearly prices of options on real estate will
depend also on the recent trend in prices. There is also another problem with

the Black—Scholes analysis. The Black—Scholes formula also relies on the
assumption that costless continuous arbitrage is possible between the option
market and the market for the underlying asset: with real estate this assumption is obviously unacceptable; transactions costs in real estate are enormous.
The derivation of prices of options on assets whose returns are predictable
here differs from that proposed by Lo and Wang [1994], who used an arbitrage

pjicing argument to derive their option prices. They noted that the original
arbitrage pricing formulation of Black and Scholes [19731 still provides the

same option price for given variance of returns even if expected returns are
predictable; options prices are not affected by expected returns, or by lagged
returns, once the underlying price is given. However, this conclusion follows
from the assumption that the underlying asset price is costlessly tradable and
is Markov. Under their assumptions, it follows that the option price is a simple

nonlinear transformation of the price of the underlying (and time) and hence
will generally tend to share, in a sense, any inefficiencies that are found in the

underlying market. This conclusion is strongly at odds with our presumption

that transactions costs are much lower in the options market than they are in
the real estate market. The same inefficiencies should not be expected in both

7See also Ingersoll [1987].
19

markets. It is of course possible that the creation of a derivative market in real
estate or of home equity insurance might alter the stochastic properties of home

prices, and might make home prices more efficient.

To price the real estate options, we will use here, in the tradition of the

early literature on options pricing of Sprenkle [1961], Boness [1964] and
Samuelson [1967], the simple assumption that the value of the European option

is just the present value of the expected payout and the assumption that prices
are lognormally distributed. The formula we derive will also have an interpretation in terms of the more modem theory of options pricing Out of equilibrium

of Constantinides [1978] and McDonald and Siegel [1984].8 To derive this
present value, we use the expression for the truncated mean E(z; z <a) for the
lognormal distribution f(z) where j.i is the mean of ln(z) and

is the variance

of ln(z):

I a\

a

Jzf(z)dz

e

1N

—

p. —

(3)

[ln(a)

where N() is the cumulative normal distribution function. The present value

of the expected payout of the put option is the present value of the exercise
price times the probability of exercise minus the present value of the expected

price of the underlying when the option is exercised. The probability of exercise is the probability that the price of the underlying is less than X; this prob-

ability can be calculated using the ordinary cumulative normal distribution
function. The present value of the price of the underlying when the option is
exercised is derived by substituting values for p. (the expected change in the log

real estate price index between today and t periods from today) and d (the
variance of the change in the log real estate price index between today and t

survey of the issues here, where the underlying market may not be
efficient or in equilibrium, may be found in O'Brien and Selby [19861.
20

periods from today) into the above equation and using X, the strike price, for

a, and premultiplying by the discount factor e

where r is the discount rate

and t is the lime to maturity. This gives us our real estate put option price w:
w(t, X, P,

i, a, r)

= Xe

N[th)

- Fe

-

N[mn

(4)

-i

- a]

where P is the price of the underlying (here, the price of the home as inferred
by the real estate price index) at the present time. A similar expression, based
on a somewhat different time series model, appears in Sutton [1994]. Note that
the formula (4) reduces to the usual Black—Scholes [1973] put option pricing
formula in the case where the underlying asset is expected to earn the risk-free

rate, i = rt

—

&t/2 and a2 = &t where

2 is the variance in the Black—

Scholes formula. As we shall apply this formula, however, we will take .t to

be the expected log price change between now and I periods in the future
according to an autoregressive model of the log real estate price index, as for

example equation (1) above. The formula (4) also reduces to the McDonald
and Siegel [1984] pricing formula for options whose underlying asset earns a

below-equilibrium rate of return if their equilibrium rate of return equals the
risk-free rate.

Let us now do pricing of one- and two-year options described above in

terms of the information we have in lagged price changes, as well as the
model, given in equation (1) above, of real estate price indices. In the auto-

regressive model Mn(P) =

pln(P1_1) +

c + c, with error variance a, when

we know the log price change over the preceding year then the expected total

growth over the next year is x = pMn(P_l) + c and over the next two years is

= (p + p2)iMn(P1) + (2 + p)c, and variance of the log price change over
over two years is a2 = (2 ÷ 2p + p2)a.
one year is a2 =
Table 1 shows the one-year, and Table 2 the two-year put option prices at
21

time t for various values of the just-observed price change Mn(P1). Note that
a two-year put is not always more expensive than a one-year put with the same

exercise price. These, or course, are European puts, that cannot be exercised
until the exercise date, reflecting our assumption that homeowners will not be

bothered with the problems of managing early exercise. With European
options, extra time to exercise is not always a benefit, since the longer maturity

may force one to postpone exercise until a less advantageous time.
Note that some of the option prices are quite high: when prices have been
dropping and when the exercise price is very high, the price of the put must of

course be high, since in these cases the purchaser of the option (homeowner)
can expect to be paid a large sum in two-year's time. It would seem likely that
marketing of options to the general public would be more successful with some

of the less expensive options. Some of the options prices are quite low. For
example, in a year when prices were unchanged, a two-year put option with an
exercise price of $90,000 (corresponding to an insurance policy with a $10,000

deductible) need cost only $255 dollars at time of purchase, or, one might say,

$128 per year of the two-year option. The insurance company could charge

this price, plus an implicit fee, for expenses, which we disregard in our
calculations here, and call it an insurance premium. Homeowners can have
'peace of mind' against price drops for a small sum.
Even an at-the-money two-year put option for a $100,000 home, corres-

ponding to no deductible at all, would only cost, at a time when prices were
unchanged, $1429 dollars, $715 per year for the two years of the option. This

put price may seem low at first glance for insuring a $100,000 home against
any price loss (due to aggregate market conditions). It should be remembered,

however, that in terms of actual loss experience in Los Angeles losses of any
substantial magnitude have been rare, and those losses that did occur tended to

be preceded by prior price declines.
An insurance company might then function as a sort of portfolio manager

22

for the puts, collecting from the homeowner each year an amount of money
that guarantees the floor value for the home for the next two years. If they are
to keep the homeowners as continuing customers, this means that the insurance

company might suggest each subsequent year that the person pay an additional
policy premium, and thereby extend the insurance for an additional year. After

the first year has elapsed, the original two-year put has been reduced to a oneyear put; the insurance company can charge for replacing this with a new two-

year put.

Let us trace through a couple of scenarios. Suppose that after a year of
unchanged prices a homeowner purchased a two-year put on a $100,000 home

with a strike price of $90,000 for the $255 shown in Table 2. Now suppose
that log house prices fell by 10%, so that the individual's home fell in value
to $90,484. Then the two-year put turns into a nearly-at-the-money one-year
put worth $2,971 (this number can be crudely approximated from Table I by
multiplying $3,585 times .90484); the put is worth much more since it is now
at-the-money; there is no longer a deductible when viewed from the new home

price. In year 1 the price of an at-the-money two-year European put for a
$90,484 home with strike price of $90,000 is $3,868. To extend the option
from one year to two, the homeowner would need to pay $3,868 — $2,971 =
$897,

or $449 for each of the two years remaining. This kind of additional

premium may be attractive to homeowners who have just seen the value of
their homes fall by 10%.

Alternatively, suppose that, after the homeowner initially purchased the
10,000 deductible policy when the home was worth $100,000, log home prices
increased the next year by 10%. The home, purchased originally for $100,000,

is now worth, as inferred from aggregate price indices, $110,517. Then the
market price of the two-year put for which the homeowner paid $255, now a

one-year put, has fallen, from equation (4), to $0: the exercise price is now
much further below the price of the home, and moreover, the price increases
23

portend more price increases. The loss of the $255 of course represents the
cost of insurance for the past year, when there was a gain rather than a loss on

the home. The homeowner is now still insured for another year, but with
prices rising, a fall below $90,000 is now extremely unlikely. In this case, it
is plausible that an insurance salesman could contact the homeowner for some

updating of the policy. At this time, the homeowner might find attractive
trading in the old policy for a new policy insuring the $110,517 home against
any decline below $110,000; the price of such a policy would be, by equation

(4), $295. Again, of course, the insurance company would also collect a fee,
to cover expenses, for this service, which we neglect in our calculations.
The scenarios we havejust described depict the rolling-over of overlapping

relatively short-term puts on the home price. We think that there is plausibly

a market for such insurance policies, though only a market test could prove
this.

Rolling over short-term puts, however, is not the same as purchasing a
single put that expires on the date that the homeowner ultimately sells. The

short-horizon insurance premia are as high as they are relative to longerhorizon premia in part because there is a chance that home prices will decline
in the next two years, and then, beyond two years, rise back to the initial price
before the individual sells. One who had followed the rolling-over of puts may

receive a payment for loss after two years, even though there was no ultimate

loss, and the initial premium must be high enough so that the insurance
company can make these unnecessary payments for such losses. Homeowners

may well want to purchase a put option whose exercise date coincides with

some life event that relates to their purchase of sale of real estate: for
example, they may want an option that matures when they ultimately sell the
home and move a distance away. Unfortunately, they do not know when they

will ultimately sell and move. But, to the extent that these life events are
exogenous random events, the insurance company can pool the risk of uncer24

tainty about exercise dates; this brings us to life—event—triggered insurance
policies.

IV. Life—Event—Triggered Insurance Policies

With a life—event—triggered insurance policy, the homeowner will receive

payment from the insurance company only when there is indeed a loss expen-

enced by the homeowner. A loss is defined as a situation in which a life event
(such as a move to another city) causes the homeowner to suffer from declining prices; normally price declines have no effect on homeowners who continue

to live in the same homes. To the homeowner, such a policy is in effect a put
option whose exercise date is contingent on this life event, although of course
the insurance policies would not likely be called put options to the homeowner.

Insurance companies might be able to charge even lower premiums for
life—event—triggered insurance policies than they would for the pass—through

options described above, since the life events on which claims are contingent
may be fairly rare. Consider a policy for which the life event is defined as the
sale of the home. Insuring against losses on sale dates may not be very expensive for insurance companies, if sale dates are randomly distributed, since few

people buy at the peak of the market and also sell at the trough.
To give some preliminary indication of the loss experience that insurance

companies can expect, we have computed the average annual total claim per
home sold twice for insurance policies on $100,000homes in Los Angeles and

New York, where the life event is defined as any sale of the house. We are
assuming that the insurance company pays a claim to the homeowner when the
homeowner experiences a loss between sales as defined by the index, and when

the loss is beyond the deductible. The quarterly data set for both cities runs
from 1985 first quarter to 1993 third quarter, a time period that includes some
striking price drops in Los Angeles. From the peak in the Los Angeles market

25

in the second quarter of 1990 until the end of the time period, the index
declined 21.8%. (The peak to trough decline in the New York index in this
sample was 10.3%). A homeowner who purchased a home in Los Angeles for

$100,000 in the second quarter of 1990 and sold again in the third quarter of
1993 would have lost, according to this index, $21,800. A $10,000 deductible

policy would pay a claim of $11,800 to this homeowner. And yet, the overall
loss experience for an insurance company would be drastically smaller than this

sale pair would suggest, since this time interval is only one of hundreds of
possible time intervals between sales. Table 3 gives the annual average claim
(loss beyond the deductible between sales when there is a loss, otherwise zero,

divided by 4.17, the average interval between sales) on the assumption that all

of the 378 possible sales intervals greater than or equal to two years that are

contained within the range of 1985 first quarter to 1993 third quarter occur
with equal frequency. The average claim for a $10,000 deductible policy is
only $144 per year for Los Angeles and less than $1 per year for New York.
The policy premiums could be indeed even lower given that many homes did

not sell twice in this period. The policy premiums would be yet lower if the
life event definition were to exclude some sales, as sales to buy a nearby home.

This simple analysis is meant to be suggestive only; we now turn to formal
modeling of the insurance costs.
We envision life—event—triggered insurance policies as resembling ordinary

insurance policies in many details. The homeowner pays a fixed annual premi-

um until the homeowner decides to cancel; the homeowner is free to cancel at

any time. Coverage continues against losses until the homeowner cancels the

policy. The policy has a deductible, which defines a floor below which the

policy starts to pay out. The floor is the price of the homes at the time the
insurance policy was taken out minus the deductible. If the price of the home,

as inferred by the initial price corrected by an index of neighborhood real
estate prices in that homes price tier, falls below the original price minus the
26

deductible, and if the homeowner is eligible for a claim on that date, as when
the homeowner must move and sell, then the insurance Company pays the loss

below the floor (as inferred from the price index) to the homeowner and the
policy is cancelled. To the extent that the dates at which homeowners become
eligible for claims (as by moving) are known, the insurance company, in writ-

ing the policies, is in effect writing a number of real estate put options with
various exercise dates. The exercise dates would be the dates of eligibility for
claims.
It was noted above that it would not make sense to create policies in which

the insurance provider has unrestricted ability to change policy premia on
existing policies; they would rationally raise premia whenever the real estate
price index appeared to be approaching a level at which claims would be paid.
We suppose here that the insurance company cannot change the policy premi-

um after the policy is first issued.
Of course, homeowners choose when to sell, and might do so strategically,

to take advantage of insurance companies; for the put option interpretation the

exercise date may in effect be stochastic and influenced by market prices. But

homeowners' willingness to sell for such a reason is likely to be limited, and
the policy may be so written that they cannot use their insurance unless they

have a real loss. For example, claims generated by home sales may be
restricted to instances in which the individual moves more than some threshold

distance, say 50 miles. Or, the policy may pay a claim only if the person

moves to another area where real estate prices have not fallen as much; the
claim could be based on the difference between the price behavior in the region

of the insured property and the region to which the homeowner moves. Such
restrictions on a policy makes it into a life—event—triggered insurance policy,

in that it compensates only for actual losses, and at the same time may make
it possible for insurance companies to offer the policies at a lower premium.

A concern is that, even if we try hard to define life events that appear to
27

be beyond the control of policyholders, some policyholders may somehow still

manage to influence the life events so that they can collect For example, a

homeowner might deliberately move more than the threshold distance to
collect. Liquidity-constrained policyholders may be especially likely to do so.

On the other hand, policy holders who are not liquidity constrained may feel

no urgency to move in order to collect, knowing that they can do so at any
future time. Realistically, we think that, although insurance companies must
expect some losses due to policyholders' influencing life events, life events can

be defined so that most homeowners will not alter the events in order to
collect.

To the extent that life events are really exogenous and predictable for the

average policyholder, and if puts of all the relevant maturities were traded in
the options markets, then the insurance company that writes the policies could

hedge its risk of losses by buying the puts whose expiration dates correspond
to expected the life—event dates. Hedging the risk by buying puts eliminates

all real estate price risk to the insurance company. It does not, of course,
eliminate risks due to the uncertainty about the aggregate frequency of life

events. Thus, hedging such insurance risk with real-estate put options is
analogous to hedging mortgage portfolios in the treasury bond futures markets.

In both case, a price risk is hedged, but a risk as to the cancellation behavior
of homeowners is not hedged (in the mortgage case, this is prepayment risk).

In practice, while there has been talk of creating puts on residential real

estate, long-horizon puts may not be traded soon. Other risk-management

techniques can be used by issuers of the insurance policies: the insurance
companies can try to diversify the geographic regions in which policies are

issued, can limit the quantity of such policies. Moreover, dynamic hedging
strategies involving real estate futures markets might be used to simulate the

put options, or policies could be securitized and sold, or real estate swap
agreements could be entered into.
28

In order to get a rough indication of the premiums required on such poiicies, and to get some idea how insurance companies should price such policies

in the absence of real estate put option markets, which do not yet exist, we
have computed break-even policy premiums using the assumption that the cost

of providing the policies is given by the price of the portfolio of put options
that the policy represents under the assumptions about eligibility of claims just

described, and using our put pricing formula (4) and equation (1).

For this exercise, we suppose that a fixed proportion a of all policies are
canceled by the policyholders each period, because of such factors as moves

(whether beyond the threshold distance or not). Moreover, we assume that a
proportion b of all policyholders at a given time become eligible for a claim
each year (as by moving more than a threshold distance), and receive a claim

if the price index has fallen enough to indicate that their home value is less
than the floor, and cancel their policies. Clearly, under these assumptions b is
less than a, since not all cancellations are incurred at times when the person is
eligible for a claim. The insurance company would thus have b times the value

initially insured in all homes for which policies were written in one-year puts,
(1—a) times b in two-year puts, (1—a)2 times b in three-year puts, and so on.

Let us suppose that the insurance company invests all policy premia in a
riskiess asset that pays the interest rate r. The total value of all the puts
(relative to the value of the initially insured housing) can then be found by

creating a weighted sum of the put prices with these portfolio values (b,
(l—a)b, ...) as weights. Let us use C to denote this weighted sum generated

using (4) above:
C

b(1 -a)1w(t, X, F,

t, ,

r)

(5)

=
generated recursively starting with Po = 0 by
is also
= MnP, and where
=
+ c and
+ it where
+ d where c =
generated recursively starting with y = 0 by CT =
where

is

pp

29

c((l_pt)/(l_p))2.9 The present value of a $1 per year insurance premium,
starting today and continuing each year until cancellation, is V = 1/(1-(1-a)d)

where d is the discount factor, d = 1/(1+r) where r is the interest rate. The
required annual premium for a single home, so that the insurance company can

expect to break even in terms of loss experience with these policies, is then
c/V.
As a way of getting some rough indication of the parameters a and b, we

turn to U.S. Census data on population mobility. In 1992, the total U.S.
population in owner-occupied units was 165.61 million persons, of these 14.79

million, 8.93% of the total, moved; a first guess at the parameter a would thus

be 8.93%. To get an indication of the parameter b, we note that 5.87 million,

3.54% of the total population in owner-occupied units, moved to another
county, and 2.81 million, 1.70% of the total population in owner-occupied

units, moved to another state.m Thus, a first guess for the parameter a
would be 3.54% or 1.70%, depending on the distance threshold the move that
defines eligibility.

The cancellation rate a might differ from the 8.93% for several reasons.
Notably, people may have reasons other than a move to cancel their insurance

policy. This consideration suggests that the cancellation rate might be higher
than 8.93%. Moreover, the census figures represent moves by individuals, not

sales of homes. Some of the moves are the result of children growing up and

moving out to live on their own; this consideration suggests that the cancellation rate might be less than 8.93%.

Eligibility for insurance claims should not be triggered by a move to

9As above, these parameters refer to the autoregressive model LMn(P) =
pln(P_1) + c + e with error variance , as exemplified by equation (1).
10See Hansen [1993], Table B, page IX.

30

another county or state, since some people live on the border of counties or

states, and such moves may be short-distance. Often, long-distance moves
occur at times of family breakup, and in these times not all members of the
family move far away; some work would have to be done defining more precisely how to define eligibility for insurance claims. Thus, we cannot translate

the Census figures into any clear indication of the parameter a. For the purposes of our simulations, let us merely assume that the distance requirement
is set at such a level that only 3% of households are eligible for claims each

year. Moreover, let us assume that 9% of all households cancel each year.
Table 4 shows the simulated break-even premia in markets in which the aggre-

gate price change had various values in the preceding year.
Some of the estimated premiums may seem implausibly small. Note from

Table 4 that even for a zero deductible, the fixed annual premium initiated in

a period of stable prices to insure a $100,000 home forever is only $33 per
year. How can the insurance company afford to insure a $100,000 home forever against price declines for only $33, when the standard deviation of the log

price residual in the first-order autoregressive model (1) is 6.8% in the first
year alone? The premium is so low since most homeowners will not actually
sell within the time that home prices are likely to be low, and for most home-

owners inflation will eventually push their home prices well above the floor
price.
The assumption that the model (1) will continue to hold indefinitely might

be questioned; many believe that we have entered a low-inflation monetary

policy regime that will have permanently lower inflation rates. Moreover,
some might question the assumption that only 9% of policyholders will cancel

per year. Table 5 was produced in the same way as Table 4 but with the
alternative assumption that the long-mn inflation rate is only 3% per year and
the cancellation rate was much higher, at 15% per year. That is, the constant
term in equation (1) was lowered from .037 to (1_-0.635)*.03 = 0.011, and the
31

parameter a was raised to 15%; all other parameters were left unchanged. The

break-even annual policy premiums look somewhat higher, but there are still
some policies that are quite reasonably priced: for example, a zero-deductible

policy issued in a time of stable prices is still only $145 per year.
The annual policy premium calculations presented here are meant only to
be illustrative; much further work remains to be done to refine the forecasting

model for real estate prices and to estimate probabilities of cancellation.

V. Conclusion
The simple insurance policies that we called pass—through futures and
options, but which need not be so described to the public, may well be attrac-

tive, easily marketed, and easy to risk-manage for insurance companies. On
the other hand, our life—event—triggered insurance policies, that look more like

conventional insurance policies, may be even more attractive to the public,
albeit harder for insurance companies to hedge. We feel that the life—event—
triggered insurance policy described above, in which the household sees itself
insured against losses connected with defined life events, may be an important

option for initiating home equity insurance, in terms of its general
marketability, serviceability, and acceptability to insurance regulators. The
life—event—triggered insurance policies will not cover households against all

consequences of price declines in real estate, but the policies do significantly

improve the households' ability to manage their risks.

32

Table 1
One-Year Put Option Prices for $100,000 Home
In terms of Actual Price Growth of Preceding Year

X (Exercise Price)
$80,000

$90,000

$100,000

$110,000

$45

$1,546

$7,714

$16,321

$3

$321

$3,585

$11,088

$19,860

0%

0

$35

$1,075

$6,057

$14,225

10%

0

$2

$181

$2,304

$8,550

20%

0

0

$16

$526

$3,788

LMn(P)

—20%

$120,000

$25,184

—10%

The parameter X is the strike price or exercise price of the option, the parameter iMn(P11) is the actual change in log price over the preceding year. For
these calculations, the interest rate r was 6% and the one-year-ahead standard
deviation of price was 6.78%.
Source: These calculations depend on the first-order autoregressive model for

changes in log price, equation (1) in the text as well as the options pricing
formula, equation (4).

33

Table 2
Two-Year Put Option Prices for $100,000 Home
In terms of Actual Price Growth of Preceding Year

Mn(P)

$80,000

X (Exercise Price)
$110,000
$100,000
$90,000

$120,000

—20%

$929

$4,009

$9,939

$17,771

$26,374

—10%

$176

$1,261

$4,518

$10,366

$18,029

$20

$255

$1,429

$4,590

$10,124

10%

$1

$31

$291

$1,404

$4,428

20%

0

$2

$36

$275

$1,215

0%

The parameter X is the strike price or exercise price of the option, the parameter LMn(P_l) is the actual change in log price over the preceding year. For
these calculations, the interest rate r was 6% and the one-year-ahead standard
deviation of price was 6.78%.

Source: These calculations depend on the first-order autoregressive model for

changes in log price, equation (1) in the text as well as the options pricing
formula, equation (4).

34

Table 3
Break-Even Analysis on Loss Experience
for Selected Markets
Annual Costs for a $100,000 Home Deductible
$5,000

$10,000

$20,000

Metropolitan Areas Using Actual Indices
Los Angeles 1985—93

$292

$144

$3

New York 1985—93

$158

0

0

Note: Figures give average claim per home sold twice assuming a claim is
paid whenever a home is sold at a loss beyond the deductible after two or more

years, assuming all possible intervals greater than two years are equally
represented. The price indices are the quarterly Case Shiller Home Price
Indices for the metropolitan areas.

35

Table 4
Calculations of Annual Premium for
Life—Event—Triggered Home Equity Insurance

Initial Home Price $100,000
As Function of Log Price Change over Previous Year
Using Price Model Estimated Using Historical Los Angeles Data

X (Home Price Minus Deductible)
$80,000

$85,000

$90,000

$95,000

$100,000

—20%

$34

$56

$89

$136

$196

—10%

$12

$20

$34

$57

$92

$4

$6

$11

$19

$33

10%

$1

$2

$3

$5

$9

20%

0

0

$1

$1

$2

Mn(P1)

0%
•

Notes: These figures were produced using equation (5) shown in the text using
equations (1) and (4) to produce C, and dividing by V, the expected present
value of policy premiums, under the assumption that 9% of homeowners move
(and then cancel) and that 3% of homeowners are eligible for a claim by virtue

of life event, each year. The figures give the annual premium such that the

insurance company will expect to break even, in consideration of loss
experience only, on this policy.

36

Table 5
Calculations

of Annual Premium for

Life—Event—Triggered Home Equity Insurance

Initial Home Price $100,000
As Function of Log Price Change over Previous Year
Moderate Inflation Regime
X (Home Price Minus Deductible)
$80,000

$85,000

$90,000

$95,000

$100,000

—20%

$143

$200

$276

$369

$475

—10%

$72

$103

$147

$207

$285

0%

$33

$49

$70

$100

$145

10%

$15

$22

$44

$64

20%

$7

$9

$19

$27

A1n(P)

$31
$13

Notes: These figures were produced as in Table 4 except that here the constant
term in equation (1) was changed to 0.011 (reflecting a lower, 3%, assumed
steady-state inflation rate) and the cancellation rate was increased from 9% per
year to 15% per year (reflecting an assumed faster defection of policyholders).

37

References

Ballew, Lynne, "Affordable Housing Through Secondary Markets," ABA
Banking Journal, p. 20, November 1988.
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, "The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities," Journal of Political Economy, 81: 637—54, 1973.

Boness, A. James, "Elements of a Theory of Option Value," Journal of
Political Economy, 72: 163—75, April 1974.

Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller, "The Efficiency of the Market for Single
Family Homes," American Economic Review 79: 125—37, 1989.

"Forecasting Prices and Excess Returns in the Housing Market,"
AREUEA Journal, 18: 253—73, 1990.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Allan N. Weiss, "Index—Based Futures and
Options Markets in Real Estate," Journal of Portfolio Management, Winter
1993.

Constantinides, George, "Market Risk Adjustment in Project Evaluation,"
Journal of Finance, 33: 603—616, May 1978.

Goodwin, Carole, The Oak Park Strategy: Community Control of Racial
Change, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1979.
Hansen, Kristin A., Geographical Mobility: March 1991 to March 1992, U.S.

Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration,
Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, Population Characteristics, P20—473, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C., 1993.

Ingersoll, Jonathan E., Theory of Financial Decision Making, Rowman &
Littlefield, Totowa New Jersey, 1987.
Ito, Takatoshi, and Keiko Nosse Hirono, "Efficiency of the Tokyo Housing
Market," Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies, 11: 1—32, 1993.

Kelly, Austin J., "Legislating Racial Stability: The Guaranteed Home Equity
Program in Chicago," unpublished paper, U.S. General Accounting Office,
Washington D.C.

38

Kuo, Chiong—Long, 'Serial Correlation and Seasonality in the Real Estate
Market," unpublished paper, Yale University.
Lo, Andrew, and Jiang Wang, "Implementing Options Pricing Models When
Asset Returns are Predictable," unpublished paper, M.I.T., Cambridge MA,
1994.

McDonald, Robert, and Daniel Siegel, "Option Pricing When the Underlying
Asset Earns a Below-Equilibrium Rate of Return: A Note," Journal of
Finance, 39(1): 261—65, March 1984.

O'Brien, Thomas J., and Michael J. P. Selby, "Option Pricing Theory and
Asset Expectations: A Review and Discussion in Tribute to James
Boness," Financial Review, 39—418, 1986.

Passell, Peter, "Tapping Home Equity to Cushion Old Age," New York Times,
Section 10, page 1, Sunday, January 30, 1994.

Poterba, James M., "House Price Dynamics: The Role of Tax Policy and
Demography," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 143—99, 1991.

Samuelson, Paul A., "Rational Theory of Warrant Pricing," Industrial
Management Review, 6: 13—31, Spring 1967. Reprinted in Paul A.
Cootner, The Random Character of Stock Prices, MIT Press, Cambridge
MA, 1967.
Scholen, Ken, Retirement Income on the House, NCHEC Press, Apple Valley,
MN, 1993.

Creating Institutions for Managing
Society's Largest Economic Risks, Clarendon Lectures Series, Oxford
University Press, 1993.

Shiller, Robert J., Macro Markets:

Sprenkle, Case M., "Warrant Prices as Indicators of Expectations and
Preferences," Yale Economic Essays, 1(1): 179—231, Fall, 1961.

Sutton, Greg D., "A Probabilistic Model of Housing Price Inertia with

Applications to Pricing Options in Real Estate," unpublished paper, Yale
University, 1994.

39

</ref_section>

