                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERiES




                               THE DISTRIBUTION OF
                            EXCHANGE RATES IN THE EMS




                                        Charles Engel
                                       Craig S. Hakkio




                                  Working Paper No. 4834




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1994


We thank Tim Schmidt for excellent research assistance. Bob Chirinko, Andrew Filardo, and
seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the University of florida, the
University of Washington. Clemson University and the System Committee on International
Economic Analysis provided helpful comments. The material contained herein is of a
preliminary nature and is circulated to stimulate discussion. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

C) 1994 by Charles Engel and Craig S. Hakkio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4834
                                                                                     August 1994

                                 THE DISTRIBUTION OF
                              EXCHANGE RATES IN THE EMS


                                          ABSTRACF


       Exchange    rates of currencies in the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the EMS are

characterized by long periods of stability interrupted by periods of extreme volatility. The

periods of volatility appear at times of realignments of the central parities and at times when the

exchange rate is within the ERM bands. We begin by considering a procedure for finding

outliers based on measuring distance as a quadratic form. The evidence suggests that the

exchange rates of the EMS can be desci-ibed by a mixture of two distributions. We therefore

model the exchange rate as switching between two distributions--one that holds in stable times

and the other that holds in volatile times. In particular, we use Hamilton's Markov-switching

model. In addition, we extend Hamilton's model by allowing the probability of switching from

one state to another to depend on the position of the exchange rate within its EMS band. This

model has the interesting implication that near the edge of the band, large movements--either

realignments or large jumps to the center of the band--are more likely if the move to the edge

of the band has been precipitous.



Charles Engel                                               Craig S. Hakkio
Department of Economics                                     Research Division
University of Washington                                    FederaiReserve Bank of Kansas City
Seattle, WA 98195                                           925 Grand Avenue
and NBER                                                    Kansas City. MO 64198
   Exchange rates of currencies in the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM)
of the European Monetary System (EMS) are characterized by long periods
of stability interrupted by periods of extreme volatility. The periods of
volatility appear at times of realignments of the central parities ir the ERM,
and at times when the exchange rates are within the ERM bands. In this
paper, we argue that EMS exchange rates, like many exchange rates, are
not normally distributed. lit addition, the distribution of EMS exchange
rates is quite different from that of more freely floating rates. We model
the exchange rate as switching between two distributions—one that holds
in stable times and the other that holds in volatile times.
   We begin with a preliminary examination of the data, comparing the
behavior of weekly changes in the French franc/DM and Italian lira/DM ex-
change rates to the behavior of the doilar/DM and the Japanese yen/DM ex-
change rates. We show that the exchange rates under the EMS and floating
systems behave considerably differently. In addition, we show that a single
normal distribution does not adequately describe EMS exchange rates.
   More specifically, the first section considers a procedure for determining
outliers. "Outliers" is the term used by statisticians to describe observations
that do not conform to the pattern suggested by the majority of observations.
In this paper, we will say that outliers come from the volatile period. The
procedure is based on measuring distance as a quadratic form, as in the
recent work of Hadi (1992, 1993). EMS exchange rates have more outliers
than floating exchange rates, but EMS outliers are less volatile than floating
rate outliers. This evidence suggests that the exchange rates of the EMS can
be described by a mixture of two distributions. Furthermore, EMS outliers
tend to cluster together.


                                      1
    The outliers are not merely realignment dates. Sometimes there are large
week-to-week changes of exchange rates within the ERM bands. This is not
surprising for the lira, which had very wide bands during much of the time
it was participating in the ERM, but it is also true, to some extent, for
the franc. Conversely, sometimes when a realignment of the central parity
occurred, the new bands overlapped with the olds bands, so that a jump in
the exchange rate was not necessary.
    We proceed from these observations to estimate a stochastic process for
EMS exchange rate changes assuming that exchange rates are distributed
as a mixture of two normal distributions. Furthermore, the preliminary ex-
amination of the data showed that there is some persistence in the "state"
of the exchange rate. While realizations from the volatile distribution are
infrequent, they are more likely to occur if the exchange rate was in the
volatile state in the previous period than if it was not. Consequently, we
let the probability that the exchange rate is drawn from the "volatile" or
"stable" distribution in any period depend on which distribution the ex-
change rate was drawn from in the previous period. So, Hamilton's (1989)
Markov-switching model is applied to the EMS exchange rates.
    We then extend the Hamilton model by allowing the probability of
switching from one state to another to depend on the position of the ex-
change rate within its EMS band (as opposed to Hamilton's assumption of
constant switching probabilities). We find that the probability of staying in
the volatile regime is higher when the exchange rate is near the top of its

    'Subsequent to our first two revisions of this paper, we received Mundaca (1994), which
fits a version of the Hamilton model estimated for several Scandinavian currencies that
forces regime breaks at times of realignments. It assumes constant switching probabilities
between states.


                                            2
band. This reflects the fact that around times of realignments (which have
always been upward realignments for these exchange rates) the exchange
rates are volatile. But, interestingly, we also find that the probability of
staying in the stable regime is also higher when the exchange rate is near
the top of its band—assuming the exchange rate was already in the quiet
regime. This finding can be given the following interpretation. It is not
accurate to model the exchange rate as being more likely to have a large
jump—either because of realignment or a large intervention that pushes the
exchange rate toward the center of the band—when the exchange rate ap-
proaches the edge of the band. It matters how the exchange rate approached
the boundaries of the target zone. II it moved there gradually, then large
change changes in the exchange rate are unlikely, If it moved there pre-
cipitously, then further volatility is likely. The fact that the probability of
a realignment depends on the regime rather than. depending on predictive
variables in a linear way could explain the general lack of success of previous
model of realignments. (See Svensson (1992) and Rose and Svensson(1993).
Note, however, that Chen and Giovannini (1993) find some ilmited success
explaining realignments using the distance of the exchange rate from the
center of the band and the length of time since the previous realignment.)
   There is a connection between our approach and the literature that in-
vestigates the frequent occurrence of outliers in exchange rate changes in
floating exchange rate regimes. See, for example, Baillie and Bollerslev
(1989), Boothe and Glassman (1987), Diebold (1988), Koedijk, Schafgans,
and de Vries (1990), and Koedijk, Stork, and de Vries (1992). As in that
literature, we emphasize the non-normality of the exchange rate. However,
we concentrate on the peculiar features of the exchange rates in the ERM,


                                      3
a_s OppOSNI to tlIC' aiOrrIIIeflti(ilI('(i St11411P5 which focus oil floating exchange

rates.
    it might seem natural to ino(lel the exchange rate in the EMS as a mixed
diffusion-jump process. Akgiray and Booth (1988) and Tucker and Bond
(1988) model floating exchange rates in this manner, and Ball and Roma
(1993) apply the diffusion-jump model to EMS exchange rates. However, an
aspect of the exchange rates in the EMS, alluded to above, is that volatility
tends to cluster. That is, it is not true that EMS exchange rates can be
described as having periods of stability broken by jumps caused by realign-
ments. instead, there seem to be periods of volatility around the time of
realignments, and occasionally at other times. Furthermore, these periods
of volatility often last for more than 1 week at a time. Thus, it seems natural
to describe the exchange rate as being drawn from two regimes—a stable
regime and a volatile regime—with some persistence in the regimes. So,
the likelihood of a volatile period is increased if the current state is volatile.
Indeed, effectively we reject a discrete time version of the jump-diffusion
model because we find statistically significant evidence of persistence in the
states.
    One possible way to model clustering of volatility is with GARCH, as in
Baillie and Bollerslev (1989). In the EMS, however, the clusters of volatility
appear abruptly, as if there were a sudden switch in regimes. So, it is
more natural to segment the time series into periods of small and large
 changes in exchange rates. It is possible that ARCH could provide additional
explanatory power within the context of a regime-switching model (that is,
 regime-switching and ARCH are not mutually exclusive). Hamilton and
 Susmel (1992) develop such a model, which they label SWARCH, but we do


                                           4
not pursue that here.
   Section I investigates the data using quadratic distance measures. Sec-
tion 11 introduces the Hamilton Markov-switching model and provides esti-
mates of the stochastic process for EMS exchange rates. Section III extends
the Hamilton model by allowing time-varying transition probabilities. The
methods of sections I—Ill provide algorithms for choosing periods of highly
volatile exchange rates. We compare the estimated periods of volatility from
each of the three methods in section IV. In section V, we discuss why the
statistical distribution of exchange rates matters for international portfolio
selection.


I A DISTANCE APPROACH FOR IDENTIFY-
   ING OUTLIERS
In this section we use a statistical procedure to determine which observations
are outliers. We also compare the behavior of EMS aad non-EMS exchange
rates. Let e denote the percent change in the exchange rate, measured as
100 *[ln(Et) — ln(Et_i)]. In this paper, we focus on two EMS exchange
rates—the franc/DM and the lira/DM—and two floating exchange rates—
the dollar/DM and the yen/DM. We use weekly data: noon buying rates,
from New York City, on Tuesday (Wednesday if Tuesday is unavailable).
The sample period is March 20, 1979 to September 8, 1992 (for the lira) and
to October 23, 1993 (for the franc, dollar, and yen). The first observation
was chosen since the EMS was formed on March 13, 1979. September 8, 1992
was the last observation for the lira since Italy withdrew from the ERM on
September 17, 1992.


                                      5
   The approach for identifying outliers was developed by Hadi (1992,
1993). Those observations which come from the tails of the empirical dis-
tribution of c are said to be outliers, while those observations that come
from the center are said to caine from the stable period. We will say that
observations from the stable period come from F(e). The basic idea of Bath
is simple: all observations that are "close" together belong to F(e), and all
other observations are outliers. "Close" is defined by measuring distance as
a quadratic form, which should be distributed x2

1.1     The Rule for Classifying Observations
How would someone find an outlier if they knew there was only one outlier?
First, for each observations form two groups: one group is the single obser-
vation and the other group is all other observations. Then, calculate the
distance from the single observation to the center of all other observations.
The center is calculated as the mean (or median); distance is measured rel-
ative to the dispersion of the data (the variance). The single outlier is then
that observation for which the distance is maximized.
      A similar approach could be used to find multiple outliers. Suppose we
knew there were exactly two outliers. Consider all pairs of observations,
and let the remaining T-2 observations come from F(e). Then, calculate the
distance between each pair of observations and the center of F(e). The pair
of outliers is then that pair for which the distance is maximized. As long
as the number of outliers is known in advance, the procedure for finding
outliers is straightforward, but time-consuming.
      However, if the number of outliers is unknown, the problem is more dif-
ficult. One must determine how many outliers exist and which observations

                                      6
are outliers. The discussion of the solution presented here is intuitive; see
Hadi (1992, 1993) for a more detailed discussion.
   The procedure to find outliers is iterative.

  1. Begin with a two element set, denoted 12(e), that is most likely to not
     contain any outliers. ("F" is used as a reminder of "F," and 2 as a
     reminder that it is a two element set.)

  2. Increase the size of F3(e) to about half the observations. In this step,
     let r denote the number of observations in the set. Rank the observa-
     tions by the distance between the observation and the center of Ffr),
     relative to a measure of dispersion. Continue until F7(e) has half the
     observations.

  3. For this step, let r again denote the number of observations in Fr(e).
     Rank the observations by the distance between the observation and
     the center of F(c),   and   test whether observation r + 1 is an outlier.
     Observation r+1 is then compared to a x11, statistic, because distance
     is measured as a quadratic form of normals.

      (a) if the distance is greater than          set F(e) = F(e) and the
          remaining observations are outliers. Stop.
      (b) if the distance is less than        increase the size of .1 to r + 1,
          denoted       (e). Repeat step 3.
      (c) if F(e) contains all the observations, there are no outliers. Set
          F(e) = all observations and there are no outliers. Stop.




                                       7
1.2 The Distribution of EMS Exchange Rates
Table 1 summarizes the exchange rate data according to the distance rule.
The table shows the number of observations and the standard deviation for
observations from the stable period and for the outliers. Two facts are clear.
First, EMS exchange rates have many more outliers than floating exchange
rates. Second, the standard deviation of EMS exchange rates is much less
than the standard deviation of floating exchange rates, for both the stable
period and the volatile period (outliers).
    Figures 1 and 2 show when the outliers occur. The vertical lines rep-
resent realignments in the French Iranc/DM exchange rate and the Italian
lira/DM exchange rate. There were only two dollar/DM outliers (Septem-
ber 24, 1985 and September 15, 1985) and four yen/DM outliers (December
11, 1979, December 9, 1980, August 11, 1981, and September 15, 1992).
Two conclusions follow from the figures. First, not all outliers occur at
the time of a realignment. Second, some realignments do not correspond
with an outliers. That is, outliers are neither necessary nor sufficient for a
realignment.
   We now turn to testing whether outliers and observations that belong to
F(e) cluster. We use a nonparatnetric runs test. Define an indicator variable
that equals 0 if e E F(e) and 1 if e is an outlier. The null hypothesis is that
the Os and is occur randomly over time. That is, outliers do not duster.
The results strongly suggest that the observations for the franc (p value is
0) do cluster, while the lira, dollar, and yen do not cluster (p value of 0.76,
0.93, and 0.73). So, floating rates do not exhibit clustering of outliers, while
the results are mixed for EMS exchange rates.



                                      8
      To summarize, floating exchange rates, like the dollar/DM and yen/DM,
behave differently than EMS exchange rates. Outliers are more frequent in
the EMS, but they are also less volatile. EMS exchange rate changes seem to
fall into two distinct categories: very large changes and very small changes.
There are few realizations that fall in the middle ground. This contrasts with
floating rates, which exhibit a wide range of outcomes. We conclude that
the EMS exchange rates are drawn from a mixture of two distributions—one
which has a high variance and one with a low variance. Since there is some
evidence that volatile periods tend to cluster together, we are led to model
the EMS exchange rates with Hamilton's (1989) Markov switching model.


II THE SWITCHING MODEL
The previous section implies that the stochastic process for exchange rates in
the EMS can be based on a mixture of probability distributions. In addition,
since outliers tend to cluster, we estimate Markov-switching models for EMS
exchange rates, as opposed to diffusion-jump processes.

11.1 The Rule for Classifying Observations
We assume there are two possible states of the world: the "stable" state
(s)   and   the "volatile" state (v). The stable state occurs most of the time,
while the volatile state occurs less frequently. We do not exogenously choose
which periods are stable and volatile. Instead, we assume that the exchange
rate is described by a mixture of normal distributions. The parameters of
the distribution are the mean and variance in the stable state, p anda, and
the mean and variance in the volatile state, p and o. In addition, there are


                                        9
parameters which determine the probability of the stable and volatile state
occurring. These parameters are all estimated to maximize the likelihood
function.
   We could model the probability of each state occurring at any date as
being independent of the state the exchange rate was in during the previous
period. hi this case, there is a fixed probability it of state s occurring,
and a probability 1 — ir of state v occurring. This model is essentially the
discrete time analog of the mixed process estimated by Akgiray and Booth
(1988) and Tucker and Pond (1988). It implies that the probability that the
exchange rate is in the volatile state in period t is independent of whether
the exchange rate was in the stable or volatile state in period t-1. If this
were accurate, then the exchange rate changes would not exhibit volatility
clustering.
   However, as discussed earlier, it appears that a volatile week is more
likely to occur if the previous week was also volatile, and a stable week is
more likely ii the previous week as stable. if this is tnie, Hamilton's (1989)
Markov-switching model would be appropriate. In this case, we let it3 be
the probability that a stable week is followed by a stable week, and it,, be
the probability that a volatile week is followed by a volatile week. We do not
impose the restriction that ir3 =   1   —
                                            ire,   as would the independent switching
model. We will present tests of this restriction.
   In the next section we estimate a time-varying transition probability
model. To nest the model of this section in the model of the next section,
it is convenient to parameterize the model slightly differently than does
Hamilton. We actually estimate the paraters 0, and Ox,, defined by



                                            10
                                                 Ce.
                                    —
                                             1   +
                                                 COy
                               liv =
                                             1+e6U

    The parameters of the model—p5, Mv,                c, O, On—are estimated to max-
iinize the likelihood using the procedure described in Hamilton (1989) and
Engel and Hamilton (1990).

11.2     The Distribution of EMS Exchange Rates
Table 2 presents the parameter estimates. The first thing to note is that for
all currencies the variance of the exchange rate in the volatile state, o, is
much larger than the variance in the stable state, o. So, it is natural to
think of the two states as being high variance and low variance states.
    The mean of the exchange rate in the volatile state (high-variance) is
positive and larger than the mean in the stable state (low variance). This
is because the mark tends to be revalued relative to the other currencies
during realignments.
    The mean change in the nominal exchange rate is small but positive in
the stable state. This is because there is a slight tendency for currencies
to depreciate against the mark when the exchange rate remains within the
bands, but the average change is very small.
   The probability of staying in the stable state in period t+1 if the ex-
change rate is in the stable state in period t, given by it,, is very high for
all currencies. This is because the periods of stability are relatively long-
lasting. In fact, the expected length of stay in state s is given by 1/(1 —

                                        11
hr thi' franc/ DM rate. 7r3 = 0.953, so the stable state lasts 21 iiionths.
   We   cannot say with certainty whether the exchange rate change on any
date was drawn from the volatile distribution or the stable distribtuion. We
can follow the practice, however, of classifying an observatiDn as being drawn
from the volatile distribution if the Bayesian probability of it being from that
distribution is greater than 0.50. Given the parameters of the distribution
(we treat the parameter estimates as being the true parameters in these
calculations), the "filter probability" that a given observations comes from
state s is the probability that the exchange rate at time I is from state
s, conditional on all observations in the sample up until time I. Using this
classification, all French franc/DM realignments occurred during the volatile
period; 2 Italian lira/DM realignments occurred during the stable period and
7 realignments occurred during the volatile period.
    AS in previous sections, we test whether observations that come from the
volatile distribution (specifically, observations for which the filter probability
of coining from the volatile state is greater than 50 percent) tend to cluster.
Using the runs test, we conclude that observations from the volatile period
do tend to cluster.
    For this model, we can test the hypothesis more specifically. The Markov
switching model is distinguished from the independent switching model be-
cause it does not impose the condition that 7r + 7r =     1.   Using the equation
for ir, and ir3, this condition is equivalent to O + t, = 0. Using a likelihood
ratio test, we can reject this hypothesis with a p-value of 0.0 for the franc
and a p value of 0.028 for the lira. So, there is strong evidence against the
simple independent switching model.
    In this section we have assumed that the probability of moving from

                                        12
one state to another is constant. That does not seem like an adequate de-
scription of the situation in the EMS, where often speculative attacks make
it seem much more likely than usual that an observation will be from the
volatile distribution this week if it is near the outer band. In the next
section, we move beyond the Hamilton model to allow the transition prob-
abilities to vary over time in a way that takes into account the likelihood of
a realignment.


III A TIME-VARYING SWITCHING MODEL
The previous section assumed that the probability of switching from the
stable state to the volatile state (and the volatile state to the stable state)
is constant. In this section, we generalize this assumption: we let the prob-
ability of switching states depend on how far the exchange rate is from the
upper band. For example, suppose the exchange rate is in the volatile state
and very close to the upper band. The time-varying transition probability
model allows the probability of staying in the volatile state to be greater
in this case (than if the exchange rate were at the central parity). In other
words, if the exchange rate is likely to be more volatile when it is near the
upper band, then we want to allow the probability of being in the volatile
regime to be greater.

111.1 The Rule for Classifying Observations
Estimating a time-varying transition probability model is very similar to
estimating a constant transition probability model. In the previous section,
ir3 was constant; in this section, we let it, = w,(Zg_1) and   ir = ir(zt_i).

                                      13
More specifically, let



                  =      Prob[statet = stable   state...j = stable, zt_i]
                  =
                         1   + éi+t_i
                  = Prob[statet = volatile state..i = volatile, zt_j]
                  =
                         1   + e°2+°—

Eight parameters are estimated:
   Our estimation procedure extends the work of Hamilton (1989) to al-
low for these time-varying transition probabilities. Other recent studies
have examined time-varying transition probabilities in a Markov-switching
framework. Diebold, Lee, and Weinbach (1992), Filardo (1994), and Zhu
(1993) discuss some of the econometric issues in estimating these models.


111.2 The Distribution of EMS Exchange Rates
The results are presented in Table 3. zj is the percentage distance from the
upper band. More specifically, Zt = 100[ln(uppert) — ln(Ej)], where tipper
equals the upper band and E equals the actual exchange rate. As it turns
out, the estimates of p.,, Pu, a, cr are similar to those reported in Table 2
for the constant probability model.
   We find 9 and e are both negative. It is easy to show that sign(Oir/Bzt_i) =
sign(01). This means that the probability of staying in state v, if we are
already in it, is greater the closer the exchange rate is to the top of the band
(Zt_i smaller). In other words, it is more likely that a volatile realization
will be followed by a volatile realization when the exchange rate is far from

                                        14
the central parity.
   This result is somewhat similar to the result of Ball and Roma (1993).
In their jump-diffusion process, they find that the probability of a jump is
greater the farther the exchange rate is from the central parity. There are
two reasons why our result is different—one minor and one signficiant. The
minor reason is that we model the probability as depending on the distance
from the top of the band. We prefer that formulation because for the lira the
width of the band changed during our sample. Hence, as the band narrows,
being close to the top of the band corresponds to a smaller distance from
the center.
   The more significant difference is that we are not modeling the uncon-
ditional probability of the volatile state as a function of the position in the
exchange rate band. Rather, in addition to depending on the location of the
exchange rate in the band, we model the probability of the volatile state as
being conditional on the current state—that is, our model is of the Markov-
switching rather than the indpendent-switching variety. We capture the idea
of volatility clustering with the Markov-switching model, because being in
the volatile state makes it more likely to remain in the volatile state. This
property is not in the independent switching model, or the jump-diffusion
model. So, our finding that O is negative does not mean simply that the
volatile state is more likely when the exchange rate is at the top of the band.
It means that it is more likely conditional on the exchange rate being in the
volatile state.
   This distinction is important because we also find that O is negative.
That means that conditonal on being in the stable state, remaining in the
stable state is more likely when the exchange rate is near the top of the band.


                                      15
EMS exchange rates have experienced long spells near the top of the band, as
central banks fight off realignment. These spells are often broken eventually
by realignments, but sometimes the exchange rate drops back toward the
central parity. This result is not inconsistent with O being negative. We
can interpret the two findings simply as saying that a transition from the
stable state to the volatile state is more likely to occur when the exchange
rate is near the center of the band, but a volatile state is more likely to
follow a volatile state state near the top of the band.
    We later discuss the restrictions placed on the model if the switching
probabilities are independent of the state but dependent on the position
within the band. One of the restrictions is that O = —O. This condition
relates to the discussion above. The independent switching model, and the
jump-diffusion model, insist that either the volatile or the stable state is
more likely irrespective of the state last period. So, the finding in that
model that the volatile state is more likely near the top of the band would
hold even if the state last period were stable. The fact that we find that
both O   and O are negative is inconsistent with that conclusion. We later

reject that conclusion—that is, we reject the discrete time version of the
Ball and Roma model.
   As in previous sections, a date is classified as being in the volatile state
if the filter probability of the volatile state is greater than 0.50. Figures
1 and 2 show which observations come from the volatile distribution. MI
French franc/DM realignments occurred during the volatile period; 2 Italian
lira/DM realignments occurred during the stable period and 7 realignments
occurred during the volatile period.
   As in previous sections, we test whether observations that come from

                                       16
the volatile distribution tend to cluster together. Using the runs test, we
conclude that observations from the volatile period do tend to cluster.
   Our specific test for volatility clustering is testing the Markov-switching
model against the model in which the probability of the volatile (or stable)
state can depend on Zt_1, but does not depend on the state in the previous
period. This independent switching model imposes rs(zc_i) =
for all realizations of Zg...1. This condition is equivalent to O = —O and
  = —O. We reject that restriction with a p-value of 0 for the franc. This
is not surprising since 9 and O are estimated to be of the same sign as
and 9. However, we cannot reject the hypothesis for the lira, the p-value is
0.13. The reason is that O and O are insignificant, so the test cannot reject
that 9 = —O and O =

rv HOW DO THE THREE RULES COMPARE?
We have presented three different rules for choosing which observations come
from the stable period and which observations come from the volatile period.
To simplify notation, we define two distributions: observations from the
stable period come from F(e), and outliers and observations from the volatile
period come from G(e). This section compares the results from the four
rules.
   Figures 1 and 2 show the observations assigned to G(e) for a the distance
rule and the time-varying parameter model. While the rules do not always
pick the same observations to put into G(e), they do seem to pick out many
of the same observations.
   Table 4 can be used to compare how the four rules assign franc/DM


                                     17
observations to F(e) and G(e). The table is actually 3 two-way tables. In
the table, "FTP" denotes the "fixed transition probability" switching model
and "TVTP" denotes the "time varying transition probability" switching
model. For example, the FTP/Distance subtable compares the FTP rule
with the Distance rule. It shows that the two rules assign observations to
F(e) and G(e) in a similar way. Of the 723 observations that belong to F(e)
based on the Distance ruie, 694 were put in the F(e) distribution and only
29 were put into the 13(e) distribution when using the FTP rule. Similarly,
of the 40 observations that belong to 13(e) based on the Distance rule, all 40
put in the G(e) distribution when using the FTP rule. The other subtables
are read in a similar way.
   Since the table is several two-way tables, we can test whether the alloca-
tion of observations by the three rules are related. We can calculate Fisher's
exact test. The probability is 0 for each pair. Therefore, even though the
rules are different, they are basically picking the same outliers.
   It would be possible to construct similar tables for the other exchange
rates. However, they look very similar to Table 4. In addition, Fischer's
exact test for association between the rules yields a probability of 0. As
with the franc, the rules are basically picking the same outliers.


V IMPLICATIONS OF TWO DISTRIBUTIONS
   FOR EMS EXCHANGE RATES
As Boothe and Glassman (1987) point out, there are at least two reasons
to investigate the nature of the stochastic process underlying exchange rate
movements. First, the distribution of the exchange rate matters for statis-


                                      18
tical tests of open economy models. Second, theoretical models in interna-
tional finance often rely upon specific distributional assumptions. We take
up the second argument in this section. We contrast the optimal portfolio
choice of an investor when the exchange rate is normally distributed and
when it is drawn from a mixture of normal distributions. This section is
not a full-fledged study of intertemporal asset demand, as in the study of
Park, Ahn, and Fujihara (1993) for the jump-diffusion process. It is set in
a two-period framework, and is intended to illustrate the importance of the
distributional assumption for asset choice.
   We look at the asset choice of an individual with a one-period horizon.
We assume that the investor has an exponential utility function. We choose
this function because it is well known that with this function, and with
returns distributed normally, the investor who maximizes expected utility
will choose a mean-variance efficient portfolio. We will contrast the optimal
portfolio choice for this investor when returns are normally distributed with
the optimal portfolio choice when returns are drawn from a mixture of nor-
mal distributions. In the this case, the optimal choice of the expected utility
maximizer cannot be characterized simply as the choice of a mean-variance
efficient portfolio.
    The individual's utility function exhibits constant absolute risk aversion:


                               U(C) =

    Suppose at time 0 the agent allocates wealth to maximize expected utility
at time 1. Because the agent consumes all wealth at time 1, expected utility
of consumption at time 1 simply equals expected utility of wealth. Let the


                                      19
asset choice be between a foreign and domestic security: 47o = b +   56.
   The assets could be denominated in nominal terms—so utility depends
on nominal wealth, and S is the nominal exchange rate. In that case, b
is denominated in the home currency and b in the foreigu currency. Al-
ternatively, investors might only consume the home good. Then, wealth is
denominated in terms of that good. b* is in terms of the foreign good and
S is the price of the foreign good in terms of the domestic good Under this
interpretation, S is the real exchange rate.
   Assume that neither security pays interest and that their prices are fixed
at one in terms of their own currency (or good). Then wealth in period 1
given by:



                             MT1 =   b+51b=W0+ob

                                         so
                              b   = S0b

   The asset choice problem becomes one of choosing Li to maximize


                                  Eo( _c""6)
Since   r°-"O   is   constant, the problem reduces to maximizing


                                     —



   116   is distributed normally with mean t and variance c2, then using the
moment generating function for a normal distribution, we can write


                                         20
                                  =

The first order condition is ti—baa2 = 0. If we define 1? = aW0 = the degree
of relative risk aversion, and A'' = b/W0 = the share of the portfolio held
in the risky foreign asset when returns are normal distributed, then

                                        P
                                 f"... RO
   Now, consider the asset choice when S is distributed according to the
switching model. We assume that there are two possible states of the world.
Changes in the exchange rate are distributed normally conditional on the
state of the world. The stable state occurs most of the time. The exchange
rate has low variance in the stable state. The volatile state occurs less
frequently and is characterized by higher variance.
   The parameters of the distribution are the mean and variance in the
stable state, p and a, and the mean and variance in the volatile state,
panda. In addition, there are parameters which determine the probability
of the stable and volatile state occurring. Let it be the fixed probability of
state s occurring and 1 — it be the probability of state v occurring.
   With these definitions, we now have


                       =                   + (1 —

The first order condition can be written




               o   =         — RA)eM8+(1U)2h12

                                      21
                      +(i — r,j(gu, — RAa)e_R0+(H2d712                     (2)


    This first order condition cannot be solved analytically for A except in
some special cases. Notice that the choice of A depends on all five of the
parameters of the distribution: p, ,u,_i, a, a, iv. In particular, A cannot be
expressed in terms of simply the mean and variance of 6. The mean of 6 is
given by


                                                                          (3)

and the variance of 5 is given by


            a2=varo(6)=7ra+(1_ir)cr+(1_1r)ir(ps_pv)2                      (4)

   We will consider a series of examples which illustrate how the portfolio

choice differs from the one chosen under the normal distribution, which does
depend only on the mean and variance.

V.1 Example 1
Suppose that the variance of the exchange rate in each state was zero, so
that c = 0    and cy = 0. Note that this does not mean that the exchange
rate is not risky. The exchange rate still has a positive variance because
it can jump between its value in the stable state, p, and its value in the
volatile state, Pv.
   if p > 0 and p, > 0, then A = .        Recall that the safe domestic asset
pays off zero with certainty. The foreign asset, in domestic currency terms,
would always have a higher payoff under this scenario, whether the state was


                                     22
normal or abnormal. investors would always be better off with the foreign
asset. The return on the foreign asset stochastically dominates the return on
the domestic asset. So, investors would want to take as large a long position
in the foreign asset as possible, and short the domestic asset.
   However, if investors had simply applied mean-variance analysis to this
problem, following the portfolio choice dictated by equation 1, they would
have ended up choosing a much different portfolio. The optimal share of the
foreign asset in this case would be given by


                        A—
                         —
                                    —          —
                             R[(l
This value of A is finite. Clearly the mean-variance solution is far from the
optimal choice.

V.2 Example 2
Now consider the special case in which ,i5 = 0     and a =    0.   This would
correspond to the case in which the exchauge rate was absolutely fixed in
the stable state. From the first-order condition, equation 2, we can derive
in this case that


                                    A



   Given   that p, =       and   a = j-k,a2 — (1-.ir)2P , we can write

                                  R(a2 —

Therefore, A >      =


                                        23
      En this case, the investor's optimal choice of A   is
                                                          always greater than
A".    So,   there is a sense in which the variance overstates the volatility of
the exchange rate. The investor is always willing to hold more of the risky
asset than he would in a mean-variance efficient portfolio.


V.3 Example 3
Table 5 shows the optimal choice of A for a variety of parameters. In con-
structing the table, the parameters were chosen so that the unconditional
mean z =      .10 and the unconditional variance a2 = .04. The risk aversion
parameter, R, was chosen to be 5. With these values, according to equation
(1), the mean variance optimal portfolio is always .50.
   The parameters were chosen to approximate what we might see in the
EMS. The probability of the volatile state is low compared to the probability
of the stable state. But the mean change in the exchange rate is much larger
in the volatile state, and the variance is chosen to be ten or twenty times
larger in the volatile state state than in the stable state.
   Examination of Table 5 shows that there is a wide range of values for
the optima] A. Often the optimal portfolio is very different from the mean-
variance optimal one (that is, A is very different from .50.)
   We conclude that the variance is not a sufficient statistic to summarize
the volatility of the exchange rate. An investor who based his decision on the
rule of minimizing the variance for a given mean would end up choosing a
very different portfolio from the individual who maximized expected utility
taking into account the fully parameterized distribution.




                                       24
VI CONCLUSION.
There are 6 conclusions that can be drawn from this paper:

  1. The distribution of exchange rates is different in a system of floating
     exchange rates and a system of tixed but adjustable rates.

  2. EMS exchange rates can be described by a mixture of two distribu-
     tions: one for the stable period and one for the volatile period.

  3. Realignments generally come froni the volatile distribution. However,
     not all volatile observations are realignments.

  4. Observations from the volatile distribution cluster together.

  5. The standard Hamilton switching model needs 6 parameters to de-
     scribe the distribution of EMS exchange rates, while the tinie vary-
     ing model needs     parameters:                                 But even
     though it takes more than two parameters to describe the distribution
     of EMS exchange rates, the added complexity is worth it because a
     two parameter distribution is clearly inadequate.

  6. There is evidence that the behavior of the exchange rate near the
     edge of the EMS band depends on the nature of the behavior of the
     exchange rate as it approaches the band. If the exchange rate rises
     to the top of the baud in a gradual, stable manner, large changes in
     the exchange rate are unlikely. However, if it jumps to the edge of the
     band rapidly, further volatility is likely either through a realignment
     or a large move back toward the center of the band.



                                     25
         Figure 1: Franc/DM Exchange Rates from the Volatile Period




                                                         TVTP outliers




                                                         Distance outliers




    79              82              85              88           91          94
                                            Year
Notes: The vertical lines represent realignments.




                                         26
         Figure 2: Lira/DM Exchange Rates from the Volatile Period




                                                            outliers




                                                              outliers




    79              82              85               88      91          94
                                              Year
Notes: The vertical lines represent realignments.




                                         27
        Table I: Summary Statistics Based on the Distance Rule


                         French   franc        Italian lira   U.S   dollar Japanese yen


                             F(e): the stable period
number of observations       723                   681        761               759
standard deviation                0.20               0.29       1.54              1.32

                                          Outliers
number of observations        40                    23          2                4
standard deviation             1.85                  1.36       9.13             0.58




                                          23
         Table 2: Markov Switching Model

        French franc                  Italian lira
     stable      volatile        stable         volatile

p       0.009          0.376        0.001           0.561
       (0.007)         (0.133)     (0.010)         (0.120)

c2      0.030           1.610       0.062           0.851
       (0.001)         (0.257)     (0.002)         (0.145)
9       3.010           0.709       2.400          -0.236
       (0.170)         (0.262)     (0.150)         (0.257)
ir      0.953          0.670        0.917           0.441




                           29
     Table 3: Time Varying Transition Probability Model

             French franc                 Italian Era
        normal        volatile        normal      volatile

Ii          0.009           0.353        0.001           0.563
           (0.007)          (0.122)     (0.010)         (0.117)
2           0.029           1.508        0.063           0.840
           (0.001)       (0.222)        (0.002)         (0.142)
90          3.193         0.588          2.592           0.050
           (0.254)       (0.314)        (0.192)         (0.283)
91         -0.489       -1.107          -0.193          -0.143
           (0.218)      (0.270)         (0.097)         (0.196)
           0.961            0.643       0.930           0.512




                              30
Table 4: Comparison of Rules for Classifying Franc/DM Outliers

                           Distance          FTP
                          F(e)    G(e)   F(e) G(e)
        FTP       F(e)    694       0
                  (i(e)    29      40

        TVTP F(e)         683       0    681      2
                  G(e)     40      40     13     67




                             31
Tahle 5: Portfolio Share for Risky Asset Exchange Rate Follows a Switching
Process R = 5, p =         c = 0.04

       r          p,1          Pg
                                0.30
                                            C
                                            0.004
                                                         cr
                                                          0.04
                                                                      A

                                                                       0.819
       0.646       -.010
       0.821       0.057        0.30        0.012         0.12         0.660
       0.970       0.073        1.0         0.012         0.12         1.211
       0.893       0.077        0.30        0.012         0.24         0.521
       0.974       0.076        1.0         0.012         0.24         1.210
       0.911       0.080        0.30        0.02         0.20
       0.980       0.082        1.0         0.02         0.20          0.821
       0.953       0.090        0.30        0.02         0.40          0.441
       0.983       0.085        1.0         0.02         0.40          0.795
       0.959       0.092        0.30        0.028        0.28         0.497
       0.989       0.089        1.0         0.028        0.28         0.638
       0.979       0.096        0.30        0.028        0.56         0.414
       0.991       0.092        1.0         O.028        0.56         0.621
   •
       0.989       0.098        0.30        0.036        0.36         0.487
       0.997       0.097        1.0         0.036        0.36         0.538
       0.995       0.099        0.30        0.036        0.72         0.429
       0.997       0.098        1.0         0.036        0.72         0.529




                                       32
                             REFERENCES

Akgiray, Vedat and C. Geoffrey Booth, 1988, "Mixed Diffusion-Jump
  Process Modeling of Exchange Rate Movements," Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 70, 631-637.
Baillie, Richard T. and Tim Bollerslev, 1989, "The Message in Daily
  Exchange Rates: A Conditional-Variance Tale," Journal of Business
  and Economic Statistics, 7, 297-305.
Ball, Clifford A. and Antonio Rorna, 1993, "A Jump Diffusion Model
  for the European Monetary System," Journal of International Money
  and Finance, 12, 475-492.
Boothe, Paul and [)ebra Glassnian, 1987, "The Statistical Distribution
  of Exchange Rates: Empirical Evidence and Economic Implications,"
  Journal of International Economics, 22, 297-3 19.
(Ihen, Zhaohui and Alberto Giovannini, 1993, "The Determinants of
   Realignment Expectations Under the EMS: Some Empirical R.egu-
  larities," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper no.
  4291.
Diebold, Francis X., 1988, Empirical Modeling of Exchange Rates, Springer-
  Verlag: New York.
Diebold, Francis X., Joon-Ilaeng Lee, and Gretchen Weinbach, 1992,
  "Regime Switching with Time-Varying Transition Probabilities," work-
  ing paper, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.
Engel, Charles M. and James I). Hamilton, 1990, "Long Swings in the
  Dollar: Are They in the Data and Do Markets Know It?" American
  Economic Review, 80, 689-713.
Filardo, Andrew J., 1994, "Business-Cycle Phases and Their Transitional
  Dynamics," Jounzal of Business and Economic Statistics, 12, 299-308.
Hadi, A.S., 1992, "Identifying Multiple Outliers in Multivariate Data,"
   Journal of the Royal Statistical Socicity, Series B, 54, 76 1-771.
Iladi, A. S., [993, "A Modification of a Method for the Detection of Out-
   liers in Multivariate Samples," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
   Series B, forthcoming.



                                  33
Hamilton, James D., 1989, "A New Approach to the Economic Analysis
 of Nonstationary Time Series and the Business Cycle," Econometrica,
  57, 357-384.
Hamilton, James D. and Raul Susmel, 1992, "Autoregressive Conditional
  Heteroskedasticity and Changes in Regime," working paper, Depart-
 ment of Economics, University of California, San Diego.
Koedijk, Kees C., Marcia M. A. Schafgans, and Casper C. de Vries, 1990,
  "The Tail hdex of Exchange Rate Returns," Journal of International
  Economics, 29, 93-108.
Koedijk, Kees C., Philip A. Stork, and Casper C. de Vries, 1992, "Differ-
 ences Between Foreign Exchange Regimes: The View from the Tails,"
 Journal of International Money and Finance, 11, 462-473.
Mundaca, B. Cabriela, 1994, "Probabilities of Realignments in a Target
 Zone: A Switching-Regime Approach," Graduate School of Business,
 Stanford University.
Park, Keewban, Chang Mo Ahn, and Roger Fujihara, 1993, "Optimal
  Hedged Portfolios: the Case of Jump-Diffusion Risks," Journal of In-
  ternational Money and Finance, 12, 493-510.
Rose, Andrew and Lars E. 0. Svensson, 1993, "European Exchange Rate
  Credibility Before the Fall," National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Working Paper no. 4495.
Svensson, Lars E. 0., 1992, "An Interpretation of Recent Research on
  Exchange Rate Target Zones," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6,
  no. 4, 119-144.
Tucker, Alan L. and lallon Pond, 1988, "The Probability Distribution
  of Foreign Exchange Price Changes: Tests of Candidate Processess,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 70, 638-647.
Zhu, Zhen, 1993, "Econometric Analysis of a Dirty Float with No Arbi-
  trage: The DM4 Exchange Rate after the Louvre Accord," manuscript,
  Department of Economics, University of Michigan.




                                 34
