                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TRADE, MULTINATIONALS, & LABOR




                                     Robert Z. Lawrence




                                   Working Paper No. 4836




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1994



Paper prepared for the Conference on The International Integration of the Australian Economy
organized by the Reserve Bank of Australia in Sydney on July 10 and 11, 1994. Thispaper
reflects ongoing work on a project on Globalization and Wages in the OECD that I am currently
doing for the OECD Development Centre. It also draws heavily on Lawrence (1994). I thank
Charles Oman for comments and Maynard Holt and Eric Pan for research assistance. The views
expressed here are of course purely my own. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Robert Z. Lawrence. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4836
                                                                               August 1994

                           TRADE, MULTINATIONALS, & LABOR

                                           ABSTRACT


        This paper summarizes and extends previous research on the relationship between low-
wage international competition and wage performance in the Developed Countries in the 1980s.
The first section argues that poor average US wage performance reflects slow domestic
productivity growth rather than international competition. The second section presents evidence
which rejects the view that Stolper-Samuelson effects are important in the US, Germany and
Japan. In all three countries, neither the wholesale nor the import prices of unskilled-labor
intensive products have experienced relative declines. At the same time, despite the rise in
relative skilled worker wages, in the US, over the 1980s, the ratio of non-production to
production workers grew faster than in the 1960s and 1970s. This suggests that technological
change in US manufacturing was particularly biased in favor of white collar workers.
        The third section explores the employment and wage behavior in US multinational parents
and their foreign-owned manufacturing affiliates between 1977 and 1989. Overall the datapoint
to the dominant impact of a commonly shared technological change rather than the impact of
trade and increased international sourcing. Developments at home and abroad were remarkably
similar. Employment fell, both in US parents and in affiliates in developed countries andgrew
only modestly in developing countries. In foreign affiliates in both developed and developing
countries, the relative compensation of non-production workers increased and the ratio of
production to non-production workers fell. While US parent sourcing from overseas affiliates
grew rapidly, the increase accounted for only a small share of total sales. The final section
discusses the issue of international labor standards.

Robert Z. Lawrence
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
                                                                                                        1




                                   Trade, Multinationals & Labor.



          The theory of international trade suggests that free trade will raise national income. It

 does not, however, suggest that the incomes of all factors of production will rise. Indeed,

 Stolper and Samuelson (1941) showed that the removal of import barriers could lower the

 income of the factor of production used relatively intensively in the production of imported

 products. If OECD imports are produced using unskilled labor relatively intensively, therefore,

 freer trade could actually reduce the wages of unskilled workers.

          In a second noteworthy application, trade theory also predicts that trade can lead to

 "factor price equalization." Under certain highly restrictive assumptions -- in particular that

competitive conditions prevail and that technological capabilities are uniform worldwide in both
traded and non-traded goods -- returns to factors would be equalized around the world.

          In principle, these theoretical results were highly relevant to US circumstances during the

golden era of the postwar period (1950-1973). Over this period, the US economy reduced its

trade barriers and expanded its trade with "low wage" nations in Europe, Japan and the
developing world.1        Nonetheless, the theory did not excite much attention among US
policymakers because real wages in the United States rose steadily and wage differentials

between skilled and unskilled workers actually narrowed. Indeed, over the 1970s, although the




    'In 1950, compensation in Germany and the United Kingdom were 13 and 17 percent of
those in the United States, respectively. Today, Mexican wages are about 12 percent of US
levels.
                                                                                              2

US economy became considerably more open -- trade doubled as a share of GNP --               the

premium earned by educated workers actually declined.

       In the 1980s, however, the US experience was different. Real wages stagnated and

relative wages became more dispersed. In 1973, real hourly earnings of non-supervisory

workers measured in 1982 dollars by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) were $8.55. By 1992 they

had actually declined to $7.43 -- a level that had been achieved in the late 1960s. Had earnings

increased at their earlier pace, they would have risen by 40 percent to over $12. Or consider

real hourly compensation, a more comprehensive measure of the payments to labor because it

includes fringe benefits as well as earnings. Between 1973 and 1991, real hourly compensation

rose by only 5 percent. However if one measures labor's income growth, it clearly has slumped

since 1973.

       A second ominous development in the American economy has accompanied this slump:

a dramatic increase in the inequality of earnings based on education, experience and occupation.

Bound and Johnson (1992) found that between 1979 and 1988 the ratio of the average wage of

a college graduate to the average wage of a high school graduate rose by 15 percent. Steven

Davis (1992) found that between 1979 and 1987 the ratio of weekly earnings of males in their

forties to weekly earnings of males in their twenties rose by 25 percent. The Employment Cost

Index indicates that between December 1979 and December 1992 the growth of compensation

and earnings of white collar occupations exceeded those of blue collar occupations by 7.9 and

10.9 percent respectively. However one distinguishes the skilled from the unskilled, the sharp

rise in wage inequality between the two in the 1980s is clear.

       In the 1980s, European wage performance differed from that in the United States in one
                                                                                               3
crucial respect -- typically real wages grew by 1 to 2 percent annually. In some countries

however, increased inequality is also evident. According to the OECD Employment Outlook

(1993), in the UK there was a substantial increase in the ratio of earnings of the highest (90th)

to lowest (10th) percentile.2 Modest increases in this measure of dispersion also occurred in

France, the Netherlands and Sweden, but in Italy and other Nordic countries no change was

discernable while, in Germany, low wage workers (those in the bottom decile) actually

experienced relatively more rapid growth than those in the top. Data are also available for some

of these countries on wage changes by level of schooling. The premium increased in the 1980s

for all countries surveyed beside Japan (where it was unchanged) and the Netherlands (where

it fell). Age-earnings profiles increased for all countries in the sample besides Sweden. I have

also obtained data on the ratio of wages of manual-to-non-manual workers in several major

European countries (EuroStat 1992). These give a different picture for Germany, showing that

between 1978 and 1988 the ratio of manual to non-manual wages fell by 8.1 percent. They

declined by 3 percent in Italy but actually rose in Belgium and Denmark.

       The OECD (1993) argues that the qualitative similarity in these changes suggests

"pervasive economic factors are at work." An important issue in Europe, however, is the

degree to which institutional and regulatory factors repressed wage adjustments and instead

raised unemployment. The OECD notes that "those countries which did not experience an

increase in dispersion over the 1980s, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy and Norway, are

countries where national institutions have a particularly strong influence on wage setting."




    2This result is also found by Katz, Loveman and Blanchflower (1992)
                                                                                              4
          What has distinguished European labor market performance has been high levels of

unemployment, particularly of workers out of jobs for more than twelve months. In 1991 for

example, such workers accounted for just 6.3 percent of the unemployed in the United States,

but in Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Italy the share was typically about 40 percent.

A second feature is that European employment growth has been virtually confmed to the public

sector.

          Also striking in Europe has been the relative decline in the employment of manual

workers in industry in general and manufacturing in particular. EuroStat data indicate that,

between 1978 and 1988, the decline in the ratio of industrial employment of manual-to-non-

manual workers in Germany (-16.1 percent) and Ireland (-15.1 percent) was similar to the

decline in the ratio of production-to-non-production workers in US manufacturing (-18.5

percent); while declines (in the ratio of manual-to-non-manual workers) were about twice as

large in French (-26.8 percent), Danish (-27.7 percent) and Italian (-30.4 percent)
manufacturing. The data certainly suggest a trade-off between wage flexibility and employment

opportunities.

          In both Europe and the United States, alarms have been sounded about the role of trade

in this poor labor market performance. In the United States, the debate over the NAFTA

crystallized concerns over wage performance that are best captured by Ross Perot's allusion to

the "giant sucking sound" of jobs as they move southward. One of the major concerns about

the NAFTA was the impetus it provided for what many in the United States see as a major

phenomenon -- that of "runaway plants" —         the   relocation by multinationals to low wage

countries. In Europe, while the absorption of low wage countries such as Spain, Portugal and
                                                                                               5
Greece   into the EC proceeded fairly smoothly during the growth phase in the late 1980s, the

recessionary environment of the 1990s has sparked similar fears of "delocalisation," i.e., that

firms are relocating to low wage countries.

         The concerns about international competition in the labor market have been voiced not

simply in terms of wages but also with regard to the regulatory environment that governs

employment. In Europe, an important aspect of creating the single market has been the "social
dimension" -- the effort to ensure that minimum labor standards prevail throughout the European

Union. In France, a furor was raised by the shift of the Hoover Corporation from France to

Scotland, purportedly attracted by both lower wage costs and lower labor standards. In the

European debate about freer trade with Eastern Europe and Asia, concerns have been raised not

simply about low wages but about "social dumping," i.e., the downward competitive pressures

that are allegedly placed on labor standards as a result of trade. In the United States, concerns

about workers rights have increasingly been reflected in US international trade legislation.

Indeed both France and the US have proposed that worker rights occupy an important role in

the post-Uruguay Round agenda.

       From the standpoint of the developing economies, these concerns could not have appeared

at a worse moment. Since the mid-1980s, these economies have almost universally shifted

toward export-oriented, "market-friendly" policies which are implicitly predicated on the
assumption that global markets are available. Similarly, progress in the reconstruction of

Eastern Europe and the economies of the former Soviet Union depends critically on their ability

to gain access to the markets of the EC.

       But is trade, in general, and with developing countries, in particular, really responsible
                                                                                               6
for the poor labor market performance in developed economies? What role has been played by

employment and sourcing shifts within multinationals, and what role should changes in labor

standards play in addressing these concerns? These are three questions I will discuss in this

paper.

         The US experience is perhaps the most suitable for detailed analysis. US wages are

generally more flexible than those in other countries, and as indicated in fig 1, compared with

the EC and Japan, the US share of apparent consumption of manufactured goods imported from

developing countries is higher and has risen more rapidly over the 1980s. In addition, the

United States remains the world's largest multinational investor. In the first section of this

paper, therefore, I will consider the impact of trade on average US wage behavior. In the

second section, I will concentrate on relative wage behavior in the United States although I will

introduce evidence from Germany and Japan. I will argue that the role of trade has been

surprisingly small. In the third section I will introduce evidence on wages and employment in

US multinationals both at home and abroad. These data indicate remarkably similar changes

taking place in US multinationals worldwide --     a   finding that is strongly suggestive that

technology rather than trade is exercising a dominant influence. They also indicate that

employment growth within US foreign affiliates abroad has been too small to be viewed as

having displaced large numbers of jobs in the United States. The same is true of the growth in

value-added sourced from abroad. In the final section, I consider the issue of labor standards.

At a multilateral level, some agreement on basic minimum labor standards could be helpful, both

in allaying concerns about the denial of elementary human rights and in limiting the scope for

opportunistic protectionist actions. Beyond these minimum standards, however, there are strong
                                                                                               7
reasons for permitting national diversity



                                  Section I: Average Wages.



       Measuring Compensation. Before explaining average US wage behavior it is necessary

to clarify how wages are measured. The most commonly cited statistic—real average hourly

earnings of production workers—shows a decline of almost 11 percent between 1979 and 1991.

By contrast, a second commonly cited series — real hourly compensation in the business sector -

- shows an increase of 1.5 percent over the same period. These series differ because (a) the

average hourly earnings series samples only production or nonsupervisory workers while the

hourly compensation series includes all persons engaged in work (including the self employed);

and (b) the hourly earnings series reflects only wages while the compensation measure includes

employers' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans (including retfrement and

medical care). Both differences are important, and the series have diverged because (a) the

wages of production workers have risen more slowly than those of non-production workers; and

(b) for all workers, fringe benefits have increased more rapidly than wages. The remainder of

this section focuses on the aggregate compensation measure.

       International Factors. Several economists have ascribed the poor average growth in US

wages over the 1980s to international factors. Lester Thurow has argued that slow growth in

US manufacturing employment due to the trade deficit in manufactured goods is to blame.

Edward Learner (1991) claims that increased capital formation abroad is leading inevitably to

"wage equalization' in which American wage rates converge to those in other countries.
                                                                                                8

According to Learner, this convergence is not benign because it entails not simply a rise in

foreign wage levels but also a decline in average American wage levels. Johnson and Stafford

(1992) argue that the erosion of high returns from American technological leadership has been

the principle source of the slow rise in American real wages since 1973. However, a careful

reading of the data supports none of these views.

       It is easy to reject the claim that poor average US wage performance reflects the loss of

high-wage manufacturing jobs because of US trade performance. Between 1981 and 1991, the

US trade balance in manufactured goods did decline significantly --from a surplus of $18 billion

to a deficit of $47 billion. But this shift was not large enough to provide much of an explanation

for average wages in the economy as a whole. In 1991, the trade deficit was equal to about 5

percent of value-added in manufacturing. Average hourly earnings in manufacturing were 8.2

percent higher than those in the private sector generally (Average weekly earnings were 29

percent higher). Since manufacturing accounted for 17 percent of total employment, shifting an

additional (.05 *   17)   0.85 percent of employment to manufacturing would have raised average

hourly and weekly wages by 0.07 and 0.25 percent respectively — an amount scarcely large

enough to explain the poor wage performance of the 1980s.

       Assessing Compensation Performance. Before turning to the other explanations based

on trade it is useful to examine the behavior of US compensation more closely. As a first

approximation, we expect changes in real compensation to match the change in output per
worker. Since growth of output per worker in the US did slow down dramatically after 1973,

it is reasonable to expect that real compensation would decline in parallel. However, the data

suggest that real compensation failed to match even the slow improvement in average labor
                                                                                             9
productivity growth.

       As Figure 2 indicates, between 1973 and 1979, average real compensation (average

hourly compensation deflated by the CPI for urban consumers) increased in line with output per

hour in the US business sector. However, from 1979 to 1991, the two trends diverged

markedly. While output per worker grew by 10.5 percent -- already a very slow pace by
historical standards -- real hourly compensation grew by only 1.5 percent.

       This divergence could in principle be explained by a shift in incomes from wages to

profits. However, in 1991, the share of total compensation in the value-added by the business

sector was 65.6 percent -- less than one percentage point lower than it was in 1979 (See Table

1). If we deflate nominal compensation by production prices rather than consumption prices,

we see that workers in the 1980s were basically compensated for the growth in output per

worker. If workers had chosen to consume the products they actually produced, they could have

raised their real compensation by as much as the improvement in productivity growth. This

finding is inconsistent with Learner's argument that international competition is bringing US

wages down to foreign levels. If Learner was correct, we would expect to see real product

wages growing more slowly than productivity.3

       The wage gap illustrated in Figure 2 is thus almost totally due to a discrepancy between

the production and the consumption wage. When nominal compensation is deflated by a

production price index (in this case the business sector GNP deflator) rather than by the

consumer price index, this "production wage" closely tracks the growth in output per worker


     In addition to arguing that trade has reduced average US wage rates, Learner (1991) argues
that trade has lowered the relative wages of unskilled workers. This claim will be discussed
below.
                                                                                             10

 from 1979 to 1991.

        Apparently, the prices of the products that workers consume have risen more rapidly than

 those which they produce. Three major differences in the composition of the deflators for

production and consumption compensation merit attention: first, investment goods. The
consumer price index which is used to measure real earnings does not, of course, reflect the

prices of investment goods. The prices of the most rapidly growing investment goods,

computers, have declined precipitously. Simply subtracting gross domestic investment from

business sector output provides a measure of consumption goods output. The implicit deflator

from this series suggests that between 1979 and 1991, real compensation in terms of consumer

goods increased by 5.1 percent (versus 1.5 percent using the CPI-U). Thus about half of the

shortfall between product and consumption compensation can be explained by the relative price

decline in investment goods.

       A second major compositional difference between the CPI and the business sector output

used in measuring productivity is housing. Output of owner-occupied housing is not included

in the business sector output measure used by the BLS to estimate business sector productivity

growth. However, the price of shelter is a major component of the consumer price index.

Between 1979 and 1991, the index of shelter prices increased by 17 percent more rapidly than

the rest of the CPI. If we deflate hourly compensation by the CPI minus shelter, we obtain an

estimated increase in real compensation between 1979 and 1991 of 5.8 percent — which is

similar to the estimate using the business deflator minus investment goods.

       The third major difference between production and consumption prices involves the goods

and services that enter international trade. If the production wage increases match domestic
                                                                                             11

productivity growth as they appear to have done, the level of real compensation will depend on

the impact of import prices on total consumer price inflation. This impact can be picked up by

the terms of trade, the ratio of export to import prices. The broadest measure of the terms of
trade -- using the GDP deflators for exports and imports of goods and services shows an

improvement of 5.2 percent, while the fixed-weight price measures show an increase of 1.5

percent. This finding is inconsistent with the view of Stafford and Johnson that an erosion of

the rents from US technological leadership explains the slow growth in US wages over this

period. If this were the case, the international buying power of' US workers (as captured by the

ratio of import to domestic wages) would have risen more slowly than their ability to produce

domestically produced goods.

       In sum, the evidence indicates that had American workers chosen to consume the

products they produced, their real compensation would have increased by about 10 percent over

the 1980s -- about as much as output per worker in the business sector. However, real wage

growth lagged behind productivity growth for two main reasons: (a) Much of the productivity

growth occurred in industries producing capital goods such as computers, which workers do not

generally buy, and (b) because of increases in the relative price of housing (which workers

consume but do not produce). International trade played no role in this poor average wage

growth. Over the 1980s, the prices of US exports actually rose more rapidly than the prices of

the goods the United States imports.

       It is noteworthy that the slowdown in US productivity growth has been centered in the

services sectors, most of which are       exposed   to international competition. Productivity

growth did slump throughout the economy between 1973 and 1979, but, since 1979, both
                                                                                              12

multifactor and labor productivity in manufacturing have returned to their post-war pace. By

contrast, productivity in the rest of the business sector has stagnated. indeed, between 1979 and

1988, according o the Bureau of Labor Statistics, almost all productivity improvements,

estimated on a niultifactor productivity basis, took place in manufacturing. Similarly there was

a substantial divergence between the growth of GDP per worker in the economy as a whole and

in manufacturing. If demand for manufactured goods has an elasticity of less than one faster

relative productivity in manufacturing will lead to a decline in manufacturing employment.



                            Section II: Trade and Wage Inequality.



       Other analysts have suggested that trade (or globalization) helps explain the growing

inequality in US wages. Robert Reich (1991) has argued that global competition has bifurcated

American workers --   and   thereby American society -- into two groups: high-earning TMsymbolic

analysts whose talents are rewarded by globalization and the mass of ordinary production

workers whose earnings are depressed by it. And referring to growing wage disparity, Murphy

and Welch (1991) found a correspondence between the patterns of wage growth and durable

goods performance and conclude that "the evolving pattern of international trade is perhaps a

primary cause of recent wage changes."

       Factor Composition and Quantity of Trade. Studies which have tried to quantify the

relationships more precisely, however, have generally concluded that the impact of trade is

small, in particular, Borjas, Freeman and Katz (1992;237) estimate the quantities of educated

and uneducated labor embodied in US manufactured goods exports and imports. They concluded
                                                                                                13

that trade flows explained at most 15 percent (i.e., 1.9 percentage points) of the 12.4 percent

increase between 1980 and 1988 in the earnings differential between college-educated workers

and their high-school-educated counterparts. Moreover, given the decline in the manufactured

goods trade deficit from $106 billion in 1988 to $47 billion in 1991, their method would attribute

to trade less than one percentage point of the disparity in relative wage growth by that time (in

1993 the deficit had increased again to $91.5 billion).

        When one considers with whom America trades, it is not surprising that estimates of the

factor supplies embodied in US manufacturing trade indicate relatively small effects on wages.

In 1990, for example, 70 percent of America's manufacturing imports came from OECD
countries -- countries with endowments and wage levels veiy similar to America's.4 US imports

from developing countries did increase rapidly over the decade, but again what needs to be born

in mind is the magnitude. In 1990, for example, these imports amounted to $115.8 billion or

2.1 percent of US GNP versus 1.2 percent in 1981 . It is hard to see how a change of this

magnitude --   less   than one percent of GNP could have a large impact on the overall labor

market.6 In a recent study, for example, Jeffery Sachs and Howard Shatz (1994) estimate that

trade with developing countries reduced US manufacturing employment by 5.7 percent between

1978 and 1990 --      a   number equal to about one percent of employment overall.



    41n 1980, hourly compensation in other OECD countries was 83% of US levels; this dropped
to 64% by 1985 but then increased to 103% by 1990.
     Imports of manufactured goods into the EC in 88/89 amounted to $89 billion --      less   than
two percent of GNP.
    6 US exports to developing countries have also grown rapidly. Over the 1980s the US trade
deficit in manufactured goods trade with developing countries swung by $45.55 billion or 8/10th
of a percent of GDP.
                                                                                              14

       Adrian Wood (1991; 1994) has challenged this methodology on the grounds that the use

of the labor intensity measures using developed country production data assumes that imports

and domestic products are similar products. Wood argues, on the contrary, that goods imported

from developing countries are not close substitutes for those produced in developed countries

and are, therefore, far more labor intensive. Thus, he objects to the use of input-coefficients

from developed countries to estimate the job content of imports. Wood argues instead that the

input coefficients of developing countries (with some adjustments) should be used. Moreover,

he argues that this problem exists not only for direct manufacturing inputs but also for indirect

inputs from other sectors. In addition, he maintains it holds for both goods and services

imports. Taking all these factors into account leads him to conclude that the employment and,

thus, wage impact is larger than conventional estimates suggest, although he sull finds that the

effect of the trade of the North with the South is "much smaller than is popularly supposed."

       But take an extreme version of Wood's hypothesis. Suppose all the growth in US

imports over the 1 980s reflects imports of products that were not produced in the United States

in 1980 at all. Had imports from developing countries not increased, therefore, Americans

would have spent their money on other domestic (and imported) products. This counterfactual

of the Wood hypothesis suggests that imports may have displaced products which were not

unusually labor-intensive.

       If Wood is correct, as Sachs and Shatz (1994) note, industries in which trade with

developing countries have a growing share should record unusually rapid increases in skill

intensity as the more unskilled — labor intensive activities move offshore. In fact, Sachs and
                                                                                                 15

Shatz do not find unusually large increases in the skill-intensity of low skill sectors.7

        Prices. In any case, there is a problem in using ex post trade flows to make these

calculations. Such flows do not necessarily capture the effect of price pressures that operate

through trade.8 If international competition forced US workers to lower their wages, for

example, domestic firms might be able to prevent imports from rising. By examining only trade

flows, as these calculations do, we would conclude that trade had no impact on wages. In

principle, therefore, even if trade flows are small changes in traded goods prices could have

large effects on the prices (and thus factor returns) of domestically produced substitutes. As

Bhagwati (1991) has emphasized, relative price changes are the critical intervening variable in

the chain of causation from trade to factor prices.

       Some studies have estimated the impact of changes in traded goods prices on wages in

particular industries. Ravenga (1992) finds statistically significant effects although she estimates

the impact on wages to be much smaller than the impact on employment. While this analysis

is informative, it is really testing for the effect of trade on returns to industry specific human

capital rather than the general attributes such as education which are of interest here. To do this

it is necessary to explore general equilibrium effects.

       If trade lowered the relative wages of unskilled workers, according to the Stolper-


       Wood also argues that        the pressures from international competition coUld spur
technological change that is particularly rapid in labor intensive products. The evidence on this
question is somewhat more supportive of Wood: As shown by Lawrence and Slaughter (1994,
figure 10) there is a positive slope to a regression of total factor productivity against the ratio
of production to non-production workers. L.eamer(1994) and Sachs and Shatz report similar
results.
    8 Deardorff and Staiger (1988) demonstrate the conditions under which this methodology is
appropriate. It is necessary that both preferences and production technology are Cobb-Douglas.
                                                                                                16

Samuelson theorem, we would expect to see a decline in the relative price of goods which are

produced using unskilled labor relatively intensively. In Lawrence and Slaughter (1993),
however, we find that over the 1980s the relative import and export prices of non-skilled labor-

intensive goods actually increased slightly. In addition, Lawrence and Slaughter also noted that

if trade was the operative factor we would expect to see a contraction in labor-intensive

industries, but we would also expect to see that the remaining sectors taking advantage of this

labor by using unskilled labor relatively more intensively. In fact, we note that throughout US

manufacturing there has been a pervasive upward shift in the ratio of skilled-to-non-skilled labor.

Our conclusion, therefore, is that the simple Stolper-Samuelson process due to trade does not

provide an adequate account of the growing wage inequality. Instead, we interpret the evidence

as consistent with a bias in manufacturing technology towards the more intensive use of skilled

labor. Our conclusion is supported by Berman, Bound and Griliches (1992) and Bound and

Johnson (1992) who find that trade played basically no role in America's wage changes in the

I 980s and ascribe these changes to technological change and changes in unmeasured labor

quality. I should stress, however, that our paper was designed to examine the role of trade and

not, directly, to provide evidence on technological change. Moreover since we only examined

data for the manufacturing sector, we could not resolve the role played by technology or other

factors in economy-wide wage behavior. In addition, I should stress that we did not argue that

evidence of an increase in the ratio of skilled-to-non-skilled workers by itself would constitute

sufficient basis to reject the claim that Stolper-Samuelson effects were reducing the wages of

unskilled workers. For this purpose the price evidence is crucial.

       As might have been anticipated, given its surprising conclusions, our work has been
                                                                                                  17
attacked by several authors. First, Learner has argued that our use of production and non-

production workers as proxies for skill levels is misleading because non-production workers

include low skill occupations such as secretaries while production workers could be supervisors

with considerable skill.      However, as Sachs and Shatz and Bound, et al.. show quite

convincingly, this measure actually does fairly well in tracking other measures of skill.
Moreover, the evidence indicates that in US manufacturing the rapid increase in non-production

workers was actually concentrated in the more highly educated professional and managerial

categories. Between 1983 and 1990, for example, manufacturing employment of managers and

administrators increased by 25.9 percent, professionals by 12.9 percent, while employment of

non-sales white collar workers actually declined by 3.0 percent.

        Cepii (1994) argues that our finding of a rapid increase in the ratio of skilled to unskilled

workers simply reflects the fact that the relative supply of skilled workers increased rapidly in

the 1980s. But, as reported in Table 2, the shift we find occurred within most industries and

not only in the aggregate. As we know from the Rybcynski Theorem, given product prices

changes in relative tactor supplies affect relative product supplies rather than relative factor use.

Thus given product prices an increase in the supply of skilled workers raises the supply of skill-

intensive goods but does not change the ratios of skilled and unskilled workers employed in each

industry. Moreover, if this relative supply was important in changing relative product prices

it should have been associated with a decline in the relative wages of skilled workers --exactly

the opposite of what happened. The fact that manufacturers are using more skilled labor despite

its relatively higher price strongly supports the hypothesis that technological change in
manufacturing played a role in the wage change.
                                                                                                   18

        Sachs and Shatz raise questions about our use of the price data. In particular, they argue

that computer prices should not be included in the sample. When they drop computers, they

obtain a negative but statistically insignificant relationship between import price changes and skill

intensity, and they note that the size of the effect is small. Similarly, if computer price changes

are omitted, instead of rising slightly, the ratio of manufacturing producer prices weighted by

production worker employment to prices weighted by non-production workers falls slightly.

While we would agree that computer prices are difficult to measure, we are not convinced that

this sector should be given no weight at all in the explanation.

        Sachs and Shatz also claim on the basis of their regressions omitting the computer

industry that there was a negative relationship between total factor productivity growth and skill

intensity. They conclude "TFP growth was less on average in high-skilled than low-skilled

industries' and argue, therefore, that technological change was therefore causing wage
differentials to narrow rather than widen. Again, the impact of the computer industry is

important. In Lawrence and Slaughter, we found that, including computers, the gap between

weighted averages of high-skilled and low-skilled productivity growth was positive and thus

concluded the impact was the opposite.

       Additional Evidence. I have now undertaken similar investigations of the price behavior

of both German and Japanese imports and producer prices. While not as desegregated as the

US, these data tell the same story. As shown in Table 3 when price changes over the decade

of the 1 980s are regressed against the ratio of unskilled to skilled employment they indicate a

positive rather than negative relationship (that is statistically significant in the case of wholesale

prices but not import prices). Similarly, as shown in Table 4, for both countries when industry
                                                                                                19

wholesale and import prices are weighted by production worker shares they show larger

increases (or smaller declines) than when weighted by non-production workers. Questions might

be raised since these data reflect industrial classification systems which include refined petroleum

as a manufactured product. In addition there are the usual issues relating to the inclusion of

computers. However, as reported in Table 4 for the weighted averages, dropping these

observations does not affect the results.

       In the case of Germany, I was also able to obtain unit value data which could be matched

with industry data at a more desegregated level. Again the data indicate no decline in the

relative price of manual-worker-intensive products.

       Mishel and Bernstein (1994) question whether the shift towards the relatively more

intensive use of skilled labor in the 1980s is any greater than it was in earlier decades. In

Lawrence and Slaughter we provided a chart which shows an acceleration in the 1980s. I can

report here additional evidence that supports our view. The shift towards the more intensive use

of non-production in the 1980s was both larger and more pervasive than in the 1970s and 1960s

(See Table 2). The ratio of production to non-production workers decreased in 87 percent of

the three digit SIC codes in the 1980s compared with 78 percent in the 1970s and 62 percent in

the 1960s. In addition the average decrease was 18.47 percent in the 80s compared with 6.9 and

7.23 percent in the 1960s and 1970s respectively. Of course an increase on the manufacturing

average could reflect either a change in the mix of industries or in the ratio within industries.

As Table 2 indicates both factors were at work. However, 69.7 percent of the shift occurred



     Though perhaps not larger than in the 50s. Sachs and Shatz (1994) show a rapid increase
between 1947 and 1960..
                                                                                                20
within industries. Since this shift occurred despite the fact that relative wages of non-production

workers actually increased, it appears to be strongly suggestive of a skilled-labor using
technological shift that was concentrated in the skill intensive sector of manufacturing.



       Mishel and Bernstein also raise the question of whether this change in skill-intensity

should described as technological change. In particular they find an absence of evidence

indicating an association with investment and other hard measures of technical change such as

R&D, capital accumulation and computerization and stress the importance of distinguishing

developments in manufacturing from those in the rest of the economy.

       I believe both the points they make are important. First, if this evidence is correct, those

arguing for a major role for technology must apply a broader interpretation that includes new

labor-management relations and work organization. Second, I believe that the divergent

productivity performance between the manufacturing and services sectors in the United States

is a major structural feature of the US economy in the 1980s. Historically, relative productivity

growth was faster in goods than in services. But this difference has widened in the 1980s when

almost all the improvements in total factor productivity in the business sector were confined to

manufacturing. If the demand for manufacturing goods is inelastic, relatively rapid increases

in manufacturing productivity will reduce the demand for manufactured goods workers. With

no bias in this change, since production workers are relatively intensively employed in
manufacturing, this will reduce the demand for production workers. In combination with a shift

within manufacturing towards production-worker saving technical change concentrated in non-

production worker sectors, the impact on relative wages could be considerable.
                                                                                              21

       There remains the issue of whether technological change itself has been affected by trade.

It is noteworthy that, while US productivity growth in manufacturing recovered in the 1980s,

it did not exceed the pace it achieved prior to 1973. This could reflect a spur from international

competition offsetting a more general slowdown or it could simply reflect a return to previous

performance. More generally however, the links between trade pressures and productivity

growth have not been adequately explored. However, since the relative price of unskilled labor

has been declining, we might expect the endogenous response of technology to be a substitution

towards rather than away from using unskilled labor.

       Finally, an alternative interpretation of the rising ratio of non-production to production

workers is that it represents increased foreign outsourcing. Indeed if the production labor

intensive activities were moved abroad this, rather than a change in technology, could explain

the rise in the ratio of non-production to production workers found in US manufacturing. If this

was the case we would expect to find smaller shifts within industries. However, in Lawrence

and Slaughter we found the shifts as pervasive at the four digit SIC level as at the three digit

level. Moreover, Berman, Bound and Griliches note that according to the 1987 Census of

Manufacturing very little of materials outsourced came from the same SIC three digit industry

as the establishment itself. This conclusion is also supported by the evidence on multinationals

introduced below.



                           Section ifi: US MULTINATIONALS.



       As reported in Table 5,    US   firms with foreign operations have not contributed to
                                                                                               22

employment growth within the United States over the past decade - a remarkable result given

the rise of about 30 percent in US employment over the past decade.'° These firms are

particularly important in the US manufacturing sector -- indeed they account for more than half

of all manufacturing employment. However, between 1977 and 1989, their manufacturing

employment in the US fell 14 percent (from 11 to 10.13 million) — considerably faster than the

drop of 1.2 percent in overall manufacturing employment over the same period.

       This sluggish employment growth in US multinationals has been attributed by many

Americans to the impact of their foreign operations. It is widely perceived in the US that many

the jobs formerly in these firms have moved abroad. Drawn by low labor costs and low labor

standards, MNCs are seen as having relocated their production towards low wage countries. In

particular, the jobs of blue-collar workers are viewed as vulnerable to this development. Such

international outsourcing could, in principle, provide an alternative explanation of the widespread

decline in       relative blue-collar wages and in the ratio of blue to white collar workers

employed in US manufacturing.

       The data on US multinational activity are collected in extensive and comprehensive

benchmark surveys by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in 1977 and 1989. These data provide

an unusually comprehensive view of developments world-wide in an important group of actors.

The data, however, should be treated with care, particularly because the aggregate level at which

I will report them here could conceal important compositional changes by country and industry.

In addition, all activities of each firm are ascribed to a single industry, which could lead to



    '° In 1989, total non-bank MNC employment in the United States was 18.8 million --about
the same as the 18.9 million in 1977.
                                                                                              23
misclassification of some activity.

       If outsourcing is important, the decline in blue-collar intensity in the US should be

associated with an increase in blue-collar intensity abroad. In addition, as viewed through the

eyes of the Stolper-Samuelson paradigm, if developing countries lower their trade barriers and

increase their specialization in unskilled-labor intensive products, in developing countries, the

relative wages of production workers should rise, while in developed countries they should fall.

In addition, we might expect to see an important increase in the share of sales by foreign

affiliates going to the United States. On the other hand, if global changes in technology were

dominant, we should see parallel increases in the ratio of blue to white collar employment in the

US and in the rest of the world and similar movements in wages.

       Employment and compensation data for US multinationals are reported in Table 5.

Several features are noteworthy. In 1989, US manufacturing multinationals employed over 13.3

million people, about a quarter of whom were in their foreign affiliates. The data suggest that

overall multinationals are not necessarily attracted abroad simply by cheap labor -- indeed only

about a third of US MNC affiliate manufacturing employment is in developing countries.

Nonetheless, within developing countries, MNCs do use production workers relatively more

intensively than in developed countries and on average production workers are paid about half

rather than three-quarters the compensation of non-production workers. It is noteworthy that

the ratio of production to non-production workers in developing countries in 1989 of 1.7 was

very similar to the ratios in Europe and Canada of 1.6 and 1.76 respectively in 1977.

       There is a widespread view that since both technology and capital are increasingly

mobile, productivity is as high in US multinationals abroad as in the United States. If this is
                                                                                              24

the case, we might expect to see lower wages per worker but similar levels of output per

worker. As reported in Table 6, measured in current US dollars, output per employee in

developing countries in 1989 was actually about 40.3 percent of output per employee in

deve loped countries. By contrast compensation per employee averaged 28.5 percent of US levels

(production workers received 22.7 percent the compensation of their US counterparts, non-

production workers 37 percent, while non-wage income per worker was 49.7 percent of US

levels). Since MNCs actually contribute their capital in the form of know-how it should be

expected that the share of non-wage income will be higher in their foreign operations.
Moreover, these data certainly dispel the notion of similar productivity levels in developed and

developing countries.

       Consider, now, changes in the data between 1977 and 1989 reported in Table 5. These

do not support the common perception that overseas employment in US-owned manufacturing

foreign affiliates has increased. Indeed, employment in the majority owned manufacturing

foreign affiliates of US MNCs actually declined by 14 percent —       a   decline similar to that

experienced in their US parents. This decline was mainly due to shrinkage in the European

operations of US MNCs where total employment fell by 23 percent and production worker

employment plunged by 31 percent. Employment growth in US manufacturing MNCs in
developing countries was more robust. Between 1977 and 1989 an increase of 5.9 percent was

recorded. However, the overall magnitude of employment in these US foreign affiliates is

relatively small. The aggregate rise in employment was just sixty thousand. This employment

growth is small when compared with the drop of 1.7 million that occurred in US manufacturing

parents over the same period and the 0.5 million drop that occurred in manufacturing foreign
                                                                                             25
 affiliates over the same period. The overall share of developing countries in the employment

 of US majority-owned foreign manufacturing affiliates increased from just 27 to 34 percent and

 their share in the worldwide employment of manufacturing MNCs (i.e., in both US Parents and

Foreign Affiliates) increased from just 6.8 to 8.1 percent.

       What about production-worker employment in these affiliates? Of the 60,000 growth in

employment overall, only 4,000 occurred in the employment of production workers. As

estimated by Slaughter (1994), declines in production worker employment occurred in Europe

(-370,700), Central and South America excluding Mexico (-75,300) and South-East Asia (-

6,100). In Mexico, production worker employment increased by 80,900. In Asian countries,

while increases were recorded, they were surprisingly small: Malaysia (15,600), Singapore

(10,400) South Korea (3,900) and Thailand (11,700). Therefore, there is little evidence that on

balance large numbers of production worker jobs are shifting within US multinationals away

from the US towards the developing countries.

       The ratio of production-to-non-production workers employed in US manufacturing

operations worldwide has fallen precipitously. Indeed the declines are of similar magnitude in

US manufacturing parents (-15.7 percent) and in their affiliates in developing countries (-13.6

percent). The declines were particularly large in Europe (-24.2 percent) and in Australia, South

Africa and New Zealand (-19.1 percent). Only in Mexico did the ratio increase. There were

also declines in this ratio in most major industries. According to Slaughter (1994) who

estimated these changes at a three-digit level, three industries were exceptional and did

experience both rising foreign employment in production workers and falling ratios of non-

production-to-production workers. These were tobacco products (+4,000, -15.7 percent), a
                                                                                                 26

subset of Chemicals Products (SIC 285,288, and 289) (+ 10,900 -25.4 percent) and computers

and office equipment (+37,500 and -27.4 percent).

       As I noted above, if the Stolper-Samuelson story was dominant, we would expect to see

the relative wages of production workers moving in opposite directions in developed and

developing countries. Instead, what we see is that, on the contrary, relative wages of production

workers have fallen worldwide. Together the picture that emerges appears to be far more

consistent with the notion of a common sh&ft in technology rather than of expanding trade.

Worldwide, we see a rise in the relative employment of non-production workers despite the

increase in their relative wage.

       1989-91. More recent data, which reflect the relatively earlier occurrence of recession

in the United States, show that overseas employment in US MNCs was more robust than in US

parents. Between 1989 and 1991, US-based employment in multinational parents declined by

5.1 percent (987,000). By contrast, employment in majority-owned manufacturing affiliates

increased by 50,700 --   1.6 percent.   It would be erroneous to assume a causal connection

between these developments, but even one were to make such a connection less than 10 percent

of US employment loss could be accounted for jobs that were transferred abroad.

       Outsourcing. Technological change also appears to be reducing the growth prospects of

very large firms. Increasingly large US firms are downsizing and slimming down only to those

core activities which are essential to their operations --   less   vital activities are performed in

smaller and more flexible suppliers. Figure 3 gives a picture of the quantitative importance of

various forms of outsourcing. As might be expected for a period in which the US trade deficit

increased, between 1982 and 1989, there was a rapid increase in the purchases of manufactured
                                                                                             27

goods by US-based MNCs from their foreign affiliates. This increased from $25 billion in 1982

to $61.2 billion in 1989. Purchases from unaffiliated foreigners increased even more rapidly

from $16.1 billion to $45.3 billion. While the increase has been rapid, these imports still

represent only a small share of the total sales of US MNC parents, increasing from 4.1 percent

in 1982 to 6.8 percent in 1989.11 Moreover, these numbers refer to purchases from both

developed and developing countries)2 Manufactured imports from developing countries were

roughly a third of these shares. These effects are thus simply too small to have employment and

wage shifts of the size they are alleged to have)3 Overall value-added within US multinational

parents fell from 41.6 percent of sales in 1982 to 37.6 percent in 1989. Of this 4 point shift

almost 1.2 points represented a rise in domestic outsourcing and 2.8 percent outsourcing from

abroad.

       The slimming down that is evident in US parents is even more striking in the behavior

of their foreign manufacturing affiliates. Between 1982 and 1989 value added within these

operations declined from 37.5 to 33.7 percent of sales of which almost all represented a rise in

inputs sourced abroad rather than in the United States. The data for 1991 suggest that this trend

has continued with the share of value added performed in house in affiliates declining to 30.6



    "Gross Product in US manufacturing was 647 billion in 82 and 1004.6 billion in 1989.

    '2Sales of US foreign affiliates of manufactured goods from developing countries to all US
purchasers increased from $7.5 billion in 1982 to about $20 billion in 1989.

   '3The BEA reaches similar conclusions. In the Survey of Current Business July 1993 they
compared employment patterns in high and low wage countries over the period 1982 to 1991.
The share of low wage share of MOFA employment increased by 3 percentage points to 34
percent. Between 82 and 89 they find that the domestic content of US parents output in
manufacturing decreased from 96 to 93 percent.
                                                                                                  28
percent. The share of inputs sourced by foreign affiliates from their US parents and other US

sources has remained fairly constant over this period.t4



             Section IV : LABOR STANDARDS & DEEPER INTEGRATION.



       In most OECD countries, the government has an extensive role in the labor market. It

commonly regulates work hours and the cost of overtime, mandates vacations and holidays and

sick leave, sets minimum wages; restricts child and forced labor; ensures non-discrimination;

provides unemployment, disability and retirement income insurance and, in many countries,

health insurance; and sets conditions for hiring and firing, unionization and collective bargaining.



       By and large, nations have taken these actions independently, although a voluntary set

of international standards has been agreed to at the ILO and the GA1'T does contain a fairly

narrow prohibition on trade in goods made with prison labor.'5 Nonetheless, efforts to bring

these issues to the international policy arena have been present in both the United States and the

European Union. As early as 1953, the United States proposed adding a labor standards article

to GATT, and it pushed unsuccessfully for the inclusion of labor standards in the Tokyo and

Uruguay Rounds The US has also tried to induce foreign compliance with worker rights in




    14Slaughter (1994) produces evidence that foreign and US labor are actually price
complements rather than substitutes. A one percent drop in foreign wages tends to raise home
employment by nearly 0.1 percent.
    The original charter of the ITO in 1948 contained a section on labor rights although it was
never ratified by the US congress for other reasons.
                                                                                               29

other aspects of its trade policy. Since the mid-1980s, the US Congress has passed a series of

laws that directly link preferential trade and investment benefits to respect for basic worker

rights. ' In Section 301 and Super 301 of the Omnibus Trade Act of 1988, the "systematic

denial of internationally recognized worker rights" by foreign governments is defmed as an

"unreasonable trade practice" and made liable for US countermeasures where "such denials cause

a burden or restrictions on US commerce." Labor standards were also an important issue in the

recent NAFTA negotiations. While the NAFTA agreement itself did not include provisions on

labor rights, one of the side agreements established an international enforcement regime for

alleged violations of national minimum wage, child labor, and occupational health and safety

regulations, and an oversight and evaluation mechanism (without enforcement powers) for other

labor issues. '

       The US focus has been on achieving "minimal standards." By contrast, measures within

the European Community have been considerably more extensive. In 1956, according to Steil

(1994), French officials argued that social legislation in Europe should be harmonized in

conjunction with the reduction of tariff protection to "make apparent to the workers the link that

must exist between the common market's establishment and higher standards of living." More



    '6Eligibility under the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act of 1983, the GSP
(Generalized System of Preferences) in 1984, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation
(OPIC) in 1985, and 1987 US participation in Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency have
all been conditioned on adherence to ILO standards on worker rights which include the rights
to associate and bargain collectively, the banning of forced or compulsory or child labor, the
provision of reasonable conditions for worker health and safety and the existence of a national
mechanism for determining a generally applicable minimum wage.
    '7Conspicuous by its absence, and an important reason for the opposition of organized US
labor to the NAFTA were rights of association, organizing and bargaining.
                                                                                              30
recently, European countries who fail to provide their workers with "adequate social protection"

are widely viewed as guilty of "social dumping." Britain, for example, was accused of social

dumping when Hoover moved from Burgundy, France to Scotland. Within Europe, efforts have

been made to raise labor standards to prevent such "dumping." On December 9, 1989, all EC

members besides Britain agreed to the "Social Charter" that covers an extensive set of worker's

rights) The European Commission has also been active in implementing this Charter.'9

       At a multilateral level, however, there are increasing calls for moving beyond the

voluntary standards of the ILO and the GATF's prohibition on forced labor (Coilingsworth, et

a!., 1994). The United States tried to ensure that discussions on labor standards would take

place in the new WTO. French leaders have been vocal in calling for European action against

other nations with lower standards of social protection. Prime Minister Balladur has demanded

that Europe be protected from "foreign traders with different values." President Mitterrand has

called for trade sanctions against nations with "inadequate social protection," and outgoing-

European Community President Jacques Delors has called for a "global social contract."

       Deeper Integration. These recent pressures in the labor area are part of more widespread



    '8These include rights to freedom of movement; employment and remuneration; the
improvement of living and working conditions — the right to social protection; the right to
freedom of association and collective bargaining; the right to vocational training; the right of
men and women to equal treatment; the right to information, consultation and participation; the
right to health and safety in the workplace; the protection of children and adolescents in
employment; the protection of elderly persons; and protection of persons with disabilities.
    '° The Single European Act allows social-policy measures relating to the health and safety
of workers to be adopted by qualified majority, while requiring un2nimity in other areas of
social policy. The Commission has accordingly defined a working-time directive (which
requires a maximum 48 hour week and 4 week annual paid vacation) as a "health and safety"
measure. Of course, in Europe a key quid pro quo to members with lower wage levels is access
to the cohesion fund.
                                                                                                31

trends toward 'deeper international integration" as domestic policies come under increasing

international scrutiny. By contrast most post-war liberalization efforts have involved shallow

integration. They have aimed at (a) removing national barriers to the entry of goods and capital

and (b) providing foreign products and investors with the ii treatment accorded to their

domestic counterparts. But they have not tried to constrain the domestic policies of sovereign

nations 20

         Are the calls for international labor standards justifiable? It is useful to distinguish

conceptually three types of effects that labor policies might have (a) those that are purely local;

(b) those that operate on international markets through market spilovers; and (c) those that

operate on international markets through direct spillovers.2'

         (a) Local effects. Where nations effectively control their borders and prevent migration,

most labor standards will either be confined to local effects or operate through market channels

to affect international trade and investment flows. In fact, despite the widespread perception that

such policies have repercussions on trade and investment flows, there are many cases in which

government intervention in the labor market will have purely local impacts.

         First, policies such as sick leave, maternity leave and family leave are usually financed

by payroll taxes. It is often assumed that such taxes on labor raise employment costs thereby

affecting resource allocation. However, unless all elements of the compensation package,

including wages, are subject to minimum standards, when such standards are imposed,


    20Measures for deeper integration, do not, necessarily involve harmonization of standards
or policies. In some cases, "mutual-recognition" might suffice.
    21
         owe this classification scheme to Richard Cooper's analysis of global environmental
policies. See Cooper 1993.
                                                                                                  32

 employers   can adjust other elements of the package to keep their total costs from rising

 substantially. Indeed, the evidence suggests that in general the supply of labor is fairly inelastic

and that over the long-run most payroll taxes are born by labor (OECD Employment Outlook

 1993). This implies that such taxes result in lower wages rather than higher compensation costs.



         Second, many labor measures actually reflect decisions which might have been taken in

the marketplace anyway and are thus not binding constraints. l'his could be the case with rules

about work hours and vacation and minimum wages. In addition, in many countries compliance

with binding measures is low and enforcement is weak. Under some circumstances evasion

takes the form of employment in the informal sector.Z

         These considerations are important since they remind us that the basic presumption that

differences in labor standards will affect trade and investment flows is not necessarily valid.

         (b) Market spillovers. In practice, however, many labor market policies will not be

perfectly neutral. Indeed, their impact can be quite subtle. Ehrenberg gives the example of

payroll taxes with ceilings, which can shift demand towards more highly paid workers.

Similarly, some employment standards are not all fully shiftable, for example, a binding

minimum wage, or child labor laws. If the value employees place on health and safety benefits



   Acwally some labor standards may actually increase the supply of labor and enhance
productivity. Thus a safer workplace, may raise workforce participation and the increased
unionization and worker participation in decisionmaking could increase productivity.

    23
       Ehrenberg notes the substantial differences in benefit levels which prevail across the
United States indicates that even within an integrated market there is considerable scope for
exercising local preferences. Maximum weekly UI insurance varies from $154 in Nebraska to
$468 in Massachusetts.
                                                                                                 33
are less than the employers costs of complying only part of the costs will be shifted.

       In general, therefore, groups seeking to raise labor standards will find their case becomes

more difficult, the higher the costs they impose on society. It should therefore come as no

surprise that such groups will be against trade, particularly of the kind which is with trading

partners which have very different preferences. However, if labor standards reflect the

legitimate preferences of a particular nation, it is unclear why others should be entitled to impose

their views.

       The traditional theory of international trade demonstrates that when costs differ, countries

gain from free trade by specializing along the lines of comparative advantage. When Ricardo

invoked the principle of comparative advantage, he referred to productive differences that were

due to climate (or technology).24 But in stating his theory, Ricardo could as easily have

ascribed the productive differences between nations to the "social climate" as to the physical

climate and his conclusions would have been unchanged: Taking climactic conditions as given.

free trade will maximize global welfare.

       The choices of sovereign nation states are reflected in part in their rules and regulations.

These regulatory decisions influence relative costs and thus patterns of comparative advantage.

Given diversity of national conditions and regulatory preferences, therefore, it will be optimal

for nations to have different regulations and norms. A strictly level playing field or a common

set of standards would be inappropriate.



    24 These explanations for trade have been so widely invoked that it is sometimes treated as
a major "refutation" of the principle of comparative advantage when it is discovered that
institutions and policies can also affect comparative advantage so that comparative advantage can
actually be "created' by governments.
                                                                                                  34

           From the standpoint of this view, therefore, the playing field of international competition

will and should never be strictly level. Competition between firms based in different nations can

never be fair in the same way as competition between firms based in the same economy. Both

traditional determinants of costs such as relative factor endowments, technology and tastes and

social determinants of costs such as regulations, institutions and government policies should

affect competitive performance. Thus firms producing labor intensive products should find it

easier to operate in economies in which labor is more abundant and less costly. Similarly, firms

producing in economies with lenient and less costly labor standards should find it easier to

produce with labor-intensive production methods. If, for example, relatively unsafe activities

shift away from countries that place a higher value on safe workplaces towards those with a

lower value, global welfare will be enhanced.

       In the light of this paradigm, therefore, those seeking more "level playing fields" based

on constraining domestic economic policies simply fail to understand that the benefits of

international trade come from allowing nations to be different, rather than requiring them to be

similar.

       As with most paradigms, however, this view of the world rests on some basic

assumptions. If these assumptions are violated, however, free trade may not be globally

optimal. In particular, two assumptions are crucial. The first is that the world consists of

perfectly functioning, competitive markets — i.e., that there are no international market failures.

And the second is the normative proposition that no constraints should be imposed on sovereign

national choices (an assumption analogous to consumer sovereignty).

       The assumption of competitive global markets is important because it rules out the use
                                                                                               35

of strategic labor-standard policies, i.e., policies designed not only to achieve a given impact on

the labor market but also on the nation's terms of t.rade. As Brown, Deardorff and Stern (1993)

demonstrate, with market power, a labor standard could operate like an optimal tariff and shift

the terms of trade. For example, South Africa could raise the price and reduce the supply of

gold in the world by raising safety standards in its gold mines. In the presence of this

potential, international controls on standard setting might be required.

       In the real world, however, most labor-standard policy decisions are not motivated by

terms of trade considerations and accusations of the use of labor standards for such purposes are

rare. Indeed, exporters of labor intensive products are actually likely to have lower standards

and importers higher standards because concerns about employment tend to dominate those of

maximizing aggregate national income.

       The assumption that nations should be completely free to impose whatever policies they

chose may also be questioned. Some have tried to advocate tougher international labor standards

on the grounds that these have positive economic effects. These include the alleged labor-

income raising effects of capital-labor substitution, productivity enhancement effects of

workforce harmony brought about by increased worker participation and the notion that a more

equal distribution of income is necessary to stimulate consumer spending (Couingsworth, et al.,

1994). But the existence of these effects are controversial and, in any case, is unclear why firms

and/or nations should be forced to take actions which are in their own interest.




      Exporting countries have incentives to set standards too high globally because they receive
this secondary terms of trade benefit. Importing countries would do the opposite. This
counterintuitive result implies that labor intensive exporters should set standards too high. (see
Brown et. al.)
                                                                                                 36
        Instead, the more compelling assaults on complete national sovereignty are based on (a)

the notion that there exist basic universal human rights and (b) the "psychological externalities"

which occur when citizens of one country find practices in other countries morally reprehensible.

But to what degree and under wha circumstances should nations in one country try to change

the behavior of others through measures involving trade?

       In some cases, the policies in poor countries which offend the sensibilities of those in rich

nations actually result from different income levels (i.e., income effects) rather than different

preferences or values. Thus those in extreme poverty may permit activities which under other

circumstances they themselves would regard as abhorrent, e.g., child labor or a lack of pollution

controls.

       The long-run solution to these problems is clearly to raise incomes. Indeed, refusing to

trade with such nations could actually retard rather than improve their abilities to provide worker

rights. In the short—run, however, some of these conflicts can be dealt with through explicit

compensation schemes and subsidies. For example, the EC has a set of social funds which allow

poorer countries to meet the labor and social standards applied by more affluent members.

Similarly, "debt for nature" swaps allow richer nations to support environmental activities in

poorer countries.

       In other cases, countries may trade off their adherence to particular practices by obtaining

concessions in other areas, e.g., in the Uruguay Round, some developing countries agreed to

the introduction of intellectual property rules in return for increased access in textiles, and

agriculture. The NAFTA provides another example in which Mexico signed a (side) agreement

on labor-standards in return for preferential market access. As already noted, the United States
                                                                                               37
has conditioned access to preferential arrangements such as GSP on adherence to basic labor

standards.

        Where sufficient compensation is not forthcoming, however, there is danger in trying to

impose such standards under conditions in which they may damage economic growth.

Moreover, there will remain cases in which divergent practices reflect divergent beliefs about

the desirability of such standards so that compensation will not be possible, e.g., the conflicts

between the United States and the Soviet Union over Jewish emigration and those between the

United States and China over human rights. Under these circumstances free trade may be

difficult to obtain, and indeed, by revealed preference both nations may be better off without

such trade.

       Trade intervention is of course not the only means of responding to labor measures found

to be reprehensible in other nations. An alternative might be insistence on labelling (e.g., "made

with union workers", or "made using ecologically sound standards") that would allow private

citizens to exercise their preferences.

       On the other hand, where nations actually agree on basic standards, international

agreements can help make such standards more credible domestically and reduce the opportunity

costs of imposing them alone. In addition, the presence of a reasonable set of mutually agreed

minimum standards could help reduce the ability for political interests to exploit these concerns

opportunistically for protectionist purposes.

       Direct spillovers. Labor market regulations and programs in one country may directly

affect conditions in a second country through induced labor flows. Immigration creates

problems, for example, when workers from one country can receive benefits but not pay the
                                                                                               38
costs of such benefits in a second. Under these circumstances, since the spillovers are not

simply pecuniary, the case for an increased harmonization (or mutual recognition) of policies

is considerably stronger. It is thus perhaps not surprising that as it perfects its internal labor

market, the European Union has moved to implement more extensive sets of common standards.

       In sum, in general there is a strong case for allowing individual nations a wide scope for

differentiation in applying labor standards, particularly when the costs and benefits of such

standards are fully born by the nation itself. Even where these standards do affect others

through market forces, in principle, given diverse social preferences, the existence of diverse

standards will raise global welfare. There is, however, a case for international standards where

(a) there is a strong danger that nations would act strategically in their absence; (b) nations can

agree on what those standards should be; andlor (c) nations share a common labor market.

Where the failure to maintain certain standards impinges on notions of fundamental human rights

they are more difficult to deal with. One solution is to induce poor nations to comply by

offering them compensation. A second is to use labelling and other forms of moral suasion.

The denial of trading opportunities should probably come only as a last resort and only in the

most egregious cases.

       A Race to the bottom? If labor market policies do not affect total labor costs, there is

no reason to believe there will be economic pressures for a convergence of standards. In

addition, if these standards reflect choices that nations are willing to make, they will not be

changed even if they do have allocative consequences. As Ehrenberg (1994) has pointed out,

there are noteworthy differences in minimum wages, occupational standards, and other labor

standards across the 50 states of the United States -- indeed prior to the early 1970s, the United
                                                                                              39
States did not have national occupational health and safety standards.



                                   Concluding Conunents.



       International trade enhances potential national welfare. It frees up resources to be put

to alternative uses in which they are more productive. However, a necessary condition for these

benefits to be realized, is that these resources do not remain unemployed. In several labor

markets, particularly in Europe, the loss of a job is viewed with considerable anxiety. The

result is that increased trade, or technological progress, is seen as a threat rather than an

opportunity.

       In this paper, however, I have shown that there is considerable empirical evidence that

the sources of poor labor market performance, particularly in the US, are essentially domestic.

They reflect ongoing technological shocks that would be present even if the US economy was

closed. The role of developing country imports and the sourcing activities of US multinationals

both remain too small to account for a significant share of the relative wage changes that have

occurred in the US. This evidence suggests that neither international differences in wage rates

nor in labor standards are the major factors in OECD labor market behavior that many believe

them to be.

       These findings suggest the major challenges to policy are (a) to educate the public on the

nature of the changes; (b) to emphasize the need for worker training and education to take

advantage of the opportunities new technologies afford; (c) to develop measures such as earned-

income tax credits which redress earnings inequality while preserving and increasing wage
                                                                                              40

flexibility.

        Where nations share a common consensus on labor standards, as most do with respect

to minimum standards, there is probably merit in reinforcing the credibility of domestic policies

through international agreement. International agreement might also help to define the terms of

the debate and thus limit the ability of particular interests to obtain trade protection.
Nonetheless, there are also gains to had in allowing considerable scope for the application of

different policies, particularly where effects are either born locally or operate only through

international markets. Nations that share a common labor market because of free immigration

flows might find a greater interest in increased harmonization, although even in this case, as the

US experience indicates, a considerable diversity in standards and practices can be sustained

within a single market.



                                          References

Berman, Eli, John Bound and Zvi Griliches, "Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor Within
U.S. Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing," December
1992.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, "Free Traders and Free Iminigrationists: Strangers or Friends?" Russell
Sage Foundation, Working Paper No. 20, April 1991.

Borjas, George J., Richard Freeman and Lawrence F. Katz, "On the Labor Market Effects of
Immigration & Trade," Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 1556,
Harvard University, June 1991.

Bound, John and George Johnson, "Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations," American Economic Review, Vol. 82, June 1992, 371-
92.

Brown, Drusilla K., Alan V. Deardorff and Robert M. Stern, "International Labor Standards
and Trade: A Theoretical Analysis," Research Forum on International Economics University of
Michigan Discussion Paper No. 333, July 1993.
                                                                                           41

Cepii. Le Lettre Du Cepii, February 1994.

Collingsworth, Terry, J. William Goold, and Pharis J. Harvey, "Time for a New Global Deal"
Foreign Affairs, JanlFeb 1994.

Cooper, Richard N., Natural Resources and Environmental Policies.
Brookings Project on Integrating National Economies. (mimeo) 1993.

Davis, Steven J., "Cross-Country Patterns of Change in Relative Wages," 1992 Macroeconomics
Annual, Olivier I3lanchard and Stanley Fischer (eds.), NBER.

Deardorff, Alan and Robert Staiger, "An Interpretation of the Factor Content of Trade", Journal
of !nternaional Economics, 1988, pp. 93-107.

EuroSut, Labor Costs 1988: Principal Results. Luxembourg: EC, 1992.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Labor Markets and Economic Integration, Brookings Project on
Integrating National Economies. (mimeo) 1994.

Gullickson, William, "Multifactor productivity in manufacturing, 1984-88", Monthly Labor
Review, October 1992.

Johnson, George E, and Frank P. Stafford, "International Competition and Real Wages," paper
presented at American Economic Association Meetings, January 5-7, 1993.

Katz, Lawrence F., Gary W. Loveman, and David G. Blanchilower, "A Comparison of Changes
in the Structure of Wages in Four OECD Countries." NBER, 1992.

Kreuger, Alan B., 'How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from
Microdata, 1984-89," mimeograph, Princeton University.

Lawrence, Robert Z., The Impact of Trade on OECD Labor Markets. Group of Thirty
Occasional Paper No.45, 1994.

Lawrence, Robert Z. and Matthew Slaughter, "Trade and US Wages in the 1980s: Giant Sucking
Sound or Small Hiccup?" Brookins Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1993.

Leainer, Edward, "Effects of a U.S. -Mexico Free Trade Agreement," paper presented at Brown
University 1991; also NBER Discussion Paper.

Learner, Edward, "Trade, Wages and Revolving Door Ideas" National Bureau of Economic
Research. Working Paper No. 4716.

Mishel, Lawrence and Jared Bernstein, "Is the Technology Black Box Empty? An Empirical
                                                                                           42
Examination of the Impact of Technology on Wage Inequality and Employment Structure,
Economic Policy Institute (mimeo).

OECD, Employment Outlook. July 1993.

Ravenga, Ana L., "Exporting Jobs? The Impact of Import Competition on Employment and
Wages in U.S. Manufacturing," quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 107:1, February 1992,
pp. 255-282.

Reich, Robert B., The Work of Nations, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1991.

Sachs, Jeffery and Howard Shatz, "Trade and Jobs in US Manufacturing," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (1994:1) (Forthcoming).

Slaughter, Matthew J., International Trade. Multinational Corporations and American Wages
Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT Economics Department, 1994.

Steil, B., "'Social Correctness' Is the New Protectionism" Foreign Affairs, Jan/Feb 1994, vol.
73, no. 1, pp. 14-20.

Stolper, Wolfgang and Paul A. Samuelson, "Protection and Real Wages", Review of Economic
Studies, November 1941, pp. 58-73.

Wood, Adrian, "How much does Trade with the South Affect Workers in the North?" World
Bank Research Observer, vol. 6, no 1. (Jan. 1991) pp. 19-36.

Wood, Adrian, North-South Trade. Employment and Inequality, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994.
                                                                             TABLE     1



                    Earnings     Comp           Output        Comp           Comp          Comp!         FWOT          Comp         GDP87/
         Year      /CPI          ICPI           IHour         /POut          /POut-l       CPI-Sh                      Share        Hours
                   (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)          (9)
         1970            98.0            89.4         87.5            88.5         86.1           88.1         126.5         67.0          89.3
         1971            100.4           91.2         90.4            89.7         86.9           89.8         124.2         65.7          92.5
         1972            104.3           93,9         93.2            91.8         89.4           92.7         120.0         65.2          93.9
         1973            104.5           96.1         95.6            94.0         91.6           94.4         116.9         65.1          95.4
         1974            101.4           95.1         93.9            94.3         92.0           93.2         107.1         66.5          94.7
         1975             99.1           95.8         98.0            94.3         92.9           94.1         106.9         65.0          97.9
         1976            100.7           98.8         98.8            97.3         96.0           96.9         107.3         65.2         100.0
         1977            102.1          100.3         100.5           98.7          98.0          98.4         103.8         65.0         100.7
         1978            102.7          101.4         101.1          99.4           99.2         100.3         102.0         65.1         100.8
         1979            100.0          100.0         100.0         100.0          100.0         100.0         100.0         66.2         100.0
         1980            95.2           97,5           99.3         101.0          100.8         99.2           91.7         67.3         100.4
         1981            93.9           96.8          100.5         100.4          101.0          98.9          93.9         66.1         101.5
         1982            93.8           98.0          100.7         102.1          102.1         100.6          97.6         67.1         101.8
         1983            94.9           98.5          102.9         102.4          101.1         100.5         101.5         65.9         103.9
         1984            94.3           98.4          105.3         102.6          101.5         100.7         104.4         64.5         104.4
         1985            93.8           99.3          106.8         103.7          101.9         102.2         105.7         64.3         105.4
         1986            94.1           102.4         109.0         106.6          104.7         106.2         107.6         64.7         107.8
         1987            93.2           102.3         110.1         107.5          105.4         106.4         102.5         64.6         107.8
         1988            92.4           102.4         111.1         108.2          105.9         106.8         102.7         64.5         108.4
         1989            91.8           101.0         110.2         107.1          104.5         105.3         102.0         64.3         108.4
         1990            90.3           101.1         110.5         108.8          105.6         105.4         100.2         65.2         109.2
         1991            89.4           101.4         110.5         109.5          105.1         105.8         101.5         65.6         110.4

Notes:
         Earnings = Average Hourly Earnings                   Output=Business Sector Outpul(Excludes Housing)
         CPI=CPI for All Urban Consumers                      POut=Deflator for Output
         Comp=AverageHourlyCompensation                       POut.l=Deflator for Output minus Investment
         CPt.Sh=CPI minus Shelter Component                   FWTOT= Ratio of Fixed Weight Price Index of Exports
         CompShare=shar,of compensation                          of Goods and Serlvces to Price Index of lrnporis
         in Business OutputVatue Added                        Hours=Hoursworked In Business Sector
 TabA2. Change. in Ratio of Production to Non-Production Woilia.t




           Production Wodier Employment to NonProduction Worker Employment


                                 Weighted Average Radoe
                                                                          Oecontpoeition of Change (b)

           Veer
               1959
                                   Velue
                                      3.23
                                             Change % Change                    thdn ma
               1969                   3.00     (0.22)         -4.91%                     25.1%                 74.9%

               1979                   2.79     (0.22)         -7.23%                      -5.9%               105.9%

               1989                   2.27     (0.51)       -18.47%                      30.3%                 69.7%

          Change Over Entire Period            (0.95)         -an                       -500%                150.8%



(a) Based on the following standard decomposing lorinular Total Change (industry 5) - (change in employment share • mean prod:nonprod. redo in period) +
(change in protnonprod. ratIo • mean employment share (or period).

Source: NBER Databenk.
                                                              RLTBL4.XLS



 TabIe3
 Regressions of Price Changes on Ratios of Production-to-
 Non-Production Workers in Japan and Germany


 Wholesale Prices (1980-901

 Regression             Dep. Variable         Constant         JP/NP     GM/NM      R-square         F-stat        No. Obs.
           1                 %WP               -14.407         5.919                  0.1599         3.43             20
                                               (-1.982)       (1.851)
           2                 %WP               -11.197                   11.896       0.3547         8.24             17
                                               (-1.109)                  (2.871)



Import Prices (1980-90)

Regression             Dep. Variable          Constant        JP/NP      GM/NM     R-squara         F-stat         No. Obs.
           1                 %MP              -29.906          6.653                  0.067          1.29             20
                                              (-2.248)        (1.137)
           2                 %MP                6.399                     3.12        0.045          1.02            24
                                               (0.789)                   (1.012)



Vanab). N.m.s:
%WP                 Percent change in wholesale pnces
%MP                 Percent change in import prices
JPINP               Japan.ae ratio of production-to-non-production workers
GM/NM               German ratio of manual-to-non-manual werkirs

Sourc.s:
Euroatat Labour Costs 1988: Principal results. vi. CECA-CEE-CEEA. Luxembourg. 1992.
Ministry ot Labour (Japan). December 1989 Surviy.
Statistiechea Bund.e.rnt Wiesbaden. Reihe 8: Pr.ise und Preisrndies fuor di. tin- urid Ausiuhr. 1980. 1985 1990.
5tatistischea Bundesamt Wi.abaden. R.ih. 6: mdix dir Grosshand.lsv.rkaufpreise. 1980. 1985. 1990.
R.eaarch arid Statistics Department. Bank of Japan. Price Indexes Annual. 1980. 1985. 1990.

Not.:
Industry data generally corresponds to SITC 2.digit classification.




                                                                Page 1
 Table 4
 Employment-Weighted Percentage Changes in Wholesale       and Impon Prices
 for Japan and Germany (1980-1990)



 Japan                                                   Percentage Change-
                                      Wholesale Prices                    Import Prices
All Manufacturing Industries
     Non-production weights                     -5.60                         -18.23
     Production weights                         -3.90                         -17.29
     Difference (Prod - NonProd)                 1.70                           0.94
w/o Office Machines
     Non-production weights                     -7.09                         -18.69
     Production weights                         -4.72                         -17.50
     Difference                                  2.37                           1.19
w/o Petroleum Products
         Non-production weights                -5.49                          -18.02
         Production weights                    -3.84                          -17.19
     Difference                                 1.65                            0.83
w/o Office Mach/Petroleum Prod.
     Non-production weights                    -6.98                          -18.45
     Production weights                        -4.66                          -17.39
     Difference                                 2.32                            1.06


Germany                                                  Percentage Change
                                      Wholesale Prices                    Impoit Prices
All Manufacturing Industries
      Non-manual weights                       23.98                          15.24
      Manual weIghts                           26.03                          17.07
      Difference (Man - NonMafl)                2.05                           1.83
w/o Office Machines
     Non-manual weights                        24.79                          15.38
     Manual weights                            26.21                          17.11
     Difference                                 1.42                           1.73
w/o Petroleum Products
     Non-manual weights                        24.15                          15.55
     Manual weights                            26.11                          17.20
     Difference                                 1.96                           1.65
w/o Office MachlPetroleum Prod.
     Non-manual weights                        24.97                          15.70
     Manual weights                            26.28                          17.24
     Difference                                 1.31                           1.54

Notes:
Non-production and non-manual weights weigh each industys price chang. by that indusuy's share of total
manufacturing employment of non-production and non-manual labor. Production and manual weights weigh
each ktdustrys price change by that industrys shar. of total manufacturing employment of production and
manual labor. Industry data generally correspond to SITC 2-digit classification.
 TABLE 5 :US MULTINATIONALS
J                                                                                                 I

                                                                                                                                                                       RATIOS   EMPLOYMENT                             COMPENSATIONRATIOS
                                                          EMPLOYMENT       FIGURES000.)               __________________ __________________                              EMP.   PROD. WORKERS             /            PROD. WORKERSCOMP.!
                                                          TOTAL                                           "".'                     V4ONPROOUCTION WORKERS    NONPROO.WORKEREMP.                                        NONPROO. WORKERCOMP.
                                                              1977           1Q09     Cbwig.            1977       1909     Chan.      1971     1Q99 Chong.     1977     199$                                  Chwig. 1971     1999
    TOTAL    (b)                                             67,344       90,644         34.61         55.179    73.474      33.21                     41.1      4.54    426                                     -5,71
                                                                                                                                     12,195  17,170                                                                       (c)    (c)
    MANUFACTURING                                            19,602       1It426          .1.31        14.135    13.257       421                      11.21     2.55    2.15                                   -15,11    no     no
                                                                                                                                      5,547    619$



    TOTAL                                                    16.605       16.765          -0.61                       no                      no            no                                                             -     no
                                                                                                                                                                                      no             no
     MANUFACTURING                                           11,775       10.127        .1401           7.257         no                                    no                      1.61             no                    -   0.76
                                                                                                                                           4,516



     MAJORITY-OWNED
     MANUFACTURINGAFFIUATESIN:
      DEVELOPED COUNTRIES                                       2.754        2.167      -21.3'          1,695     1196         -29.51                      971         -02          1.60                                       0.75    0,66   -10.61
                                                                                                                                            1.059                                                   1.23           -22.11
        CANADA                                                    502          455      -192             356        274        -22.51        204           III        -11.5         1.76            1.52           -13.61      0.66    0.61    -5.21
          EUROPE                                                1,951        1.509      -22.6'          1,202       621        -31.1          749          Ml          -9.1         1.60            1.22           -24.31      070     0.63   -10.01
       JAPAN                                                      40            75       66.61            14         23         62.01          26           52         99.7'        0.53            0.43                       0.75    0.69    4.51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -IU91
       AUSTRAL-NEWZEALAND-S. AFR                                 201          129       -35.0'            122         71       -41.31          80           50        -21.4         1.53            1.23           -19.V       0.70    0.68   -12.51
      DEVELOPINGCOUNTRIES                                       1.019        1.079        5.91            675      679           0.61        344           400         16.4         1.96            1.10           -13.61      047     0.41   -12.61
               TOTAL                                            3,773        3,247      -14.0'          2.371     1.975        -20.61       1403         1.37 I        -2.3'        1.69            1.37           -19.11      0,80    059    -14.21

     MAJORITY-OWNED
     MANUFACTURINGAFFILLATES IN:
     FOOD & KINDREDPRODUCTS                                      377          306       -16.5'            248   194  -25.61                   129          124         .42          1.93            1.49           -22.71      0,57    0.62    9.01
     TEXTItEPRODUCTS& APPAREL                                    102           92       -19.5'             00     59 -27.21                    21           23           9.3'       3.76            2.52           -33.31      047     0.59   23.71
     CHEMICALS& ALLIED PRODUCTS                                  464          475         2.21            233   227     -2.51                 231          247           9,5        1.01            0.92             -9.61      0.11   0.64   -9.11
     PRIMARY AND FABRICATEDMETALS                             229    179  -21.9'                          ISO    117   26.11                   it           62        -12.3'        2.23            1,89           -15.01       0.00   0.73    .94,
     MACHINERY.EXCEPT ELECTRICAL                              523   509     -2.9'                         270   254     -6.01                 253          254           0.4         1.07           1.00            -9.41       0.61   0.59    -3,61
     ELECTRIC & ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT                          629    455   -27.7                          422   288   -31.01                  207          167         -19.3        2.03            1.72           -15.51       0.56   0.54    -4.31
     TRANSPORTATION   EQUIPMENT                               740    597  -19.4'                          507   365   -26.0'                  233          231         -05          2.17            1.56           -27.31       0.97   0.61   -37.21
     OTHER MANUFACTURING                                      709   615     -9.01                         452   392   .13,5'                  257          293          2.3          1.76           1.45           -17.4        0.75   0.59   -21.01
                     TOTAL                                  3,773  3.247  -1417                         2.371  1.875  -20.61              1,403  1.371   22                                                         19.1'       0.8$  059     -14.21
                                                          __________________                          __________________                __________________                          --1.69          l7         -               _______



I$YE3k.. I
    f.)  L.,bo.'Jon S.4,,i,             fo iho 71.2. Dopoi'i.oi.f .,f I,oy'i Ern,4o7.n , !Ioo,-j, n,,.I
                                                                                                             Fonwp, II,.jio, Sioies, Q7)Q.9Q,
    (I.) Fpi.o.. Jo.' pon-oio n,.ofon.,
                                      y        ,.th,onw, Tho io.'ol ...o..fo.o. fi...',o.-.. 7977- 92.47!
                                                                                                        o..,         1969. !96.413,,.ill,o...
    fr)  7 ho                     In' frf.i! 13.3.          i
                                                       onnor ..eo.opoo,y. .'f ih. yhso n'0.,,/bly.coIL,, .-oso.bn'o ii. 7077 .,.,.l 7069, ii, bli..A.-d bytho 16,no.,of 1.obo,SiaS,rnci
    (.4) .nb..g hi .,,yjho4 o.. (1.3 Lh1yw,,.oy .,f Co.,,ywn'.                    tiono- 7977 1/i. 1.hoy.'i !,,,,,nyey, 4h.'yy,4, 79*0 U.S. Lb,yn 1,',on ,'4.n,od.
                                                                        pi
     (.3 (l.o.f..-d by .o.hon-yof ..ffilioio. A,conhy, hi tho L)op,no.oniof Coo,,,,e,'y.
                                                                                                                                                                   I,,!onoooo..i. f.v..o'.b...hU.S. ,'oon'toof oonb,.,,A 11.3. ffilioSo.
                                                                                                  blin,gon, .'eforn.co.S ,,bo,y.
 TABLES: US MANUFACTURING FOREIGN AFFILIATES:QIjTPUT & EMPLOYMENT
 Data for 1989



                                                                     Comp.         Net Income          Output
                               Output ($MM)        Employees         Per Worker     Per Worker     Per Worker
D.velop.d
 Courttnes
   All Workers                      $143,244          2,167,300       $33,028          $12,587        $66,093
   Production Workers                       -          1,196,100      $26,943                 -              -
   NonProductiort Workers                   -            971,200      $40,523                                -

Developing
Cournr,es
  All Workers                        $28,764          1,079,400       $9,404            $6,250       $26,648
  Production Workers                        -           679,200       $6,110                                 -
  NonProduction Workers                     -           400,200      $14,955


Ratio of Developing to Developed Countries for:

Compensation Per Worker
  All Workers                                              0.28
  Production Workers                                       0.23
  NonProduction Workers                                    0.37

Gross Product Per Worker                                   0.40

Net Income Per Worker                                      0.50

Sources:
U.S. Department of Commerce Publications - U.S. Direct Investment Abroad 1989 Benchmark Survey, and Survey
of Current Business, February 1994.
N
fig2J
                    OUTPUT/HOUR &
                      REAL HOURLY COMP
    120




    90-
          70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
           71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91
              - OUTPUT/HOUR —'-—- COMP/CPI   COMP/BUSDEF
          I
FIgure   3. SourcIng Comparison for U.S. Multinationals and Their Majority-Owned Affiliates
         O.#y AS  D.     6.   ...&




                  •0%



                  S0%



                  '0%



                                                                                            M Puch.,.d from Fc,IUn AttiS.*ss
          I        0%
                                                                                            M PxcP*..d hem Fot.lgn.s
                                                                                            •   U.S. PaiunI Mad.
                                                                                            • Putch...d fromU.S.&JppIlvs
                  30%



                  30%



                   70%




                   0%


                                     '.7,                                        'II.
                                               1977     %            1992                     190$      %
     T.t. Outpv                             *746.11   100.00%   $1.01 1.56   100.00%    $1,600.32     100.00%

     OutpetM.d.                             $319.10   42.50%     $440.01     44.09%       $647.09     41.61%
     O.sp0 Pl.'vh...d                       $420.01   67.40%     '565-u      SLII%        $912.03      05.40%

     O.,?•,              C.nt.n              $30.24     4.00%     $41.0$      4.00%       $ too 03     6.03%
     Out pu$'a   b3. C..w..w                $710.47    "3.95%    $070.41     00.04%     $1463 79      93.11%
Figure 3. SourcIng Cnmparlson for U.S. Multinationals and Their Majority-Owned Affiliates (continued)
       I7.41D. I. aw.....

                                                              a/ority-Owned Aff1/Iate4
                                                                                      I., ,I - II

                    •0%

                                                                                                                                                       U U.S. P.r.ntMad.
                                                                                                                                                       U P,ch...d from U.S.
                    ¶0%                                                                                                                                U At Pat. Mad.
                                                                                                                                                       U Pizch...d from Forolgn Suppliscu
                    009

            I       00%




                    10%




                     0%


                                          'I,,                      1101
                                                                                               'II,                       "I
                                                          1977      %                                    1992     %                                  1999   S                          1991     5
                                                      $ISS.22     100.00%                          *209.34      ¶00.00%                           $513.01 100.00%                  $894.71    100.00%

    Oinps    Med.                                      $92.12      40.47%                          $121.94      49.30%                            $231.01      44.99%              *244.78    41.15%
    OutputPta,rh.,.4                                  $109.10      33.53%                          *137.70      51.70%                            $292.00      35.02%              $349.la    99.95%
    Output'aFo9C.nfsut                                $173.07      97.31%                          $231.89      00.95%                            $447.11      97.09%               107.77     14.70%
    Oulpue, U.S. C...n.,,t                             $20.15       12.09%                          *34,78      ¶3.09%                             100.45      ¶2.93%               $12.22     2.05%
    N.,.    $..,.   , .,f.,.,..h...,   p'4d   .   h   lI..,.....t.f f..........   .. F........,,.. 4,.!,..,      ..l C.,,,..,,iIl.,......,. r.r......y ,q4
