                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              WHY IS INFLATION SKEWED?
                            A DEBT AND VOLATILITY STORY




                                      Joshua Aizenman
                                     Ricardo Hausmann




                                  Working Paper No. 4837




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambiidge, MA 02138
                                    August 1994



Useful comments by Guillermo Calvo, Leonaido Leiderman, Michael Gavin and the seminar
participants at the 1DB are gratefully acknowledged. We also wish to thank Justino De L.a (Yuz
for econometric support. All enors are ours. This paper is part of NBER's research programs
in International Finance and Macroeconomics and International Trade and Invesiment. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the 1DB or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

  1994 by Joshua Aizenman and Ricaido Hausmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4837
                                                                                August 1994

                               WHY IS INFLATION SKEWED?
                             A DEBT AND VOLATILITY STORY


                                          A B STR ACT


       This paper studies the patterns of inflation skewness in 56 countries. Monthly data

suggests that inflation is posicively skewed. We investigate linkages between skewness and non-

linearity, showing that concavity (convexity) will lead to negative (positive) skewness if the

independent variable is symmetrically distributed. We construct a public finance model for a

developing country that uses inflation tax and external borrowing as the residual means for fiscal

financing. The model predicts a convex dependency of inflation on output. whem inflation

skewness depends positively on inflation volatility, and external debt difficulties magnify the

skewness. We conclude the paper with an assessment of the patterns of inflation between 1979-

1993 for the 56 countries. Overall, the patterns are consistent with the predictions of the model.



Joshua Aizenman                                            Ricardo Hausmann
Department of Economics                                    Inter-American Development Bank
Dartmouth College                                          1300 New York Avenue, NW
6106 Rockefeller Hall                                      Stop W0304
Hanover, NH 03755                                          Washington, DC 20577
and NBER
       Recent decades have been turbulent for Latin American countries and other
developing countries, a period associated with high and volatile inflation, terms of trade
instability, and external debt problems. A question that deserves further attention is the
impact of the resultant volatility on macroeconomic performance. Recent studies have
shown that macroeconomic volatility impacts negatively on investment and growth.'
The economic explanation for these patterns, however, deserves further investigation.
       The purpose of this paper is to focus narrowly on one aspect of volatility - its
impact on patterns of inflation. Figure 1 plots the volatility/skewness patterns of
monthly inflation in a sample of 56 countries during the period of 1979-1993. 2 Table         I

summarizes the avenge skewness, variance and the mean of inflation rates and inflation
tax rates, demonstrating that inflation is positively skewed. 3,     Our paper will trace
possible economic reasons that explain this pattern.
       In section 1 we identify the linkage between skewness and non-linearity. We

       See Rodrick (1991), Barro (1991), Aizenman and Marion (1993), Flausrnann
(1994), Dornbusch and Edwards (1994) and the references therein.
2      Our sample was restricted by the availability of monthly data. It is composed of
18 OECD countries, and 38 developing countries.
3      The inflation tax rate is defined by 11(1 + I), where I is the inflation rate. This ratio

measures the implicit tax rate imposed by inflation on money balances, and is bounded
between values close to zero and one. The advantage of focusing on the inflation tax
rate is that it is a stationary variable that has a simple public finance interpretation.
4       The skewness reported in this study is defined by the third central moment
divided by the cube of the standard deviation. While inflation is positively skewed both
in the OECD countries and the developing countries, skewness is lower for the first
group -- the average inflation skewness for OECD and developing countries is 0.92 and
1.7, respectively. The avenge inflation tax rate skewness for OECD and developing
countries is .868 and 1.02, respectively.
                   Figure 1. Skewness and Variance of Inflation
                         56 CountrIes, February 1979-October 1993




      10-

0
C
I.—
0
02
      2-


      -2-


                                      Variance of inflation
            Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF.
                                                     2


                                                Table 1

                                Average statistics, 1979- 1993
                Monthly data, 56 countries, Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF



                                        Inflation rate               Inflation tax rate
                                               I                           11(1+1)



Skewness                                      1.45                           0.98

Variance                                    0.0039                          0.001

Mean                                         0.02                           0.017




                      Patterns of skewness across the 56 countries5

                                        Inflation rate               Inflation tax rate
                                               I                           11(1÷1)


Significantly negative                 2 developing,                   3 developing,
                                          I OECD                          I OECD

Non significant skewness               7 developing,                   9 developing
                                           1 OECD                          1 OECD


Significantly positive                 29 developing,                 26 developing,
                                          I6OECD                          I6OECD




       The confidence level reported in this table is 95%.
                                              3



show that if an independent random variable is symmetrically distributed, concavity

(convexity) leads to a negative (positive) skewness of the dependent variable.
       In section 2 we describe a public finance model of inflation tax and external debt
that may lead to a convex dependency of inflation on output shocks. The model is
designed to account for several features specific to developing countries. We consider a
government that finances its activities and services its outstanding external debt by
direct taxes, printing money, and external borrowing. Future output is stochastic, and
the access of the country to the international credit market is limited by its
creditworthiness, which in turn is related to the tax capacity of the government.6 Both
inflation tax and external borrowing are assumed to be associated with excess burden.
We characterize the pattern of inflation and external borrowing, and derive the
association of inflation and output We show that if the tax capacity is large relative to
the needed fiscal resources, inflation rate will be low (possibly zero), and direct taxes will
be used to finance government expenditure. If the fiscal revenue needs exceed the tax
capacity, both the inflation tax and external borrowing will be used to finance current
fiscal outlays. Further increase in fiscal needs (or a drop in tax capacity) exhausts the
ability of the country to increase its external borrowing, as the credit ceiling is reached.
In these circumstances inflation tax is used as a residual means of taxation, leading to a
convex dependency of inflation on output. This convexity is magnified in the presence
of external credit ceilings, or a large accumulation of foreign debt.




6      In countries where the private sector does not have access to the international

credit market, most external borrowing is either done by the government, or guaranteed
by it. Hence, the external debt should be viewed as a liability of the government, and
the tax capacity is one important indicator regarding the government's ability to service
its debt.
                                              4


       Section 3 turns to an empirical assessment of the skewness of inflation
throughout the last 15 years. Overall, the patterns are consistent with the predictions of
the model described in Section 2.
       Before turning to the paper, it is useful to place it in the context of the relevant
literature. The importance of inflation tax as the residual means of financing is well
established in the existing literature.7 A topic that deserves further attention focuses on
the degree to which limited access to the international credit market affects inflation tax.
The skewness of price adjustments, in the presence of an inflationary trend, has been
derived in models that focused on menu costs and nominal rigidity.8 Our discussion
ignores menu cost factors, focusing instead on public finance aspects of inflation and
external debt as the residual means of financing government expenditure. While we do
not negate the potential importance of menu costs and nominal rigidities, these
considerations are not unique to developing countries. The linkages between output
volatility, inflation and external debt, however, are more pronounced for developing
countries, and may be crucial for explaining the patterns of inflation taking place in
these countries.9




       On the optimality of using inflation tax as a residual, see Calvo and Guidotti
(1992), Calvo and Leiderman (1992) and the references therein.
8      See   Tsiddon (1991) and Ball and Mankiw (1994). In these models shocks that
raise firms desired relative price trigger larger price responses than shocks that lower the
desired relative price, as in the second case the inflation will reduce the relative price

without any nominal price adjustment.
       Industrialized countries are well integrated with the international credit market,
and their tax system is well developed. Hence, they may be able to adjust to real shocks
without relying on the inflation tax.
                                             5


1.    Skewness and non-linearity
      Frequent applications of certainty equivalence in macroeconomics may induce
one to overlook the impact of non-linearity. The purpose of this section is to establish
the linkage between non-linearity and skewness when certainty equivalence does not
hold. A possible measure of skewness is the third moment of a function, defined by the
expected value of the cube difference between the function and its mean.
       Consider the example provided in Figure 2, plotting a concave function y = f(x).
Suppose that x follows a symmetric three states distribution:


               ÷h    Probability 1/3
(1)    x=            Probability 1/3    • h > 0.
               —h
                     Probability 113



                      f(x)                  a2
                                                    Cs

                                                                f(x)
                                                      C

                             A'



                                       a1
                                                            X
                             x0-h           xo   x0-,-h


                          Figure 2: Concavity and skewness
                                            6


The corresponding values of the function are


                   f(x0)+ ha2     Probability 1/3
       (2)    x = f(x0)           Probability 1/3
                   f(x0) — ha1    Probability 1/3


where a1 and a2 are the slopes of y = f(x) between points (A & B) and (B & C),
respectively, satisfying a1 > a2. Direct calculation reveals that for the example
considered above


       (3)    E[{f(x)T E[f(x)J}3] = -[a   - a21[2(a1)2 +       + 2(a2)2](!)   <0


where E is the expectation operator.
       Had y = f(x) been a linear function (like NBC' in Figure 2), volatility would not
affect its mean (equals to f(x0)), and the third moment of f(x) would bezero. For a
concave function, however, volatility reduces the mean. This effect in conjunction with
the fact that point A is further below point B than point C is above B, induces a

negative third moment. Applying the logic of figure 2, it follows that for a convex
function, the skewness is positive. In Appendix A. we apply a second order Taylor
approximation showing that:


Claim 1:     Let y = f(x) be a twice differential function, and let x be a random variable
distributed symmetrically around xij with a small support where f' Cv) 0 , then

sign E[{f(x) — Qf(x)] }3] = sign f". Hence, concavity (convexity) is associated
with a negative (positive) skewness.
                                                7


2.       Inflation skewness, productivity shocks and external debt.
         We turn now to a public finance model that links output to inflation. The model
will enable us to predict the patters of non-linearity in the association of output and
inflation. The model is characterized by the following assumptions, motivated by the
experience of developing countries in recent decades:
         Inflation tax and external borrowing are the residual means of financing
government expenditure, meeting any gap between the fiscal revenue needs and the
fiscal funding available from other sources.
•        Other taxes (like income and sale taxes) are characterized by their relative rigidity
- the   costs of adjusting the tax rates to the realized state of nature are too high.
•        Foreign borrowing is limited by the credit worthiness of the country, which in
turn is linked to its tax capacity. When the external credit ceiling is reached, the
inflation tax remains the only residual means of fiscal financing.
•        Both the inflation tax and foreign borrowing are associated with excess burden.


         We start with the construction of a simple framework capturing these
assumptions - a model of a one traded good in a two period example. Appendix B
extends the logic of the model to a more general n period framework Ui 00). To fix
ideas, we consider the case where all external borrowing is done by the government.
The outstanding foreign debt at the beginning of the first period is B1. The demand for
money is characterized by a cash in advance constraint:'0




10       Allowing for a variable velocity will complicate exposition, but will not modify
the key results, as is illustrated in Appendix B. In fact, a negative dependency of the
demand for money on the inflation rate tends to increase the convexity of the inflation
output schedule (See Appendix B for further discussion).
                                                   8



   (4)



where M stands for nominal balances, P is the price level, and Q denotes output. The
government has two means of taxation: the inflation tax, and a proportional income tax
at a rate of x. Throughout the analysis we take this tax as given, reflecting the fiscal
capacity of the government In addition, the government may have limited access to the
international credit market, borrowing D1 to be returned in period 2 with a contractual

interest rate R (denominated in foreign currency units). The access to the international
credit market and the contractual interest rate are determined by risk neutral creditors
who demand an expected return equal to the risk free rate, denoted by r.
         The budget constraint facing the government in period us given by

                         M-M
                          '
         (5)       B=XQ+
                       I                      1   1
                                    p1



where           stands for   the nominal money balances 'inherited' from the previous period,
and       stands for government expenditure on goods and services, assumed to be

exogenously given. The right hand side of (5) corresponds to the fiscal revenue net of
expenditure, being the sum of direct taxes, revenue from printing money, and external
borrowing, minus expenditure. Applying (4) and (5) we infer that


         (5')      B1 =Q1+k[Q1—Q0]+ir1kQ0÷D1—G1 =(+ k)Q1 —(1—,r1)kQ0+D1 -G1
                                            9


             P-P0 is
where =                the inflation tax, defined to be bounded between zero and one.
               P1

We assume that inflation introduces deadweight losses, the consumption cost of which
is iQ(g)2 The coffesponding first period consumption (C) is given by:


       (6)
              c=[l_x_k_(x1)21Q1+(1_,r1)kQ0.

       The second period is modeled as the terminal period: at that period external debt
is settled. The consumption at that period equals the difference between production and
debt payment. To simplify presentation we assume that in the terminal period the
demand for money is zero. Appendix B extends the mode] to a general n period
framework. In addition to the cost of inflationary finance mentioned above, we assume
that external debt may induce deadweight losses, due either to adverse incentive effects
associated with debt overhang, or to more frequent spells of non-cooperative behavior.
       Suppose that the only uncertainty in period 1 concerns the second period output.
There are two independent sources for this uncertainty: an exogenous and an
endogenous one. The exogenous uncertainty reflects the state of nature, being
determined by factors like weather, terms of trade, etc. We summarize this uncertainty
by a distribution f(Y2), where    stands for the potential output. The endogenous

uncertainty stems from the possibility of production disruption due to non-cooperative
behavior among domestic competing pressure groups (like labor and capital or other
potential rival groups). Or alternatively, due to a drop in effort induced by debt
overhang. We model this by assuming that non-cooperative behavior, or debt overhang,
will induce a percentage GNP drop of r, occurring with probability p. This probability
depends positively on the external debt burden:
                                             I0



               p=p(z), where z =           (1+r)Dj , and
       (7)                                                   p>O for z>O.
                                            E(Y2)



The value of z measures the exposure of a country to external debt relative to the
anticipated output. The presumption is that a larger exposure increases the frequency of
production disturbances, due to several possible reasons. First, if external debt
accumulation leads to debt overhang, it will reduce effort resulting in a similar reduced
form equation. Alternatively, cooperation may be in short supply in bad times, leading
to spells of production disturbances due to conflicts among rivaling groups. A higher
debt burden is equivalent to an adverse shock, reducing the net resources available for
consumption or investment, and encouraging thereby opportunistic behavior.t2,13




1      For a discussion on debt overhang, see Krugman (1988), Classnes (1988) and the
references therein. See Berg and Sachs (1988) for a statistical analysis that highlights
the role of exposure to external debt in explaining rescheduling.
12     The presumption is that adverse shocks will increase the benefit of opportunistic
behavior as it increases the marginal evaluate of extra resources and reduces the planing
horizon, diminishing the value of future penalties associated with non-cooperation. For
a model capturing these feature, see Aizenman (1993). For a war of attrition
interpretation of high inflation see Alesina and Drazen (1991).
13
       Another way for linking external debt with productivity disturbances is to
recognize that a partial default on external debt may lead to a drop in international trade
due to trade embargo or to the elimination of trade credits. In these circumstances, t

measures the output effects of a default, and p represents the default probability.
                                             11



      Assuming that the resolution of both types of uncertainty occurs simultaneously,

the expected GNP equals:14


      (8)      E(Q) = (1—v p)E(1)


      The sovereign debt is modeled in a manner akin to Helpman (1989). where the

country repays its external debt each period up to a fraction x of its GNP. where x
corresponds to the tax capacity.15 Hence, the supply of credit facing the country in
period one is determined by the condition:


       (9)      D1(1+r)=E[Min{(1+R)D1;%Q2)}.


This condition defines implicitly the supply of credit facing the country. The maximum
external credit supported by (9) defines the external credit ceiling, denoted by 1)3.
       The expected second period consumption equals the difference between the
expected second period output and the expected external debt repayment:


       (10) E{C2}=(l—'rp)E(Y2)—(1+r)D1


       The representative consumer is risk neutral, discounting second period
consumption at a rate of r. The utility of the representative decision maker is given by:




14     A similar analysis applies if nature moves first, although the resultant equations
are more involved.
       In this fonnulation we implicitly assume that creditors have the bargaining power
to induce the debtor to repay up to the tax capacity.
                                             12




       (11)
                        14-r


       The government sets the first period inflation tax and borrows so as to maximize
the expected net present value of consumption, subject to the proper constraints. This
problem can be reduced to the following constrained maximization:


(12)



              Q1[l_z_k_(,r1)2}+k[1_,r1jQ0
                                                  (1t (1+r)D1 +
MAX
                  + k)Q1 — k(1 — it1 )Q + — — B1 } +           -
it1




       The policy maker determines the inflation tax and external borr owing so as to

maximize the expected utility of the representative agent subject to two constraints: the
government budget constraint (the multiplier of which is A, representing the shadow
cost of government expenditure), and the external credit ceiling (the multiplier of which
isp, representing the shadow benefit of extending the external debt ceiling).
      There are three possible regimes. If the present tax capacity suffices to cover all
government outlays, the inflation tax will not be used (it1= 0), and any tax surplus will
be saved (leading to D1 <0)16 In this regime, both external borrowing and inflation tax

are redundant. In the second regime tax capacity falls short of revenue needs. An
internal equilibrium is characterized by the optimal application of both inflation and
external borrowing. If the credit ceiling is not binding, the second regime is

16
       Equivalently, the government may rebate the excessive tax to the consumer.
                                               13



characterized by equating the marginal cost of both means of financing. Formally, this
yields the following first order conditions:


              a.

       (13)

              b. t      dz
                             =S21,r
                               Q01

Condition a. states that the cost of funding extra government expenditure is
proportional to the inflation rate. The proportionality factor is linked to the deadweight
losses stemming from the inflation taxP Condition b. equates the marginal cost of
raising revenue via both means of financing. The marginal cost of external debt equals
to the marginal increase in the probability of production disturbances, times the
percentage output drop induced by these disturbances.
       If revenue needs are large enough to exhaust all the available foreign bonowing,
the credit ceiling is binding, leading to the third regime. In this case inflation tax is
residual, being determined by:



       (14)     1
       Further insight can be gained by imposing further restrictions on both the
stochastic process and the endogenous uncertainty. Suppose that the future potential
output follows an auto regressive process:



       Note that the term            in (13a) measures the excess burden of one dollar
                              QoI
raised by inflation tax.
                                               14




       (15)



where £2 is a white noise process. Thus, E[}] = vQ1
       Let the 'switching' probability follow a logistic function:


       (16)   p=                        s>O.
                   1+exp(s/z)


Parameter s captures the sensitivity of the switching probability with respect to the
anticipated burden of servicing the external debt. Applying this formulation to (13) we
infer that the internal equilibrium is characterized by


       (17) r      sexp(slz)
                {1+exp(s/z)} z
                                  2T8'
                                    I



       Applying the above conditions, we can summarized the three possible regimes
with the help of Figure 3, which plots the inflation tax against a first period output.



                                  It1




                              1




                           Figure 3: Output-Inflation Schedule
                                              15




       The position of the output-inflation curve depends on the outstanding debt, B1.
Point A (Figure 3) corresponds to the output level that induces inflation, switching from
the first to the second regime. Applying the budget constraint we infer that the output
at point A is given by Q1 =
                              G+B+kQb         Hence, a larger external debt accumulatrnn

or a smaller tax capacity shifts point A to the right, from the solid curve to the dashed
one.18 A larger real interest rate applied to the debt induces a similar shift.
       Figure 3 highlights the possibility that a rigid direct tax structure and the
exposure to country risk yields a non-linear, convex output/inflation association.
Applying our discussion from section 1 to Figure 3 enables us to conclude:


•      If the independent variable is output, and if its distribution is symmethc around
the mean, a large enough volatility will lead to a positive skewness of inflation. The
resultant skewness increases with volatility.
-      Debt accumulation or a raise in the international interest rate will shift the curve
to the right, increasing thereby the convex region, and raising the inflation skewness.
•      A higher anticipated output volatility leads to a higher expected inflation and
thereby to a higher interest rate.




      Applying the first order conditions it can be shown that at point A
sta=0 .2k]>0
dQ1
                                              16



3.     Some evidence -- inflation skewness and external debt
       We turn now to evaluate some evidence regarding the impact of volatility and
external debt difficulties on inflation skewness. Ideally, one wishes to use the volatility
of GDP, terms of trade, government revenue and all the other relevant variables to test
the model described above. Unfortunately, we do not have monthly information
regarding this variable. Instead, we proceeded indirectly. First, we used annual data to
investigate the skewness patterns of the real GDP of the 56 countries in the sample.
With the exception of one country, we can not reject the hypothesis that the real GDP is
not skewed.19 This result enables us to apply Figure 3 to infer that external debt
difficulties and higher volatility of inflation should increase inflation skewness.
       Next, we proceeded by dividing the sample into three periods: before the debt
crisis (February 1979-July 1982), periods during the debt crisis (August 1982- December
1989) and the aftermath (January 1990-December 1993).
       Table 2 reports a summary of the average values of monthly inflation skewness.
variance, and mean throughout the sample. Table 3 provides similar information for the
inflation tax rate. Overall, throughout the years characterized by the debt crisis, it is
evident that skewness, volatility and rates of inflation moved together, increasing
throughout the sample. While this is not a formal test of the model, these results are
consistent with the interpretation that the adverse shocks leading to the debt crisis
moved countries from the flat portion of the inflation-output schedule (Figure 3) to the
upward sloping convex part, where volatility induces skewness and where external
credit ceilings are worsening the inflationary impact of adverse real shocks. Our model
predicts that even if some countries regain limited access to the international credit
market, the past accumulation of external debt continues to bite -- as these countries
continue to operate along the convex part of the inflation-output schedule.



19     The confidence level used is 95%.
                                                      17



                                                  Table 2
                  Average statistics for the 56 countries: Inflation rate
                  Monthly data, 56 countries, Source: International Financial SLalistics, IMF



                            1979   -   1982         1982- 1990                1990- 1993


 Skewness                       0.76                    0.99                       1.06

 Variance                     0.0006                   0.0027                     0.008
 Mean                          0.0145                   0.021                    0.023



                       Patterns of skewness across the 56 countries20

                           1979- 1982              1982- 1990                1990- 1993

 Significantly             1 developing,          4 developing,                     0
 negative                    1 OECD                  2 OECD


Non significant          17 developing,           8 developing,             14 developing,
skewness                   12 OEcD                   6 OECD                   7 OECD

Significantly            20 developing,          26 developing,            24 developing,
positive                    5 OECD                 10 OECD                    11 OECD




20
      The confidence level reported in this table is 95%.
                                                      18




                                                  Table 3


               Average statistics for the 56 countries: Inflation tax rate
                  Monthly data, 56 countries, Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF



                                    1979- 1982                 1982- 1990                1990- 1993
Skewness                                0.59                        0.71                        0.90
Variance                               0.0007                     0.001                     0.0011

Mean                                   0.0135                     0.018                         0.018




                       Patterns of skewness across the 56 countries21

                                    1979- 1982                1982- 1990                 1990- 1993

Significantly negative            2 developing,              4 developing,                       0
                                      IOECD                     2OECD
Non significant                   18 developing,             14 developing,             18 developing,
skewness                            13 OECD                     9 OECD                     8 OECD

                                  18 developing,            20 developing,             20 developing.
Significantly positive               4 OECD                    7 OECD                    10 OECD




21     The confidence level reported in this table is 95%.
                                             19



along the convex part of the inflation-output schedule.




4.     Concluding remarks
       Our model can be extended to study the impact of volatility on exchange rate
regimes and on the patterns of financial markets. For example, adverse fiscal shocks,
affecting developing countries, induce a regime switch from a fixed exchange rate
regime to a crawling peg regime or to other regimes that accommodate the induced
inflation. Our discussion predicts that the impact of volatility on expected inflation and
thereby on the interest rate depends on the sophistication of the tax system. and the
ability of the country to use the international credit market. A given increase in output
volatility will induce a larger interest rate increase in countries the tax structure of which
is less developed, and whose external debt is large -. as both factors increase the
convexity of the output inflation schedule. This underscores the importance of
broadening the tax base, suggesting that fiscal restructuring will have important effects
on the patterns of interest rates.
                                           20




                                       References


Aizenman, Joshua. (1993); "Soft budget constraints, taxes, and the incentive to
       cooperate." international Economic Review, pp. 819-832.
Aizenman, Joshua and Nancy Marion. (1993); "Policy Uncertainty, persistence and
       growth." Review of international Economics, pp. 145-163.
Alesina A. and Drazen A. (1991); "Why are stabilizations delayed." American Economic
       Review, pp. 1170-88.
Ball, Laurence and N. Gregory Mankiw. (1994); "Asymmetric Price Adjustment and
       Economic Fluctuations." The Economic Journal, pp. 247-261.
Barro, Robert (1991); "Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries." Quarter/v
       Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, May.
Berg, Andrew and Jeffrey Sachs. (1988); "The debt crisis: structural explanations of
       countries performance." Journal of Development Economics, pp. 27 1-306.
Calvo, A. Guillermo and Pablo E. Guidotti. (1992); "Optimal Maturity of Nominal
       Government Debt: An Infinite Horizon Model." International Economic Rev iei',
       pp. 895-919.
Calvo, A. Guillermo and Leonado Leiderman. (1992); "Optimal Inflation Tax
       Precommitment: Theory and Evidence." American Economic Review, pp. 179
       -194.
Claessens, Stijn. (1988); "The debt Laffer Curve: Some Estimates," manuscript. World
       Bank.
Dornbusch, R. and S. Edwards (eds.). (1994); Stabilization, Economic Refonn and
     Growth. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
Hausmann, Ricardo. (1994); "On the road to deeper integration with the north: lessons
     from Puerto Rico." manuscript, 1DB.
Helpman, Ethanan. (1989); "Voluntary debt reduction." IME Staff Papers, pp. 580-611.
Krugman, Paul, R., (1988); "Market-based debt-reduction schemes," NBER Working
      paper 2587.
Rodrick, Dani. (1991); "Policy Uncertainty and Private Investment in Developing
      Countries." Journal of Development Economics, pp. 229-242.
Tsiddon, Dani. (1991); "The (mis) behavior of the aggregate price level." manuscript the
      Hebrew University, Jerusalem, October.
                                                  21



                                                Appendix A
         The purpose of this Appendix is to derive Claim I. We focus on approximating a
skewness measure, p , defined by the third central moment divided by the cube of the
standard deviation:
             —     E[{f(x)— EIf(x)]}3}
         aLL3—

                 [E{(f(x) — E[f(x)])2}]
Consider a function y = f(x), and let x be a symmetric random variable         the mean and

standard   deviation of which are         ,    , respectively. We assume that the support of x
is small enough to enable the use of a second order Taylor approximation around x0.

First, note that
         (Al)     f(x)f(x0)+(x—x0)f'(x0)+O.5(x—x0)2f" (x0).

Hence,

         (A2) EEf(x)I       f(x) + O.5(a )2f" (xo).
Thus,
         (A3) f(x)_E[f(x)I(x_xo)f' (xo)+O.5[(x_xo)2 —(a)2]!'' (Xo)
and
         (A4)
(1(x) —                                       + 3{(x —x)f' (x0)}20.5[(x — x)2 —(a1)2]!" (xo)
                        {(x—xo)f'
        - x0)f' (x)}{O.5[(x —x0)2 - (a)2]f" (xo)}2 + {O.5[(x - x )2 - (a)2]f" (x)}
Consequently, applying the symmetry of x,
         (A5)

E[{f(x)— E[f(x)]}3] 1.5[E[(x—x0)4 —(a)J]{f' Cr0) 1''

÷{o.51'' (x0)}3E[{(x_x0)2 _(a)2}3]
From (A3) we also infer that


         (A6) E{(f(x) — RTf(x)])2}        (a)2f' (xo)2 + O.52[E{(x
                                                                     —
                                                                         x) } — (c1)]f' (xo )2
                                              22




From (A5) and (A6) we infer (using the assumption that the support of x is small to
enable us the elimination of higher order terms) that



        (   )     —     E[{f(x)—E[f(x)J}3]         —   1.5[E[(xx0)4 —(a)4JJf'' (xe)
                                              .5
                                                               f' (x0)j(a1f
                      [E{(f(x)— EIf(x)])2}I
from which we conclude that22


        (AS) sign (p3) = sign f,'(x0).




22      In making this inference we make use of the fact that for a small support and a
symmetric distribution, EI(x — x0)4 — (a1)4] > 0. Notice also that we implicitly assume
that   f(x0)0.
                                             23



                                         Appendix B
       The purpose of this appendix is to extend the model to n periods. For the sake of
brevity we summarize here the solution in terms of a recursive structure. We assume the
absence of pre commitments, hence in each period a similar problem is solved, where the
past history determines both the present output, and the initial indebtedness. The first
period decisions, regarding yr1 and IL)1, are history in terms of the second period. By

solving the problem in the second period, one can obtain a reduced form of the expected
utility in the second period, denoted by 02. The expected utility of the representative

consumer in the first period is


                     EU]]
       (Bl)     C1 l+r2

The optimization problem facing the government can be summarized by
       (B2)
                                    2                 E[U
                                                        2 +
MAX           Q1[l---k——(x1) ]+[1—,r1]kQ40+

               11{(x1 +k)Q1 —(l—1)k+D1 —G1 —B1}+p1[D1 -D1J


       An internal equilibrium, where both means of financing are used in period 1, leads
to the following first order conditions:
       (B3)
                             8—Eu]]
                                 2 /(l+r)                          3—E[C]
                                                                       2
                         +
         1+
                SQ1ir1
                                  dir1
                                                      '     =
                                                                     8D     1


                             kQ0
                                                                      l+r

       These conditions together with the budget constraints form a system that
determines the set of policies. While the dimensions of the problem are determined by
                                               24



the number of periods, the economic principles are the same as in the two-period

example: the split of financing between inflation and external borrowing is done so as to
equate the marginal cost of extra dollar raised. If the credit ceiling binds in the first
period, the inflation is determined according to equation (14). If the fiscal revenue from
direct taxes suffices to cover the fiscal outlays, the inflation tax is zero. For an internal
equilibrium, where both the inflation tax and external borrowing are used, we determine
the optimal configuration of fiscal instruments by applying the above first order
conditions in conjunction with the budget constraints.
       We conclude this appendix by reviewing the case where inflation affects the
velocity of circulation. Suppose that the demand for money at time t is given by
M
    = k1Q, where k depends negatively on expected inflation. The problem facing the


policy maker in period 1 can be restated as

                MAX          Qi[1_x_ki_(,ri)2]+[1_,rj]koQo+ E'L12J÷
         -
       (B")                                                                            —




The resultant first order conditions are:

       (B3')

                c5Q,r1 +
                             d—E[02j                                 3E[u2j
            +                                                 =
                      k0Q0   +



As in our pervious discussion, one can identify three public finance regimes: for a larger

tax base relative to the fiscal needs, inflation is zero. A drop in the tax revenue or a raise
in the revenue needs moves us to an internal equilibrium, where both the inflation tax
and external borrowing are used. Once the external credit ceiling has been reached,
                                             25



                                                        dkj
inflation is the only means of financing. Note that if —< 0, the inflation cost has gone
                                                        d,r1
up, increasing the advantage of using external borrowing. Hence, a variable velocity
tends to increase external borrowing, implying that the debt ceiling is reached at a
higher output. These effects tend to increase the convexity of the output-inflation
schedule: inflation will be lower as long as the debt ceiling has not been reached, but the
credit ceiling will be reached at a higher output. Once the credit ceiling is reached, a
further drop in output will tend to accelerate inflation due to the drop in velocity, until

we reach the revenue maximizing inflation.23




23     At that stage, a further drop in output necessitates a drop in G.
