                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE PRODUCFIÔN OF HUMAN
                             CAPITAL ANT) THE LIFECYCLE
                              OF EARNINGS: VARIATIONS
                                    ON A THEME




                                        Jacob Mincer




                                  Working Paper No. 4838




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  August 1994



Funding by the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The work benefitted
from excellent research assistance provided by John Higgins. This paper is part of NEER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Jacob Mincer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit pci-mission provided that full credit1 including
noUce, is given to the source.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4838
                                                                               August 1994

                                 THE PRODUCTION OP HUMAN
                                 CAPITAL AND THE LIFECYCLE
                                  OF EARNINGS: VARIATIONS
                                        ON A THEME


                                         ABSTRACT


       After a brief summary of Ben Porath's 1967 model approach, I enquire into the empirical

validity and some implications of his insights. Section 2 is an attempt to answer the question:

Are the shapes and magnitudes of growth in wage profiles largely attributable to human capital

investments? Section 3 tests the proposition that over the working age capacity wages (i.e. wages

before netting out investment) decline before observed wages do. Implied timing of labor supply

provides the test. The findings shed light on developments in the U.S. labor market in the past

several decades. In section 4 some implications are drawn from Ben Porath's model for

interpersonal differences and historical changes in life-cycle human capital investments. The

positive correlation between schooling and training, predicted by the model is found in cross-

sections. It also shows up in parallel movements in schooling and training in the 1980's as the

demand for human capital increased. Once again, observed U.S. patterns are highlighted.



Jacob Mincer
Department of Economics
International Affairs Building
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
                                 3




I. Introduction


     Yoram's 1967 article on the Production of Human Capital was an

important building bloc in the rapidly developing theory of human
capital between the late fifties and early seventies.         This
pioneering work stood the test of time in the following quarter
century and is likely to remain significant for future generations

of students. Tragically, it has now become a monument to Yoram's
memory - much too soon.



     Although Yoram spent more time and effort on contributions to

the evolving research in the economics of population and the
family, his name is most prominently linked to the basics of human
capital. He is invariably cited in the myriad of expositions and
analyses of human capital, in research papers and in textbooks.


     As is well known, the revival of the human capital concept in

the late fifties was a response to the appearance of a huge
residual in growth accounting, as well as to the findings in U.S.
data that the largest component of income inequality is the
variance in labor incomes.     Human capital analysis promised to
correct the inadequacies of the old growth theories and of the
functional approach to income distribution. In the latter context,

it shifted attention to a major topic in labor economics, that of
the determination of the wage structure. In the new analysis, wage
                                  4

differentials are due to differences in human capital stocks across
workers and over time. An important dimension of these differences
are age differences in the stocks which are built up over a
lifetime.    The lifetime accumulation of human capital is the
process on which loran concentrated by modelling it as an optimal

path of human capital investments over the individual's life—cycle.

Interestingly, loran's approach brings home the realization that
human capital's twin responses to findings in growth accounting and
in income distribution statistics are basically the same:
Aggregate accumulation of human capital is a factor in generating
aggregate economic growth, while individual accumulation is the
process which generates individual economic growth, a basic micro
unit in modern labor economics.



       Though familiar to most, a brief summary of loran's model
should be helpful in introducing the work reported here.


       The centerpiece of loram's model of optimal capital
accumulation is the individual human capital production function,

which can. be written:




                   Qtnt(Kt,Sttxt;B)           (1)




Here     is the person's gross investment in human capital in period

t, K is the stock of human capital at the start of t, St is the
                                  5

fraction of time in period t devoted to the production of Q, the

gross additions to the stock, X are purchased goods and services
used in the production. B is a parameter added by Becker (1975) in
his use of the same production function.' B denotes the "limited
individual physical and intellectual capacity" which rationalizes
Yoram's assumption of decreasing returns to scale.



     Yoram's model offers a productivity—based explanation of the

growth of earnings with working age, as these are proportional to
the size of the accumulated stock K,.        Rational allocations of
time for investment requires that most of the investment be
undertaken at younger ages.     This is because later investments
produce returns over a shorter payoff period, so total benefits are

smaller. Also, to the extent that investments in human capital are

profitable, their postponement reduces the present value of net

gains.   Finally, later investments could be more costly, if
opportunity costs of time devoted to investments increase.
However, this would not happen in the special case where
productivity in learning grows as fast as productivity in earnings.

This latter assumption of "neutrality" is featured in Voram's model

for the sake of simplicity: It keeps the within_period marginal
cost curve (MC) fixed over the life cycle.


          'Human Capital (1975, n. 89, p. 101) Earlier (ibid, n. 22, p.
63) Becker states that his formulation is very similar and much
influenced by Yoram's model.    While Iota used the function to
analyze the optimal distribution of human capital production over
the Life cycle, Becker used it to analyze the optimal. distribution
of total accumulations across persons.
                                 6

     Given this reasoning, should we not expect a rapid
accumulation of human capital as early as possible in life? The
answer is negative, because attempts to increase investments 0
within a given period run into diminishing returns: Costs rise
with the speed of production. Thus the within period marginal cost

curve (as a function of Q) is upward sloping. Marginal benefits
diminish over time mainly because the payoff period is getting
shorter, and also because depreciation reduces net gains. Thus the

marginal revenue curve (MR) slides downward with advancing age,
tracing out a declining pattern of investment over the life cycle.
The decline is reinforced if the MC curve shifts to the left with

advancing age.   Indeed, in a 1970 contribution Yoram tested the

neutrality hypothesis empirically concluding that investments
decline over the working life faster than would be predicted by the

mere downward slide of MR on a fixed MC curve.



     While it makes human capital investments decline over the
working lifer Yoram's optimization process leads to increases in
investments during the early stages, before earning activities
begin. This is caused by a corner problem: The initial capital
stock (1(e) is so small that even an input of all the available
time, other resources not being highly substitutable, produces less

than the optimal output Q.    As the stock incre4ses, investors'
output increases until an optimum is reached. From this point on
time devoted to investment and its volume are likely to decline.
The initial period of complete specialization in the production ol
                                7

human capital is devoted to full—time schooling. It is identified

by the absence of earnings, a condition which tends to end before
the completion of schooling, and which is more frequently
encountered as schooling lengthens.


    After this brief summary of Yoram's approach, I enquire into
the empirical validity and some implications of his insights.
Section 2 is an attempt to answer the question: Are the shapes and

magnitudes (of slopes) of wage profiles largely attributable to
human capital investments? Section 3 tests the proposition that

over the working age capacity wages (i.e. wages before netting out
investment) decline before observed wages do. Implied timing of
labor supply provides the test.       The findings shed light on
developments in the US, labor market in the past several decades.
In section 4 some implications are drawn from Yoram's model for
interpersonal differences and historical changes in life-cycle
human capital investments. Once again, observed U.S. patterns are

highlighted.
                                  8

2. Is the Wage Profile a Result of Human Capital Investments?



     Human capital theory elegantly expressed in Yoram's model,
explains the ubiquitously observed shape of the wage profile: its
upward slope, deceleration, and eventual decline. Since factors
other than accumulated human capital are likely to affect the wage
profile as well, the significance of Yoram's insights depends on
how much of the observed profile can be attributed to human capital

investments in a quantitative empirical sense. After completion of

schooling these investments consist of formal and informal job
training and learning, as well as job mobility involving search on
and off the job.



     Empirical studies reveal that wage growth within jobs (firms)
accounts for the bulk of wage growth over the life cycle2, with job

mobility accounting for less than 20% of it, but perhaps as much
as 30% for young workers (working age < 12) in U.S. data.
Investments in job search and consequent job mobility contribute to

the upward slope and to concavity of the life-cycle wage profile
for much the same reasons as those elucidated in Yoram's model. At

the simplest level, positive (on average) wage gains from moving
are a return on investment in search, and these investments are
more frequent at younger ages, as predicted.          Mobility gains


         2 Mincer and Jovanovic (1981), Bartel and Borjas (1981), Topel
and Ward (1992)
                                9

decline also for a typical move as workers age (Mincer, 1986)


     Burdett (1978) has shown that s simple job search model which

assumes no job training, could explain both the declining frequency
and gains to inter—firm mobility over the life cycle.      But the
magnitude of life—cycle wage growth so achieved can not account for

much of the actually observed wage growth as already indicated.


     That wage growth is related to in firm training is a finding
in many studies, based on a variety of data and periods. Viewing
this growth as a return on the investment costs produces positive
rates of return which vary depending on the data, sample
(population group) and period. On average, the range of estimates
(Mincer, 1991) exceeds the rate of return to schooling. This is
perhaps not surprising since returns on job training investments do
not contain consumption (cultural) benefits as school education

does for many graduates.    In any case, job training investments
produce significant wage growth and represent a profitable
investment.    Also, the incidence and duration of training
observably declines with age, which produces concavity in the wage
profile, quite in accordance with Yoram's model.


     To illustrate: In my study of PSID panel data (1988) I found
that annual wage growth of otherwise comparable workers in 1976
jobs was 4.4% greater during the 1968 to 1982 period for those who

received training than for those without training in the same year.
                                10

The effect of training on wage growth was 2 to 3 times greater f or

young workers (working age less than 12) than for older ones. This
is due to greater frequency and intensity (in terms of hours per
year spent in training) of training of younger workers.


    The quantitative question remains: How much of the observed
growth in wage profiles is attributable to training investments?


    My attempt to answer this question consists of a comparison of
indirect estimates of total worker investment costs derived from

observed wage profiles with directly observed costs of job training
investments. The ratio of the "direct" to the "indirebt" estimate

of investment costs provides the fraction of observed wage growth
that is attributable to job training and learning.



    The "indirect" approach dates back to my 1962 work based on
Census data for 1959. Costs of job training were estimated from

typical (cross—sectional) wage profiles of male workers, classified
by education level: Increments of wages over each year of
experience in the cross—section3 were summed over experience and
across education groups and capitalized by internal rates of-
return.' The arithmetic is straightforward even if tedious: The


          '
           Actual (longitudinal) increments contain in part wage
changes due to aggregate growth and cycles, which are not returns
on individual investments.

         'The rates were estimated from pairs of successive education
wage profiles.
                                     1].


annual wage increment




where r is the internal rate and c the investment cost over the
year t.   The conclusion was that total costs of human capital
investments during the working ages were large, almost a half of
total costs (including opportunity costs) of school education.


     No "direct" estimates of training costs were available at that

time. These became feasible for 1976 when a special time-use study

of the PSID (Duncan and Stafford, 1980) reported job training
information. Wage data were available for the same year in the
regular PSID panel. Thus for 1976 both "direct" and "indirect"
estimates can be constructed and compared.



     The "indirect" approach based on wage profiles was implemented
on the 1976 data in a much less laborious fashion (Mincer, 1991)
than in the 1962 study. The simplification was made possible by
the use of a parametric wage function. A semi—log wage function

(Mincer, 1974)


          ln w=aZ + rk0X   -
                               4XI     ln(1-k0÷X)     (2)




contains on the right-hand side a vector of variables Z which
                                   12

includes years of school education, the experience variable X, and
the parameters of the a linear investment profile k=k0_(k0/T)*X,
where       is the initial fraction of earning capacity devoted to
investment, and T the investment period. All the parameters were
estimated in a non-linear procedure by H. Rosen (1982).


        Based on the Rosen estimates Table (1) shows my ca1culation of

inferred investment costs.5 With w the average wage in each age
bracket, N the number of workers in it and k, the mean investment
ratio in the age bracket,


                                  E Nwk


summed over all brackets yields the average ratio of training

investments per hour to wage per hour. The resulting 8.5% ratio
was applied to the wage bill in 1976 National Income Accounts and
yielded a figure of $88 billion of worker post-school investments.
Netting out mobility investments as 15% of the above figure leaves
the indirect estimate of job training investment costs that would
produce the observed (within firms) wage growth at $75 billion in
1976.




              For greater detail, see Mincer (1991). Rosen's parameters
are estimated on wages of males. My estimates average male and
female investment ratios, with the latter assumed to be a hair of
the former, and applied to the wage bill of females which was about
40% of the total in 1976.
                                  13

        All that is needed for the 'direct" estimate o job training

investment costs is the time spent in training per period and the

period opportunity cost of that training. The 1976 PSID Time Use
Survey is the only such survey of time allocation on the job during
a week's period. The data are shown in Table (2). The calculation
is simple: It is the product of columns 1 through 4 summed over
all ages: Total costs per week


                             TCtEw.h.N



where w is the wage foregone, h hours of training per week,6 and
N the number of workers receiving training during the week. So
estimated, total annual costs of job training amounted to about $56
billion in 1976.



        One check on this order of magnitude is available from a
survey of companies published in Training Magazine. The survey
reported expenditures on formal training of about $40 billion in
1987.     The time spent in formal training was about a week per
trainee. This does not include time spent in informal training or
Learning on the job which is the preponderant manner of training in
the U.S. Indeed, the PSID Time Use Survey suggests an average of
about five weeks (200 hours) of training per year, so if the time


          6 The Time Use Survey lists separately training time without
production and d time with production ongoing. Only a third of the
latter was (conservatively) estimated as training time. The two
components are summed in col. 2.
                                14

spent in all forms of training in 1987 is the same as in 1976, the
report frotri finns would Suggest a figure of about 200 biLlion of

1987 dollars in 1987.      Projecting the 55.7 billion to 1987
(assuming the same ratio of training expenditures to the wage bill)

yields about $150 billion in 1987. Apparently the training ratio
increased by l981, so the estimates based on the two entirely
different and independent surveys are not very different.


    The "indirect" estimates of job training expenditures based on

wage profiles and the "direct" ones using the PSID Time Use Survey

provide the best comparison as they were taken in the same year.

Since growth in the wage profile over the working age is likely to
include factors other than job training it is reasonable to find
the "indirect" estimate to be larger (75 billion) than the direct

estimate 56 billion).     This suggests that roughly 75% of the
(cross—sectionally) observed intra-f in wage growth over the life—
cycle is attributable to job training or learning, while 25% is

likely to contain factors which produce an upward sloping wage
profile other than human capital investments.8 This is rather
persuasive evidence for the validity or primacy of the human


      see section 4 below.

           A series of rough calculations suggests that a generous
margin of error could lower this ratio to 65% or raise it to 85%.
The other models which posit an upward slope of the wage profile,
aside from job training, include employer schemes to economize on
costs of monitoring (Lazear), on costs of turnover (Salop and
Salop) and wage outcomes of job matching (Jovanovic). No empirical
evidence exists on the quantitative empirical importance of these
undoubtedly plausible models.
                                15

capital interpretation of the wage profile, as proposed by Yoram
and his followers.




3.   Observed Earnings. Capacity Earnings, and Hours of Work Over
the Life Cycle.



     While the neutrality hypothesis is easily relaxed to produce
more realistic implications, another simplifying assumption in
Yoram's model is the two—way allocation of time between learning
and earning.      Time spent in consumption or leisure is not
considered, or assumed fixed.        Because of the difficulty in
analyzing 3—way choices, models have first considered either the
labor-leisure choice (as in Ghez and Becker, 1975) or the labor—
human capital investment choice (as in Ben-Porath). Blinder and
Weiss (1976) and Heckman (1976) broadened the analysis to three—way

choices. The results add complexity to the analysis of life-cycle
patterns especially in terms of effects of production-function
specifications and of consequences of differences in initial
conditions. Although the extensions represent improvement, Heckman
concludes that the Ben—Porath model survives the complexities
rather well.



     Even without a simultaneous analysis of three—way choices, the

observed life—cycle patterns of hours of work may be helpful in
testing a distinction that is important in Yoram's analysis of the
                                     16

life—cycle wage profile. The distinction is between capacity wages
and net wages.     The latter are wages from which investment
(training or learning) costs are netted out, so these are basically

what we observe, while capacity wages are not observable without a

specified or visible investment profile.


     One of the distinctions between the two wage profiles is the

timing of peaks:     because depreciation eventually outstrips
declining gross investment, net investment becomes negative and

capacity wages begin to decline.            However net or observed wages
continue to rise for a while reaching a peak later in life than
capacity wages do. The proof is simple: Let                be observed wages

at working age t, w capacity wages, and c investment component of
capacity wages:

                                 wct =wt +ct




Peak of w is reached when

                       ____ --      - dw            dc
                        dt                cit        dt'


At the peak of


                    -j
                     dw
                          > 0 ,   since,
                                                do
                                                Ti_lit
                                 17

that   is, w is still rising.


       Life-cycle labor supply models as in Becker and Ghez (1975),

predict a positive relation between wages and hours over the life
cycle9, as intertemporal substitution dominates the wealth effects.

The latter are zero or negligible as wealth expectations are
assumed basically unchanged after completion of schooling. Since
the price of time is properly measured by capacity wages rather
than by observed wages, the peak of hours of work would occur at
the same time as the peak in capacity wages. We can therefore,
empirically test for the lag between peaks of capacity and observed

wages as well as measure its size.              The magnitude of the lag
between the peaks of capacity and observed wages can be gauged from

the simplified quadratic wage function shown in (2):

                                        rk
                   in w aZ + t/c0   -   __Sx2       (2a)


Here as before, Z includes years of schooling and other variables,

r is the rate of return to post—school investments, X is years of

labor-market experience, and the linear investment profile in X is

k=k0—(k0/T)*X; )c is the initial fraction of earning capacity
devoted to net post-school investment, and T the positive net
investment period. Thus the peak of w occurs at X=T.


             They also predict a lag between wages and hours1 but for
different reasons. See discussion below in note 12.
                                         18

     For observed earning, add 1n(l—k,') to (2a), as w=(lkA)*w.

Approximating —k"ln(l—k) .               Here k is the gross investment
ratio.


                                 '                 rk
                   in w -   aZ                 -            -




     Assuming a fixed depreciation rate. the decline in k is the
same as in k, that is, (k0/T) in the linear case. Hence, the peak
of observed wages occurs when


                    ____ = 0
                     ax
                                     =   it°
                                               -
                                                   1'
                                                        +
                                                                1'




     Solving for X, X, (time of peak observed wages) = T +           (l/r).
     Thus, if the human capital interpretation of the lag is
correct, with an approximately linear profile of investment ratios

the lag would roughly equal the inverse of the rate of return to
training, a range covering a bit more or less than a decade as the
rate fluctuated over time.



     The assumption of relatively fixed wealth expectations in the
life-cycle model of labor supply applies more readily to cohorts
than to cross-sections.                  With secularly growing wealth,
progressively older cohorts would show longer hours of work
corresponding to lesser wealth, biasing the peak of hours forward
in cross-sections. On the other hand, secular growth in wages
shifts the peak of wages and of hours toward older ages within
                                    19

cohorts. Hours shift in tandem, because the price of time changes
regardless of whether the change is due to human capital or to
overall economic growth. The shift in cohort peaks can also be

gauged roughly with wage function (2); incorporating a g percent
growth term:


                inw0rat.ricxqxi+gx                               (3)


Now

                     dlnwC               rk
                           = tic0   -          +
                                                   g    =   0,
                       ax                —2x
                  sax =T+T.—S—,andf-t=—!—
                                nc0                dq        tic,


Using the parameters estimated by H. Rosen for 1976 T26, r0.12,
and k0=O.32, an increased rate of growth by 1% would shift the peak

of w by close to 7 years. If g declined by 2 percent points, as
it did for the less skilled labor force groups in the U.S. in the

past two decades compared to earlier periods, peak wages and peak
hours would have shifted between a decade or two. Thus the more
recent cohorts would show declines in wages and in hours that are
much earlier than in the older cohorts.


      The existence of lags, their magnitudes, and shifts over time

during the years 1964 to 1991 are shown in Figures (1-3) and Tables

(3,4).
                                20

       Data on which the Tables are based come from annual cs
surveys in the years 1964 to 1991. They are restricted to males of

working ages.   Annual earnings and annual hours are far better
measured in the CI'S than in the 1960 census used in the pioneering

work of Becker and Ghez (1975). First, weeks and usual hours per
week refer to the same calendar year, and secondly, we imposed a
number of restrictions to eliminate outliers in hours, earnings,
and earnings per hour, including a blanket exclusion of the upper
and lower 3 percentiles of workers. We then calculated average
wages and average hours for each year of experience in five
education groups: Years of schooling C 12, 12, 13—15, 16, > 16.
The over 200 means were computed for each calendar year in cells
which on average exceeded 100 workers. To minimize reporting and
sampling errors, we used 3—year centered moving averages to get the

experience profiles of hourly wages (CPI deflated) and annual
hours. The annual cross—sections make it possible to construct 26
cross—section profiles for each education level, as well as
synthetic cohort data in Which the same cohort, defined by
education and age, is one year older in the next calendar year.
Becker and Ghez used the 1.960 Census cross—section, "because
information on a single cohort at different ages is lacking" (p.
83).   With our data we can explore the relation between hours and
wages in the synthetic cohorts as well as in cross—sections. In
addition, we used three different definitions of labor input: (1.)

Annual hours for workers employed some time during the year (2)
Annual hours including zeros for those not employed, and (3)
                                21

Percent of Population employed in each cell. Very similar patterns
hold across all three definitions.    (For the sake of brevity we
deleted the employment—population ratio and the "some college"

group from the presentation here.)


     The cohort graphs and Tables display 6 cohorts: the oldest was

55 years of age in 1964, followed by ages 50, 45, 40, 35, 30.      The
cross-sections start with calendar years 1965, again followed by
five—year intervals down to 1990.     As expected, peaks of hours
precede peaks of wages in every cohort.. It is also true in most
but not all cross—sections where the peaks are generally more
ambiguous and erratic.10 Remarkably the average duration of lag
between peak wages and peak hours runs from 6 to 10 years in
cohorts but covers a wider range in cross—sections (1 to 16 years)

Note that the size of the average lag is a reasonable order of
magnitude for the inverse of the rate of returrd


     Note also, that the rate of growth of average real hourly
earnings declined from close to gt2% per annum before 1913 to
little more than 0.5% afterwards (Bound and Johnson) -   This   decline

held mainly for the 70% of the less skilled (education c 12)
workforce, less so or not at all for the better educated and




             The flatness of the profiles makes the choice of peaks
ambiguous. We chose the oldest peaks in all graphs. The cohort
peaks are less problematic.
                                22

skilled workers.'1 As predicted, peaks of wages decline by about
a decade and a half from the oldest to the youngest cohorts of
workers with high school or less.       Small or no declines are
observed for the more educated workers. Hours fall in all groups
but much more in the two less educated groups (about two decades
compared to less than a decade among college educated).



     The shift in peak wages and hours over the historical period
is not noticeable in the cross-section profiles, although as
already mentioned, the lag between peak wages and peak hours is
usually preserved.


     The cohort findings are more informative showing the
implications of the decline in the rate of growth of wages in
addition to the lag of peaks of wages and hours.


     Interestingly, while the cross—section profiles show no age
bias in the changing rates of growth of wages, the cohorts show
declines in hours of work at progressively younger ages. These
declines are due to the secular declines in rates of growth of real
wages, themselves a result of declines in productivity—based demand
for less-skilled labor. it is this skill-bias that translates into

an appar age—bias, despite its absence in the series of cross-
sections.


            -

             For the less skilled the growth rate actually became
negative after 197].
                                23

    To recapitujate The proposition that capacity wages reach a
peak before observed wages do can be tested on the basis of the

life-cycle labor supply theory, since capacity wages measure the
relevant cost of time.   Both cohorts and cross-section profiles
document the lag, and its duration appears to be of the order of
magnitude predicted by the inverse of the rate of return to post-
school investments. Both peaks of wages and of hours shift towards

younger ages in consequence of the decline in the rate of growth of

wages of workers with education of high school or less.        The
magnitude of shift in wages and hours is again consistent with
observed parameters of a simple human capital wage function. These
shifts are not detectable in cross-sections, suggesting.that it was

the skill-biased change in demand for labor rather than an age-bias

which created the decline in hours (and participation) at
progressively younger ages during the last two decades in the U.S.



     Incidentally, the distinction between observed and capacity
wages suggests that the usual estimates of the intertemporal
substitution over the life cycle are severely understated since
they are incorrectly based on observed and not capacity wages. The

understatement occurs because the relevant capacity wage profile is

flatter on the upswing than the observed profile- The difference
between the two profiles diminishes as the investment ratio
diminishes over time. Moreover, in the interval between the two
peaks the correlation between capacity and observed wages is
                                   24

negative, further reducing the elasticity.12



4 Schooling, Ability, and Job Trainj!flq


    Although Voram's model addresses itself to intertemporal
differences in human capital investments over the life-cycle, it

has clear implications for interpersonal differences)3 At any
life—cycle stage the marginal cost of producing human capital is
lower for persons with greater learning ability.'4 On the benefit



          12 Becker and Ghez show estimates of wage elasticities for
males by education    level in the 1960 Census in their 1975 study
(Table 3.5). These    elasticities appear to be smaller the higher
the education level   (3 levels were used: school, high school, and
college graduates).   This is consistent with the larger discrepancy
between observed and capacity wages at higher levels of schooling,
as job training investments are correlated with school education,
a matter discussed in the next section here.
     We should note that Becker and Ghez were the first to show
(with the cross-section data) that hours of work decline before
observed wages do in the life—cycle. The size of the lag ranged
from S to 30 years, for white men in 1959, a variation that is
probably affected by measurement error.
     The existence of the lag is interpreted by Becker and Ghez as
an effect of positive interest rates and of time preference which
induce workers to shift work hours toward earlier ages. Even if
theoretically sound this hypothesis does not yield predictions of
orders of magnitude. If correct it would lengthen the size of the
lag observed on account of the human capital interpretation
provided here. The evidence on such an additional effect is not
detected in our data.

         13 These are put in a demand—supply framework in Becker (1975) -

           In an illustrative Cobb—Douglas function, more output Q is
produced with the same inputs (S and K) when the ability parameter
b is larger:
                               =
                                  25

side, marginal revenue is greater the easier the access to
financing or the lower the interest rate on funds faced by parents,

students, and trainees.'5 So persons with greater ability to learn
and with lesser costs of funds and greater time preference for the

future invest more in human capital in all periods. Since more
schooled individuals are likely to be more able and/or to face
lower discount rates, they are also more likely to invest more in

job training.   In the Ben—Porath diagram, for them the higher
Marginal Revenue curve slides down on a lower Marginal Cost curve,

tracing out a series of larger quantities of additions to human
capital Q.


     The empirical implications of this reasoning are (1) Persons
with more schooling tend to invest more in job training (2) Persons

who engage more than others in job training in early periods tend
to do so also in later periods (3) Persons with greater ability or

better schooling engage in more job training, even with the same

(nominal) schooling attainment.


     The first implication, a positive correlation between
schooling and job training has been observed in numerous studies



     15


                               a
                           HR r+6
where alpha is the return on a unit of human capital, r the
interest rate, delta is the depreciation, and F a less—than—unity
correction factor for the finite payoff period.
                                  26

starting with Lillard and Tan in 1986. In my study (1988, 1993) of
PSID data reported in 1976, 1978 and in 1985 I found that years of

schooling significantly affected the incidence and duration of job

training, holding constant experience, levels, marital and union
status (Mincer, 1993, Table 8.2). I also found that training in
1985 was persistent for those who trained in 1978 and/or in 1976,

even though they were not in the same firm, hol.ding years of
schooling constant (Table 8.4, ibid).


     The fact that ability, as measured by test scores, is related

to schooling attainment, as cause or effect, has long been
observed. Evidence of ability as an input to schooling is shown
for example by the observation that standardized scores on verbal
and numerical tests in the last year of high school strongly
predict future educational attainment)6 Since these ability scores
have also been shown to increase with years of schooling, they may

also represent a human capital output, or a measure of school
quality in addition to being a student characteristic.        In any

case, higher scores at given levels of schooling represent higher
levels of human capital, and should lead to larger investments in
training. This hypothesis is confirmed in recent IlLS data in a
current study by Bartel and Sicherman (1993)


     Ability test scores obtained in 1980 for members of the NLS


          16
               The most recent study is by Murnane, Willett, and Levy
(1993)
                                 27

Youth panel were used by Bartel and Sicherman17 among a number of
variables as determinants of the incidence of job training,
especially company training in the years 1980 to 1990. The effects
of numerical and mechanical aptitude were significant, after
standardizing for a large number of variables. That is to say, at

the same level of experience and schooling, more training is
reported by young men with higher aptitude scores. Conversely, at
the same aptitude levels, young men with more schooling receive
more training, these effects of aptitudes and of schooling are
probably understated as a number of additional variables reflecting

correlated human capital levels are included as independent
variables in their regressions.       These are: length of tenure,
marital status, firm size, industry, location, and sectoral
productivity growth.


     Just as individual differences in benefits and costs produce
individual differences in schooling and training, so changes in
benefits and costs, that is in their profitability, should affect

human capital investments in their various forms or life—cycle
stages over historical time.       Yoram's analysis distinguished
schooling from job training only as a sequence in the life cycle,
the first a full—time the second a part time activity. Otherwise
the human capital produced in each is homogenous. Therefore, if we

          17
               am grateful to Bartel and Sicherman for permission to
cite the (preliminary) findings. Xt is interesting to note that as
the test scores were not available to employers, their provision of
training and the higher wages resulting from it can not be
attributed to a "screen".
                                       28

ask whether increases in demand for human capital induce increases

in its supply at all stages of the life cycle, the answer ought to

be positive.



     As is well known, the profitability of education, measured by
rates of return grew strongly in the U.S. in the 1980's. There is

accumulating evidence that the growth of demand for human capital
or of "skill—biased" demand for labor was the moving force, while
the supply of educated workers grew rather slowly in response.
Thus between 1979 and 1988 the education "wage premium", as
measured by the percent differential between wages of college and
high school graduates15 with about a decade of work experience, more

than doubled; enrollments of 18-24 year olds as a proportion of
High School graduates grew from 31 to 37% (Clotfelder, 1991; Table

2.7). This growth appears to be a response to the increasing wage
premium, as I find that the latter variable is highly significant

in affecting enrollments, even after tuition, family income, and
unemployment are accounted f or.19



     Do we find corresponding increases in profitability and in
volumes of job training?




            18
                 This measure   differs from a properly calculated rate of
return, as it omits direct costs of schooling.             This omission
inflates the measure somewhat, but does not affect its course over
time.
     19
          Based on current, unpublished research.
                                 29

     Several pieces of evidence provide an affirmative answer: (1)

In my 1991 study I correlated annual education wage premia" with

slopes of experience-wage profiles (Mincer, 1991, 1993, Table
13.5). The regression coefficient on educational profitability is

highly significant and equal to or greater than unity, holding the
age distribution constant. A similar finding was reported by Allen

(1993) who correlated educational wage differentials within two—
digit industries with slopes of wage functions estimated in each
cross—section and over time (over the 1960's).        The dependent
variable (experience slope) is basically a product r*k0, where r is
the rate of return to postschool investments (largely job training
and learning) and k0 the initial ratio of investment to earning
capacity. The first is a measure of profitability, the second of
volume.   We expect the latter to increase in response to an
increase in the former, so the product would certainly increase.
That volumes of training increased is suggested by a comparison of

data in two recent 08001, Reports carried out by the 81,8 in 198] and

1991 on special CPS surveys.20 In the 1991 survey training was
reported by 41% of workers, up from 35% in 1983.       Moreover, the
average duration of training, at least in the formal company
programs increased from 8 to over 12 weeks. Training activities
increased in all age groups and all schooling groups, but not
equally: Worker groups which already had high levels of schooling
and of training increased their training most- Thus most of the


             The findings are reported in Training to be Comnetitive,
published by ETS, Princeton, 1993.
                                30

expansion of training is observed among workers with post-secondary

education and in age groups 30-50, where repeated training also
increased.



     Whether this skill—bias in the production of new human capital
corresponds to the skill bias in the market demand for labor, both

reflecting effects of new technologies, is a question that deserves

exploration.


     Aside from the skill-bias phenomenon, the basic features of
interpersonal differences and of historical change are illuminated
within Yoram's model of homogeneous human capital. Viewing the
products of schooling and training, as heterogeneous forms of human
capital would lead to similar predictions if schooling and training
tend to be complementary rather that substitutable: An increase in

demand for schooling would also raise the demand for training.
However a richer insight into the various non-neutralities would be

gained by the implication that a higher marginal product
(efficiency) of training requires more or better schooling (and
ability). These issues are outside of Yoram's model. The limits
were intentional, to provide an all—the—more powerful focus in a
landmark advance in human capital theory.
                                  31

Summary; Yorain Ben-Porath's Contribution to. Human Capital Thepry


     The subject of individual growth and aging has been studied in

biology, medicine, psychology, and anthropology for a long time.
the economic aspects of individual development began to receive
treatment only in the past few decades with the emergence of human

capital theory. Individual economic development is a basic unit of
analysis both in modern theories of aggregate economic growth and
in labor economics. A succinct model of individual economic growth

was formulated by Yoram Ben—Porath and published in 1967. In it
the lifetime accumulation of human capital is viewed as an optimal
path of human capital investments over the life cycle. Two basic
ideas (inputs) drive the production model:       one, that it takes
human capital to produce more of it, and two that it is the
diversion of that ultimate resource, time, from other uses that is

the other major input in the production of human capital. In turn,

the age distribution of investment is optimized by equating its
marginal benefits and costs within each periOd. When we think of
the process of human capital accumulation as the transmission and
growth of knowledge and of skills, we realize the full significance
of Yoram's insight in pinpointing the economic mechanism at the
individual   level.
     Although   the ideas expressed by Yoram were shared by others at

the time, his model provides the most succinct, rigorous, and
fruitful formulation. Its fruitfulness became almost immediately
                                32

apparent in the further developments of human capital theory: As
Becker states in the second edition of his Human Capital (1975),
his formulation and use of the human capital production function
was much influenced by loran's model. While loram used the age-
specific costs and benefits to analyze the optimal age distribution

of human capital accumulations, Becker used these same costs and
benefits in a supply—demand framework to analyze the optimal
distribution of completed accumulations across persons.
     The qualitative implications of Yoram's model for the age—
earnings profile were translated into an econometric tool in my own

development of the earnings function in 1974. The efficacy of this

toot0 provides a further boost to the general realization of the
potential power of loran's model.
     loran's model offers a productivity—based explanation of the
growth of earnings with working age. Formal or informal on—the—job

training is the major productivity building investment, after
completion of schooling.    Accepting Yoram's implication of the
nearly linear decline over the working age in the fraction of time

devoted to such investments, the observed human capital earnings
function can be empirically analyzed to reveal the investment
profile and the rates of return on the investment. This is on the
assumption that the wage profile is indeed a consequence of job
training.
     With the appearance of direct information on job training
activities, their cost and their wage consequences, loran's
hypothesis is tested more directly in my recent work described in
                                 33

section 2 of this paper. The conclusion that post-school human
capital investment is the primary factor underlying the slope of
the wage profile is confirmed in U.S. data.


     The distinction Yoram introduced between capacity and observed

wages is important in deriving the earnings function, but it also
turns out to be quite useful in providing insights into inter-
temporal changes in hours of work, especially across recent cohorts
in the U.S., as I show in section 3.

     Yoram's model, which addresses inter—temporal differences over

the life—cycle, has also clear implications for interpersonal
differences in human capital investments.      Among them are the
following observed phenomena:
     (1) Persons with more schooling tend to invest in more job
          training
     (2) Persons significantly engaged in training in one period
          are likely to do so again in future periods or
          employments
     (3) Persons with greater ability or better schooling tend to
          engage in job training more than others with the same

          (nominal) schooling.
     (4) When the demand for human capital increases, both the
          profitability of schooling and of job training increases
          —   at   least in the short run.     Consequently school
          enrollment and job training incidence increase.
     All of these implications are empirically confirmed in section
                                34
4 of this paper.

     The   positive correlation between schooling and training
across persons and over time is implied by the homogeneity of human

capital assumed by Yoram. As all fruitful landmarks are, brain's
model is a starting point. The deliberately imposed limitations in
it, such as the homogeneity of human capital, the neutrality
hypothesis, and the two—way allocation of time between learning and
earning, are all invitations to further probing when the
restrictions are relaxed. But, we owe it to Yoram's intuition that

much is accomplished within the restrictions while relaxing them
invites further insights.
                                          35

                                       References




Allen, S.C., :      chnology and the   Wage StructureM,

            Urqtiblished Research Paper, North Carolina State University and
            NBEt; June, 1993.


Bartsl,A. and    C.   Borjas, "Wage Growth and Job Turnover", in S. Rosen, ed.
            ssudies in Labor_Markets, U. of Chicago Press, 1981


Bartel,A.   and N. Sichernan, "Technological Change and On the Job Training
            of Young Workers", paper presented at tJflER Swnner Institute June,
            1993.


Becker, C.S., Human Canital. 2nd ed., Chicago University Press, 1975.

Becker, G.S, and C. Ghez, The_Allocation of_line art Goods aver the Life
            ççfl,     Columbia (3. Press for NBER,   1975.


Ben-Porath, Y., "The Production of Human Capital over Time", in W. L.
            Hansen,     ed., Education. rncone_nd Human Capital, Columbia
            University Press for riDER, 1970.



Ben-Porath, 1., "The Production of Human Capital and the Life—Cycle of
            Earnings", Journal of Politiqal Economy, August 1967.
                                       36

Blinder, A. and  1. Weiss, "Human Capital and Labor Supply: A Synthesis",
           Journal of Political Economy, June 1976.

Bound, J. and C. Johnson, "Changes in the Structure of Wages During the
           mo's", American Economic Revijy, June        1992.


Buxdett, K., "A Theory of Employee Job Search and         Quit Rates", American
           Economic Review, March, 1979.


Duncan,   C. and F. Stafford, "The Use of Time and Technology b Households
            in the U.S.", Research in_Labor Economics4 vol.3, 1980.



Educational Testing Service, "Tha ining to     be   Competitive", Policy ReDort,
         Princeton, 1993.

Hec)cman, J.,. "a Life Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and consumption",
           lpunnl of Political Economy, Part 2, August 1916.

Jovanovic, B., "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover", Journal of
            Political_Economy, October 1978.

Lazear,   E., "Why   is there   Mandatory Retirement?", Journal of Political.

            Econony, September 1979.


Lillard, L. and H.Tan, Private Sector Training. Rand Report, flarch 1986.
                                     37


Mincer, J., "on the Job Training", Jounal of    Political tconoiny,      Part 2,
          October 1962.



Mincer, 3., schoo1ina Exoerience. and Earninqi,   Coluirabia U. Press,    1974.



Mincer, 3., "Wage Changes in Job Changes", Researckin Labor Economics,
          vol. BA, 1986.



Mincer, 3., "Job Training, Wage Growth, and Labor     Turnover",   1988 flEER

          Working Paper 2680; Published in 3. Mincer, Studies in Thaar
          Capital, E. Elgar 1993.



Mincer, 3., "Job Training; Costs, Returns, and Wage Profiles", in rk
          Failure   inAjob Training?, 3. Stern and 3. M. M. Ritzen, eds.,
          Springer Verlag, 1991.



Mincer, 3.,   "Human Capital, Technology, and the Wage Structure", MBER      WP

          3581. Published in 3. Mincer, Studies in human Canital, E. Elgar,
          1993.



humane, 3. Ft., ¶4illett, 3.8. and F- Levy, "The Growing Importance cC
          Cognitive Skills in Wage Determination", Research Paper, March
          1993.
                                       38



Rosen, B.,, "Taxation and on       the Job Training Decisions", Rviexof
          Economics an& Statistics, August 1982.


Salop, 3. and S. Salop, "Self Selection and   Turnover   in the Labor   Market",
          Quarterly   Journaj._of Econonjs, November 1976.

Topel, R. and   M.    Ward,   "Job Mobility and the Careers   of Young Men",

          QlarterlvJournalQL Economics, May 1992.
                                                        39
                                                      Table 1
                               Calculation of 1976 Worker OJT Invnencs
                                        Dented from Wage Function

                Age      MeanAge             k        Nw       Nwk

               <25             22            .23       74j 17.0
               25-34           30            .15      1.26     18.9

               35.44           4.0                    102       5.1
                                             .QSj
               45+                          0         In( 0                Rado              Dollars

                                     Toal                      41.0        8.5%         388.4 billion
           L
                                                      484

                     Sources: k esdinaced from Rosen (1982); N and w from Table 2.




                                                      Table 2
                          Worker Opportunity Costs of Job Training, 1976
                                                       —                            .

         Age           Hourly           Hours o(             Percent        Number               Costs (Sinil)
                        Wage          Tnininz per             with            o(                  per Week
                        (wJ             Week (h)           Tnininz         Employee                (wjipN)
                                                               (p)          N-
                                                                           millions)
                         (1)                (2)                (3)            (4)                     (5)
       <25              53.7                    6.4           76            20.1)
                                                                                         [            360
                                                                                                                 —
     H-
     '35—44
                         5.6
                         6.2
                                                4.3
                                                3.8
                                                              72
                                                              53
                                                                       1    22.5
                                                                            t6.5
                                                                                                      390

                                                                                                      225
                                                                                             —
                         6.7
                                 —
                                                2.2           43            16.1                      114.
      53—64              6.3     —
                                                Li            29            10.9                       22
                                                                                                                 —

                                                                            Total                  $11U
                                                                             Cost

Sources: CaL (1), (2) and (3) from Duncan and StaEord, 1984)
Training hours in caL (3) calculated as um of separate hours in aining and one-third of hours
roent jointly in training and producüou.
Cal. (4) from Employment and Earnings, BLSI 1976.
CaL (5) Ls the product of caL (1) through (4).
                                                 40
                                         TABLE 3: COHORTS
                               Peak Ages in Wages and Hours

                     Wages                 Hours of Employed                  Lag
Educ        <121121161>15 <1211.21161>15                       <121 121161>16
AGE                                      Cohorts delineated by age in 1954.
55          61      62    58        62     58    58   58    58     3     4          0     4
50          58     59     62        54     52    50   54   55      6     9          8     —1
45          53     53     53        57     48    48   49   50      5    10          4     7
40          54     50     58        62     43    41   44   52     11     9          14    10
35          44     48     56        60     36    35   49   40
            ——p
                                                                   &    13          7     20
30          45     47     55        52
                                            —p
                                           33
                    Differences aaongst cohorts
                                                 37   51   47     12    10          4     5
                                                                  Nean Lag by Education
                                                                             Group

            pp
Y0*
                                                - p ap
            —10    —12    —2        0     —16   —14   —6   —B     7.5   9.2     6.2       7.5
30—55       —16    —15    —3     —10      —25   —21   —7   —Li.


                         Wages              HoursofAfl I                            Lag
Educ        <121121161>16                 <121121161>151          <12112116               >16
 ACE
                                         Cohorts_delineated by age in 1964.
 55                                       57    58    58   58      4     4          0      4
 50                                       52    52    54   54      6     7          8      0
 45                                       48    47    48   46      5    11          5     11
 40                                       42    41    42   43     12     9          16    19
        -         Wage data    as               44    49   42      6     4          7     18
 30                  above
                                         —Differences
                                          3]
                                             pa 43    50   47     12     4          5

                                                                  Mean Lag by Education
                                                                                           5


                                           amongst cohorts                Group
1-0k                                      -14   -1Q   -6   -9     7.5   6.5   6.8         9.5
30—55                                     —24   —15   —8   —11
 * Note:      Y-O is the average          difference between the three       younger and the
      three   older cohorts.
                   LOG HOURLY WAGES by cohort
                          education ee than 12 yen




Ii
                                                                45
         3.6




2         L4




                   LOG HOURLY WAGES by cohort
                          education equauing 12 yns
          5-2---
                                                      +.÷.++.




                                                                45
          18-
                                                                40




I


NOTE:   The distances between cohorts .are arbitrary
               HOURS OF EMPLOYED WORKERS by cohort
                                  education   lees thon 12      years

                  3.7
                  3.6
                  3.5
                  3.4
'0
0                 3-3                                                   55
C                 3.2
V
L                 3.1
0
2                   3
C—                                                                      50
—S                2.9
St
00                2.6
         3    £   2.7

'I-
• .—,
                  2.5                                                   45
S                 22
0                 2.4
                                                                        40
t
S
0
C
                  2.3
                  2.2
0                 2.1                                                   35
Id
                    2
                  1.9
                                                                        30
                  12
                         0                    0             I
                             10                             30          50

                                              expI.nencS


                HOURS OF EMPLOYED WORKERS by cohort
                                  Sucatlon equaling 12 ors
                  3.5
                  3.7
                  3.5
4C                32
a                 3.4
C                 3-3
                  32
 C                3.1
                    3
                  2.9
         3        2.5
                  2.7
                  2.6
 0                2.5
 tC
 S                2.4
                   2.3
     0
     0
     V             a
                   2.1
                     2
                   1.9




                                               experience

             NOTE: The distances between cohorts are arbitrary
        HOURS OF EMPLD WORKERS by cross—section
                           educatn   Sn than 12 years
          3.7
          3.6
          3.5
          3.4
I]
Ii        3.3
Ii
          3.2
L         3.1                                                      90
)
a          3
          2.9                                                      85
'U     j2.5
4)0       2.7
a.,       2.6                                                 19U0
22        2.5
0         2.4
¼)




'I
0
0
          2.3

          2.1
                                                             z75   70
U           2
                                                              1965
          1.9
          1.8
          1.7
                C)    I         20                I     40     I
                      10                          30           50
                                     •xperlencs

        HOURS OF EMPLD WORKERS by cross—section
                    WuccUon equalling 12 yen

          32
          3.7
          3.6
          3.5
          3.4
          3.3                                                 1990
f         3.2
          3.1
            3                                                 1985
C
          23
          2.5                                                 1980
          2.7
U
          2.5
          2.5                                                 1975
 I,
 I,
          2.4
 0
 4-       2-3                                                 1970
 'a
          22
          2.1
                                                              1965
            2
                0                20                     40
                      10                          30           50

                                     np.,1,nce
      NOTE: The distances between cross—sections are arbitrary
           HOURS OF ALL WORKERS by cross—section
                            education less than 12 years
           4.4
           4.2
             4
 0         3.8
 U
 >.
           3.6
 U
           3.4
 a         3.2


           24
           2.5
 "I—       2.4
 C
 0         2-2
 U
             2
 a         1.8
 a
 0
 L         1.5
 U
           1.4
           1.2




                                    sKpsnsnc.


           HOURS OF ALL WORKERS by cross—section
                            sducaUon .quol&tq 12 years
           4.5
           4.6
           4.4
           4.2
            4
           34
           3.6                                                  1990
           3.4
           3.2
             3                                                  1985
Ii         2.8
           24                                                   1980
.9
U
           2.4                                                  1975
           2.2
U
a            2                                                  1970
p          12
U
           14
           1.4                                                  1965
           12
                 0                20                       40
                       10                       30              50

                                   npri.ncs
       NOTE: The distances between cross—sections are arbitrary
