                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           GEOGRAPHIC CONCENTRATION IN
                           U.S. MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES:
                                A DARTBOARD APPROACH




                                         Glenn Ellison
                                       Edward L. Glaeser




                                   Working Paper No. 4840




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1994



We would like to thank Richard Caves, Sara Fisher Ellison, Bill Miracky, Wally Mullin, Peter
Reiss and José Scheinkman for helpful comments, and Matt Botein, Rajesh James, Bruce
Sacerdote and Jacob Vigdor for research assistance. Both authors thank the National Science
Foundation (SBR-93 10009 and SBR-9309308) and the Harvard Clark Fund for fmancial support.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Growth. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Glenn Ellison and Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4840
                                                                                 August 1994


                            GEOGRAPHIC CONCENTRATION IN
                            U.S. MANUFACIURING INDUSTRIES:
                                 A DARTBOARD APPROACH


                                           ABSTRACT


        This paper discusses the prevalence of Silicon Valley-style localizations of individual

manufacturing industries in the United States. Several models in which firms choose locations

by throwing darts at a map are used to test whether the degree of localization is greater than

would be expected to arise randomly and to motivate a new index of geographic concentration.

The proposed index controls for differences in the size distribution of plants and for differences

in the size of the geographic areas for which data is available. As a consequence, comparisons

of the degree of geographic concentration across industries can be made with more confidence.

We reaffirm previous observations in finding that almost all industries are localized, although the

degree of localization appears to be slight in about half of the industries in our sample. We

explore the nature of agglomerative forces in describing patterns of concentration, the geographic

scope of localization, and the extent to which agglomerations involve plants in similar as opposed

to identical industries.



Glenn Ellison                                               Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                       113 Littauer Center
50 Memorial Drive                                           Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02139                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                            and NBER
 1     Introduction
The concentration of the computer industry in Silicon Valley and of the auto industry in
Detroit are two of the more famous examples of the geographic agglomeration of firms in
a single industry. The economics literature motivated by these examples is both old and
vibrant. Agglomerations have for years drawn the attention both of urban planners with
practical concerns and of economists who wish to understand them simply because they
are a striking feature of the economic landscape. More recently, they have been regarded
also as a potential source of insights into the nature of the increasing returns and external
economies which drive the new theories of growth and international trade. As a result,
researchers primarily interested in international trade, growth, industrial organization, and
business strategy have joined geographers and urban economists in investigating geographic
concentration]
    This paper is concerned with measurement issues relevant to work in all these fields.
Our "dartboard approach" to studying concentration consists essentially of extending the
analogy of firms choosing locations by throwing darts at a map into a useful set of models of
location choice in the presence of agglomerative forces. In doing so, we have two main goals.
First, we wish to look formally at whether most industries are truly localized. Second, and
more importantly, we wish to use the models to guide the development of new tools for
the measurement of localization. We hope that the index of localization we propose will
facilitate future research into a range of topics involving cross-industry comparisons, e.g.
how patterns of agglomeration compare in different countries, how levels of concentration
have evolved over time, and whether cross-industry patterns provide insights into the nature
of the forces which cause agglomeration.
    That Silicon Valley-style agglomerations may be more the rule than the exception has
been noted by a number of authors (see e.g. Krugman (1991a)). Our first goal is to provide
a careful reexamination of whether this is indeed the case. The defining characteristic of
our dartboard approach (and the motivation for a reexamination) is that we wish to reserve
the term "localized" for industries exhibiting levels of concentration beyond those which
would be observed if firms had chosen the locations of their plants in a completely random
manner. In doing so, we take as exogenous the discreteness of plants.2 For example, in
the U.S. vacuum cleaner industry (S.I.C. 3635) about 75% of the employees work in one
of the four largest plants. Given this, we do not want to regard the industry as being
    'For samptes of work in these lietds see Florence (1948), Hoover (1948), Fuchs (1962), Carlton (1983),
Henderson (1988), Enright (1990), Porter (1990), Krugman (1991a) and Jafe ci. .1. (1993).
   2We do not mean to say that the determinantion of plant sizes is not a topic With interesting implications
for understanding increasing returns, just thai it is usefully separated irom the measurement of inierplant
agglomeration.


                                                     1
  localized simply because 75% of its employment is contained in four
                                                                           states. Also, even if
  firms did choose locations for their plants
                                              by throwing darts at a map, one should recognize
  that several of the plants by chance might
                                               appear to form a cluster.3 Our use of the
  term geographic concentration is further restricted in that we will regard an industry
                                                                                         as
  concentrated only if it displays some agglomeration beyond the overall concentration
                                                                                                         of U.S.
 manufacturing.1 For example, we do not want to call the newspaper industry concentrated
 just because 12% of all employment in the industry is in California and
                                                                            an additional 9%
 is in New York. Despite this more stringent definition
                                                        of localization, our results strikingly
 reaffirm the belief that localization is widespread.
     Our primary locus in this paper is on the development of a new index (and other tool-
 s) for the measurement of the degree to which industries are geographically concentrated.
 We believe that a useful index of geographic concentration must have two properties: it
 must measure something which is interesting to economists and allow one to make com-
 parisons across industries. Such comparisons are not only of descriptive interest, but are
 the substance of most inquiries into the nature of geographic concentration.5 Interindus-
 try (or interternporaj) corriparisons are problematic with previously defined indices because
 the comparisons are greatly affected (in ways which are not completely understood) by
 variations in industry characteristics and data availability.6
     We motivate our index with an analysis of two models of location choice: one based
on the idea that spillovers (e.g. localized knowledge spillovers7) may lead firms to wish to
locate together, and the other based on the idea that firms want to locate wherever some
type of natural advantage (e.g. access to raw materials) is present. Both models are capab]e
of accounting for geographic concentration, and they are likely important to varying degrees
     3Tn fact, one only needs to throw 6 darts at a map ci the U.S. before ills most likdly that at least two
 wiU hit in some state. Such random agglomerations would be less likely to occur if transportation costs or
other "centrifugal" forces give ftrms a desire to locate away from their competition.
    'We thus use the term as a synonym for what Henderson (1988) and Krugman (1991.) call localization as
opposed to what they term urbanization or geographic concentration. We hope that our use of localization
and geographic concentration as interchangeable terms does not creale confusion. Again, we do not wish to
Imply that the overall agglomeration olindustries is not an interesting topic, just that it is useFully separated
from an examination of intraindustry agglomeration.
   'For example, Krugman (1991.) discusses whether high tech industries are more concentrated than other
industries to investigate the importance oF knowledge spillovers and compares the U.S. auto industry with its
European counterpart to discuss the potential impact of European intejratioa. Earlier comparative works
include Florence', (1948) study of U.S. and British industries and Fuchs's (1962) discussion of changes in
the US. between 1929 and 1954.
   4A representative set of these indices are those of Creamer (1943), Florence (1948), Enright (1990) and
Krugman (1991a). Florence's observation that industries with larger plants are more concentrated is a
particularly clear example of the difficulties in interpreting comparisons.
   'See Krugman (l991b) For a discussion of other spillovers.


                                                      2
in different industries. (Our best example of natural advantage is the wine industry where
it is difficult to separate manufacturing from the growing of grapes and 78% of employment
is in California. Our best example of spillovers is the fur industry where 334 plants in
New York (most in Manhattan) employ 77% of the industry's workforce.8) The main point
of our analysis is not that these models can both account for geographic concentration,
but rather that regardless of which mechanism generates geographic concentration in a
particular industry we can control for the number and size distribution of plants and for
the set of geographic areas for which data is available in the same way. It is because of this
coincidence that we feel somewhat comfortable that our index may control for these factors
in the real world as wed.
     While the paper is concerned largely with methodolo', we try also to provide as detailed
a description as space allows of geographic concentration in U.S. manufacturing industries.9
After all, the ultimate test of an index is whether it provides enlightening results. First,
we discuss overall levels of concentration, with one observation being that many industries
are only slightly concentrated (with a substantial fraction of what others have identified
as concentration being attributable to the discreteness of plants.) Next, we discuss briefly
which industries are concentrated. Subsequently, we explore the nature of the spillovers (or
other forces) causing agglomeration along a number of dimensions: using data on county,
state, and reonal agglomeration to investigate the geographical scope; looking at whether
their influence is felt within narrowly defined industries or whether these spillovers act more
broadly; and examining the degree to which the agglomeration of plants occurs internally
within firms.


2 Models of Location Choice
In this section we develop several simple models of location choice. These models will be
used to construct a test of whether observed levels of geographic concentration are greater
than would be expected to occur randomly, and to motivate our subsequent proposal of an
index of geographic concentration.
    As a practical matter, the data available for measuring geographic concentration typical-
ly consists of a breakdown of an industry's total employment by some geographic subunits,
e.g. we may find state-by-state employments for an industry in the U.S. or country-by-
   'Fuchs (1957) provides an excelient discussion of the industry.
   'The raw data for most of our calculations is from the 1987 Census of Manufactures. We have gone to
some length to fill in missing state-industry employment data so that we nay analyze the complete set of
manufacturing industries. We have also estimated the Herfindahi indices of the plant size distributions for
each 4-digit industry. We hope that this data may prove uselul in future work as well.


                                                    3
country employments in the European Community. We therefore consider an abstract
model in which a geographic whole (e.g. the U.S.) is divided into M subunits which have
shares 1112     xsj of aggregate employment. We assume the shares               5M of a
given industry's employment located in each of these subunits are also available. With such
data, a natural measure of the degree to which employment in the industry departs from
the overall pattern of employment is
                                                     M
                                             g   =   (s      —
                                                                 z)2.

We   feel that such a measure is ol economic interest in that it emphasizes departures which
involve significant fractions of an industry's employment. We will focus on modifications of
this measure throughout this paper both because the measure is of economic interest, and
because it will prove easier to work with than, say, Cmi coefficients.10

2.1 A Simple Model
We begin with a simple model we will use to ask whether the concentration of employment
within industries is greater than would be expected if all plants were located in an inde-
pendent random manner. We view the "random" choice of the model as reflecting what
would be expected in an industry lacking both agglomerative forces (such as spillovers) and
centrifugal forces (such as transportation costs with dispersed demand).
   Consider an industry consisting of N business units having shares 11,12,...,ZN of the
industry's employment. We write H for the industry Herfindahi index" defined by H =
> z. Suppose that each business unit chooses a single location for all of its operations
within a country which is divided into M geographic areas having shares 'i, z2
of total employment.t2 As a model of random location, we imagine that each business
unit chooses a single location for all of its employees by throwing a dart at the map of
the country. Formally, we suppose that the geographic areas in which the firms choose to
locate are independent identically distributed random variables v1,v2,. ..,VN, each taking
on the values 1,2,..., M with probabilities P', P2.. PM We can think of the probabilities
p1,p2      PM as describing the relative sizes of the states on the map. In trying to test
whether this model can describe the geographic concentration of U.S. industries, we will
  '°Florence (1948) provides a lengthy argument for a similar measure.
  "Note that our definition dillen from the conventional use of the term both in that we will usually
think of plants rather than firms as the business units in question and in that market shares ale shares of
employment rather than shipments.
  We think of the industry as being small relative to the country so that the (r} can be treated as fixed
regardless of the location decisions of the business units in the industry.



                                                         4
usually take p, = x, for all i, so that the random location process would on average produce
a pattern of employment shares for the industry matching that we have assumed to prevail
in the aggregate.'3
    Let us now examine the degree of localization such a model would produce. The fraction
of the industry's employment located in geographic unit i is
                                                     N
                                                 =
                                                     1 ziuji,
where uj is the Bernoulli random variable equal to one if and only if v1 =                     1.   Define a
normalized measure, C, we will refer to as the raw geographic concentration of the industry
by
                                           G=    E(sz)2
                                                  '-EM
    Proposition 1 characterizes the raw geographic concentration produced by this model.
The fact that we get such a simple answer with the expected value of G depending only
on H and not on any details of the plant size distribution is not only interesting, but also
useful in that detailed data on plant sizes may be hard to come by.

Proposition 1 In the model above,

                                 EG —      1EIPIH + Ei(p—r)2
For(p,        p,,q) = (xj        'M) this reduces to

                                                E(G) = H.

    Proof
    The result follows from a straightforward calculation using the fact that the expectation
of a sum of random variables is the sum of the expectations regardless of whether therandom
variables are independent.
          —                  = E(E(s — z)2)
                             =

                             =

   "We emphasize that by doing so we are taking as given the concentration of ag8regate employment,
even though this may be thought of as resulting from (nonindustry-specific) interfirm spillovers. We are
interested in exploring mitt-industry localizations, not in the fact that there is virtually no manufacturing
in the state ol Wyoming.


                                                      5
 Using s, =       z5u3 and that the Ujj for j = 1,2,..., N are independent Bernoulli random
 variables we have

       (1   —
                Ez)E(G) = EEz]Var(tij) +                  —
                                                              x)2
                           = z]p(i —p)+E(p—z)2
                           =

 as desired.
     QED.
    To help get some intuition for this result, it may help to note why it holds in a couple
of limiting cases (assuming that p, = r for all i). First, for any fixed set of geographic
areas, the limit as H —. 0 describes an industry with an infinite number of small firms. In
this case the law of large numbers dictates that a fraction x of the industry's employment
will be in geographic unit and G will be zero. Next, for any fixed firm size distribution
                                                                                      c
imagine that the sizes of the geographic areas become arbirarily small, i.e. let M —, with
maxz — 0. With only a finite number of firms we can in the limit ignore the probability
of two darts hitting any geographic unit. The value of (s — x)2 will then be approximately
    if business unit j is located in area i and 0 otherwise. Hence, we can see that the sum
of squared deviations will approach the Herfindahi index.
     The result also gives us our first intuitive interpretation of a measure of concentration.
If an industry has raw concentration G, we can think of the distribution of employment in
the industry as being as concentrated as would be expected if randomly selected locations
each had a fraction G of the industry's employment.
    In testing whether a set of industries exhibits excess geographic concentration, it is
uselul also to know the variance of G in this model. The expression is not as simple as that
for the expectation, and depends also on the fourth moment of the distribution of business
unit sizes.

Proposition 2 For (pl,p2         PM) = (xi ,22,..., ZM) in the model above

VaG) =
              (I- Er)2 (117 (Er? - 2Er? + (Exfl2) - Ezi (Er? - 4Er + 3(Ex?)2
   The result follows from a straightforward but tedious calculation, which we omit.




                                              6
2.2 Two Models of Localization
We now discuss two additional models of the location decision process, each of which is
capable of explaining tocalization in excess of that predicted in the simple model above.
The models will thus be useful in developing an index of the extent to which an industry
exhibits excess geographic concentration.
     The models concern Location choices which are influenced not only by aggregate em-
ployment1 but also by the "natural advantages" to locating in certain areas and by localized
intraindustry spillovers." In order to discuss how these factors should be incorporated,
it is helpful first to recast the dartboard model of the previous section in more economic
terms. Specifically suppose that in an industry like that described above, each business
unit locates in whichever state maximizes its profits, and that the profits received by the
kut unit when it locates in area i take the form

                                         log = logii+ kii
where      is a measure of the average profitability of area i and Eki is a random variable
reflecting idiosyncratic elements of the suitability of the area to the firm in question (because
of fixed firm characteristics, preferences of its management, the success of its search for a
site, etc.). If we assume that the {kj} are independent and have the Weibull distribution,
then it is a standard result that firm k's location vk is a random variable with

                                       Prob{vk = i} =             14



Our standard dartboard model can be obtained as a special case by assuming that the states
have no distinguishing features which affect their average profitability other than differences
in aggregate employment, and that the positive spillover of aggregate employment on profits
takes the form 3 = z. With this specification

                                     Prob{vk = i} =              = 2.
                                                         E x,
Because this dependence of average profits on aggregate employment leads to location
choices which on average recreate aggregate agglomeration given the error structure we
have assumed, we shall take it as a starting point for our subsequent models.'5
   "See McFadden (1973).
  ''Rather than thinking of this dependence as reflecting aggregate spillovers, it is also possible to obtain
such a relation indirectly by assuming that the profitability at each potential site is independent and cx-
ante identical, but that larger states have more sites to choose from (proportionally to their aggregate
employment) so that the best location in a luger state is on average superior.


                                                     7
2.2.1 A Model of Natural Advantage
Our first model of industry localization is motivated by the observation that the business
units in an industry will appear to be clustered whenever their location decisions are influ-
enced by factors which can be regarded as giving a "natural" advantage to certain of the
geographic areas. Our prototypical example is the wine industry. Clearly, the localization
of the industry in is in large part due to California's climatic natural advantage in growing
grapes. Similarly, the concentration of industries which import or export bulky commodi-
ties in coastal states reflects a natural advantage in access to transportation.16 Perhaps
because such factors so straightforwardly lead firms to cluster together they have generally
received less attention than spillovers in discussions of industry localization. They are,
however, an essential component of a complete description of agglomeration.
    The simplest way to add natural advantage to the location choice model described above
is to assume that firm ks profits when it locates in state i are again ol the form

                                          logi'rk, = log57+ ki,
but   with the average profitability of state 1, 7, now taken to be a nonnegative random
variable reflecting all of the ways in which nature has chosen to make state i unique (which
affect profits in the same way for all plants). Conditional on a realization of the {iii}, the
probability that each business unit locates in state I is

                                               pi=E—.
                                                    ir
The larger are the differeces between the p's and the x's, the more we can think of locational
patterns as being influenced by natural advantage.
    We analyze a specification of this model in which the importance of natural advantage
is neatly pararneterized by a single constant To E [0,1], by assuming that the state profit
levels {3t7) are independent of the {EkI}, and that their distribution is such that E(p) =
and Var(p) = yox(1 — z))1 Note that when To = 0, there are no common shocks and
we obtain our standard darthoard model of random locations. At the other extreme, when
   = 1 each p has the largest possible variance given its mean and support, so that with
probability one the differences in state characteristics are so extreme that all business units
will cluster in a single state.
   To explore the level of raw geographic concentration such a model produces for inter-
mediate To and how this depends on the structure of the industry, it is helpful to restate
  "One formal study of such an effect is Carlton (1983), which finds that energy prices are an important
determinant of plant location decisions in several industries.
  'TFor example! one could assume that fl= z + with the (ci) being mean zero random variables with
     = 0 (with probability one) and Var(q) = ior.(i — ri). Another example i.s given later in this section.

                                                      8
the model using a dartboard metaphor. We can think of the business units' choices of
location   as
            a two stage process. In the first stage nature chooses (from some set of possible
dartboards) a single dartboard on which the geographic areas have sizes p1,p2,•. 'PM,
reflecting the importance and allocation of comparative advantage across the areas
                                                                                        (the
larger areas being those with greater average profits). ft the second stage, all business

units, being influenced by the same levels of comparative advantage, independently throw
darts at this board to choose their locations.

    The following proposition shows that the expected raw concentration is linearly increas-
ing in o and again depends on the distribution of the plant sizes only through H.

Proposition 3 In the two stage model of comparative advantage described above

                                        E(G) = 70 + (1 — 7o)H.

      Proof
      Using the result of Proposition 1 we have

        (1 -               =E                 pflH + (p -
                                       ((1-
We    have assumed that E(p) = x1, and Var(p) = ox1(i — ri). Hence,
        (1 —    flE(G)     =   11(1
                                       —
                                                + 7oz(l   —
                                                              xi)) + -yox;(i — x)
                           =   H(1 —70 +(yo— 1)Ez)+io(1 —Er?)

                           = (l-Ezi)1-7o)H+7o)
as   desired.
     QED.
   For concreteness, it may help to note that one specification satisfying the conditions
above is obtained by assuming that the {*7} are independent random variables with w
having a chi-square distribution with 21r degrees of freedom. The induced distribution
of m =       is then I3(i1x1, !.E,&(1 — rJ), and hence has mean x and variance or1(1 —


  "More generally the same distribution for p is obtained whenever W — ['(!.3nx1, A). The joint
distribution of (p,..., pM) is Dirichlet with parameter. (!ix,       —4J'XM). See Johnston and Kotz
(1972, p.    231) for a  description of this distribution. The density function is f(yi   VM—I) =

          I.'
r(L=za)flA4
   -To
                r(=y1p, '°
                  -To
                               ,
                                   -




                                                  9
2.2.2 A Model of Spillovers
Our second model of industry localization is motivated by the idea that externalities or
spillovers may lead firms to desire to locate their plants near other plants in the industry.
We use the term spillovers quite broadly here to refer to technological spillovers, gains
from interfirm trade, the effect of local knowledge on the location of spinoff firms, etc. —
essentially any forces which lead firms to choose locations near other firms in the industry.
    To model such factors, one might assume that the profit of business unit k if located in
area is of the form
                          logirj = logff(z1,v1, . . . , v1_1, v.,vpj) + Eki,
where as before vj is the location of plant j. This formulation allows average profits within
a state to be affected generally by both the aggregate employment and the location of
the other plants in the industry (but not by state characteristics). To make the analysis
tractable and to aid interpretation, we again examine a simple parametric specification of
this model. In particular, we consider for 7o E [0,1] profit functions of the form
                          log rkl = log(x1) +       en(1 — uz1)(—) +        ki,
where the {ekt} are Bernoulli random variables equal to one with probability 7o, uj is an
indicator for whether r'1 = i, and the {E*} are again independent Weibull random variables
independent of the {ek,}.
    To motivate this formulation, note that the first term log(x) is the same dependence
of profits on aggregate employment necessary to reproduce (on average) the pattern of
aggregate employment. The second expression involves two main assumptions made largely
for tractability. First, we have assumed that the effect of plant L's locatkn on plant k's
profit depends only on whether they are in the same area, not on the distance between
different areas. Second, rather than assuming a continuous distribution for the magnitude
of the spillovers, we take the spillovers to have an extreme two point support — they are
either strong enough so that firms k and I will have negative infinity profits if they locate
apart, or they are nonexistent so that k's profits are independent of L's location. As the
probability that any pair of firms has such a crucial spillover between them, o clearly
indexes the importance of spillovers.'°
    In this spillover model, one needs to be more careful in specifying the decision processes
of the business units. We assume the the business units choose locations in some preor-
dained order, and that each firm in turn maximizes its profits conditioning only on the
  '9Note that in a violation of accepted practice are using o to represent & completely different parameter
here thao in the previous model. We have made tbis decision to emphasize that the predicted mean
concentration of the two models will turn out to be identical.


                                                    LU
location decisions of the firms which have moved previously. We shall assume also that the
indicator variables {ekz} for whether spillovers exist between pairs of firms are symmetric
and transitive in the sense that e = 1 ej = 1 and e*j = 1 and tim = 1 * ekm = 1.20
this case, the process we have specified is a rational expectations equilibrium in which each
firm earns nonnegative profits and the resulting distribution of locations is independent of
the order in which the business units make their choices. Note that for 7o = 0 the model is
again our standard dartboard model, and for 70 = 1 all firms will cluster in a single area.
    To analyze the geographic concentration such a model produces it helps again to think
of the firms' location choices in terms of a dart throwing metaphor. Each business unit is
represented by a dart which will be thrown to choose a location. In the first stage, nature
randomly decides to weld some of the darts together into clusters, with the distribution
of her decisions being such that each pair of darts has probability 70 of being in the same
welded cluster. In the second stage, each cluster of welded darts is thrown independently
(with all darts in a ctuster hitting a single point).
    In this model, the business units' locations v1,. . . , vy are identically distributed random
variables, each taking on the value 1€ {1,2,...,M} with probability z1. Note, however,
that the {v} are not independent; instead it is straightforward to show that Con(u,u) =
 1o for all i and all    k.2' Proposition 4 characterizes the raw geographic concentration
produced by this model.
Proposition 4 In the model of spillovers described above

                                         E(G) = 70 + (1 — 70)H.
    Proof

       (l—LZflE(G) = EVar(Ezuaj)
                              = ELz,Var(uj) +                            zkzCov(uk,tLa1)
                                     ii                        I

                              = Ej   i
                                            z,z1(1
                                                     —
                                                         r1)   +E
                                                                   i
                                                                       E ZkZj7OZ(1 — z1)

                                   (1Lx)(Ez,+io
                                          j
  '°Note that we have not (uUy specified the joint distribution of the {eaj}. The proposition below will apply
to all distribution, with the properties above. To see th.t at least one such joint distribution exists consider
the case of the {cn) being perFectly correlated, so that with probability y° all the firms are completely
interdependent and with probability 1 — o all of their profits are independent.
  21The reader may note that this is the only property of the joint distribution which is necessary For
the proposition and hence the proposition applies to any Formulation of the interdependent profits which
induces this correlation in location choices.


                                                         11
The desired result now follows from the substitution E$k z;z = (E1 z5)2 — EzJ = 1—H.
   QED.
    The most notable feature of the result in Proposition 4is that our model of spillovers and
our model of natural advantage yield identical functional forms for the relationship between
the expected level of geographic concentration and the other industry characteristics (the
plant size distribution and the sizes areas for which employment breakdowns are available).
This coincidence motivates the index of concentration proposed below. The coincidence of
the results of Propositions 3 and 4 also tells us, in some sense, that we cannot distinguish
comparative advantage from spillover theories based only on the mean levels of geographic
concentration 72

    Real wortd location decisions are likely to be affected by both natural advantage and
by spillovers, so it is probably worth noting that a combination of the two factors also
produces a level of raw concentration which is related to the industry characteristics in the
same way. Specifical], consider a three stage model (we give only the dartboard version)
wherein the first stage Nature chooses (P1,Th,. .. ,PM) from a distribution with E(p1) =
and Var(p) = 7ix(l — ri); in the second Nature randomly welds each pair of darts with
probability 72; and in the third the welded clusters are independently thrown at a dartboard
in which the states have sizes (p,p7       PM).

Proposition 5 In th€ three stage mode/ above

                                        E(G) = ÷ (1 —
with     =   71   + 72 —   777.
    The proof is similar to those of the previous propositions and is therefofe omitted.


3 An Index of Geographic Concentration
Suppose we are given data containing the shares           •3M of an industry's employment
in each of M geographic areas, the shares x1, £2, . . . ,zç of total employment in each of
those areas, and the Herfindahl index H = L1 z] of the industry plant size distribution.
  22The theories will differ in their predictions for higher moments of C. Recall, however, that we have not
fully specified either model (leaving out the higher momenta of the (p4 in the natural advantage model
and the full joint distribution of the (ca.g} in the spillover model). Varying these elements, each model can
produce • range of predictions for Vai(G). For this reason, we do not feel that attempts to distinguish the
theories on such grounds will be fruitful.



                                                     12
 As a convenient index of the degree to which an industry is geographically concentrated we
propose the use of a measure -y defined by

                        —   C— H— Ei(si — r)2 — (1— E1 x?)EL z,2
 2                      =
                            1-H =       (1-EixD(i-E1)
We believe that this index has a number of attractive features. It reflects a property which
is naturauy meaningful iii emphasizing large deviations from the distribution ofaggregate
employment. Because E(-y) = 0 when data is generated by our standard dartboard model,
it is clearly interpretable as measuring excess concentration beyond that which would be
expected to occur randomly. Finally and most importantly the index allows us to easily
perform meaningful comparisons of the degrees of concentration in different industries,
e.g. comparing a U.S. industry with its counterpart in another country, or comparing
concentration using 3- and 4-digit industry definitions.
   To justify such comparisons, we note simply that if the location decision process of
plants is accurately described by either or both of the natural advantage and spillover
models of the previous section then

                                                 E(G)—H
                                                               =70,
z.e. the index is an unbiased estimator of the fundamental parameter which describes the
strength of natural advantage or spillovers. That the index controls for the number and
size distribution of plants and (subject to the caveat below) for the sizes of the geographic
subunits for which data is available in both of these modes gives us some hope that it will
allow us to compare the strength of these forces in real world industiies as well.
    In making the transition from the models to the real world one caveat is necessary with
regard to comparisons based on differing geographic subunits. Each of our models takes
an extreme view of the geographic scope of the forces which produce localization. For
example, when spillovers are important they are assumed to accrue only if the firms locate
in the identical geographic subunit. In practice, spillovers would likely have an effect which
declines more smoothly and provides some benefit to locating in nearby areas as well (more
so when the areas in question axe smaller). If we estimate 7 using county level data, it will
reflect only the added probability of pairs of plants locating in the same county, while a -y
estimated from state level data will reflect the typically larger increase in the probability
of the pair locating in the same stateP
  "The location decision process of the natural advantage model depends heavily on the definition of
the subareas, and thus the conditions under which we can compare estimates based on different geographic
subunits are less obvious. One case in which such comparisons are completely justified is that of the gamma-



                                                     13
    The fact that we can regard y as a parameter estimate clearly suggests that it should be
interpreted in light of its standard error. What this standard error is, however, can not be
determined given the assumptions we have made so far. In particular, (and we consider it
a feature of our paper that this is true) the results on mean concentration above have been
derived without ever specifying the higher moments of the {i} in the natural advantage
model or joint distribution of the indicators {ekj} in the spillover model. A straightforward
calculation of the standard errors gives

        Vaz( — o) =                                 2                    ZjZkZZmCOV(jjPkj,prMmr).
                             —   H2     —
                                                1
                                                        i,r=1 j,k,1,m1
The covariance terms will depend on the unspecified elements of the models. To give a
feet for the magnitude of one of the sources of measurement error in our calculations of
7's, we wtU present later standard errors (obtained from simulations) from one complete
specification — a natural advantage model where the distribution of the (pi,p    p,w) is
assumed to be Dirichlct with parameters (.i.ç&xj, !.2z12, , i.ftrM).24

4 Data
By design, the data requirements for this paper are fairly simple. We require the distribu-
tion olemployment across a set of geographic areas for a set of industries and the Herfindahl
indices of firm and plant employment shares for those industries. Our definition of irtdus-
tries is the finest one possible given data availability constraints — the 459 manufacturing
industries defined by the 4-digit classifications of the Census Bureau's 1987 S.I.C. system.
Given this decision, we settled on the finest geographic areas for which we felt we could
obtain reliable employment breakdowns — the 50 states plus the District of Columbia. Our
distributed fIT) described at the end of Section 22A. In this model, we can regard natures choice of a
dartboard as resulting From an assignment of a probability (or more precisely of an independent gamma-
distributed IT) to each square inch of the country, with the probability of a dart hitting each state (or other
subunit) being obtained by summing the probabilities of its hitting each of the square inch plots within
the state. More formally, suppose that geographic area ii. divided into subareas 11112           ir with shares
In       lit of total employment (with x, + -       - + X.     x1). When (p11     ps,,pn   PM) S Dirichlet
with parameters (L 2t5 ,,               'TX2        1ZM), (pii+"             +PIr,P3  PM)  is Dirichlet with
parameters (12t11, L1az                     Note  that thi. specification is extreme as well in that natural
advantages of nearby square inches are likely to be spatially correlated, so again we would expect to find
larger 's when using coarser subdivisions,
  "One question of interpretation arises in defining the standard errors. Do we treat y as an estimate of
the variance of the cx ante distribution from which the (p1) are drawn or as an estimate of the a post
realization of            We take this latter interpretation, drawing (p1) for which this expression is equal
to   from the conditional distribution induced by the Dirichiet.


                                                         14
 source for all of this data is the 1987 Census of Manufactures, although despite our simple
 data requirements the process of constructing the data is quite involved. While the data
 we have filled in is by necessity speculative, we hope that our data may be helpful to others
 in the future.
     Our construction of state-industry employments relies on the Census of Manufactures'
listings of state-industry employments and on the reported totals for manufacturing em-
ployment in each state and in each 2-, 3-, and 4-digit industry. A very substantial data
filling procedure was necessitated by two limitations of the raw data. First, employment in
any state-industry with lewer than 150 employees is omitted from the raw data (presumably
to save space). Because states with less than 150 employees contain a nontrivial fraction
of employment in some industries, it is desirable to fill in these numbers. Second, and
more importantly, to protect the confidentiality of individual responses the Census often
reports state-industry employment only as falling into one of live categories corresponding
to employments of 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, 1000-2500, and the unfortunately low top-
code of 2500+25 To give some idea of the magnitude of these restrictions, simply setting
employment in each of these cells to its lower bound unequivocally identifies the location
of 90% of employment in the median industry and 80% on average.
   To complete our data set, we have filled in data for all 2-, 3-, and 4- digit state-
employments using the census data and the adding up constraints across states within
industries and across subindustries within states. Our algorithm is based on the idea of
imposing the upper and tower bounds of the reported ranges, and adjusting employments
within the ranges to try to satisfy the adding up constraints in both directions. Data for
state-industries with less than 150 employees is filled by a similar procedure which uses also
the number of "missing" establishments created by the nonreporting of these cells. More
details are given in Appendix A.26
    Throughout most of the paper we will think of plants as the business units of the model,
and thus rely on a l-ierhndahl index H of the employment shares of plants to control for the
size distribution of business units. While the Census does not publish this information it
does make available for each 4-digit industry the total employment and the total number of
  "Fortunately, employment in many topcoded cells is relatively small, because the largest state employ-
ments tend to occur in states with several firms so that withholding restrictions do not apply.
  26An alternate approach used by several past authors, e.g. Enright (1990), is to reduce the number of
topcodes by obtaining data from the County Business Patterns (which does not have an identical sample,
but which has a much higher topcode) and use means of ranges, dropping industries where topcodes can
riot be avoided or where the ranges are too large. Drawbacks of such an approach are that the important
inFormation in the adding up constraints (and often the existence of small state-industries) is being ignored,
and that industries with interesting agglomeration often end up being dropped.



                                                     15
plants in each often employment size ranges.27 Subject to disclosure rules, the total number
of employees within the plants of a size category is also usually reported. The withholding is
somewhat more of a problem here than in the construction of the state employments because
it is primarily the shares of the largest plants which are obscured by the nondisclosure rules.
For each industry we used the data to estimate a sum of squared plant shares using a two
step procedure: employees were first allocated between the classes where data was withheld,
and a llerfindahl index was then estimated by a procedure similar to that recommended
by Schmalensee (1977), but taking into account the additional information available here
in the form of the category divisions. To get a rough idea of the magnitude of the resulting
measurement errors we conducted tests of our algorithm on simulated data. The details of
the data construction and of the simulations are reported in Appendix B. The simulations
suggest that measurement errors are not likely to substantially bias our results. A complete
list of our estimated plant Herfindahls is given in Appendix C.
     A firm level Herfindahl index,     was taken directly from the Census of Manufactures'
Concentrution Ratios in Manufacturing. The data are based on shares of shipments of
the top 50 firms rather than on all firms' employment, and are available for 444 of the
459 industries, with the values for the remaining fifteen (highiy concentrated) industries
withheld because of disclosure rules. We drop these industries whenever our analysis uses
H1. In the restricted sample of 444 industries, the mean of Hj is 0.068 and that of H is
0.025. It is interesting to note as an aside that following Scherer (1975) one may use the
ratio of these two concentration measures for an industry as an estimate of the effective
number of plants operated by the large firms.28 In doing so, we find a mean across industries
of 3.8 plants/firm and a median of 2.7, figures roughly comparable to those reported by
Scherer twenty years ago. The ratio takes on its largest value, 30.1, in S.I.C. 2813, industrial
gases.
    Finally, for our analysis of the geographic scope of concentration we obtained a dataset
of 1987 county level employments for 3-digit industries. The dataset had been constructed
by tilling in County Business Patterns data using an algorithm which consists largely of
using mean plant sizes for all nondisclosed employments.29 Some comparisons of this data
with our primary dataset are given at the end of Appendix A.
  "The ranges axe those determined by the lower bounds oil, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000, and 2500
empioyen.
  "The estimate is literally valid only if each firm's activities are divided evenly between the same number
of plants.
  "See Cardocki and Baj (1985)




                                                    16
5 Basic Results on Geographic Concentration
In this section we describe the patterns of geographic concentration in U.S. manufacturing
industries. We begin at the broadest level with a discussion of whether any geographic
concentration exists before moving on to discuss a few aspects in a little more detail.

5.1       Are Industries Geographically Concentrated?
The single most crucial question one must ask before further studying the geographic con-
centration of industries is whether geographic concentration really exists. While a number
of previous writers have noted that localization appears to be widespread, we present here
for the first time formal tests of the more stringent hypothesis that the extent of localization
is greater than that which would be expected to arise randomly.
    We begin with what is clearly the most compelling application of our simple dartboard
model, assuming that the plants in an industry are the business units choosing their loca-
tions in an independent random manner. The prediction of the model is that E(G) =
with the difference between C and H, being heteroskedastic with a variance given in Propo-
sition 2. For the full sample of 459 industries we find that the means of C and H, are 037
and 0.28, respectively. The simple dartboard model predicts that the sample average of
the C's should have a mean of 0.28 and a standard deviation of 0.0005, so this difference
is highly significant indicating that there is excess localization relative to random location
choice.
     Looking at the industry-by-industry estimates the prevalence of excess localization
which previous authors have noted is strikingly confirmed. The level of raw concentration
C exceeds that which would be expected to arise randomly in 4-46 of the 459 industries.30
In fact, the flip side of this result — that in only 13 industries are plants more evenly dis-
tributed than would be expected at random — is interesting in that it indicates that the
need to be near final consumers is rarely an overwhelming force in location decisions.
     Before discussing patterns of geographic concentration in more detail, we would like to
comment briefly on an alternate application of the dartboard model which might poten-
tially account for higher levels of concentration. Specifically, one could apply the model by
assuming instead that the firms in an industry are the business units, with each choosing
a common location for all of its plants. While this extreme is plainly counterfactual, it
may provide a more reasonable test for the hypothesis that locations are random in some
instances. For example, for a number of years Maytag had exactly two plants in which
it manufactured washing machines, and both of these were located in Newton, Iowa. The
   "The difference between G and H, is larger than twice its standard deviatioo in 369 of the 446 industries
in which the difference is positive, and none of the 13 industries in which the difference is negative.


                                                    17
two location decisions were not independent, and given that the entire industry (SIC 3633)
consists of only 18 plants, treating them as independent observations might lead to a mis-
leading conclusion that locations are unlike those expected from independent random dart
throws.
    Looking first at the overall level of concentration, we note that for the 444 industries
for which H1 was available the means of G and H1 are 0.074 and 0.068, respectively. While
the overall level of concentration appears to be approximately that predicted by the theory,
there is a difference between correctly predicting the overall level of concentration and
predicting the pattern of concentration across industries. A more demanding test of the
firm-random location theory is obtained by estimating the parameters in the regression
G1 = °o + o1H11 + j and testing whether 00 = 0 and aj = 1. OLS estimates of this
equation are given in Table 1. Each of the equalities is rejected individually with a t-
statistic of at least 10, and an F-test of the joint hypothesis yields an F2,442 statistic of
177.8, also rejecting strongly. The model thus fails to account for pattern of concentration
across industries, which should not be surprising given that we know that multiplaut firms
do often choose multiple locations. The comparison does provide some intuition for the
degree to which manufacturing industries are localized: they are approximately as localized
as would be expected if units as large as firms' operations in each industry chose locations
at random.

                   Table 1: Test of the Firm-Random Location Theory

                         Equation; G1 = a0 + a1H1 +
                        Parameter Coeff. Estimate Std. Error
                        Constant            0.047             0.005
                         H1                 0.394             0.057
                              = 0.09
                        • indicates significance at the 1% level.




5.2   Levels of Geographic Concentration
From the previous section we know that the degree of localization in U.S. manufacturing
industries is not zero. In this section we try to use our models to get a feel for how much
concentration there is. It seems likely that the agglomerative forces reflected in our models
will vary greatly from industry to industry. We therefore begin by imposing no structure
across industries and simply computing the index i defined by (2) for each of the 459 4-

                                              18
digit industries in our sample.3' Recall that 7 can be interpreted either as the probability
with which any pair of plants choose their locations jointly or as a measurement of the
importance of natural advantage in location choice. A complete list of the 7's we find is
contained in Appendix C.
    A histogram illustrating the frequency distribution of these y's is presented in Figure
1. In the figure, each bar represents the number of industries for which lies in an interval
of width 0.01. The taUest bar is that corresponding to values of 7 between 0 and 0.01.
The distribution appears to be quite skewed, with a mean of 0.051 and a median of 0,026.
Approximately 43% of the industries have 'y c 0.02, while 26% have 7 > 0.05.
    How large are these values? Recall that ii an industry has many equal sized plants (so
that 11 0), the natural advantage and spillover models both predict that E(G) = . A
similar level of concentration would result from completely independent random location
decisions by 1/7 equal sized plants. Hence, for the 118 industries with 7 < 0.01 we can think
of agglomerative forces as being sufficiently weak so that if not for the fewness of pLants,
production would be no more concentrated than if it were scattered at 100 equal sized sites.
While there is no justification for any definition of the phrase "not very localized," we feel
that it would be an appropriate description of such a pattern, and we apply it both to
these and to the other 88 industries with C 0.02. At the other extreme, we shall refer to
industries with > 0.05 as "very localized"u This category contains 119 industries.
    The reader should keep in mind that if one views locations as being generated by
a random process, an individual industry's 7 is a parameter estimate with a. nontrivial
standard deviation. To get a feel for the size of this uncertainty in our measurements, we
computed standard errors by simulating a special case of our natural advantage model —
that of Dirichlet'distributed state sizes.33 Among industries with H C 0.02 the mean of
the estimated standard errors is 0.02. The means for industries with H in the ranges 0.02
- 0.05, 0.05 . 0.10, and 0.10 - 1.0 are 0.024, 0.041, and 0.072, respectively.
    To provide some intuition for the importance of accounting properly for random agglom-
eration when constructing an index of geographic concentration, Table 2 lists the frequency
with which -y/G falls into a number of intervals, both for all industries and for the sub.
sample of those in the upper quartile of raw geographic concentration. We can think of
the fraction as a rough measure of the portion of raw concentration which is legitimately
attributable to some form of spillovers/natural advantage rather than to randomness. The
 table indicates that the two components are comparable in magnitude and that there is
  "Note that we assume here and throughout the rest ol the paper that the plants are the business units
choosing locations.
  3The computation requires also a more complete specification of the plant size distribution. For this
purpose, we took the plant sizes to be those used as an intermediate step to the Herfindahi calculation.


                                                   19
                Figure 1: Histogram o(



               Histogram of Gamma
                    4-Digit Industhes




     90

     ac

     10•
S

— 80-
-v
C
i 50-

I


           4          I      I! IT      IA.1 A
                                                 d.e
                          Gamma




                           20
great variation in the mix between them. In roughly one third of the industries (both over-
all and among the industries with high raw concentration) the fact that plants are discrete
units and that some clusters appear at random accounts for at least as large a part of
measured raw concentration as do actual agglomerations of plants. Our index may then
give a somewhat different picture of geographic concentration than would a discussion of
raw concentrations

     Table 2: Raw Concentration Attributable to Spillovers/Comparative Advantage

                          Fraction of md ustries with 7/G        in Range.
                          Range      All Industries High         C Industries
                       Less than 0        0.03                     0.03
                       0.00 — 0.25        0.09                     0.10
                       0.25 — 0.50        0.22                     0A6
                       0.50 — 0.75        0.32                     0.19
                       0.75 — 1.00        0.33                     0.53




5.3 Patterns of Concentration
An attempt to explore formally the industry characteristics which tend to be associated
with localization is well beyond the scope of this paper? We would, however, like to
present a few more tables concerning the geographic concentration in different industies.
   In Table 3 we summarize the levels of geographic concentration of the 4-digit subindus-
tries of each 2-digit manufacturing industry. For each 2-digit industry, the table lists the
fraction of subindustries which fall in the not very localized (y c 0.02), intermediate, and
very localized (y > 0.05) ranges. High levels of geographic concentration are most preva-
lent in the tobacco, textile, arid leather industries and most rare in the paper, rubber and
plastics, and fabricated metal products industries.
    In hopes that the forces affecting geographic concentration might be clearest at the
extremes, Table 4 lists the 15 most and the 15 least localized industries in terms of the
index -y. As Krugman (1991a) has previously noted, there is no obvious single factor
accounting for extreme concentration. The most concentrated industry, furs, is probably
explained both by the local transfer of knowledge from one generation to the next, and
as a response to buyers' search costs. Furs also have an unusually high ratio of value to
weight. The next most concentrated, wine, may be largely attributable to the natural
 33For interesting work on this topic see Henderson (1988) and Enright (1990).

                                                 21
                       Table 3: Concentration by 2-digit Category


                                            # of 4-digit   Percent of 4—digit industries with
2-digit industry                           subindustries   < 0.02     e [0M2,0.05} 7> 0.0.5
20. Food and kindred products                   49          47            18             35
21. Tobacco products                             4                         0            100
22. Textile mill products                       23           9            13             78
23. Apparel and other textile products          31          13            42             45
24. Lumber and wood products                    17          29            47             24
25. Furniture and fixtures                      13          69             8             23
26. Paper and allied products                   17          53            47              0
27. Printing and publishing                     14          71            14             14
28. Chemicals and ailed products                31          38            24             38
29. Petroleum and coal products                 5           60             0            40
30. Rubber and misc, plastics                   15          73            27             0
31. Leather and teather products                11           0            36            64
32. Stone, clay, and glass products             26          58            27             15
33. Primary metal industries                    26          39            35            27
34. Fabricated metal products                   38          61            32             8
35. Industrial machinery and equipment          51          49            26            26
36. Electronic and other electric equip.        37         41             46            14
37. Transportation equipment                    18         28             33            39
38. Instruments and related products            17         47             41            11
39. Miscellaneous manufacturing md.             18         44             22            33




                                           22
 advantage of California in growing grapes. The concentration of oilfield machinery (in the
 Houston/Galveston area) may be partially attributable to the location of oil production.
   The list of the 15 least concentrated industries is also something of a mixed bag. The
industries certainly do not stand out as being those in which spreading out to be close to
final consumers is important, and the list contains several industries, e.g. vacuum cleaners
and small arms ammunition, where raw concentration is substantial, but employment turns
out to be concentrated in a few very large (randomly scattered) plants.34


6 Scope of Geographic Concentration
In this section we examine two different aspects of the scope of geographic concentration.
First, we discuss the scope in the sense of industrial definition, i.e. whether concentration
is principally a phenomenon which exists at the level of individual industries or whether it
is characteristic of broad industry classes as well. Next, we discuss the geographic scope ol
concentration, comparing data at the county, state, and regional levels.

6.1 Industry Definition
Table 5 provides a simple look at the concentration of 2-, 3-, and 4-digit industries. While
raw geographic concentration increases steadily as we move to finer industry definitions,
the increase in y appears to come more abruptly as we move from the 2-digit to the 3-digit
level. This naturally raises two questions of scope. Is there any correlation in the location
decisions of firms which share only a two digit industry class, or is the concentration of
2-digit industries entirely a consequence of the localization of its 3-digit subindustries? Are
location decisions influenced as strongly by the locations of plants belonging to different 4-
digit industries within the same 3-digit class as they are by the locations of plants belonging
to their own 4-digit industry? In this section, we develop a framework for addressing such
questions and apply it to our data.
    Consider an industry with r subindustries having shares tu1,W2,...,W,. of the overall
industry employment. Write H' for the plant Herfindahl of the ith subindastry, and H =
E..., wJHi for the plant Herfindahl of the broader industry. Suppose that plants choose
their locations in a manner which is nearly identical to that of our spillover model, but that
the probability of any pair of darts being welded together (i.e. that a crucial spilover exists
between the firms they represent) being         if both darts correspond to plants within the
  '41u interpreting these latter cases the rea4er should keep in mind that the errors in measuring iinclude
both the inherent uncertainty olanalyzing random dart throws and errors in flung in Census nondisclosures.
Each ci these components is larger when H, is larger, so the list may contain many industries with large
H simply because this is where we have made the largest errors in measurement.

                                                    23
             Table 4: Most and Least Localized Industries

                      15 Most Localized Industries
4-digit industry                              H        G
2371. Fur Goods                              0.007    0.63         0.63
2084. Wines, Brandy, Brandy Spirits          0.041    0.50         0.48
2252. Hosiery, n.e.c.                        0.008    0.44         0.44
3533. Oil and Gas Field Machinery            0.015    0.44         0.43
2251. Women's Hosiery                        0.028    0.42        0.40
2273. Carpets and Rugs                       0.013    0.39        0.38
2429. Special Product Sawmills, n.e.c.       0.009    0.38        0.37
3961. Costume Jewelry                        0.017    0.33        0.32
2895. Carbon Black                           0.054    0.34        0.30
3915. Jewelers Materials, Lapidary           0.025    0.32        0.30
2874. Phosphatic Fertilizers                 0.066    0.34        0.29
2061. Raw Cane Sugar                         0.038   0.32         0.29
2281. Yarn Mitls, Except Wool                0.005   0.29         0.28
2034. Dehydrated Fruits, Veg's, Soups        0.030   0.30         0.28
3761. Guided Missiles, Space Vehicles        0.046   0.28         0.25

                     15 Least Localized Industries
4-digit industry                           H,,        G
3021. Rubber and Plastics Footwear        0.06       0.05    •
                                                                 -0.013
2032. Canned Specialties                  0.03       0.02        -0.012
2082. Malt Beverages                      0.04       0.03         -0.010
3635. Household Vacuum Cleaners           0.18       0.18         -0.009
3652. Prerecorded Records and Tapes       0.04       0.03         -0.008
3482. Small Arms Ammunition               0.18       0.18         -0.004
3,324. Steel Investment Foundries         0.04       0.04         -0.003
3534. Elevators and Moving Stairways      0.03       0.03         -0.001
2052. Cookies and Crackers                0.03       0.03        -0.0009
2098. Macaroni and Spaghetti              0.03       0.03        -0.0008
3262. Vitreous China Table, Kitchenware   0.13       0.13        -0.0006
2035. Pickles, Sauces, Salad Dressings    0.01       0.01        -0.0003
3821. Laboratory Apparatus and Furniture 0.02        0.02        -0.0002
2062. Cane Sugar Refining                 0.11       0.11        0.0002
3433. Heating Equipment except Electric  0.008       0.009       0.0002

                                  24
                           Table 5: Concentration and Industry Definition

                                                               mdustry means
                              Industry Definition            H    G
                                     2-digit              0.007 0.032 0.026
                                     3-digit              0.014        0.058    0.045
                                     4 digit              0.028        0.077    0.051



1th subindustry and 7o otherwise. We will assume that      Mlfljj...r7j, so that spillovers
are always more powerful (in expectation) between plants which are more similar.35
    Again writing C for the raw geographic concentration of the broader industry we have
Proposition 6 In the model above,

                           E(G) H +70(1 —W)+7W](1 — Iii).

    Proof
    Write n, for the number of business units in the JO subindustry and z1, . . .      for the
sizes of plants in that subindustry. Writing uj11 for the Bernoulli random variable indicating
whether the 1°' plant in subindustry j locates in area i, the assumption on welding implies

                            Corr(u1,usp) = I                   ifj=j'andt$t'
                                                               .   .

                                                   t.   7o

We then have

       (1-E4)E(G) = LVar(s)
                              =                z1var(u1j) + >                  zjezivCov(uiLI, up)
                                         i.e


                                                  Zj(Zi#L# v(ue,

                              =
                                     I
                                               — xi))    EzJc +
                                                         i.e
                                                                         E       ZjjZjgi7j +   >

  3We require   aiso   that the welding relation is again symmetric and transitive. The assumption that
                                                                                     so that the model is
   C Mirry, ensures that such a joint distribution on the welding probabilities exists
well defined.


                                                        25
                     E(G) =
                                          i                                j
                              =

 QED.
     Given data on state-industry employments for an industry and for each of its subindus-
 tries, raw geographic concentrations may be computed both for the larger industry and
 for the subindustries. Write G1 for the raw concentration in the tA subindustry and j
      C—Hi          .
 for iH . An unbiased estimate of the degree of intersubindustry spillovers may then be
 obtained from the raw concentrations by setting

                                         G- H- E.1iaw(1 -H)
                                  lo =

To discuss the degree to which spillovers are general, we define a new measure A by

                                               -
                                              A—
                                                   E,wrii
 Note that this measure should be zero if there are no spillovers between plants in different
subindustries and one if spillovers are equally strong regardless of the subindustry to which
plants in the same broad industry belong?
    There are 97 3-digit industires with more than one 4-digit subindustry. A histogram
for A on these three-digit industries is given in Figure 2. The values of A arefairly evenly
spread between 0 and 0.8, indicating that there certainly is some clustering of similar 4-digit
industries. In answer to our introductory question, however, it appears that spillovers are
nearly as strong across 4-digit industries in the same 3-digit industry as within the 4-digit
industries themselves only in about 20% of the cases.
    Moving on to yet broader industry classes, Table 6 reports the results of the identical
calculation using the 3-digit subindustries of each 2-digit industry. The mean value of
A across 2.digit industries is 0.29. There is great variation across industries. In four
cases (furniture, industrial machinery, electronic and electric equipment, and transportation
equipment) the data indicate that there is no concentration at all at the 2-digit level. On
the other hand, there is substantial concentration of the 3-digit industries within the 2-digit
tobacco, textile, and lumber industries.
    We should note while we have tended to use the word "spillovers" in this section, several
factors may explain the results. Technology or knowledge spillovers are one possibility, but
       course, A is a random variable so these statements apply literaily only to , 'a   - Note also that
                                                                                 —1
A is riot an unbiased estimate of this expression. An earlier version of this paper defined A by a linear
interpolation which in practice yields values almost identical to those we report here.

                                                   26
          Figure 2: Extent of Spillovers between 4-digit Industries




                             Histogram of Lambda
                                     3-Digit Industries


     16


     14



     I2


5S 0-
3
C

'a




          -I   -0.5   -0.6   -0.4   -0.2        0
                                           Lambda
                                                    0.2
                                                          Ilk1
                                                          0.4   0.5   0.5




                                           27
spatially correlated natural advantages or other "spillovers" like minimizing transportation
costs given intersubindustry trade could also account for positive values of A. While a more
detailed analysis is clearly called for, the list of 2-digit industries where A is largest suggests
that we may be detecting in large part that the "natural advantages" which are important
to the subindustries are similar.

                  Table 6: Extent of Spillovers between 3-digit Industries


 2-digit industry                       jo      A   2-digit industry                                     A
 Food and kindred products           0.002   0.14   Rubber and misc- plastics               0.003     0.38
 Tobacco products                    0.151   0-88   Leather and leather products            0.017     0.31
 Textile mill products               0.115   0-61   Stone, clay, and glass products         0.002     0.20
 Apparel and other textiles          0.010   0.29   Primary metal industries                0.012     0.41
 Lumber and wood products            0-016   0.63   Fabricated metal products               0.003     0.22
 Furniture and hxtures               0.001   0.02   Industrial machinery and equip.          0-000    0.00
 Paper and allied products           0.005   0.31   Electronic & other electric equip.       0-000    0-02
 Printing and publishing             0-005   0.48 Transportation equipment                  -0.001    -0.08
 Chemicals and allied products       0.007   0.25 Instruments and related products           0.013     0.36
 Petroleum and coal products         0.007   0-12 Miscellaneous manufacturing                0.011     0.34




6.2 Geographic Scope of Concentration
In Section 3, we noted that the 's estimated from county-, state-, or region-level data
should be identical (in expectation) provided the scope of spillovers is such that advantages
are gained only if firms choose identical locations. If on the other hand the effect of spillovers
(or the spatial correlation of natural advantage) is smoothly declining with distance, then
those 's will reflect the excess probability with which pairs of firms tend to locate in
the same county, state, and region, respectively. To investigate the geographic scope of
spillovers we estimated 's from our county/3-digit dataset using counties, states, and the
nine census regions as the units of observation.
    Figure 3 presents histograms of the 's estimated from the three levels of data. Compar-
ing first the county- and state-level estimates note that substantially more concentration is
apparent at the state level. The median 7'S at the two levels are 0.005 and 0.023,with the
median of the ratio between them being 0.25, so that typically the effect of spillovers is such
that about one fourth of the excess tendency of plants to locate in the same state involves

                                                     28
Figure 3: Concentration at the County, State, and Regional Level

                               Couny-LsvsI Gammas

        ,
        go

        So

        ia


        so

        40
E
        10

        20

        '0
         o
              0    006 0.1 0.15 02 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0,4 0.53
                                        Gamma


                                  SLata-L.v.


        35.

        30'
    2
        25


    0 20'
    2
    E
    z   :.
                    L


         :    •0   0.06 0.' 035 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.33 0.4 0.41 0.5 0.51 0.1 0.45
                                         Gamma

                                 Ragon-t.ev.l Gammas




    I

 zI



                                         Gamma

                                           29
plants locating in the same county. We draw two conclusions. First, given that states
have many more than 4 counties, spillovers appear to have a stronger effect at very small
distances. Second, spillovers are still quite substantial at a range beyond that of counties.
In only a few cases do spillovers appear both to be substantial and limited in scope to the
county Level.37 The rubber and plastics footwear industry seems to be the unique example
where concentration is substantially greater at the county level than at the state level, i.e.
where tightly grouped clusters of plants are spread (excessively) evenly across the states as
if to minimize transportation costs.
    Measured levels of state and regional concentration are more similar, although the
regional data shows a much thicker tail of very concentrated industries. (The mean 's are
0.044 and 0.078.) The general pattern of slightly more than half of the tendency of firms
to locate in the same region being accounted for by the tendency to locate in the same
state appears to hotd equally well for industries which are very unconcentrated and very
concentrated at the state level, although there is considerable variation about this norm.


7 Geographic Concentration within the Firm
In this section we investigate the tendency to locate together of plants belonging to the same
firm. The issue is interesting not only in its own right, but also in that such a tendency
might account for a significant portion of the localization we have identified.
     To analyze the potential for measuring agglomeration within the firm, we consider an
industry consisting of ,- firms with shares w1,w2         W,. of the industry's employment.
Suppose that firm j consists of nj plants having shares                 of the industry's em-
ployment. Assume that the location choices of the plants are again made as in our spillover
model with the probability of a pair of darts being welded being equal to 70 if they corre-
spond to plants in different firms and ' > 'yo if they belong to the same firm. The model
is thus a special case of the model of Section 6.1 with the firms analogous to subindustries
and the expected degree of spillovers within each firm assumed to be identical. A direct
coroUary of Proposition 6 is

Proposition 7 In the model above,

                              E(G) = Hp + 70(1 — Hj)+ 71(Hj — Hr).
  "The most notable cases are Fur goods, building paper ad board mill., and periodicals.
  3Indu.tnes notablefor unusually high (relative) regional concentration include ordnance and accessories,
nonferrous foundries, and cigarettes. Industries in which state-level clusters are unusually dispersed include
photographic equipment and supplies, radio ad television receiving equipment, and periodicals.




                                                     30
    In trying to apply the prediction of this model to recover it, a great obstacle arises —
state-firm employments are much harder to find than state-industry employments. As a
result, we cannot separately estimate 70 and it for a single industry. What we try to do
instead is to identify average values of io and 7 using cross-industry variation. Specifically,
we note that if one makes the heroic assumption that the parameters
                                                                      loi and 711 for industry
I are random variables whose conditional means are independent of if,, and H11, then the
coefficients 6o and c11 from the OLS regression

                            —
                                H1 = ao(1 — ilpi) +   a(H — H1) + €.
are  consistent for E(70), and E(71).
     We estimated the regression above for our sample of 444 4-dit industries. The parame-
ter estimates are do and c11 are 0.046 (s.e. 0.005) and 0.068 (s.e. 0.067), respectively. While
the first coefficient estimate is highly significant, the second is quite imprecise. Hence, while
the point estimate is that plants belonging to the same firm are slightly more agglomerated
than other plants in the same industry, we can not rule out a substantially higher level of
intrafirm agglomeration. Given that the mean of H1 — H is only 0.04, we can say fairly
confidently that only a very small portion of total geographic concentration is attributable
to intrafirm agglomerations.
    As a simple specification test for this model, we estimated also the unconstrained re-
gression
                                     = j3o + $iIfji + f32H ÷
and   performed a Wald test of the restriction $o + $i + $2 = 1. The test does reject the
specification at the 5% level, although we note that the test would no longer reject if we
made the minor bias correction suggested by Appendix B. While we believe the results of
this section are of interest, we thus admit that they clearly should be interpreted with some
caution.


8 Conclusion
In this paper we have developed a new framework for the analysis of geographic concen-
tration based on a dart throwing metaphor. Using a series of very simple models, we
obtain characterizations of both "random" agglomeration and of agglomeration caused by
spillovers and natural advantage. Our most important theoretical result is that it is possible
to control for industry characteristics in a fairly robust manner when measuring geographic
concentration. This leads us to propose two new "natural" indices, 7 and A, to measure
the localization of industries and the relative strength of cross-industry agglomerations.


                                              31
    The empirical work of this paper is largely descriptive. Besides reaffiming that localiza-
tion is ubiquitous, we have tried to develop rough sketches of the variation of localization
across industries, the geographic and industry levels at which it is most prominent, and its
relationship to the structure of multiplant firms.
    The existence of geographic concentration has attracted the attention of researchers in
many fields and many potential explanations have been proposed. In the future, we hope
that our measurement techniques will prove useful both in descriptive work on the nature of
geographic concentration and in attempts to use the facts uncovered to assess the relative
importance of various agglomerative forces.




                                              32
   Re fere aces
Carlton, Dennis (1983): "The Location and Employment Decisions of New Firms: An
Econometric Model with Discrete and Continuous Exogenous Variables," Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics, 65, 440—449.

Creamer, Daniel (1943): "Shifts of Manufacturing Industries," in Industrial Location arid
Natural Resources. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.

Enright, Michaet (1990): Geographic Concentration and Industrial Organization. Ph.D.
thesis, Harvard University.

Florence, P. Sargant (1948): Investment, Location and Size of Plant. London: Cambridge
University Press.

Fuchs, Victor (1957): The Economics of the Fur Industry. New York: Columbia University
Press.

Fuchs, Victor (1962): Changes in the Location of Manufacturing in the US Since 1929.
New Haven: Yale University Press.

Gardocki, Bernard C., Jr. and Baj, John (1985): "Methodolo' for Estimating Nondisclo-
sure in County Business Patterns Data," Mimeo.

Glaeser, Edward L., Kallal, Hedi D., Scheinkman, Jose, and Shleifer, Andrei (1992): "Growth
in Cities," Journal of Political Economy, 100, 1126—1152.

Henderson, J. Vernon (1988): Urban Development: Theory, Fact and illusion. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Hoover, E.M. (1948): The Location of Economic Activity. New York: McGraw Hill.

Jaffe, Adam, Trajtenberg, Manuel and Henderson, Rebecca (1993): "Geographic Local-
ization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108, 577—598.

Krugman, Paul (1991a): Geography and Trade. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.



                                            33
Knagman, Paul (1991b): "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography," Journal of Polit-
ical Economy, 99, 483—499.

McFadden, Daniel (1974): "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,"
in P. Zarembka, ed., Fronteirs in Eocoriometrics. New Yourk: Academic Press, 1974, pp.
105—42.


Porter, Michael E. (1990): The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York: The Free
Pres5.

Scherer, F. MichaeL. et at. (1975): The Economics of Multi-plant Operation: an Interna-
tional Comparisons Study. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.

Schmalensee, Richard (1977): "Using the fl.index of Concentration with Published Data,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 59, 186—193.




                                          34
    Appendix A
    This appendix describes the process by which state-industry employment figures were
constructed. The 1987 Census of Manufactures reports the employment or a range of
employments for all state-industries with at least 150 employees. Table 7 indicates the
number of these state-industries for which data is categorized, the number of these which
are topcoded at 2500 or more employees, and the average across industries of the fraction
of employees whose state cannot be determined simply by assigning each state its minimum
possible employment.

                             Table 7: Extent of Withheld Data

                                                     Industry Definition
                                                  2-digit 3-digit 4-digit
                   # Industries                       21       141      460
                   # Cells with Ranges               153     1776     5700
                   # Topcodes                         46       268      487
                   Avg. Employment Fraction         0.02      0.11     0.20


    Before beginning to fill in the data, we first adjust the upper or lower bounds on any 2-
or 3-digit state industry for which a sharper bound can be obtained by summing the upper
or lower bounds of the subindustries which comprise it. This reduces the number of 2- and
3-digit state industries without upper bounds to 13 and 157, respectively. In addition, a
total ol 82 and €80 bounds are tightened on cells where a non-topcoded range had been
given.
    The filling process begins with the 21 x 51 matrix of 2-digit data. First, a rough estimate
of the total employment in cells which are reported as zero is made for each state and for
each industry. The estimate is simply 35 times the number of missing firms with 20 or more
employess plus 6 times the number of missing firms with fewer than 20 employees, provided
that this total is less than 150 times the number of empty cells in the appropriate row or
column. (Each of these estimates is less than 600 employees).
    The main part of the algorithm assigns values within the given range to each cell, trying
to do so in a manner that makes the sums of the rows and columns as close as possible to
those indicated by the reported totals for employment in each industry and manufacturing
employment in each state. While this could be treated as a large optimization problem with
a number of variables equal to the number of categorized state-industry employments, this
approach was deemed intractable and instead an admittedly ad hoc procedure was used.to

                                             35
sequentially fill in cells. Essentially, the procedure repeatedly looks at the matrix of data,
identifies the categorized cells for which there is the least uncertainty as to employment, fills
in employment of those cells, and again looks at the matrix in which the filled in numbers
are accepted as fact.
    The process of identifying which cells to fill in follows a set of priorities. First, if there
 are any rows or columns for which all categorized cells must be set to the minimum or
maximum to satisfy adding up constraints those cells are chosen. Next, the algorithm looks
for rows or columns in which only a single element is unknown. If all rows and columns
have muitiple unknown cells, the algorithm selects the row or column in which there is
the least variance possible within the unknown ranges. The manner in which this is done
usually results in topcodes not being tilled in until virtually all active rows and columns
contain a topcode, and rows/columns with multiple topcodes not being filled until there are
no rows/columns with a single topcode remaining. When filling cells in a row with multiple
unknown elements, the algorithm looks at the departures from expected employment in the
row and column of each unknown cell and adjusts the cells in a direction calculated loosely
on the analogy of calculating conditional means of normal random variables. The amount
by which a. cell is adjusted is limited by the constraint that its row/column must be able
to sum as well.
    After filling the 2-digit data, the process is repeated on the 3- and 4- digit data, the only
difference being that instead of using the constraint that the state-industry employments
should add up to the state total manufacturing employment we use the set of constraints
dictated, for example, by employment within each state in the 3-digit subindustries of a
2-digit industry adding up to the employment in that state in the 2-digit industry.
   In addition, the previously estimated state and industry total employments in states
whose employments are reported as zero are allocated across state-industries by an algorith-
m identical to that described above. In the 4.digit data, these rounded-to-zero employments
are occasionally a nontrivial fraction of the total employment in an idustry.
    While there is no way to tell that this algorithm is doing well, it is at least possible to
tell that it is doing badly to the extent that the algorithm is unable to make the state or
industry totals add up (although due to rounding errors totals are off by up to 400 employees
in industries where no data is withheld). Of the 21 2-digit industries, the maximum error
in the adding up constraints is 508 employees with all other industries within 400. In the
3-digit industries and 4-digit industries there are two and six industries where the error is
greater than 400, with two 4-digit industries having errors greater than 1000 employees,
the maximum being 2010 (although these two are very big industries). The average error
in the state adding up constraints are 31, 177, and 558 at the 2-, 3- and 4-digit level. In
all but one of the 2-digit industries and in all but 6 of the 3-digit industries it was never

                                               36
necessary to fill in multiple topcodes at the same time.
    We would have liked to simulate a data withholding process to provide rough estimates
of the bias and variance of measurement error on the raw geographic concentration measure
G induced by our data filling. However, the Census's withholding process is not sufficienty
transparent that we felt confident that we could reasonably simulate it. Absent that, we
present here a small test of the accuracy of our procedure based on data obtained separately
from the County Business Patterns for the area where our procedure is most suspect, filling
in topcodes in the 4-digit data.
    Data was available from County Business Patterns on state-industry employment for
171 of the 487 4.digit state-industries where employment was topcoded at 2500 or more.
The CBP's sample differs somewhat from the Census of Manufactures, and as a result
the CBP reported employment is below 2500 in 30 of these state-industries. We dropped
these state-industries from our test. (We chose not to use CUP data as an input to our
algorithm precisely because it is often incompatible with range and adding up constraints
in the Census of Manufactures data.) Of the remaining 141 state-industries, four have
very large employments and in each case our data fit extremely well, giving our estimates
a misleadingly high 0.98 correlation with the CBP data. Across the remaining 137 state-
industries the mean and standard deviation of employment are virtually identical in our
data and in the CUP data and the correlation between the two is 0.74. (The means are
5329 and 5304, the standard deviations 3451 and 3306.) For comparison, if the Census of
Manufactures had reported ranges for this data using the CUP ranges (2500-4999, 5000-
10000, and 10000-20000) and we had constructed estimates simply by filling in the mean
of the appropriate range, the correlation coefficient would be higher (0.93), but the sample
means and variance would be much further from those of the CBP data. (The mean would
be 5939, and the standard deviation 4314).
    'While the results above suggest that our procedure has some accuracy in filling, the
most important question is clearly what implications errors in assigning state-employments
have on the computation of G. Even a procedure which is quite inaccurate might yield
reasonable estimates of G if it simply assigns clusters of employment to the wrong states.
As a rough estimate of the effect of that our filling in of topcodes has on the computation
of G, we constructed a measure of G4,o.,, by substituting the CBP employment totals for
our filled in employment totals for all topcoded cells in the 61 industries where the CBP
data allowed all topcodes to be filled in (and where there was at least one topcode). For
this purpose we took the CUP data to report an employment of 2500 whenever it actually
reported a smaller number. Comparing our previously estimated G with the value G4,,
we find that the means are 0.054 and 0.050, with correlation of 0.96. The absolute value
of the difference between the two has a median of 0.0015, with the value being larger than

                                             37
0.005 in 11 of the 61 industries. While this suggests that our fifing of topcodes does not
induce significant bias or large measurement errors, we should point out that the industries
in which this test was performed may have been among the easier industries with topcodes
to fill because they tended to have fewer topcodes than the average industry with at least
one topcode (1.5 vs. 2.5). On the other hand, the majority of 4-digit industries have no
topcoded cells to begin with. Also, while we the filled topcodes would appear to be the
greatest potential problem with our algorithm, this test says nothing about biases due to
the filling of nontopcoded ranges and of state-industry employments of less than 150.
    For another look at the sensitivity of measured levels of concentration to the way in
which we filled in the data, we compared the values of G obtained from a state/3-digit
industry calculations with our standard dataset and with state totals from our county-level
dataset. (Recall that this latter data-set had been constructed entirely from CBP data
using mean establishment sizes to fill in missing values.) Because the latter dataset is not
based on the 1987 SIC revision, the comparisons below involve only the 96 SIC codes whose
definitions were unchanged. The values of G from the two data sources differ (in absolute
value) by less than 0.005 in 59 of the 96 industries. The difference is between 0.01 and
0.02 in 14 indt4stries, and greater than 0-02 in eight. In several of these cases, however,
the values of G are quite large so that we may regard the two data-sets as giving roughly
similar measurements. The differences are both larger than 0.015 and larger than 20% of
the larger G for only eight SIC codes: 213, 281, 302, 315, 321, 375, 386, and 387. The data
for these industries should perhaps be treated with some caution.




                                            38
    Appendix B
     This appendix discusses the manner in which the variable H was constructed from the
 Census data and the potential implications  for our measurements of geographic concentra-
 tion. Given that a significant amount of information about the distribution of plant shares
 within each industry is available, we have chosen to construct H by a procedure which
 is much more akin to filling in data than to imposing any distributional assumptions and
estimating parameters, and which therefore will admittedly be ad hoc. The algorithm has
two main steps: the first consisting of allocating employees across size classes to obtain a
regular data structure, and the second of computing an expected sum of squares for the
plants within each class using a rule of thumb recommeded by Schmalensee (1977).
    In 316 of the 459 industries the Census Bureau has withheld data on the total employ-
ment within a size class (typically one with three or fewer plants.) In this case, the Census
data instead contain the combined employment in this class and another indicated class,
To perform a rough separation of the employment in combined classes, we first for each size
class used the sample of industrues for which the total employment is reported to estimate
the mean and variance of employment/plant as a function of the number of plants in the
class. (The mean was assumed to be of the form cz0 + ailog(1 + it) and the variance of
the lorm b.3 + bj(1/n), with the parameters estimated by OLS regressions.) Employment
in each of the combined classes were then set so that departures from the predictedmeans
were inversely proportional to the predicted variances, provided that this did not violate
the upper and lower bounds on plant size.
    The second step procedure essentially consists of assuming that the sizes of the plants
within each class are discretely uniformly spread on a range centered on the the mean and
with its boundary at the closer of the two endpoints of the size range. H is estimated
simply by taking the sum of the squares of the plant shares for this particular allocation of
employees across plants. Schmalensee (1977) reports that this assumption of linear shares
within a class seems to give the best estimates of the Herfindahl index in a similar problem.
   We do not regard this procedure as an attempt to assign employments to plants, but
just as a complicated function which approximates the Rerfindahi index given the available
data. To assess the accuracy of this procedure, we constructed a simulated dataset of
5000 industrues. The simulated industries were created by assuming that the plant sizes
in industry i consist of it, draws from a lognormal distribution with mean p and standard
deviation a4. The parameters it,jij, and a1 were themselves realizations of independent
lognormal random variables with means (standard deviations) 527 (1106), 143 (286), and
287 (2101), respectively. These parameters were obtained from sample statistics (and the
estimated H) of our 459 industry sample. The data produced by the simulations bears a

                                              39
superficial resemblance to the actual data, although it tends to contain far more extreme
outliers (e.g. industries with over 95% of employment in a single plant.) We created a
simulated dataset modified to preserve confidentiality by combining employment in any
size class with two or fewer plants with the employment in the next lower nonempty size
class. This modification involved withholdJng data in 3200 of the 5000 industries.
    We applied our algorithm to this dataset to produce estimated plant Herfindahis, H,
and compared these to the true H. On average the estimated Herfindahls were slightly
smaller than the true values, the ratio of the means being 1.05. Our principal use for
estimates of H in the paper is as a part of the computation of for each industry. Note
that if we set y = (G — ft)/(l — 1,), where G = lo + (1— 7o)Hp + with E(EIH, 1i) = 0
then
                          E(7 - 7011(p) = (1- 70)E('           Ill,).
Hence,   if E(HIH) = H, then our estimates of 7o will be unbiased.
    One cannot estimate E(HI1i,,) without making assumptions about the distribution of
H. While our simulated Hr's do not match the observed distribution of plant Herfindahls,
we hope that they will at least provide results which are indicative of the magnitude of the
bias our procedure produces. Over our 5000 industry sample, a OLS regression of H on
14 yields an estimated constant of 0.0003 (t-stat: 1.3), with the estimated coefficient on
H being 1.04 (t-stat: 228.9). Restricting the regression to the observations with E, C 0.3
to eliminate the effect of unreasonable industries gives estimates of 0.0001 (t-stat: 0.5) and
1.05 (t.stat: 173.8). Adding a quadratic term to this regression we find the coefficient to be
insignificant, suggesting that nonlinearity is not a problem. Regressing the squared error
from the linear regression on a constant, iJ,, and        to get an idea of the magnitude of
the measurement error in a typical industry gives the estimate 53 = 0.00003+ 0.00311,, +
o.ooi14.
   If we believe these results, then for a typical industry with 7o small we will underestimate
7o by about 0.0.511,,. Given that the mean of H,, is less than 0.03, this bias is fairly small.
To correct this bias, one could simply multiply all of our previous estimates of H,, by 1.05.
The correction is not large, however, and given that we have limited confidence in the
simulations we decided not to impose it.




                                              40
 Appendix C

                         Indusby                     Employrn.nt   Plant H.fljndan   Gamma
  2011 Meal packing lante                                  1139             0.006      0.043
  2013 Sausage. and other prepared fleaS                    7.7
  2015 Po445y alaughteong and p'oceasing
                                                                            o0o4      oe
                                                           147.9            0.005     0.065
 2021 Creamerybutter                                         1.1            0.045     0.147
 2022 Cli..... nalur& and procan.d                          33.0            0.009     0.131
 2023 Dry. condenled. and evaporated dairy product          14.1            0.064     0.015
 2024 Ic. crew, and frozen deeaein                         20.3
 2026 FlUid milk
 2032 Canned ap.c.alt,
                                                           72.4
                                                           24.5
                                                                            0.
                                                                            0.001

                                                                            0.002
                                                                                      0.001
                                                                                       0.002
                                                                                      .0.012
 2033 Canned frUit and vegetable.                          66.1             0.000      0.044
 2034 0#iydrat.d fniJ. vegetable., and soup.               10.1             0.090     0260
 2035 Pickle., 'aix... and salad dnning.                   21.4             0.013     0.000
 2037 Frozen fnjils and veçelabies                         49.8             0.011     0079
 2031 Frozen specialt... n...c.                            37.5            0.015      0.002
 2041 Flout and other grain mdl products                   13.3            0.009      0.019
 2043 Cer.t bre.kfaat food.                                16.0            0.064      0.016
 2044 Ace millIng                                           4.5            0.063      0.134
2045 Pr.pared 6o4.w 'mae and dough.                        12.1            0.020      0.015
2045 Wst con. mdlng                                         8.4            0.060      0.137
2047 Dog and Cal food                                      13.4            0.016      0.011
2048 Prepared feed.. n.e.c.                                34.5            0.002      0.Oit
2051 Bread, cake. and related product                     iit.i            0.002      0.001
2062 Cooloes and crackere                                  453             0.026     -O 00'
2063 Frozen bakery products. except bread                   9.9            0.005      0.013
2061 Raw Can. luger                                         6.2            0.031      0.280
2062 Can. sugar refIning                                    5.5            0.107      0.000
2063 6..l sugar                                             1.9            0.031      0.074
2064 Candy and other conf.cbonery product                  45.1            0.012      0.045
2066 a.ocoln and cocna product                             11.0            0.107      0.091
2067 Chewing gun,                                           5.2            0.157      0.072
2066 Salted and ,oaat..d nuts and seed.                     4.6            0.011      0.025
2074 Cotflw.ed Oil n,iM                                     2.6            0.032      0.168
2075 Soybean oil nihla                                      7.0            0.020      0.070
2076 Vegetable S mit. nec.                                  01             0.064      0.049
2077 AMnal and manna fat and oil.                           9.5            0.001     0.010
2079 Edible fate end olS. n.e.c.                            9.3            0.021      0.001
2012 Malt beverages                                        31.9            0.042     .0.010
2063 Malt                                                   1.4            0.072      0.235
2064 Wnet bandy, end bandy it                              13.9            0.041      0.410
2065 Disfled and blended Iqis.                              9.0            0.035      0.079
2086 DoSed and oen,ed soft *fls                            96.4            0.002      0.006
2061 FlavorS.9 enact     eyn*s, n.e.c.                      9.1            0.016      0025
2091 Canned s.d and bit end seafood.                       4.7             0.020      0.061
2092 Fresh a be4i prepared Ueàt                           31.2             0.007      0.059
2096 Roaasd cofle                                         10.7             0.026      0.032
2096 Potate chip. and similar snacks                      33.1             0.011      0.001
2097 Menuf.cssed Ice                                       4.7             0.005      0.012
2096 MacarcS and epegiwta                                  6.4
2096 Food prsparadovn. n.e.c.
2111 Clgarese.
                                                          56.0
                                                          32.0
                                                                           0.
                                                                           0.024

                                                                           0.323
                                                                                     -0.001
                                                                                      0.013
                                                                                      0.161
2121 CIgar.                                                2.5             0.101      0.151
2131 Cl,e.tg and smoking tobacco                           3.3             0.063      0.200




                                                     41
                          Industry                       Employment   Plant Herfindatil   Gamma
2141 Tobacco stemming and redrying                              6.9              0.045      0.178
2211 Broadwov.n fabric mills, cotton                           72.3              0.025     0.170
2221 Broadwov.n fabric mills, manmade fiber and silk           88.3             o.ooi      0.228
2231 Broadwoven labric mills, wool                             14.0             0.042      0,087
2241 Nanow fabric mKls                                         18.5             0.011      0.074
2251 Women's hosiery, except socks                             29.3             0.028      0.398
2252 Hosiery, n.e.c.                                           36.5             0.008      0.437
2253 Knit oulerwear mills                                      sg.o             0.012      0.065
2254 Knit underwear mills                                      19.3             0.082      o.o2o
2257 Weftknittabricmills                                                        0.019      0.191
2258 Lace and warp knit tabric mills                           20.5             0.014      0.116
2259 Knitting mills, n.e.c.                                     a.a             0.071      0.094
2261 Finishing plants, cotton                                  ie.s             0.019      0.123
2262 Finishing plants, manmade                                 27.9             0.022      0.188
2269 Finishing plants, nec.                                    11.7             0.020      0.098
2273 Carpets and rugs                                          53,3             0.013      0.378
2281 Yarn spinning mills                                       89.0             0.005      0.284
2282 Throwing and winding mills                                18.3             0.025      0.206
2284 Thread mills                                               6.5             0.051      0.207
2295 Coated fabrics, not rubberized                            10.3             0.020      0.001
2296 Tire cord and fabrics                                      s.i             0.121      0.178
2297 Nonwoven labrics                                          13.8             0.023      0.038
2298 Cordage and twine                                          6.9             0.011      0.034
2299 Textile goods. n.e.c.                                     16.4             0.009      0.021
2311 Men's and boys' suits and coats                          55.2              0.010      0.043
2321 Men's and boys' shirts                                   76.7              0.004      0.062
2322 Men's and boys' underwear and nlghtwear                   17,2             0.032      0.097
2323 Men's snd boys' neckwear                                   7.4             0.018      0.106
2325 Men's and boys' trousers and slacks                      93.3              0.004      0.064
2326 Men's and boys' work clothing                            33.1              0.009      0.090
2329 Men's and boys' clothing. n.e.c.                          52.2             0.006      0.025
2331 Women's, misses', and juniors' blouses and shirts         73.4             0.002      0.038
2335 Women's, misses', and juniors' dresses                   112,7             0.001      0.098
2337 Women's, misses', and juniors' suits and coats            55.2             0.003      0'034
2339 Women's, misses', and juniors' outerwear, n.e.c.         107.3             0.002      0.028
2341 Women's and children's underwear                          53,7             0.006      0.063
2342 Brassieres, girdles, and sued garments                    13.8             0.024      0.019
2353 Hats, caps, and millInery                                 17.2             0.013      0.044
2361 GIrls' and chIldren's dresses and blouses                30.9              0.007      0.030
2369 GIrls' and chIldren's outerwear, n.e.c.                  40.5              0.008      0.048
2371 Fur goods                                                 2.2              0.007      0.630
2381 Fabric dr.sa snd work gloves                              4.8              0.027      0.102
2384 Robes and dr.salng gowns                                  8.7              0.029      0.024
2385 Waterproof outerwear                                       6.4             0.057      0.075
2388 Leather and sheep-lined clothIng                          2.1              0.034      0.100
2387 Appar.l belts                                            10,5              0.013      0.167
2389 Apparel and accessories, n.e.c.                           8.3              0.015      0.020
2391 Curtains and draperies                                   27.1              0.008      0.025
2392 Housefurnishings, n...c.                                 50.5              0.006      0.036
2393 Textile bags                                                               0.011      0.005
2394 Canvas and related products                               16.7             0.005      0.010
2395 Pleating and stllchlng                                    14.1             0.009      0.026
                           Industry            Employment   Plant Herfindahf   Gamma
2396 Automotive and apparel trimmings                44.2             0.016     0.074
2397 Schiffli machine embroideries                    5.9             0025      0.153
2399 Fabricated textile p.oducts. fl-S.C.            30.5             0.008     coos
2411 Logging                                         85.8             0.001     0.062
2421 SawmiLls and planing miils. general            148.3             0.001     0.039
2426 Hardwood dimension and flooring mills           29.7             0.005     0.062
2429 Special product sawmills, n-c-c-                 2.2             0.009     0.374
2431 Miilwork                                        89.0             0005      0.0 13
2434 Wood kitchen cabinets                           67.0            0.002      0.011
2435 Hardwood veneer and plywood                     20.5            0.008      0.050
2436 Softwood veneer and piywood                     38.9            0.008      0.187
2439 Structural wood memebers. rte.c.                24.6            0.003      0.026
2441 Nailed wood boxes and shook                      5.9            0.009      0.018
2448 Wood pallels and skids                          25.7            0.001
2449 Wood containers. n.e.c.                          5.4            0.023      0.026
2451 Mobile homes                                    39.9            0.005      0.037
2452 Prelabricaled wood buildings                    25.4            0.006      0.025
2491 Wood preserving                                 11.8            0.005      0.029
2493 Reconstituted wood products                     22.0            0.011      0.029
2499 Wood prodUcts, n.e.c.                           56.3            0.002      0.006
2511 Wood household furniture                       135.9            0.003      0.077
2512 Upholstered household furniture                 82.1            0.004      0.130
2514 Metal household furniture                       30.1            0.010      0013
2515 Matvesses and bedsprings                        24.4            0.004      0.001
2517 Wood television and radio cabinets               5,9            0.072      0.010
2519 Household furniture, n.e.c.                      5.9            o.oso      o.oo
2521 Wood office furniture                           31.0            0.009      0.045
2522 Office furniture, except wood                   4t7             0.036      0.050
2531 Public building and related furniture           21.8            0.012      0.008
25-41 Wood partitions and fixtures                   40.6            0.002      0.003
2542 Parlitions and fixtures, except wood            33.5            0.007      0.011
2591 Drapery hardware and blinds and shades          20.6            0.018      0006
2599 Furniture and fixtures, n.e.c.                  29.3            0.005      0.007
2611 Pulp mills                                      14.2            0.051      0.047
2621 Paper mills                                    129.1            0.008      0.039
2631 Paperboard mills                                52.3            0.011      0024
2652 Setup paperboard boxes                           8.7            0.011      0.037
2653 Corrugated and solid fiber boxes               105.7            0.001      0001
2655 Fiber cans, drums, and similar products         12.5            0M09       0.006
2656 Sanitary food containeri                        15.8            0.047      0.028
2657 FoldIng pap.rboard boxes                        50.7            0.004      0.002
2671 Papercoat.d and laminated packaging             15,0            0.018      0018
2672 Paper coated and laminated, n.e.c.              30.9            0.017      0.010
2673 Bags: plastics, laminated, and coated           36.6            0.009      0.011
2674 Bags: uncoated paper and multiwall              17.1            0.013      0.025
2615 Die-cut paper and board                         15.7            0.011      0.011
2676 Sanitary paper products                         36.4            0.020      0.033
2677 Envelopes                                       27.6            0.007      0.008
2678 Stationery products                             11.2            0.021      0.025
2679 Convened paper products, n.e.c.                29.6             0.009      0.012
2711 Newspapers                                    434.4             0.002      0.002
2721 Periodicals                                    tlO.0            0.005      0.067
                         Industry                 Employment   Plant Hertindahl   Gamma
 2731 Book publishing                                   70.1              0.008    0.062
 2732 Book printing                                     43•5             0.012     0.011
 2741 Miscellaneous publishing                          69.5             0,005     0.008
2752 Commercial printing, lithographic                 403.9             0.000     0.00.4
2754 Commercial printing. gravure                       23.6            0.032      0.016
2159 Commercial printing. n.e.c.                       125.8            0.001      o.oos
2751 Manifold business forms                            53.3            0.003      0.003
2771 Greeting cards                                     21.5            0.091      0.037
2782 Blankbooks and looseleaf binders                   39.1            0.007      0.007
2789 Bookbinding and related work                       29.7            0.005      0.020
2791 Typesetting                                        37.6            0.002      0.014
2796 Platemaking services                               31.8            0.002      0.010
2612 Alkalies and chlorine                               5.0            0.061      0.058
2813 Industrial gases                                    8.1            0.005      0.011
2816 Inorganic pigments                                  8.3            0.041      0.031
2819 Industrial inorganic chemicals, n.e.c.             72.2            0.053      0.017
2821 Plastics materials and resins                      56.3            0.012      0.029
2822 Synthetic rubber                                   10.4            0.063      0.155
2823 Cellulosic manmade fibers                          10.5            0.224      0.159
2624 Organic fibers. noncellulosic                      45.4            0.043      0.140
2833 Medicinals and botanicals                          11.6            0.042      0.089
2834 Pharmaceutical preparations                       131.6            0.015      0.023
2835 Diagnostic substances                              15.4            0.033      0.059
2836 Biological products, except diagnostic             13.3            0.023      0.010
2841 Soap and other detergents                          31.7            0.016      0.004
                                              .
2842 Polishes and sanitation goods                      20.6            0.010      0.018
2843 Surface active agents                               9.1            0.017      0.040
2844 Toilet preparations                                57.9            0.011      0.055
2651 Paints and allied products                         55.2            0.003      0.007
2861 Gum and wood chemicals                              2.6            0.041      0.061
2865 Cyclic crudes and intermediates                    22.8            0.019      0.010
2869 Industrial organic chemicals. n.e.c.              100.3            0.012      0.069
2873 Nitrogenous fertilizers                             7.4            0.025      0.031
2874 Phosphatic fertilizers                              9.4            0.066      0.291
2675 FertIlizers, mixing only                            7.5            0.006      0.020
2679 Agricultural chemicals. n.e.c.                     16.1            0.038      0.031
2891 AdhesIves and sealant,                            20.9             0.005      0.012
2892 Explosives                                         13.8            0.113      0.003
2893 Printing Ink                                       11.1            0.005      0.015
2895 Carbon black                                        1.8            0.054      0.300
2699 Chemical preparations. n.e.c.                     31.9             0.006      0.006
2911 Petroleum refinIng                                74.6             0.011      0.088
2951 Asphalt paving mixtures and blocks                 14.6            0.003      0.009
2952 Asphalt felt, and coatings                         13.5            0.009      0.010
2992 LubrIcating oil, and greases                       11,2            0.001      0.013
2999 Petroleum and coal products, n.e.c.                 1.9            0.027      0.061
3011 TIres and Inner tubes                             65,4             0.025      0.038
3021 Rubber and plastics footwear                       10.9            0.060     -0.013
3052 Rubber and plastics hose and belting              23.2             0.026      0.038
3053 Gaskets, packIng, and ssaling devIces             28.4             0.011      0.016
3061 Mechanical rubber goods                           49.8             0.008      0.047
3069 Fabricated rubber products, n.e.c.                54.3             0.006      0.022
                        Industry                           Employment   Plant Herfindahl   Gamma
3081 Unsupported plastics film and sheet                         46.4             0.006     0.006
3082 Unsupported plastics proFile shapes                         25.2             0.001     0.005
3083 Laminated plastics plate, sheet, and profile shapes         17.3             0.025     o.oos
3084 Plastics pipe                                               12.5             0.008     0.010
3085 Plastica bottles                                            25.1             0.007     0.012
3086 Plastics foam products                                      61.3             0.004     0.004
3087 Custom compounding ol purchased plastics resins             17.3             0.008     0.012
3088 Plastics plumbing fixtures                                   7,5             0.023     0.014
3089 Plastics products. n.e.c.                                  364.9             0.001     0.006
3111 Leather tanning and finishing                               14.6             0.013     0.025
3131 Footwear cut stock                                           5.0             0.032     0.142
3142 House slippers                                               3.7             0.104     o.o66
3143 Men's footwear, except athletic                             31.6             0.016     0.073
3144 Womens footwear, except athletic                            26.6             0.012     o.oss
3149 Footwear, except rubber, n.e.c.                              9.2             0.025     o.o88
3151 Leather gloves and mittens                                   3.1             0.028     0.035
3161 Luggage                                                     11.4             0.027     0.041
3171 Women's handbags and purses                                  9.5             0.021     0.144
3172 Personal leather goods. n.e.c.                               7.2             0.024
3199 Leather goods, n.e.c.                                       7.1              0.011     0.023
3211 Flat glass                                                 14.6              0.o55     0.019
3221 Glass containers                                           41.1              0.013     0.011
3229 Pressed and blown glass. n.e.c.                            36.3              0.020     0.038
3231 Products of purchased glass                                51.1              0.005     o.oo2
3241 Cement, hydraulic                                           19.1             0.009     0.010
3251 8rick and structural clay tile                              16.6             0.001     0.036
3253 Ceramic wall and floor tile                                  9,5             0.039     0.023
3255 Clay refractories                                            6.4             0.027     0.078
3259 Structural clay products. n.e.c.                             2.1             0.048     0,160
3261 Vitreous plumbing fixtures                                   9.7             0.041     0.014
3262 vitreous china table and kitchenware                         54              0.126    0.00i
3263 Semivitreous table and kitchenware                           1.8           . 0.109     o.o88
3264 Porcelain electrical supplies                               10.7             0.030     0.044
3269 Pottery products, n.e.c.                                    10.5             0.016     0.012
3271 Concrete block and buck                                     18.6             0.002     0.004
3272 Concrete products. n.e.c.                                   70.0             0.001     0.012
3273 Aeadymixed concrete                                         96.8             0.001     0.010
3274 Urns                                                         5.1             0.033     0.063
3275 Gypsum products                                             12.1             0.013     0.013
3281 Cut stone and stone products                                12.5             0.011     0.036
3291 Abrasivs products                                           23.4             0.038     0.028
3292 Asbestos products                                            4.0             0.107     0.009
3296 Minerals, ground or treated                                  8.8             0.011     0.005
3296 Mineral wool                                                21.5             0.020     0.015
3297 Nonclay retractorie.                                         7.7             0.020     0,042
3299 NonmetallIc mineral products, n.e.c.                         7.6             0.009     0.004
3312 Blast furnaces and steel mills                             188.1             0,018     0.067
3313 Electsometallurgial products                                 3.9             0.072     0.148
3315 Steel wire and related products                             24.7             0.012     0.013
3316 Cold finishing of steel shapes                              16.4             0.027     0.032
3317 Steel pipe and tubes                                        19.6             0.010     0.038
3321 Gray and ductile iron foundries                             82.4             0,011     0.029
                          Industry                Employment   Plant Hertlndahl   Gamma
3322 Malleable iron foundries                            4.2              0.197     0.072
3324 Steel investment foundries                         203               0.040    -0.003
3325 Steel foundries, n.e.c.                            22.9              0.012     0.040
3331 Primary copper                                      3.3              0.135     0.194
3334 Primary aluminum                                   17.3              0.050     0.053
3339 Primary nonferrous metals. n.e.c.                  11.0              0.044     0.004
3341 Secondary nonferrous metals                        12.5              0,008     0.016
3351 Copper rolling and drawing                         22.6             0.029      0.018
3353 Aluminum sheet, plate, and foil                    26.1             0.063      O.oog
3354 Aluminum extruded products                         30.7             0.013     0.001
3355 Aluminum rolling and drawing, n.e.c.                0.9             0.084     0.031
3356 Nonferrous rolling and drawing. n.e.c.             17.9             0.031     0.016
3357 Nonferrous wiredrawing and insulating              64.9             0.008     0.018
3363 Aluminum die-castings                              28.1             0.010     0.021
3364 Nonferrous die-casting, except aluminum            12.9             0.010     0,036
3365 Aluminum foundries                                 26.3             0.008     0.021
3366 Copper foundries                                    8.2             0.007     0.0 12
3369 Nonferrous foundries, n.e.c.                        4.0             0.117      0.103
3398 Metal heat treating                                18.0             0.004      0.026
3399 Primary metal products. n.e.c.                     13.8             0105       0.059
3411 Metal cans                                         39.4             0.006      0.009
3412 Metal barrels, drums, and pails                     8.1             0.014      0.042
3421 Cutlery                                            10.5             0.039      0.066
3423 Hand and edge tools. n.e.c.                        41.9             0.008      0.008
3425 Saw blades and handsaws                             7.7             0.039      0.039
3429 Hardware, n.e.c.                                   85.2             0.007      0.008
3431 Metal sanitary ware                                 8.0             0.054      0.030
3432 Plumbing fixture fittings and trim                 17.1             0.023      0.003
3433 Heating equipment, except electric                 20.5             0.008      0.000
3441 Fabricated structural metal                        80.9             0.006      0.004
3442 Metal doors, sash, and trim                        74.7             0.003      0.003
3443 Fabricated plate work (boiler shops)               74.7             0.004      0.010
3444 Sheet metal work                                  100.2             0.001      0.003
3446 Architectural metal work                           28.0             0.004      0.004
3448 Prefabricated metal buildings                      25.8             0.009      0.006
3449 Miscellaneous metal work                           22.9             0.006      0.014
3451 Screw machine products                             42.7             0.002      0.027
3452 Bolts, nuts, rivets, and washers                   52.0             0.006      0.029
3462 Iron and steel torgings                            26.6             0.017      0.024
3463 Nonferrous forgings                                 7.3             0.082      0.022
3465 Automotive stampings                              119.8             0.013      0.177
3468 Crowns and closures                                 6.1             0.056      0.039
3469 Metal stamplngs. n.e.c.                            95.5             0.002      O.OiS
3471 Plating and polishing                              71.1             0.001      0.012
3479 Metal coating and allied services                  41.5             0.002      0.014
3482 Small alms ammunition                               9.0             0.184     -0.004
3.483 Ammunition, except tot small arms, n.e.c.         41.5             0.041      0.003
3484 Small arms                                         13.3             0.067      0.080
3489 Ordnance and accessories. n.e.c.                   23.9             0.168      0.004
3491 Industrial valves                                  45.9             0.009      0.006
3492 Fluid power valves and hose fittings               27.9             0.010      0.037
3493 Steel springs, except wire                          5.0             0.024      0.048
                           Industry            Employment   Plant Herfindahi   Gamma
 3494 Valves and pipe fittings, n.e.c.               25.1             0.010     0.017
 3495 Wire springs                                   19.7             0.009     0.014
 3496 Miscellaneous labricated wire products         35.1             0.003     0.004
 3.497 Metal loll and leaf                           10.4             0.033     0.033
 3498 Fabricated pipe arid fittings                  20.0             o.oo4
 3499 Fabricated metal products. n.e.c.              72.5             0.002     0.006
 3511 Turbines and turbine generator sets            22.9             0.091     0.023
 3519 Internal combustion engines, n.e.c.            64.0            0.034      0.070
 3523 Farm machinery and equipment                   57.0            0.013
 3524 Lawn and garden equipment                      24.9            0.043      0.014
 3531 Construction machinery                         81.1            0.016      0.061
 3532 Mining machinery                               13.6            0.016      0,057
 3533 Oil and gas field machinery                    24.8            0.015      0.433
 353.4 Elevators and moving stairways                10.2            0.028     -0.Qoi
3535 Conveyors and conveying equipment               31.5            0.005      0.018
3536 Hoists, cranes, and monorails                    7.0            0.020      0.015
3537 Industrial trucks and tractors                  20.1            0.0 16    0.004
3541 Machine tools, metal cutting types              31.7            0.019     o.035
3542 Machine tools, metal forming types              13.8            0.016     0.071
3543 Industrial patterns                              8.6            0.006      0.051
3544 Special dies, tools, jigs, and fixtures        114,4            0.001      0.053
3545 Machine tool accessories                       48.5             0.003      0.037
3546 Power-driven handlools                         16.8             0.037     0.045
3547 Rolling mill machInery                          3.9             0.067     0.084
3548 Welding apparatus                              18.7             0.028     0.040
3549 Metalworking machinery. n.e.c.                 11.3             0.011     0.041
3552 Textile machinery                              15.6             0.012     0.165
3553 Woodworking machinery                            e.g            0.016     0.033
3554 Paper industries machinery                     ii.i             0.022     0.096
3555 Printing trades machinery                      25.0             0.032     0.016
3556 Food products machinery                        19.2             0.008     0.014
3559 Special industry machinery. n.e.c.             83.3            .0.003     0.007
3561 Pumps and pumping equipment                    35.2             0.010     0.008
3562 BaIl and roller bearings                       36.9             0.021     0.043
3563 Air and gas compressori                        23.8             0.021     0.020
3564 Blowers and tans                               24.8             0.008     0.003
3565 Packaging machinery                            22.6             0.010     0.018
3566 Speed changers, drives, and gears              17.9             0.019     0.019
3567 Industrial umac.s and ovens                    16.6             0.010     0.006
3566 Power transmission equipment. n.e.c.           22.0            0.014      0.014
3569 General Industrial machinery. n.e.c.           40.6            0.004      0.004
3571 ElectronIc conput.rs                          151.9            0.019      0.059
3572Coniputer storag, devIces                       43.3            0.113      0.142
3575 Computer tenninals                             15.0            0.046      0.005
3577 Computer peripheral equipment, n.e.c.          76.2            0.030      0.031
3578 Calculating and accounting equipment           12.8            0.060      0.008
3579 Office machines. n.e.c.                        28.5            0.063      0.015
3581 Automatic vending machines                      7.9            0.062      0.005
3582 Commercial laundry equipment                    4.6            0.054      0.019
3585 Refrigeration and heating equipment           133.3            0.008      0.011
3586 MeasurIng and dispensIng pumps                  9.4            0.063      0.002
3589 Service Industry machinery, n.e.c.             35.2            0.005      0.014
                            Industry                 Employment   Plant Herfindahl   Gamma
3592 Carburetors. pistons, rings, and valves               21.7             0,038      0.042
3593 Fluid power cylinders and actuators                   20.2             0.052      0.025
3594 Fluid power pumps and motors                          14.8             0.034      0.003
3596 Scales and balance., except laboratory                 6.7             0.027      0.023
3599 Industrial machin.ry. n.e.c.                         228.5             0.000      0.005
3612 Trartslouners, except electronic                      32.2             0.010      0.021
3613 Switchgear and switchboard apparatus                  448              0.010      0.008
3621 Motors and 9eneralors                                 74.6             0.008      0.021
3624 Carbon and graphite products                           9.8             0.033      0.042
3625 Relays and industrial controls                        66.6             0.010      0.008
3629 ElectrIcal industrial apparatus. n.e.c.               14.5             0.017      0.010
3631 Household cooking equipment                           21.9             0.050      0.030
3632 Household reirigeralors and freezers                  25.7             0.107      0.035
3633 Household laundry equipment                           16.7             0.128      0.124
3634 Electric housewares and fans                          25.1             0.019      0.107
3635 Household vacuum cleaners                             11.3             0.182     .c.Qo9
3639 Household appliance., n.e.c.                          16.0             0.061      0.030
3641 Electric lamp bulbs and tubes                         22.2             0.027      0.033
3643 Current-carrying wiring devices                       47.9             0.011      0.009
3644 Noncurrent-carrying wiring devices                    21.5             0.023      0.012
3645 Residential lighting fIxtures                         22.5             0.009      0.021
3646 Commercial lighting fixtures                          22.7             0.022      0.018
3647 Vehicular lighting equipment                          15.5             0.139      0.022
3648 Lighting equipment, n.e.c.                            14.4             0.017      0.010
3651 Household audio and video equipment                   30.9             0.035      0.016
3652 Prerecorded records and tapes                         13.3             0.039     -0.008
3661 Telephone and telegraph apparatus                    112.3             0.021      0.009
3663 Radio and television communications equipment        126,0             0.015      0.021
3669 Communications equipment, n.e.c.                      21.9             0.017      0.030
3671 Electron tube.                                        28.4             0.057      0.043
3672 PrInted circuit boards                                68.6             0.006      0.041
3674 Semiconductors and related devices                   184.8            .0.014      0.064
3675 Electronic capacitors                                 21,7             0.023      0.029
3676 Electronic resistors                                  15.7             0.022      0.016
3677 ElectronIc coils and transformers                     23.9             0.009      0.018
3678 Electronic connectors                                 42.8             0.017      0.036
3679 Electronic conlporbents, n.e.c.                      162.6             0.008      0.022
3691 Storage batterIes                                     24.2    .        0.017      0.010
3692 Primary battefles. dry and wet                        10.7             0.045      0.049
3694 Engin. electrical squipinent                          67.3             0.045      0.054
3606 Magnetic and optical r.cordlng medIa                  25.8             0.028      0.065
3699 ElectrIcal .qulpm.nt and supplies, n.e.c.             60.3             0.008      0.015
3711 Motorv,hlcIes and carbodles                          281.3             0.016      0.127
3713 Truck and bus bodIes                                  37.8             0.009      0.008
3714 Motor vehicle parts and accessories                  389.6             0.006      0.089
3715 Truck trailers                                        21.5             0.013      0.014
3716 Motor homes                                           15.1             o.oss      0.150
3721 Aircraft                                             268.2             0.053      0.023
3724 Aircraft engines and engine parts                    139.6             0.042      0.041
3728 Aircraft parts and equipment n.e.c.                  188.2             0.029      0.032
3731 Ship building and repairing                          120.2             0.080      0.014
3732 8oat building and repairing                           57.2             0.005      0.046
                          Industry              Employment   Plant Hertindahl   Gamma
3743 Railroad equipment                               22.1              0.085     0.123
3751 Motorcycles. bicycles, and parts                  7.4              0.077     0.010
3761 Guided missiles and space vehicles              166.7              0,046     0.249
3764 Space propulsion units and parts                 31.8              0.145     0.112
3769 Space vehicle equipment. n.e.c.                  15.1              0.157     0.005
3792 Travel trailers and campers                      17.2              0.011     0.087
3795 Tanks arid tank components                       16.7              0.157     0.023
3799 Transportation equipment. n.e.c.                 15.4             0.015      0.021
3812 Search and navigation equipment                 369.4             0.011      0.039
3821 Laboratory apparatus and furniture               17.1             0.020      o.ooo
3822 Environmental controls                           26.5             0.035      0.011
3823 Process control instruments                      53.3             0.010      0.017
3824 Fluid meters and counting devices                10.1             0.032      0.022
3825 Instruments to measure electricity               65.2             0.014      0.031
3826 Analytical instruments                           31.2             0.014      0.039
3827 Optical instruments and lenses                   20.1             0.027      0,061
 529 Measuring and contolling devices, n.e.c.         41.0             0,015     0.004
  11 Surgical and medical instruments                 73.1             0.007     0.011
   2 Surgical appliances and supplies                 78.5             0.005     0.006
   I Denta equipment and supplies                     14.6             0.017     0.022
   4 X-ray apparatus and tubes                         8.7             0.049     0.017
  35 Electromedical equipment                         29.2             0.021     0,025
J851 Opthalmic goods                                  24.2             0.020     0.027
3861 Photographic equipment and supplies              68.0             0.067     0.174
3873 Watches, clocks, watchcases, and parts           11.8             0.031     0.005
3911 Jewelry, precious metal                          35.5             0.006     0.095
3914 Silverware and plated ware                        6.9             0.065     0.049
3915 Jewelers' materials and lapidary work             7.1             0.025     0.298
3931 Musical instruments                              12.2             0.017     0.014
39.42 Dolls and stuffed toys                           4.4             0.027     0.086
3944 Games, toys, and childrens vehicles              30,9             0.017     0.011
 - :9 Sporting and athletic goods, n.e.c.             53.6             0,006     0.003
        Pens and mechanical pencils                    8.4             0.048     0.030
        Lead pencils and art goods                     5.6             0.045     0.030
      - Marking devices                                7.5             0.007     0.006
        Carbon paper and inked ribbons                 7.3             0.035     0.008
    1 Costume jewelry                                 22.2             0.017     0.320
3965 Fasteners, buttons, needles, and pins             9.6             0,018     0.042
3991 Brooms and brushes                               12.3             0.014     0.007
3993 Signs and advertising specialties                66.3             0.001     0.006
3995 Burial caskets                                    8.7             0.026     0.050
3996 Hard surtac. toor coverings, n.e.c.               7.6             0.139     0.097
3999 Manufacturing Industhes, n.e.c.                  68.3             0.003     0.008
