NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIAS IN U.S. IMPORT
PRICES AN!) DEMAND

Robert C. Feenstra

Clinton It Shiells

Working Paper No. 4841

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1054) Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1994

The authors thank Shunli Yao for research assistance, and William Alterman, Lael Brainani and

William Helkie for providing data. Clinton SMells was on the staff of the U.S. International
Trade Commission during the preparation of this papet views expressed are the authors' and
should not be attributed to the International Monetaiy Fund, the U.S. International Trade
Commission or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in International Trade and Investment.
1994 by Robert C. Feenstra and Clinton R. Shiells. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,

not to exceed two paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4841
August 1994

BIAS IN U.S. IMPORT
PRICES AND DEMAND

ABSTRACF
The purpose of the paper is to measure the potential bias in the U.S. import price index
due to the appearance of new product varieties, or new foreign suppliers, and determine the effect

of this bias on the estimated income elasticity of import demand. Existing import price indexes

are based on a sampte of products from importing firms. We argue that if the share of import
expenditure on the sampled products is falling over time, this will lead to an upward bias in the
measured index. Using a correction based on the falling expenditure share on sampled counthes,

we find that the income elasticity of aggregate U.S. import demand is reduced from 2.5 to 1.7.
or about halfway to unity. Our estimates suggest that the aggregate import price index is upward
biased by about one and one-half percentage points annually.

Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER

Clinton K. Shiells
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Room 5-218
Washington. DC 20431

1. Introduction
Since the work of Houthakker and Magee (1967). it has been known that

estimates of the income elasticity or demand for imports to the United States
(and to other industrialized countries) are substantially greater than unity. Since
these estimates exceed roreign country's income elasticity of demand for our

products, the implication is that balanced world growth will lead to an automatic
worsening in the U.S. trade balance. Dissatisfaction with this result has led a
number of researchers to suggest that there is an upward bias in the import price
indexes and income elasticity estimates, due to the omission of neW product

varieties,

or new roreign suppliers of existing products.1 According to this

argument, over the past several decades the U.S. has experienced an expansion in
the

range of imports from rapidly growing, developing countries, but no

corresponding decrease in import prices. As a result, the rising share of imports

- Which IS correlated with rising U.S. income - is attributed to a high income
elasticity in the import demand equation.
Helkie and Hooper (1968) attempt to correct the estimation of aggregate
U.S. import demand by including a measure of foreign country's capital stocks, as

a proxy reflecting their movement into new product
to

tines.

It would be preferable

incorporate these import varieties from new supplying countries directly into

the import price index, and then estimate the effect on the income elasticity.
Drawing on the results in Feenstra (1994), we describe in section 2 how the
appearance of new product varieties, or new suppliers of existing products. could

bias the import prices indexes. The major purpose of the paper is to measure this

bias over the at! U.S. imports, and then determine the effect of this bias on the
estimated income elasticity of import demand.
To obtain the import price indexes, the Division of International Prices.
Bureau or Labor Statistics (BLS) surveys importing firms, as described in

Alterman (1991). For firms included in these surveys, interviews are conducted
to determine the prices or imported goods whose quality characteristics are
unchanged over time: we refer to these as 'sampled products' and sampled
prices.' These interviews necessary exclude some products from sampled firms.

and other importing firms entirely.

In section 2. we argue that if the share or

import expenditure on the sampled products is talking over time, this will lead to
an upward bias in the measured index.

The entry of countries into new product lines is one reason to expect that
the expenditure on sampled products may be falling, though this can also reflect a

more rapid fall in prices from the new suppliers. Both of these hypotheses are

consistent with the 'product cycle theory of international trade (Vernon. 1966).
whereby production of commodities will shift over time to the lowest-cost
locations. Thus, the appearance of new suppliers can quite possibly lead to an

upward bias in the import price index. This idea is related to the potential bias
in the consumer price index due to the appearance of new retail outlets offering
lower prices (Reinsdorf, 1993). Our paper can be viewed as an international

analog to this domestic argument, with new foreign suppliers taking the place of

new retail outlets.
In section 3, we discuss the sensitivity of our results to three issues:
the functional form of the aggregator: the absence of multinational firms; and the

availability of firm-level data. While the basic results are derived for a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregator function, we show that similar
results can be obtained for the translog case, so the choice of aggregator is not

crucial. On the other hand, the results are very sensitive to the assumption that
the international transactions being considered are at arms-length. i.e. these are

not transactions internal to a multinational firm. Since Imports internal to the
firm are prevalent in some industries, as we describe, the results concerning the

3

bias are not

The

expected

to hold in these cases.

third issue of concern is the availability of data; the correction to the

OLS price index described in section 2 relies on having data for the expenditure on

products sampled from each importing firm. This information is not currently
collected on a continual basis. Accordingly, we are forced to rely on country-

level rather than firm-level data. That is. instead of using the expenditure share
on sampled products, we will be using the expenditure on all products from
sampled countries. These import expenditures are obtained from the U.S. Bureau

of the Census. Thus, we are relying on the Census data to construct proxies (or

the theoretically correct adjustment to the BLS indexes, which would rely on
rirm—level data. The usefulness of these proxies will be judged by their
statistical significance when included in import demand equations.
In section 4. we examine how the adjustments to the import prices indexes

affect

the

income elasticity of demand for aggregate U.S. imports. The inclusion

of the foreign capital stock proposed by Helkie and Hooper lowers the income

elasticity of import demand from about 2.5 to 2.2. In comparison, using the
correction based on the falling expenditure share on sampled countries, we find

that the income elasticity is reduced from 2.5 to 1.7, or about hallway to unity.
Our estimates suggest that the aggregate import price index is upward biased by
between one and two percentage points annually. We conclude our paper by making

a simple recommendation on the collection of additional data by the BLS when it

interviews firms.
2. Potential Bias In the Import Price Index
To motivate our analysis, consider the case of new

retail

outlets for

domestic goods. Reinsdorf (1993) argues that very similar products will sell at
different prices across retail outlets, and cites Denison (1962) to suggest that

4

these price differentials are due to time lags needed for consumers to respond to

the price information, rather than quality differentials across retail outlets.
These new retail outlets are linked into the consumer price index without directly

incorporating the price differential, resulting in an potential upward bias in the
index.
goods

In order to model this bias, it is essential to assume that the similar

are imperfect substitutes across

empirical

the retail outlets. This reflects the

observation that a lower price at one outlet does not eliminate

the same good at another outlet. Reinsdorf and Moulton (1994. sec. V) put

for

further
good

structure on the imperfect substitutes assumption by assuming that the

has a constant elasticity of substitution across

the retail outlets.

We will be taking the same approach to modeling the choice
to

demand

of a U.S. firm

import a product from various possible foreign suppliers. That is. we will

assume that the U.S. importer treats the product as imperfect substitutes across

the foreign suppliers, reflecting any quality differentials across the suppliers, as
well as differences in their time lags of delivery, ease of communication.

reliability of supply, etc. That is, even when observed quality differentials are
absent, we will suppose that the wholesale services provided by the various

foreign suppliers are enough to differentiate them from the buyers point of view.

We should stress that the buyer in our case is the U.S. importer rather than the
U.S. consumer,

since the latter may be entirely unaware of

these

differences in

wholesale services by the various suppliers. We feel that this assumption of

imperfect

substitution across foreign supplier is analogous to that made for

domestic retail outlets, provided

that the

transactions between two unrelated firms.

import

in question is an arms-length

In contrast, the import of a product

by a multinational from its own production facility abroad would not

framework, and will have to be treated separately.

fit into this

S

2.1 CES Index
Like Reinsdorf and Moulton (1994. sec. V). we will also assume the buyer

treats the product as having a

constant

elasticity of

substitution (CES) across

the

various supplying firm. This assumption is made for tractability, though we wilt
argue in the next section that similar results could be obtained under alternative

specifications. With this assumption, the minimum cost of
services

from

obtaining

one unit of

the foreign suppliers i of some product are given by:

(1—e)\1(1—ø)

I
c(pt.lt) :1

i(lt

bipit

.

0> 1.

(1)

)

where C denotes the elasticity of substitution, which we assume exceeds unity:

Itch

N} is the set of foreign suppliers in period t with prices Pit >0. itlt:

Pt denotes the corresponding vectors of prices in period t; and b>0 denotes a
quality

(or taste) parameter for the product from supplier i.
Several features of the CES function in (1) should be noted. First, we have

treated each Foreign firm as supplying a single variety i or the differentiated
product. Multiproduct firms can be handled, however, by letting i index each

variety supplied by each firm. Thus, we will sometimes refer to i as an index of
product varieties, where it is understood that this can be across firms or across
products within a firm. Second, we have treated the quality parameters bi as

constant over time in (1). This is not essential, and we could alternatively
allow these parameters to change. In that case, we would assume that the
quality—adjusted price is correctly measured for products that the BLS samples:

that is. movements in b are correctly evaluated for the sampled products. For
the non-sampled products, movements in b will not affect our results below,
since we will use the expenditure shares to evaluate the (unobserved) prices and

6

these shares would also respond to any changes in quality (Feenstra. 1994).

To briefly review known results, suppose that the same set of product
varieties I are available in periods t—1 and t. and that the amounts purchased of

each variety, x_ and x, are cast—minimizing quantities for the prices Pt-i and
Pt, respectively. Let at_iCI) and st(l) denote the corresponding expenditure shares:

a PitXit/ PitXit

(2)

Id

As

in Diewert (1976), the exact price index P[pti ,pt,st_i(l).st(lfl is defined as a

function of

observed

prices and expenditure shares, such that,

c(pt, l)/c(pt_i .1)

P[pt_j .pt.t—i (I),St(l)].

(3)

The important feature of (3) is that the price index itself does not depend on the
unknown parameters b, i ci. From Sato (1976) and Vartia (1976), a formula for
the exact price index corresponding to the CES unit-cost (unction is:

1pti .Pt.t—1 (l)st(II]

ri (Pit/pit—i )Wit(

U

iii

(4a)

This is a geometric mean of the individual price changes, where the weights

wit (I)

are computed using the cost shares sit(1) in the two periods, as follows:

wit(I)

sit(l) —sit—i (I)
= (lnsit(l) - lnsjti l)
—

itO) —sit—i (I)

/ I (insitw - lnsit;WJ

The numerator on the right of (4b) is the logarithmic

(4b)

mean of sitU) and sit_i (I).

and lies between these cost shares. Then the weights wt(l) are a normalized
version

of the logarithmic means, and add up to unity.2

The exact price index in (4) requires that the same varieties are available

7

in the two periods, and that the prices for all these products are sampled. We
now show how the exact index can be computed when only a subset of the product

varieties are sampled. To this end, suppose that

and l are the full sets o(

imported products, and that l,(It flIt-i). 110. is sampled in both periods. We
shall let P(pti,pt,st_i(I),st(I)) denote the price index in (3) that is computed by
using data on only this set. We shall refer to this as a conventlonal' price index,
in the sense that it is computed over a constant set of (sampled) products. The

exact price index should equal the ratio c(pt,It)/c(pt_i .lt—i). Our first result,
proved in Feenstra (1994). shows how this can be measured with observed prices

and quantities:
Proposition 1

Ear any setof sampled products lc(Itfllt_i), Ito, the exact price index for the
CES aggregator 5:

c(pt,lt)/c(pti .lt-i)
where X(I)1

Pirir

itt,

P(ptj,pt,sti(l),st(I)]
PirXir, far rrt-1,t.

(5)

This result states that the exact price index equals the conventional index

P(pt_i,pt,sti(l),st(l)], times an additional term that represents the bias in the
convehtional index. To interpret this term, note that X(l)t equals the fraction of
expenditure on sampled products in period t. relative to the entire set it It.
Thus. [X(I)t/x(I)t_i) is the ratio of expenditure on sampled products over the two

periods. U this ratio is less than unity, reflecting a declining share of expenditure on the sampled products, then the exact price index will be tower than the

index P[pti .pt.5ti (l).st(I)). In other words, the declining share of expenditure on
the sampled products wilt Lead to an upward bias in the conventional index.

a

A declining share or expenditure on the sampled products could be due to the

appearance of new suppliers, or alternatively, to a fall in the relative price of
products not included in the sample. Both of these hypotheses are consistent with

the product cycle theory or international trade (Vernon. 1966), whereby

production or commodities will shift over time to the lowest-cost locations.
Thus, the appearance of new suppliers can quite possibly lead to an upward bias in

the import price index. The potential bias in the conventional index is measured
by the change in the share of expenditure on the sampled products, raised to the

power 1 1(0-i). For example, if new suppliers are providing products that are a
perrect

substitute for existing products, so that C

approaches infinity, then there

would be no bias in the existing index. Conversely, if C is low (but stilt greater
than unity), any given change in the relative expenditure on sampled products will
indicate a greater bias in the conventional index.3

2.2

BLS Index
The BLS samples multiple varieties of a

product within each 10-digit

Harmonized System (HS) category, and then constructs the index at that level.
More precisely, given the

ratio of

prices in the

two time—periods for each sampled

product, the BLS constructs an unweighted arithmetic mean of these prices in the
10—digit HS category: aggregation to broader industry levels then occurs with a
Laspeyres
result

formula. The use of an

arithmetic rather than geometric mean will

in some upward bias in the index, and the absence of weights in the index

may also introduce some error. In addition to these, we can use Proposition 1 to

determine the potential upward bias in the BLS index if the sampled products have

expenditure shares that are falling over time.

-

Note that Proposition 1 holds even if the set I used to construct the
conventional index price index P contains only a single variety, so that Ir(i}. In

9

this case the conventional index is simply the price ratio for that single variety.
while the term X1(i)=s11 measures that observed expenditure share on

that variety. Then taking the geometric mean of (5) of all the sampled product
varieties 1:1

N. it follows that the exact price index equals,

c(pt.lt)/c(pt_i .'t-i) fl (Pit/Pit-i )i/N (

f

(6)

The unweighted arithmetic mean used by the BLS exceeds the simple geometric

mean appearing in (6). We then obtain:
Corollary 1

The BLS index is related to the exact price index by:
N

N

1

Ri

(Pit/pii) infl

i/N

(c(pt,lt)/c(pti .lt-i)] fl(sit/siti 1

/1)

,

The final term on the right of (7) is the average decline in the expenditure
shares on products sampled by the BLS. When these shares are declining, there is
an upward bias in the measured index as compared to the exact index. This bias
reflects

either the inferred price decline on firms not sampled by

appearance

the BLS, or the

of new product varieties. If we suppose that the newest suppliers —

not yet in the 8LS sample - also have the most rapidly rising shares, then this
upward bias is a plausible
is

outcome. The data used to measure this potential bias

discussed in the next section, after first reviewing the sensitivity of our

results to assumptions we have made.

10

3. Sensitivity of Results
3.1 Functional Form
The results above were derived under the assumption of a CES aggregator

function, and it is important to determine how sensitive the results are to this
choice. Suppose instead that the product varieties i enter into a translog

aggregator function, so that the unit-cost function (1) is rewritten as:

Inc(pt,I) o
with oj>Q

and

oi
iii

+

tnp1

+

ki E1Lnp1tnP1t
jil

.

The set I in this definition refers to the universe

(8)

of

possible product varieties, and is not allowed to vary. For products that are not
available

in some period, their reservations prices must be used on the right of

(8). which are generally finite (see below). This contrasts with the CES case in
(1), where the reservation prices were infinite, and products not availabte would
simply not appear in the unit—cost function. Summing over this universe of
products,

the unit-cost function is homogeneous of degree one in prices provided

that Eisi: and EiEj V'jj O.
For

the translog function, the share of expenditure devoted to variety i is:

5it

cii XrP0 .

(g)

JO

If there is a vartetu n that is newly available in period t, then its reservation

price in t-l is calculated b setting
lfl'nt_i

, Ii

in (9), obtaining:

b'niflPItl
id

.

(10)

)

We assume that V,11.cO, so that the reservation price is positive and finite for

some values of Pit-iS This reservation price is used in (9) and (10) when variety

11

n is not available.
Our goat is to determine how the translog aggregator would affect the
results in Proposition 1. To this end, we suppose that variety n is not included in

the set of sampled varieties in either period. This mau be because variety n is
new, or because it is available in both periods but not sampled. In either case.

let l/(n}E(iiLI and ixn} denote the set of sampled products. Then the change in
the price of variety n between the two periods can be computed from (9) as:

tn(—) (srtrsnt.i)

ici/(n}

(11)

in(t)

To interpret (11), recall that nn<° and that Zi'ni:0. so that , 5'nnl.
iel/(n}
Then the expression on the right of (11) is a weighted average of the change in

prices of all goods ixn.

Then (11) states that the change in the price of good n.

relative to a weighted average of the prices of other varieties, is proportional to
the change in the expenditure share on variety n.

Note that this expression

continues to hold if variety n is not available in one (or both) of the periods, in
which case its share is set at zero in (11).
To determine the impact of the non-sampled variety on unit-costs, we use

the result that the ratio of unit—costs for the translog function equals a Divisia
index of the changes in the individual prices (e.g. Diewert, 1976):

ln(c(pt.lt)/c(pti it-i)]

(sit-I +sjt)In(ptt/pt..i) .

(12)

it I

When variety n is newly available in period t, then its reservation price (10) is
used on the right of (12) in period t—1. To determine the effect of omitting
variety n from the price index in both periods, we substitute (11) into (12).

12

obtaining:

ProposItion 2
Letting li{nk{ljitl and izn} denote the set of sampled products, the exact price

for the translog aggregator function 5:

index

lnRc(pt,l)Ic(pt_ 1.1))

1—

—

(it1 + sit)ln(pi tlPit—1

—

(SnrSnt-t

iI/(n}

where:

(a) kns1—[2nn/(snt_1 snt)] is the average elasticity of demand for variety n;
(b)

1r E Sir CSnr5nifl'nn) equals the expenditure share on i if variety n was

priced at its reservation level in period r. rat—1,t.

if the varieties ui/mi are

weakly separable from n, then sir=sir(I) defined in (2).

This result states that the exact index equals the sum of two terms: Ci)
a Divisia index constructed over the sampled products iei/(n}, where the shares 'jr

in this index reflect the optimal choice ii variety n was not available: and (ii) a
term reflecting the change in the expenditure share on variety n. and its average

elasticity of demand. As a proof, note that from (9) the elasticity of demand for

variety n in period t is tint

4,nIsnt). Then the following term appears when

(11) is substituted into (12):
1

'5nr5nt-1

)

where

11n

1

il

t5nr5nt-i
—

-(2b'nn/(snt_i 'snt)] is the elasticity of demand computed with the

average share between periods t-1 and t. This establishes part (a).

To establish (b). let Pnr denote the observed price for variety n and Pnr its

reservation

price.

Holding all other prices fixed, it is immediate from (9) that

ln('nr/pnr):_snr/nn. Substituting this change in prices into the share equation

13

(9) for 5ir. it follows that ir is the implied expenditure on variety i when n is
not available. The shares ijr are not generally observed, which is a limitation of

Proposition 2. However. if the varieties icl/(n} are weakly separable from n.
then a change in the price of variety n (from its observed to reservation level),
should have no impact on the relative expenditure share (or varieties iel/(n}. In

that case, the formula for the shares in (2) — which simply omits variety n from
the calculation - would equal ijr, so that the Divisia index in Proposition 2 can be
readily measured.

The condition that the products iel/{n} are weakly separable from n is
rather special, and mare so because we have already assumed that nn<0 (so that

the reservation price is finite). The latter condition means that the higher-level
function defined over the aggregate icl/ln} and variety n must be translog but not
Cobb-Douglas. However, this implies that the lower-levet function used to
aggregate the varieties iU/(nl must be Cobb—Douglas. in order for the resulting

unit-cost function to be translog.4 Thus, the varieties iel/(n} will have constant
relative shares. The special nature of this separability assumption is perhaps no
worse than the CES case, however, as it is the only function for which every
subset of goods is weakly separable from every other. Indeed, it appears to be

this separability property, rather than the infinite reservation prices, that makes
the analysis of new and non-sampled goods so tractable in the CES case.

In order to compare the translog and CES cases, let us continue to assume

that there is a single non-sampled variety n.5 Then from Proposition I the exact
price index in the CES case is:
i—sot

ln(c(pt,lt)/c(pt 1 It-i)] r lnPtpt_i .p.s-i (l),st(I)] + (—j)ln[1 -sotI]

= lnP[pt_i .pt,sti (I),st(t)) —

(sot — snt_

J,

(13)

14

where the second tine follows if the expenditure share on the non-sampled good is

smalt. so that ln(1 -snr)=-snr• Comparing (13) to Proposition 2. we obtain:
Corollary 2

If variety n is not sampled, then the ratio of the bias in the conventional index
for the transtog and CES cases is approximately:

1 if ii'n:d.

(

(- J 4 = 1/2 if 5nt-1 O and TInt

. a as both 5nt- and nt"°'
To interpret the first result above, note that the elasticity of demand for
variety n in the CES case is ci(1 —snt)'snt. For small values of 5nt this is close to

c, so that if the average elasticity of demand in the translog case equals that in
the CES case, then the bias terms are approximately equal. This comparison
depends, however, on computing the elasticity of demand un using the average

share (snt_jsnt)/2, Alternatively, if
that

variety

n is newly available in period t

SO

SnI_irO, then the bias term in Proposition 2 is written as snt/2(flnt—1) for

1'tnt

I ('nn'5nt)' With Ttnt. this is about one—half the bias in the conventional

index

snt /Ca-i) obtained in the CES case. Since these bias terms can also be

interpreted as the welfare gain due to the introduction of the new product
variety, we have shown that this gain is approximately twice as large in the CES

case (with qnt). Finally,

the last resutt above indicates that these com-

parisons are quite sensitive to the share of the non—sampled good:

approaches zero, then the elasticity of demand ij'n for the
infinite,

so the ratio of the biases approaches zero.

if this share

translog case approaches

15

White Corollary 2 summarizes the quantitative relation between the biases,

an immediate qualitative result From comparing (13) and Proposition 2 is that for
both the CES and trans log unit-cost functions, a decease (increase) in the share of
the sampled products indicates an upward (downward) bias in the conventional

price index. This result does not rely on the approximation in (13), but simply
uses the fact that both 0>1 and ifn>1 (since Wnn<O). Thus, the qualitative nature

of the bias identified in Corollary 1 — that sampling From firms with a falling
expenditure share on their products will lead to an upward bias in the index — is
preserved across these two functional forms, though the magnitude of the bias

will depend on the elasticities of substitution and demand as discussed in

Corollary 2.
3.2 Multinational Firms
An assumption maintained through our discussion is that the quantity

purchased from foreign firms by the U.S. importer is cost—minimizing at the

observed prices. This assumption fails to hold, however, when the import is

internal to a multinational firm, in which case the transfer price for the import
may bear little relation to its economic value. Thus, for these internar imports
we

should not expect the bias we have identified in the conventional index to

apply.

firm

This conclusion is

reinforced by the observation that imports internal to a

may not be differentiated across sources of supply: a U.S. multinational

engaged in production abroad at two different plants may very well treat the
products from these sources as perfect substitutes. Thus, our other maintained

assumption -

that

imports are differentiated across Foreign sources -

Data on intra-cornpany imports are presented in Table 1 and 2.

also

fails.

In Table 1.

we distinguish U.S. manufacturing imports that are internal to U.S. multinationals

(shipped from nonbank U.S. affiliates abroad), and those that are internal to

is
foreign multinationals (shipped to nonbank foreign affiliates in the U.S.).

In

addition, we distinguish imports that are intended for sate to consumers
(wholesale trade) from those that are intended as inputs into further production
(manufacturing imports). The most precise data — dealing with shipments from a
company abroad to the same company in the U.S. - are available from a 1982 or
1987 benchmark survey.

For U.S. multinationals, the intra-company manufacturing imports amounted
to $25.4 billion in 1962, or 14% of total non—petroleum merchandise imports.6

Of this, $1 0.6 billion was accounted for by transportation imports from Canada,
reflecting the Canada—U.S. auto pact. We have listed the three largest source
countries, which were Canada, Japan and Mexico. There was an additional $2.3

billion or intra-company imports classified as wholesale trade, bring total intra—
company trade from U.S. affiliates abroad to 15% of imports. Turning to the
foreign multinationals with operations in the U.S.. the internal manufacturing

imports of these firms amounted to $17.8 billion in 1981. or 5% of total
imports. The three largest source countries are Japan. Germany and Canada. A

much larger amount of imports - $65.1 billion or 23% of the total - occurs in
wholesale trade.7 The bulk of this wholesale trade was from Japan. much of
which is explained by wholesale trade in autos (such as Toyota Motor Corporation

sending its vehicles to Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A). in total, the intra-company

trade of U.S. and foreign affiliates is roughly one—half of total imports.
More detailed evidence for individual industries is provided in Table 2.

which covers only the U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals, and their internal
imports in manufacturing.8 The classification of industries is that used by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). and the industries are ranked according to the

share of internal (i.e. intra—company) imports in total imports. At the top of the
ranking are chemicals and primary metals, followed by industrial machinery.

17

household audio equipment, and various food products. The average of the internal

manuFacturing imports for the entire sample is 8%.
The borderline industry in Table 2 is motor vehicles and equipment, where

the internal manufacturing imports are 7% of the total. Given the extremely
large amount or wholesale internal imports in this industry, we ranked it as
above—average in internal imports, and the same holds for all industries listed

above motor vehicles and equipment in Table 2. Conversely, all industries listed

below are treated as below-average in their internal imports.9 More specifically,
for those industries with the internal imports share exceeding 0.08 in Table 2
(including motor vehicles and equipment), we identiFied the corresponding 3-digit
Standard industrial Trade Classification (SITC) numbers. Excluding petroleum
products, there are roughly two hundred 3-digit SITC categories, of which about
one-half corresponded to those industries listed in Table 2 with above-average

internal imports; the other half are treated as having below-average internal
imports.

Given this crude division of our sample, our hypothesis is that the bias

in the conventional import price index should be more prominent for the industries
with below—average internal imports.

3.3 A va/lability of Data
The potential bias in the BLS import price index is measured by the last
term appearing in Corollary 1, i.e. the change in expenditure shares on sampled

products. An immediate difficulty with implementing this formula is that the
expenditure

shares on the sampled products are not collected on a continual basis

by the BLS. While expenditure information is used to form an initial sample, once
a product has been selected for a price interview, the firm is no longer asked to
report

the expenditure on that product. For this reason, we have relied on certain

proxies for this bias term, constructed from disaggregate import data available

18

from the U.S. Bureau or the Census, over 1978-88. The Census import data is

reported according to the Tariff Schedule of the United States (TSUSA)

classification, which includes over 10.000 categories annually. The extremely
disaggregate nature
expenditure

of this data set makes it useful source for constructing

shares on imports.

We will consider two proxies for the bias term in Corollary 1. The first
replaces the firm-level expenditure shares with the corresponding country-level

expenditure shares in the same product category. That is. for each 3-digit SIIC

industry, we obtained from BLS a list of the countries from which price data was
actually collected. This information was obtained for the interviews conducted
at two dates - September. 1982 and March, 1985. We also need to make some

assumption about what interviews occurred in other years. In the absence or

other information, we will assume that the country-product interviews used in
the 1982 interviews remained constant over the period 1978-83, and that the

country-product interviews used in the 1985 interviews remained constant over
the (overlapping) period 1983-88.

To describe the first proxy, suppose that the BLS obtained from information

on product i imported rrom country k(i), in years t- I and t. We have used Sj

in

Corollary I to denote the share or expenditure on product i, relative to all
imports in that product category.1 0 We only have information on the countries

sampled from at the 3-digit SITC level, so we construct the bias at that level.
Letting 5k(t) denote import share of country k(i) at the 3—digit SITC level, our

first proxy ror the bias term appearing in Corollary 1 is:

SHARE1 r fl[sk(i)t/sk(i)t-1]

fl(skt'skt-l ) .

where this term is constructed for each 3-digit SITC industry.

(14)

19

To obtain (14), we simply replace the product share sjt in Corollary 1 with

the country shares 5k(i)t• We have also omitted the elasticity term 11(0-1)
which appears as a power on the bias in Corollary 1. since this wilt be estimated
when we include (14) as a variable in an import demand equation (as described in

the next section). Note that the share of country k is repeated each time an

import product i (within the same 3-digit SITC category) is interviewed from

that country. Then letting k denote the share of interviews within each 3-digit
SIIC for products coming from country k (which was provided to us by
the second
Our

the BLS).

equality in (14) is obtained.

second measure of the potential bias is closely related to the first, but

uses inFormation on the detailed TSUSA level products supplied by each country.

In particular, a country that supplies in more TSUSA categories over time can be

judged to have increasing product variety in its exports to the U.S. The expected

impact of greater product variety would be to reduce the expenditure share jt on
each variety supplied by individual firms.

In the absence of having firm—level

data, we can evaluate these changes in product variety be computing the country
share 5k(i) over only those TSUSA categories that country k supplies continuously.
That is. for each 3-digit SITC category and each source country, we identified the

TSUSA products supplied every year in the sub-periods 1978-83 and 1983-88. Then

we calculated the expenditure on these TSUSA products, relative to all U.S.

imports tn the same 3-digit SITC industry: this expenditure share is denoted by
which is less than the country share 5kt by construction. Greater product

variety from country k will mean that

Falls relative to 5kt Our second

measure of the potential bias is then:

SHARE21 flst/stit ,
w here

(15)

20

sct .S 5k1

denotes the expenditure on TSUSA products that country k

supplies

continously over 1978-83 or

imports

in the same 3-digit SITC category.

1983-88. relative to total U.S.

We expect that SHARE2 would be a bettor measure of the potential bias than

SHARD, because it takes into account changes in product variety from each
country. A Limitation of SHARE2 occurs, however, when the names of the TSUSA

categories change over time, as they do in response to product innovations or
changes in U.S. trade laws.1 1

For example, as televisions of increased variety

were imported into the United States, the ISUSA categories have adjusted to

reflect this (distinguishing color versus black and white, and size of screen). If
a TSUSA category is split during our sample period, then we count that product as

not continuously supplied, and ignore it in the calculation of 4. In principle, our
calculation

is robust to these changes in ISUSA names: if a product with a fixed

percentage of

country k export sales (within

omitted from the calculation of s' and

some 3-digit SITC industry) is
because its TSUSA category split,

this would have no impact on the ratio (s't/3u-i ). However, when many of these
changes in product names occur, then this ratio is calculated over a very small
number of (continuously supplied) TSUSA products.1 2 In that case, we might
expect SHARE2 to display more erratic behavior than SHARE1. In general, we wilt

judge the usefulness of these two proxies by their significance in regressions of
import demand, as described in the next section.

4. U.S.

Import Demand

We will follow Helkie and Hooper (1988) in specifying a Tog-linear equation
ror aggregate U.S. imports:
lnomt

.

1lnP $2lnPdt . lnY + t ,
+

(16)

21

where 0m1 is real non-petroleum imports. mt is the aggregate import price index
(based an the OLS interviews), dt is the U.S. GNP deflator, and Y is nominal
GNP. Since demand should be homogeneous of degree zero in prices and income, we

can impose the constraint ( +$2.flj)rO on (16) and rewrite it as;
(17)

lr)Omt o + $ lnCPmt/Pdt) + 3ln(Yt/Pdt) + q .
which is the form usually estimated.

In the first row of Table 3. we show the results of estimated (17) with
quarterly data over the period 1979:1 to I 968:IV. In addition to the variables in
(17). Helkie and Hooper include a measure of capacity utilization (in the U.S.

relative to that abroad). The coefficients of the relative import price follow a
second-order polynomial with eight quarterly lags, real GNP includes one quarterLy

lag, and the equation is estimated with first—order autocorrelation, The long-run
income elasticitu is estimated at 2.5.13 Helkie and Hooper use an average of

foreign countries capital stock (relative to the U.S. capital stock) as a

determinant of their ability to move into new product lines. In the second
regression in Table 3, this relative foreign capital stock lowers the income

elasticity

to 2.15, though the coefficient of

the capital stock is insignificant.

Over the longer period 1969:1 to 1984:lV (used by Helkie and Hooper) this variable

is

more precisely estimated, though the income elasticity is nearly identical to

that in Table 3.

As an alternative to the capital stock variabLe, we will use the bias terms

SHAREJ and SHARE2.

demand

We suppose that the correct price to include in

the import

equation (17) is the exact index, which is related to the conventional index

by Corollary 1.14 Substituting this into (11), we obtain:
lnQmt

$o • $iln() + (ij)n(SHARE1 t) hln() . et

(16)

22

where SHARE2 is alternatively used. We take a weighted geometric mean over

these variables at the 3-digit SITC tevel to arrive at the aggregate value for
SHARE1 or SHARE?, where we distinguish those industries with above-average and
below-average intra-company imports (using Table 2).1 5 Thus, SHAREIA denotes
the mean or SFIARE1 over the industries with above-average imports. SHARE1B

denotes the mean over the industries with below-average imports, and similarly
for SHARE2A and SHARE2B. Using the aggregates for both groups of industries in

(18). we arrive at the estimating equation:

InomI $o

ln(!).oi lfl(SHARE1At).(j)lfl(SHARE1 Bt)8sIn(vL}et. (19)

where SHARE2A and SHARE2B are alternatively used.

In Figure 1 we show the values for SHARE1A and SHARE2A. aggregated over

industries with above-average intra-cornpany imports, and in Figure 2 we show
SHARE1 B and SHARE2B, for industries with below-average internal imports.1 6 All

the SHARE variables are normalized at 1.0 in 1976. In Figure 1, the SHAREA

variables are quite erratic, showing little trend aside from a decline in the last
gears of the sample. In Figure 2 by contrast, the SHAREB variables for industries
with below-average internal imports show a marked tendency to decline. SHARE1B

reflects the import shares of countries with sampled products, and declines to
0.68, or about one percent annually. A greater decline - to 0.75 - is shown by
SHARE2B, or about 2.5 percent annually. This fall indicates that the countries
with sampled products were also moving into new product lines, so that the
expenditure share on the products supplied continuously declined more rapidly.
The results of including the SHARE variables in the import demand equations

are reported in the third and fourth regressions of

Table

3, where the third uses

SHARE1A and SHARE1B, while the fourth uses SHARE2A and SHARE2B. In both

23

cases, we see that SHAPEA enters with a positive sign and SHAREB with a

negative sign. The sign on SHAREB is expected, since $'cO in (19) in the price

elasticity or demand, so with 0>1 the coefficient on SHAREB is negative. We
have not offered any prediction about the sign on SHAREA, however.
One

rationalization for the positive coefficient on SHAREA is that when

a

company decides to shift production offshore, rather than produce domestically,

we will observe both an increase in quantity and share of imports from that
foreign county source. Conversely, when a foreign company decides to expand its

U.S. manufacturing base, rather than import, there wilt be a decline in both the
quantity and share of expenditure from that source country.

It is entirety

possible that the products internally imported by these companies are included in
the BLS interviews, so that the positive correlation between SHAREA and imports
is to be expected.17

This argument concerning the sign of SHAREA highlights the fact that all
the

SHARE variables are likely to be correlated with the error in (19), since

random
their

change in the

import quantity

any

from the sampled countries wilt also affect

expenditure shares. To address this, the third and fourth regressions in

Table 3 use instrumental variables when including the SHARE variables: the
instruments are time, time2, tim&, and the other variables on the right of (19).
Since

also

the SHARE variables are measured as annual values, quarterly dummies are
included in the instruments and the regression.
In the third regression in Table 3,

using SHAREIA and SHARE1 B. the income

elasticity falls from 2.5 to 1.9, and the coefficients of both SHARE variables are

significant at the 10% level. The autocorrelation coefficient is also reduced. A
slightly larger impact on the income elasticity is obtained when using SI4ARE2A
and SHARE2B. calculated according to (15).

In the fourth regression, the income

elasticity falls to 1.7, though the standard errors of the SHARE coefficients are

24

higher than before. The reduction in the income elasticity in either case is the
principal result of our paper:

the SHARE variables has a substantial effect on the

income elasticity of aggregate import demand, moving it about halfway towards

unity. This result supports the hypothesis that the high income elasticity or
import demand is due, at least in part, to the inability of conventional indexes to
account for the expansion of product varieties from new foreign suppliers.
Using the coefficient or SHARE2B in the fourth regression, along with the

long-run price elasticity $. we can obtain an estimate of
a: 1 .(l .1 49/O.926)r2.24 (with a standard error or

from (19) as

.08). This estimate seems

Low for an elasticity of substitution between a product differentiated across
suppliers, and is smaller than the disaggregate estimates in Feenstra (1994). One

reason for this might be that the SHARE variables are proxies for the true

expenditure shares from interviewed firms, which could bias the elasticity
estimate, For example, if SHARE2B measures only a fraction of the true expansion

in product varieties, then this variable would fall too slowly, and the resulting

elasticity estimate of $I(c-1) in (19) is upward biased — so a is downward
biased. More generally, from our results in section 3.1, we need not assume that
the true aggregator is CES, so that the coefficient of SHARE2B is open to

interpretation.
Regardless of how we interpret the coefficients of the SHARE variables, we

can combine these two term with the relative import price and rewrite (18') as:
lnomt :

. $i[ln().(1)1n(sHARE2At) .(—2-—)ln(SIIARE2Bt)]. Bsln(-). Ct.

The term in brackets is our estimate of the (relative) exact import price index.
Then using the estimates from the fourth regression in Table 3, we construct.

ln(PRICEBt) : ln(Pmt/Pdt) + (2-!)ln(sHARE23t)

25
and!

.926

.478

ln(PRICEABt) z tn(Pmt/Pdt) + (?149)ln(SHARE2Bt)_ (i4g)lnsHARE2At

The first or these series only takes account or the industries with below-average
intra-company imports, white the second series takes into account atl industries.
Also, tet PRICEtr(Pmt/Pdt) denote the (relative) BLS import price index.
In Figure 3, we ptot PRICE. PRICEB and PRICEAB (with 1978.1:100). The

fall in PRICE over 1960-85 ref tects the appreciation of the dollar. Both of the
other series tie below PRICE. indicating the upward bias of the conventionat index,
with PRICEAB tying below PRICES in atl years except 1987-88. The difference

between PRICE and PRICES in 1988 is 16.4, relative to their initial values of 100,
while the dirference between PRICE and PRICEAB in 1988 is 12.9. Since these
differences develop over the decade 1978-88, we conctude that the conventional
price index is upward biased by about one and one-half percentage points annually,
as compared to an exact index.

5. Conclusions
As a necessary result of the sampling procedure used by BLS to construct

(domestic or international) price indexes, some products will be excluded from
these indexes. In this paper, we have discussed the consequences of this exclusion.
Our basic result is the expenditure shares on the sampled products provided very
useful inrormation on the movement in prices of the non-sampled goods. in
particular,

infer

a fatling expenditure share of

the sampled products means that we

a falling relative price for the non—sampled products. This inference is

particularty usetut when we consider that some of the non-sampled products may

be new, with prices are falling from their reservation to observed levels when
they are first avaitabte, Since these reservation prices are never observed (and

26

difficult to estimate when dealing with many goods simultaneously), the strategy
of using the expenditure shares to infer the movements in prices seems quite

attractive.
In

Figure 3, we have plotted the (relative) U.S. import price index along

with two constructed indexes, to illustrate the upward bias in the former. It
should be stressed that this diagram is not meant to demonstrate any limitation

of the BLS procedures in collecting the import price data. Even with the best
practice techniques, we would expect any price index constructed from interview

data to be potentially biased from the exclusion of products. It would be futile
(and prohibitively expensive) to attempt

that

to collect such a broad range of prices

this potential bias is eliminated, since the (reservation) prices for new

product varieties are simply not

available.

Rather than expanding the scope of the price interviews, the recommendation

of

this paper is to collect

price data. Currently,

expenditure data from firms at the same time as the

the expenditure

on sampled products is not collected on a

continual basis. While expenditure information is used to form an initial sample.

once a product has been selected For a price interview, the firm is no longer asked

to report the sates (for domestic price indexes) or purchases (for import price
indexes) of that product. The collection of this information would impose some

extra time-costs on the reporting firms, but it would not require any new
procedures for selecting the products to interview. That is. once a narrowly—
defined product has been identified to obtain price data, the firm could be asked
to supply (quarterly or annual) value data on exactly that same product. These
data could be reported at the same level of aggregation as the price indexes, so

that the confidentiality of firms is maintained. We have argued that this
expenditure data would be very useful to deal with the potential bias in import
prices, and it would undoubtedly be useful for domestic indexes, as well.

27

Footnotes
1

See Sato (1977), llelkie and Hooper (1968). Hooper (1969). Krugman (1969) and

Riedel (1991).

2 Using LHospital's Rule, it is readily shown that as Sit_i (I) • sjt(l) for all
then the weights wt(l) approach st(I).
3 The elasticity of substitution must exceed unity, since otherwise alL product
varieties are essential for consumption, so the set It cannot vary over time.
4

The logic of this statement is that a translog function of translog functions is

not translog in general: rather, it will involve terms of the form
lnpilnpjlnPklnPt.
aggregator

which are ruled out by assuming that either the higher-order

or the lower—order aggregates are Cobb-Douglas.

If there are multiple non-sampled goods, then we assume that this set of

varieties (n is weakly separable from the set icl/jn}, and use the scalar n to
denote the aggregate of the non-sampled goods.

If these varieties {n) originally

entered the translog function (6). then the aggregator over them must be Cobb-

Douglas, for the reasons discussed in note 4. Alternatively, we could use any

aggregator over the non-sampled varieties jn}, and then just assume that this
aggregate enters the translog function (6).
6

In both 1982 and 1967, imports from majority-owned U.S. affiliates abroad

accounted for over 80% of the total intra-company imports of u.s. multinationals.
7 Zeile (1993) provides a general description of the merchandise trade of U.S.
affiliates of foreign companies, including both manufacturing and wholesale trade.

6 These data are obtained directly from Brianard (1993). whom the authors thank
ror assistance.

Ideally, it would be desirable to have the same data for the

internal imports of U.S. multinationals, but this was not as readily available.
9 We judged that tobacco products (which is suppressed in Table 2) would have

28

above-average internal imports and it was included in the former group.

10 The BLS will sample multiple products within each 10-digit Harmonized
System category (which has replaced the TSUSA classification since 1989). so in
principle,

Sit denotes

the share within this category.

The TSUSA numbers change very frequently, and for this reason, we ignore the
numbers and use only the TSLJSA names.
12

In an extreme case, there could be no TSLJSA category within a 3-digit SITC

that an interviewed country supplied in continuously. When this happened (which

was infrequent) we replaced the value of (s't/sti) for country k with (skt/skt.1)
before computing (15).
13

If a (linear) time trend is introduced in this equation, its coefficient is

0.002,

which is highly insignificant and reduces the income elasticity to 2.25.

In

contrast, for disaggregate import demand equations, Alterman (1993) argues that
the
14

that

inclusion of

a time trend can significantly reduce the income elasticities.

can be questioned whether using the exact price index in (17) also means
the exact quantity index should be used on the left. We will follow usual

practtce

by using the real imports obtained by deflating nominal imports by the

BLS index, rather than deflating by an exact price index. Note that the issue of

how to construct the quantity variable goes away if the share of imports in total
expenditure ts used on the left, as in Feenstra (1994). for example.
The weights in this geometric mean are the average export values in each 3-

digit SITC industry over the 1970-63 period, or over the 1983-68 period.

16 The data (or these aggregates is reported in the Appendix. Table Al.
1 7 A product ts excluded from the BLS interviews only if the company states
that the Lmport price for that product is not influenced by the market, which
seldom occurs.

29

References
Alterrnan. William (1991) "Price Trends in U.S. Trade: New Data. New Insights,"
in Peter Hooper and J. David Richardson, eds. International Economic
Transactions. NOER Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 55, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 109-139.

Atterman, William (1993) Analgzing Disaggregated U.S. Trade Rows in the
1980s." mimeo.
Brainard, S. LaeL (1993) •An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity—concentration
Tradeoff Between Multinational Sales and Trade," NBER Working Paper no. 4580.
Diewert, W. Erwin (1976) "Exact and SuperLative Index Numbers." Journal of
Econometrics 4. 1975, 115-145.
Feenstra, Robert C. (1994) "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of
International Prices," American Economic Review. 64(1). March, 157-177.

Helkie, William H. and Peter Hooper (1988) "The U.S. External Deficit in the
I 980s: An Empirical Analysis," in R.C. Bryant, 3. Hottham and P. Hooper, eds.,
External Deficits and the Dollar: The Pit and the Pendulum, Washington. D.C.:
The Brookings Institution.
Hooper, Peter (1989) "Exchange Rates and U.S. External Adjustment in the Short
Run and the Long Run," Board of Governors, International Finance Discussion
Paper no. 346, March.
Houthakker, Henrik S. and Stephen P. Magee (1969) "Income and Price Elasticities
in World Trade," The Review of Economics and Statistics 51(2). May. 111-125.

Krugman, Paul (1989) "Differences in Income Elasticities and Trends in Real
Exchange Rates," EuroDean Economic Review 33. 1031-1054.

Reinsdorf, Marshall B. (1993) "The Effect of Outlet Price Differentials on the U.S.
Consumer Price Index," in Murray F. Foss. Marilyn E. Manser and Allan H. Young,
eds., Price Measurements and Their Uses. NBER and University of Chicago Press.
22 7-2 60.

Reinsdorf, Marshall B. and Brent R. Moulton (1994) "The Construction of Basic
Components of Cost or Living Indexes," forthcoming in Timothy Bresnahan and
Robert J. Gordon. eds. The Economics of New Goods. NBER and University of
Chicago Press.

30

Riedel, James (1991) Txport Growth and the Terms of Trade: The Case of the
Curious Elasticities? The Johns Hopkins University. mirneo.
Sato, Kazuo (1976) The Ideal Log-change Index Number. Review of Economics and

Statistics 58, May, 223-228.
Sato. Kazuo (1977) The Demand Function for Industrial Exports? Review of
Economic and Statistics 55, 456-464.
Shiells, Clinton R. (1991) 'Errors in Import-Demand Estimates Based Upon UnitValue lndexes, Review of Economics and Statistics 73(2). May, 378-382.
Vartia. V.0. (1976) ideal Log-change Index Numbers,' Scandinavian Journal of

Statistics 3. 121-126.
Vernon, Raymond (1966) international Investment and Internationat Trade in the
Product Cycle, Quarterlu Journal of Economics. 60. 190-207.

Zeile, William (1993) Merchandise Trade of U.S. Affiliates of Foreign
Companies, Surveu or Current Business, October, 52—65.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, U.S. General lmDorts for ConsumDtion, Schedule A,
FT 135. ComrnadLty by Country, various years. Washington. D.C.: U.S. Department
of Commerce.

Table 1: U.S. Imports by Source Companies and Countries
1982 and 1987, $ Billion
1982
Total U.S. non-petroleum merchandise importsa
Manufactuz-ing imports from nonbank U.S. affiliates abroadb,C

— To nonbank U.S. parents
— from Canada (transportation equipment)

1987

185.7

366.8

31.8

57.3

25.4
13.4 (10.6)

n.a.
n.a.

— from Japan

2.2

n.a.

— from Mexico

1.6

n.a.

2.7

6.7

2.3

n.a.

13.8

24.5

n.a.

17.6

Wholesale trade from nonbank U.S. affiliates abroadb.C

— To nonbank U.S. parents

Manufacturing imports to nonbank foreign affiliates in the U.S4e
— From nonbank foreign parent group
— from Japan

n.a.

3.9

— from Germany

n.a.

3.2

— from Canada

n.a.

2.7

Wholesale trade to nonbank foreign affiliates in the U.S4e

— From nonbank foreign parent group

58.7

107.3

n.a.

85.1

— from Japan (motor vehicles and equipment)

n.a.

53.3 (26.1)

— from Germany (motor vehicles and equipment)

n.a.

11.6 (9.2)

— from Canada (motor vehicles and equipment)

n.a.

2.5 (n.a.)

Sources:

a Economic Report of the President, GPO. 1993.
b U.S. Direct Invesunent Abroad: 1982 Benchmark Survey Data, U.S. Dept. of Commerce,
Bureau of Economic Analysis, GPO.
c

Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr., "U.S. Multinational Companies: Operations in 1988? Survey of
Current Business. June 1990, 31-4.

d Ned G. Howenstine, "U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Companies: Operations in 1983,' Survey of
Current Business. November 1985, 36-50.
e Forei2n Direct Investment in the United States, 1987 Benchmark Survey. Final Results. U.S.
Dept. of Commerce. Bureau of Economic Analysis, GPO.

Table 2: U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Companies:
Internal Manufacturing Imports by Industry, 1989

BEAR

Internal Imports"
(Foul Imports

283

0.46

281

0.28

102

289
353
335
356

0.22
0.20
0.19
0.15
0.15

366

0. 14

284
308
349

0. 12

101

0.11

265

0.11
o. to

202
205

208
291
321

341
120

209
305
343
371

355
384
329
367

140

220
357
379
381

272
331

3M
358
107

262
275
271
342
352
390

0.12
0.12

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.07C

0.07
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.05

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

BEA Industry Definition

Drugs
Industrial chemicals and synthetics
Copper, lead, zinc, gold, silver
Chemical products, nec.
Constniction, mining, and materials handling machinery
Primary meW products, nonferrous
Generaj ndustija machinery
Household audio, video, communications equipment
Soap, cleaners, toilet goods
Miscellaneous plastics products
Metal services; ordnance; fabricated metal products. nec.
Tronore
Other paper and allied products
Dairy products
Bakery products
Beverages
Integrated petroleum refining and extraction
Glass products
Metal cans, forgings, stampings
Coal
Other food and kindred
Rubber products
Heating equipment, plumbing, structural metal products
Motor vehicles and equipment
Special industrial machinery
Medical and ophthalmic insmutents and supplies
Stone, clay, concrete, gypsum, nonmetallic minerals
Electronic components and accessories
Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels
Textile mill products
Computer and office equipment
Aircraft, motorcycles, bikes, spacecraft, railroad
Measuring, scientific, optical instnnnenis
Miscellaneous publishing
Primary metal products, ferrous
Metalworking machinery
Refrigeration and service industry machinery
Other metallic ores
Pulp, paper, board mill products
Commercial printing and services
Newspapers
Cutlery, hardware, screw products

Farmandgardenmac1thezy

Miscellaneous manufacturing

Table 2: Continued
Internal
Internal Imports
BEAR

(rotal Imports

•201

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

230
250
386
010

020
080
090
133

240
287
299
203
204

210
310
351

359
363
369

Average

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
(d)
(d)
(d)C

(d)
(d)
(d)
(ci)

(d)

BEA Industiy Definition
Meat products
Apparel and other textile products
Furniture and fixtures
Photographic equipment and supplies

Crops

Livestock, animal specialties
Forestry
Fishing, hunting, trapping

Crudepetrolextiaction,naturalgas

Lumber and wood products
Agricultural chemicals
Petroleum and coal products, nec.
Preserved fruits and vegetables
Grain mill products
Tobacco products
Leatherand leather products
Engines, turbines
Industrial and commemial machinery, nec.
Household appliances
Electrical machinery. nec.

0.08

Notes:

a

Industry code from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

b

Includes imports by affiliates only from foreign parent group.
Motor vehicles and tobacco products are treated as having above-average internal sales.

c

Source: Brainard (1993).

Table 3: U.S. Import Demand

Relative

Real

Relative
Capacity
Utilization

Relative

-0.030
(0.175)

—

Foreign SHAREA SHAREB

Import
Price

GNP

—1.147

2.491

(0.205)

(0.281)

—0.979

2.154
(0.332)

—0.157

—1.483

(0.216)

(0.186)

(0.942)

-1.231
(0.175)

1.894
(0.475)

-0.016
(0.157)

-

—

—1.149

1.733

—0.105

(0.226)

(0.953)

(0.284)

Rho

Capital
—

—

0.535

0.993

(0.143)
—

—

0.476

0.994

(0.151)
0.662

(0.204)

-1.450
(0.795)

0.478

—0.926

(0.288)

(0.831)

0.312

0.994

(0.165)

0.429
(0.169)

0.991

Notes:

Standard errors are in parentheses.
Dependent variable is the log of the import quantity.

Sample range is 1978:1 to 1988:IV. The coefficients of the relative import price follow a secondorder polynomial with eight quarterly lags; real GNP includes one quarterly lag; and the relative
foreign capital stock is entered as a lagged value.

The third regression uses SHARE IA and SHARE1B, while the fourth regression uses SHARE2A
and SHARE2B; in both cases the instruments for this variable are 1, t2, 0, and the other variables
in the regression. Since the share variables are measured annually, quarterly dummies are included
as instruments, and are also included in the third and fourth regressions above (but not reported).

Table Al; Values of SHARE! and SHARE2 for Aggregate U.S. Imports

Industries with

Industries with
below-average

above-average

internal nnorts a
Year

SHAREIA SHARE2A

internal imnorts 1)

SHARE1B SHARE2B

1978

1.0000

1.0000

1.0000

1.0000

1979

1.0658

1.1241

1.0060

0.9718

1980

1.0559

1.0098

0.9905

0.9451

1981

1.1155

1.0627

0.9923

0.9303

1982

1.1048

1.0393

1.0102

0.9437

1983

1.0760

1.0342

0.9779

0.9321

1984

1.1334

1.1012

0.9556

0.9018

1985

1.0684

1.0297

0.9586

0.8668

1986

1.0697

1.0230

0.9630

0.8429

1987

1.0615

0.9976

0.9261

0.7952

1988

0.9666

0.8803

0.8999

0.7538

a These industries have internal imports greater than 0.08 in Table 2, including motor
vehicle equipment and tobacco products, and excluding petroleum products.

b These industries have internal imports less than 0.08 or supressed in Table 2, excluding
motor vehicle equipment, tobacco products and petroleum products.

Figure 1: Industries with Above—average Intra—company Imports
1.15
1.10
1.05

1.00

0.95
0.90

0.85

78

79

80

81

82

83

I

84

85

SHAREIA

86

87

88

SHARE2AI

Figure 2: Industries with Below—average Intra—coinpany Imports
1.05

1.00

0.95

0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
78

79

80

81

82

83

I

84

85

SHARE1B

86

87

88

SHARE2BI

Figure 3: U.S. Relative Import Price (78.1=100)
110

100

90

80

70

60

I

PiucE

PRICEB

PRICEAB1

