                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PASS-THROUGH OF EXCHANGE
                               RATES AND PURCHASING
                                   POWER PARiTY




                                     Robert C. Feenstra
                                      Jon D. Kendall




                                  Working Paper No. 4842




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1994




The authors thank Ken Froot and Carol Osler for very helpful comments on earlier versions of
this paper, and Andrew Rose and Steve Sheifrin for comments on this draft. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in International Trade and Investment Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Robert C. Feenstra and Jon D. Kendall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4842
                                                                                August 1994


                              PASS-THROUGH OF EXCHANGE
                                RATES AND PURCHASING
                                    POWER PARITY


                                          ABSTRACT


       In this paper we develop and test two hypotheses about purchasing power parity (PPP)

derived from the pricing behavior of profit-maximizing, exporting firms. The first is that changes

in the price of traded goods relative to domestic substitutes, due to partial pass-through of

exchange rates, will affect the PPP relation. The second is that PPP should hold on forward

rather than spot exchange rates, due to hedging by firms. Using quarterly data for the United

States, Canada, France, Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom, we fmd considerable support

for the first but not the second hypothesis.




Robert C. Feenstra                                         Jon D. Kendall
Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
University of California                                   University of Tasmania
Davis, CA 95616                                            G.P.O. Box 252C
and NBER                                                   Hobart, Tasmania 7001
                                                           AUSTRAUA
 1. Introduction
        In this paper we develop and test a model of purchasing power parity (PPP) derived from
 the pricing behavior of profit-maxinuzing, exporting firms. It is well known that exporting firms

 facing a downward sloping demand curve will likely adjust their prices by less than the full change
 in the exchange rate. For example, as their currency appreciates, firms may lower their profit

 margins to absorb part of the exchange rate change, thereby passing through only part of the
appreciation to the importers price. This change in the price of traded goods relative to domestic
substitutes, due to pass-through behavior, should be taken into account when measuring the parity

between prices in the exporting and importing countries. This is the first hypothesis that we shall

investigate.

        The second hypothesis is that parity should hold between the prices in trading partners and

their forward rates of foreign exchange, rather than their spot rates. From covered interest parity,
the difference between the spot and forward rates equals the interest rate differential, so this second

hypothesis implies that PPP equations of spot rates should include the interest rate differential as an

explanatory variable. We will find considerable support for our first hypothesis in explaining

deviations from PPP, but little support for the second hypothesis. One reason for this is that the
interest rate differentials between most countries are stazionazy, or nearly so, so they cannot explain

the nonstationary deviations from PPP. A significant portion of these deviations are, however,
explained by the price of traded goods relative to domestic substitutes.

       There is ample precedent in the literature for both the hypotheses that we test. The idea that
partial pass-through of exchange rates may affect PPP is considered by Froot and Rogoff (1994),
though they devote greater attention to a more common hypothesis: that deviations from PPP will
arise due to the inclusion of nontraded goods in the wholesale or consumer price indexes. The
implication of this hypothesis seems to be that we should correct the aggregate price indexes,

possibly by including the relative price of traded goods as another variable in the PPP relation.
Thus, the correction implied by the mismeasurement of the indexes (due to nontraded goods) is
quite similar to the correction we propose to account for pass-through behavior, and in this sense
the two hypotheses are similar. Nevertheless, we will argue that there are some subtle differences

in the exact manner that these two hypotheses should be tested (see section 3.2).

        The idea that the forward rate determines the price and/or output for exporters is also not

new, and is an example of the "separation theorem" discussed by Ethier (1973), Baron (1976a)
and Eldor and Zilcha (19897). We will derive this result from a model of a risk-averse, exporting
tirrn. that must set the prices for its products before the exchange rate is known. The firm may set
prices in either its own currency, or the currency of the importing country, and will optimally

engage in transactions in the forward market. In either case, we show in section 2 that the optimal

price for the firm is determined by the forward rate, even if only partial covering is optimal.

       The optimal pricing relation for the firm can be estimated as a pass-through equation

between forward rates and product prices, or alternatively, inverted to obtain a PPP relation

between the product prices and the forward rate, as described in section 3. In section 4we

estimate the latter as a cointegrating relation, using quarterly data for the United States, Canada,

France, Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom over 1974.1-1992.1. Applying the method of
Johansen (1991), we find strong evidence of multiple cointegrating relations, so that not all

variables need be included to obtain a stationary relation with the exchange rate. We find that the
cointegrating vectors that include the relative traded goods price have significantly lower residuals,
or smaller deviations from PPP, than the relations that only use the wholesale prices. In contrast,
the interest rate differentials explain very little of the PPP deviations in most cases. Additional
conclusions are given in section 5.


2.   Theory
       Numerous authors have examined the question of the currency in which exporting firms set
their prices. Studies which have examined the optimal choice of invoicing strategy include those
by Baron (1976b) and Giovannjni (1988), with the result that the optimal choice is very sensitive
to properties of the demand function. We shall consider invoicing in either the currency of the

exporter or the importing country.
                                                                                                          3




2.1. Invoicing in the Importing Country's Currency
      In this section we suppose that the firm sets its price in the importing country's currency.

The model we shall use is similar to Feenstra (1989), except that the firm is assumed to be risk
averse. Buying one unit of importers currency requires St units of the exporter's currency on the
spot market, where S is stochastic. Since the exporter must Set its price Pt in period t-l (before
this spot rate is known) the revenues received in its own currency are uncertain. This uncertainty
can be covered by selling in period t- I the amount Yt of the importers currency on the forward
market, at the price of . ,f. The firm will experience a profit (or loss) on these forward contracts
of y(1f1 - s1), which will offset the "translation exposure" from converting sales revenue to its
own currency. The demand for imports is given by x1=x(p,q,I1.), where qt is the (scalar) price of
domestic import-competing goods, and I is consumer income or expenditure.' We assume that
the firm is engaged in Bertrand competition with other firms, so it treats qt as exogenous.

       The exporter maximises expected utility of profits in its own currency:


                   max E1.1 ( U[(s1p     —
                                             c')x(pt, qt,It) + y(j_if — se)] J,            (1)


where E denotes expected value using information available in period t-1; U is the firm's utility
function; and c' denotes marginal and average costs in the foreign currency. We will treat both

costs and consumer income as stochastic, but independent of each other and of the spot rate. The

firm will be forecasting the period t values of these variables using information available in t-l.

The price q is chosen by competing firms in period t-I, using an analogous maximization problem
to (I). This price will be fully determined by information available in period t-1, so we will treat it
as nonstochastic in (1).




i Note that the prices of domestic goods qt could be a vector, but for convenience we shall treat it
as a scalar aggregate. In addition, we assume that this competing good is an imperfect substitute
for the product of the exporting firm.
                                                                                                        4

         Let it = (s1p-c)x(pt,q,I) + y1(1..1f1-s1) denote profits in the exporting country's
currency, inclusive of the gain or loss from the forward transaction. Then U(,t) may be

approximated by a second order Taylor expansion about expected profits as:

                                  U(E1..1t) + U'(Ei.i7t')(7t - E1..1it')

                                 + - U'(E   t)(ic - E1..1it)2.                              (2)


Letting e1 = E11 (s1) denote the expected exchange rate, substituting (2) into equation (1) and using

             E1.1ic) = 0, we obtain:
         -


                                max              + U"(E.tit)var(it) ,                       (3)
                                PtYt

where.                      =                                + yt(tift-et)                (4a)

and,                               var(7t') = a(p1E..ix1 -yt)2.                           (4b)

       Assuming that U"(E11ic) is constant2 and taking the first-order condition of(3) with

respect to y1 results in:

                                Yt =         +   ptEtix(p1,q1,I),                           (5)
                                       Ra
where Ru -[U "(E11ir)/U (E..it)] is the Arrow-Pratt measure of absolute risk-aversion.
From (5), the optimal forward contract is decomposed into two terms: the first is a "speculative"
purchase (or sale) that reflects the difference between the forward and expected future spot rate;
while the second term is the sales revenue that the firm needs to convert to its own currency. If

11f <e1, indicating that the exporter expects an appreciation of the importer's currency relative to

the current forward rate, then the optimal speculative position is to buy forward contracts, so in
that case the firm will not sell forward enough of the importer's currency to convert its total Sales



2 Thus, our analysis is exact for a quadratic utility function U.
                                                                                                          5

 revenue. The speculative purchase or sale is also affected by the firms attitude towar(i risk, as

 indicated by R. The relation between the (onward and expected future spot rate is determined in

general equilibrium (as in Hodnck, 1989, for example), and is related to the risk premium in the

foreign exchange market. We will simply accept these rates as exogenous to the firm.
         Before determining the optimal price Pt. it is useful to substitute (5) back into (4b) and
rewrite the variance of profits as:


                                  var(t) = (tiftt)2                                         (6)


This expression indicates that the uncertainty in profits is related solely to the speculative purchase

or sale of forward contracts. Substituting (6) and the optimal choice for Yt in (5) into (3), the
objective function can be rewritten as:



            max U('(etpt_EtIc*t)Etlxt + (c.ift-et)Et.ixt +                (tift1)2
             Pt                                                            RuO
                                 + - U"(Eit) "' f-c'2
                                      2
                                                  (       (F
                                                                                            (7)
                                                      RX

Treating U"(E1 it) as fixed, the coefficient of absolute risk-aversion R will still vaiy with

changes in p. However, working out the algebra shows that the derivatives of L with respect to
Pt - in the two places where it appears in (7) - cancel each other out. Thus, the only terms that

matter are the first terms that appear in (7), which are simplified as:



         (e1pt-E.ic')E.ix + (t.if1-et)ptEt_ixt = G.iftpt - Et_ic')Et_ixt.

In other words, the firm will seek to maximize profits evaluated at the hypothetical own-cunency
price obtained at the forward exchange rate.
                                                                                                        6

          Letting -rh aln(E11 X)/alfl denote the elasticity of demand, the first-order condition
for (7) is simply:

                                                   £ c*
                                  Pc(1 - —)= ( 11f1')                                     (8)



 This is a conventional monopolistic pricing formula, with the exporters marginal costs E..i c"

converted to the importing country's currency using the forward rate         Thus, even when the
revenue received from export sales is only partially covered by forward contracts, it is the forward
rate that determines the optimal price. This is an illustration of the "separation theorem" discussed

by Ethier (1973), Baron (1976a) and Eldor and Zilcha (1987). We next examine whether this
same result holds with invoicing in the exporter's own currency.



2.2. Invoicing in the Exporting Country's Currency
        The maximization problem confronting an exporting firm which sets price in its own
currency is similar to that above, except that now profit is maximized by choosing p and yt:


                         max U(Eti,t) + - U"(Etit)var(,t),                                (9)
                         p;,yt
where      = (p-c')x(p/st, q, I) + yt(if1-s) again denotes profits in the exporting

country's currency, and P/t is the random price in the importing country. As before, the firm

sets price before the exchange rate is known but, unlike the case where the exporter sets puce in

the domestic currency, revenues are uncertain due to random fluctuations in import price and
demand. This means that the terms Et..12t and var(t) take on the form


                             (p - E11c')E11x1 + y(if — e1),
                             =                                                        (iOa)

           var(it') = (p-Et..Ic")var(xt) + ya - 2yt(p'-Et.ic")cov(x,,s,).              (lOb)
                                                                                                            7

    Treating U(E1. it) as constant, the first-order condition for (9) with respect to Yt is:


                        Yt   =           +                                                  (11)
                                 Rua                     [       a       j

Thus, the desirability of forward covering depends on both the relation between the forward and
expected future spot rate - which is the same speculative effect obtained in (5) - and on the

covariance between the future spot rate and product demand. The latter term enters because

changes in the exchange rate will affect the product price in the importer's currency, and therefore

product demand, and the exporter will want to hedge against this "operating exposure." A
depreciation of the importer's currency lowers the spot rate s, which raises the price Pt=p/t. and

and lowers expected demand and profits. It follows that Cov(Xt,St)>O, so the firm will hedge by

selling forward contracts in the importer's currency. Then a depreciation of that currency results in
greater profits earned on the forward contract, which offset the loss in profits on its reduced saks.

         Substituting (II) back into (lob), we can rewrite the variance of profits as:


                     var(t =         (11f1-e1)2 +
                                         22
                                                    (pEic')2 1V11 ,                        (12a)
                                                             2



where,                                              cov(xt,sc)1      .                    (12b)
                                 v1=[cov(xt,st)     var(xt) J


The first term on the right of (I 2a) reflects the uncertainly in profits due to the speculative purchase

or sale of forward contracts. The second term depends on 1V11, which reflects the correlation

between the changes in the spot rate and product demand, since:


                             IVI=a 2var(xt)I11 - COV(Xt,St)2
                                     S


                                            ,,    a5var(xt)
                                                                                                           8

The magnitude of this term depends on the functional form of demand, as the following example

makes clear.

        Let the demand function be given by:


                          x(p,q,l) =           -           cx43>0                           (13)


This functional form, while not familiar, has very conventional properties:

(a) Decreasing function in own price, Xp <0;
(b) Increasing in the price of the domestic import-competing good, xq > 0;
(c) If the price of imported good is sufficiently higher than domestic good, then demand for

imported good will be zero: x1 >0 only for Pt < q1(a/3).
Substituting Pt=p'/t into (13), and keeping p fixed, it is immediate that changes in demand are

perfectly correlated with changes in the spot rate St. In this case, the firm can entirely eliminate the
uncertainty in its profits by selling foward contracts in the importe?s currency. Formally, it is
readily verified that for the demand function (13), 1V11=O.

        More generally, we would expect that for other functional forms of demand, the firm

would still be able to eliminate the uncertainty in its profits arising from fluctuating price and

demand if it had available a complete set of put and call options on the foreign currency. Then for

any possible change in the spot rate, the exporter could calculate the corresponding change in
expected demand and profits, and make the appropriate forward sale to offset the fluctuation in

profits. In that case, the remaining variation in profits would consist of only the first term in (12a),
reflecting the speculative holding of forward contracts. Thus, while we will focus on the special
case of the demand function in (13), we expect that similar results would hold for more general
demand functions, with a complete set of exchange rate options.

       Using lVi=0 in (12a), computing cov(xt,st) from (13) and using this in (11) and (lOa), the
objective function (7) can be rewritten as:
                                                                                                      9

            max U((p-Et.ic)(Et.iXt +            (tift-et))
                                                       Pt )
                                                            +
             p*

                               +             . (tif-et)2
                                   2 ' Lt.ilt1,                                            (14)
                                                  R
                                                    22



 Again, the coefficient of absolute risk-aversion R will vary with changes in p, but the
derivatives of R with respect to p in the two places where it appears in (14) cancel each other

out. Thus, the only terms that matter are the first terms that appear in (14), which are simplified

using (13) as:


          (p-E1 c*)[Etlxt + (tift-et)a(Iti/p)1
          = (p-E1ic)[a(if1/p)



In other words, the firm will seek to maximize profits evaluated at the hypothetical import price
obtained at the forward exchange rate.

       Letting TI '                                         denote the elasticity evaluated at this

forward rate, the first-order condition for p is simply:

                                         -        E..ic'1   .                              (15)



Notice the similarity with equation (8) for the exporter invoicing in the domestic currency. Again.

a conventional monopolistic pricing formula is obtained, but with the forward exchange rate in the

elasticity to compute a hypothetical price in the importer's currency. l'his foward rate is used

despite the fact that the firm may be only partially covering its operating exposure.
                                                                                                          10

3. Empirical Model
3.1 Functional Form
        In order to convert (8) and (15) into equations that canbe estimated, it is very convenient to

again use the demand function (13). This function implies a log-linear relationship between the
chosen price arid its determining variables. For the case where the exporter invoices in the
importer's currency and its own currency, respectively, we obtain:

                       lnp = lo + y1(lnE11c' - lntjf) + (1-)lnq1,                          (8')

and,                   lnp= 'yo + yjE1..1Inc' + (1-yi)(lnq1 + tnt_ift),                   (15')

where   y= - ln(aJ) and yi=l/2. An appreciation of the exporter's currency in the forward market
will lower      raise the price of that product in the importer's currency in (8'), and lower the price

received by the exporter in (15'). Both the log-linear form of these expressions, and the
coefficients ofy1=l/2, follow from the special form of demand in(11). For more general demand

functions we can still obtain a log-linear form for these pass-through equations, but with other
values for         as we shall allow. In general, the pass-through equations must be

homogeneous of degree one in the right-hand side variables, so the coefficients sum to unity as
shown above.3

        Pass-through equations of the form (8') or (15') have been recently estimated on

disaggregate data (e.g. Knetter, 1989, 1993; Feenstra, 1989; Marston, 1990), though using the
spot rather than forward rate. The variables in these equations axe sometimes found to be
coin regrated, meaning that (some or all) of the variables are integrated of order one, 1(1), but a

linear combination is found to be stationary, or 1(0). This will be the case for the equations
estimated in this paper. Then without loss of generality, the coefficient of any variable can be
normalized at unity, and it can be treated as the "dependent" variable for expositional puposes. We



  The existence of demand function yielding log-linear pass-through equation is discussed in
Feenstra (1989), where the homogeneity properties are also established.
                                                                                                            II
will find it convenient to invert the pass-through equations to obtain a purchasing power parity

(PPP) fomulation.

         Considering first the case where the exporter invoices in the importing country's currency.
we can move the forward rate to the left of (8') to obtain:


                      lnt..ift =          (Elnc" - inq) - (.)(In - lnqt)     .               (16)
                                   (Q)+

This is interpreted as a PPP equation applied to the forward rate. The variable (E..iLnc' - Inqi)

equals the exporter's costs relative to competing prices in the importing countiy, and its coefficient
of unity accords with the conventional PPP equation: an increase in relative prices of the exporting

country will depreciate its exchange rate, or raise         The variable (lnp - lnq.) is the import price
relative to the domestic price, and it while it does not normally appear in a PPP equation, our

derivation from the optimal pricing behaviour of the exporting firm shows that this variable is
relevant. The coefficient of this relative import price equals the inverse of the pass-through
elasticity in (8').
        To express (16) in terms of the sport rate, we can use the covered interest parity condition:

                             - inst_i =
                                          in[(I+iT_1)/(1+i_i)] ( i_1 - i_1) •                (17)


where i1 (i ) denotes the period t-1 nominal interest rate in the exporting (importing) country.

Substituting this into (16), and combining variables, we obtain:


              lnsi = ()+ (E.ilnc - inq) -         -     +
                                          (—)(lnpt inqi) ( i.1-i'j).                         (18)


Thus, the PPP equation for the spot exchange rate includes the interest rate differential as an

explanatory variable, with a coefficient of unity.
        To estimate (18), we need to determine the forecasted value Elnc'. We will assume that
inc' is integrated of order one, 1(1), and verify that this property holds empirically. This means
                                                                                                         12

that lnc =            +c, where Li is a stationary variable. It is quite possible that
E1        be autocorrelated and depend on    lagged differences of 1nc, which are observable in period
c- 1. However, E1.1(E1) will be stationary in general. Thus, we can replaceEcilnc'         by lnc'1,
and add a stationary error onto the right of (18). We will also assume that lnp1 and lnq1 in (18) are
1(1). while verifying that this property holds empirically. This allows us to replace these variables
by their lagged values in (18), and add other stationary errors onto the right. Then updating the
subscript on all variables from i-Ito t yields:


                 Ins1 =   () + (lnc' - lnq) - (—)(lnp - lnq1) + ( i1-i') + U1.              (18')


We expect that the spot exchange rate in also 1(1), but the error u1 is stationary by construction;

thus, (18') represents a cointegrating relation between the spot rate and the various prices. We will

find that the interest differential is stationary, or nearly so, for most countries.

          We next compare the results in (18) to those obtained when the exporting firm prices in its

own currency. Moving the forward rate onto the left of (15'), and using the covered interest parity
condition (17), we obtain:


            lns11 =         + (E11lnc'-lnq1)      + j-j (lnp'- Eilnc') + ( i1-it1).         (19)



This equation differs from (18) in that the exporter's price relative to marginal Cost appears on the

right, rather than the relative import price. Otherwise, (18) and (19) are the same in that the
variable (E1..1lnc-lnq1), and the interest rate differential, still appear with coefficients of unity.

We can write (19) in a stochastic form by replacing Elnc by lnc'1 plus a random error, and

similarly replacing lnp1 and lnq1 by their lagged values pus errors, to obtain:




     For example, if lnc' follows that time series process lnc=lnc 1+E1 with £tPEt..1+Ut, and u1
uncorrelated over time, then E l(lnc)=lnc'1 +E1.. j(e.1)=lnc 1+p(lnc -
                                                                                                       13

              Ins1 =          + (lnc'-lnq) +            (lnp- lnc') + ( i1-i') + V1.      (19')



        While (18) and (19') provide us with estimating equations when the exporter sets prices in
the importer's currency, and its own currency, respectively, the price indexes available in
aggregate data would always be a combination of these two cases. To see how this affects the
estimation, suppose that a fraction of products are priced in the importer's currency , using

(18'), and the remaining (l-X) are priced in the exporter's currency using (19'). The import price
index Pt is constructed as:

                                 lnP1 ?1np + (1-A)(Inp - ins1),                            (20a)

where Pt is the nonstochastic price chosen by the exporter in the importing country's currency,
whereas (Inp - Ins1) is the stochastic price of those imports whose price is set in the exporter's

currency. Similarly, the export price index is constructed as:


                                lnP X(lnp1 + Ins1) + (1-X)lnp'       ,                    (20b)


where (lnp1 + lns) is (he stochastic price received by the exporter on the fraction ? of products,
while Inp is nonstochastic.

        Summing Xy1 times (18') and -(l-y)(1-.) times (19'), and using (20), the following
relation between the spot rate, prices and interest differential is obtained:


               Ins1 =
                        (X+y1.l)
                                   + (Inc'-1nq1) + (   jj
                              [A,(lnP1-lnq   1-?)(1nP'- lnc')]                w,           (21)



where w1=[Xy1u1-(1-)(1-y1)v1J, and                     is assumed. Thus, the spot rate depends on a

weighted average of the relative import and export price indexes, which we shall refer to as the
"relative traded goods price." The weights used reflect the proportion of traded goods prices in the
                                                                                                           '4
importers and exporters currency, respectively. Note that this proportion X also affects the

coefficient of the average traded goods price, in a nonlinear fashion. In particular, when X=1 we

obtain the coefficient on the relative import price in (18'), and when X=O we obtain the coefficient

on the relative export price in (19').



3.2   Data and Identification
           We will consider the PPP relation between the U.S. and five major trading partners -

Canada. the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Japan and the United Kingdom (U.K.).

Aggregate quarterly data from 1974:1 to 1992:1 comprise the sample period (see the Appendix for

sources). Variables of equation (21) for the five countries are as follows. The dependent variable

(Ins1) is the average quarterly spot rate of foreign currency per U.S. dollar. Period averages seem

more reasonable than using end-of-quarter figures since exporters ship goods throughout the
period. For the foreign marginal costs (lnc') and the U.S. domestic price (lnq) we use the

wholesale price indices (WPI) of these countries.5

           The US import price variable (lnP1) is a Divisia index which excludesthe following

categories f imports: (1) food, feeds, and beverages; (2) petroleum products; and (3)

automobiles. These sectors were omitted because they did not conform to the imperfectly

competitive model of section 2 (as with food), due to cartel behavior (as with oil), or due to import

quotas (as with autos). As a rough approximation, one finds that the combined importance of the

excluded goods account for an average 45% of total US imports, leaving 55% to be explained by

the model. The export price indexes of the foreign countries (lnP') is the aggregate export price

index reported by these countries. The last variable of equation (21) is the interest rate differential,

which was the difference between the 90-day interest rate for the U.S. and foreign countries.6




  The whoa1e prices are preferred to consumer prices to the extent that the former exclude
nontraded services. For France the WPI was not available, so we used the consumer price index
instead.
6 For France the 90-day rate was not available, so an overnight rate was used instead.
                                                                                                          15

       Note that there is one respect in which our data do not closely correspond to the theoretical

model of section 2, and that is in the use of the U.S. multilateral import price index, and foreign

multilateral export indexes, which include trade to and from all trading partners. This contrasts

with the theoretical price indexes n (20), which are the bilateralprice indexes between the

importing and exporting country. Since bilateral indexes between the U.S. and its trading partners

are not generally available, the multilateral indexes are used instead. For Canadian trade with the

U.S., however, we felt that the multilateral U.S. import index would be a particularly poor

measure of bilateral prices, because the three omitted sectors (along with forestry products) are

among the largest Canadian export products. As an alternative, we rely on the fact the the U.S. is

the principal destination market for Canadian exports. The multilateral Canadian export price index

(lnP) is available, and then a measure of the U.S. import prices from Canada is constructed by

simply converting this index to U.S. dollars using the (period average) spot rate. That is, for

Canadian-US. trade we construct the U.S. import index lnP1 from the Canadian export index lnP

using the identity:

                                      lnP1 lnP - lnst,                                    (22)


which follows directly from (20). This identity has implications for the identification of the

coefficients in (21), as we shall discuss below.

        Data on the currency of invoice for exports is taken from Page (1981, Table 1). For the

years 1979 or 1980. she lists the following percentages of total country exports that are invoiced in

the countrys own currency:7 Canada. 15%; France, 62.4%; Germany, 82.3%; Japan, 32.7%;

United Kingdom. 76%. For total United States imports, 85% are invoiced in dollars. These

percentages correspond to (1 -X) and X in our theoretical model, or the fraction of trade priced in the

exporter's and importers's currency, respectively. Comparing Canada and the U.S., these

percentage of trade invoiced in each country's currency happen to sum to unity, but this does not




  The figure for Canada is an estimate.
                                                                                                      16

hold in the ocher cases because the pecentages are for multialteral trade. In order    scale these
percentages so that they sum to unity, we simply divide by their sum, obtaining:

                   Canada              (l-X)=O.15

                   France              (I -X)=O.624/(O.624+O.85)=0.42

                   Germany             (l-A.)=O.823/(O.823-i-O.85)=O.49                    (23)

                   Japan               (1 -A.)=O.327/(O.327+O.85)=O.28.

                   U K.                (1 -A)0.76O/(O.76O-s-O.85)=O.47


        With these values for A., the average traded goods price [X(lnP-lnq}+-(l-A.)(lnP'- lnc)]

that appears in (21) is computed. These values of A. should be regarded a estimates, however, and

it will be important to determine how sensitive our results are to other choices.8 To determine the

sensitivity to the estimating equation to the percentages used for invoicing currencies, let A.

continue to represent the true percentage invoiced in the importers currency, as in (20). However,

suppose that the relative traded goods price is constructed using the weight A.' as:


       (A.'(lnP1-lnq1)+(l-X')(lnP- lnc')] =
                    (A. - A.' )   (Ins-lnq-lnc') + A.(lnpt-lnq1)+( I -X)(lnp'- lnc),       (24)

where the equality follows from (20). Then again summing Xyl times (18') and -(l-y1)(l-A.) times

(19'). and making use of (24), we obtain:


          Ins1 =
                   (X'+y1. >
                                  + (lnc'-Inq1) + (:) i-i')
              -
                   x'4i           [A.'(lnPt_lnqc)+(1_X')(InP_ lnc')] + (.+.11)wt.          (25)


8
    For example, using bilateral data for a sample of products in 1973, Magee (1974, Table 2)
finds that 28% of Japanese exports to the U.S. are invoiced in yen, which is the same figure that
we calculate in (23). However, he also finds that between 60% or 81% (depending on the
calculation) of German exports to the U.S. are invoiced in marks, which is higher than in (23).
Grassman (1973,1976) provides evidence on the currency of invoice for exports from Sweden and
Denmark.
                                                                                                                17



          Comparing (21) and (25) it is evident that rnispecification of the weight X - using X' instead

-   will affect the coefficient of the interest rate differential and the relative traded goods price, though
the coefficient of the relative wholesale prices (lnc'-1nq) is not affected. Another way of stating

this result is that the coefficients of (21) are not identified without knowledge of ?, so that we

could not estimate this parameter along with the other coefficients. The reason for this
identification problem is that the ratio of the bilateral export and import prices is exactly equal to the

spot rate, or Inst lnP - lnP1 as in (22). Adding any multiple of this identity to (21), we obtain
other linear combinations of the variables that would have the same residuals, and in this sense,

explain the data equally well. We expect this identification problem to be most severe on the

Canadian-U.S. data, where the identity (22) holds by construction. However, even for the

multilateral indexes used for other countries the relation (22) holds approximately, so that it may
still be difficult to identify X. We will avoid this identification problem by using the data in (23)

for ?., but will also experiment with other values in our sensitivity analysis.

          The identity (22) also has implications for testing the comon hypothesis that the wholesale

prices are mismeasured due to the inclusion of nontraded goods. Rewriting (22), we obtain;

                         Inst (lnc-lnqt) - (lnPt-lnq1) + (lnP- 1nc) .                        (22')

This can be interpreted as saying that the PPP equation defined over wholesale prices should be
corrected by including the relative import and export prices, in which case PPP holds by

construction when the bilateral price indexes are used. Note that them is an important difference

between (22') and our specification (21) or (25), in that the relative traded goods prices appear
with opposite sign in (22'), but with the same sign in (21) or (25), for OX1. This means that the

when estimating (21) or (25), there is no possibility of simply obtaining the identity (22').
Evidently, if one wanted to test whether deviations from PPP were caused by the mismeasurement
of the wholesale prices (due to the inclusion of nontraded goods), a hypothesis that does not

simply yield an identity like (22') would need to be developed.
                                                                                                            IS

4.       Estimation
4. 1. Testing for Unit Roots
         The first task in estimation is to determine whether the variables are stationary or not.

We use the augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test, under which the null hypothesis is that the
variable has a unit root (Dickey and Fuller, 1991). This hypothesis is tested by regressing the

difference of a variable on a constant, its own lagged value, lagged differences, and possibly a time
trend.9 Under the null hypothesis. the coefficient of the lagged value should be insignificantly
different from zero. The ADF test statistic is just the ratio of the coefficient to its standard error

(though this does not have the conventional t-distribution). These test statistics are reported in
Table I, where the first row for each variable tests the null hypothesis of a unit root in the level,

and   the second row tests the null hypothesis of a unit root in theflrs:-d(fference. We also included

a time trend in the test when its coefficient was significant at the 10% level, as indicated by "t" in

the cable.

         Looking first at the results for the spot exchange rates (relative to the dollar), we cannot
reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in the levels, but do reject the hypothesis of a unit root in
the first-differences. As expected, we conclude that these spot rates are 1(1). The wholesale price
indexes are also found to be 1(1) for Canada, Germany and Japan. For France, where the CPI is
used, we cannot reject the hypothesis of a unit root in either the levels or first-differences so it

appears that this variable is 1(2). 10 The economic interpretation is that the inflation rates for France

appears to have a unit root, which is surprising. For Britian, we find that the wholesale price

index is stationary. For the U.S. WPI (not shown in Table 1), the ADF test statistic is -1.48 for

the level, and -2.82 for the first-difference, so we conclude this variable is 1(1).
         Turning to the relative traded goods price, [X(lnP1-lnq1)+(l-X)(lnP- lnc')], we conclude

that this variable has a unit root for all countries except Canada, though in that case we might find


  We included three quarterly lags of the differences, which were sufficient to eliminate serial
correlation in the errors, except for the Canada WPI where four lags were used.
10 The hypothesis that the second-difference has a unit root is strongly rejected. Using monthly
data, Pippenger (1993) also finds evidence that the WPI of some countries are 1(2).
the same result at a significance level weaker than 10%. In contrast, the interest rate differential is

found to be stationary for Canada and France, and possibly also for Japan and the U.K. at a
weaker significance level. The interest rate differential between Germany and the U.S. stands Out

as failing to reject a unit root in the levels, but soundly rejecting a unit root in the first differences,
so that it is 1(1). Summing up, most variables in (21) are found to have a unit-root, except for the
interest differential which is stationary for some countries. Aside from the French CPI, we
therefore need to allow for both 1(0) and 1(1) variables in the estimation.



4.2. Estimation of Cointegrating Relations
        The parameters of (21) are estimated using the method of Johansen (1991), which imbeds

this cointegrating relation within a vector-autoregression (VAR) system of all five variables,

denoted by the column vector X [1ns, 1nc', lnq1, ( i-i), X(InP1-Inq)+(1-A.)(1nP- lnc')]'.
The VAR specifies that the difference of each variable depends on a constant, lagged differences,

and lagged cointegration relations that are linear combinations of the five variables:

                                        K              N
                              = l.t +              +                + Et,                      (26)
                                        k=I            iI
where .i is a (5x I) vector of constants, K is the number of lagged differences, Ok is a (5x5) matrix

of estimated coefficients for each lag k, N in the number of cointegrating relations, and ai and i
are (5x 1) vectors of estimated coefficients. In particular, j is the cointegrating vector such that
the cointegrating relation         is stationary. The cointegrating relation can be interpeted as an

error-correction term, which adjusts the change in each variable in the VAR according to thc error

from the long-run equilibrium. It is quite possible that there are nzu1flp1e cointegrating relations,
which we have indexed by i. Johansen (1991) derives the maximum likelihood estimates of
coefficients in (26), and shows how to test for the number of cointegrating vectors j. In

comparison with single-equation method for estimating cointegrating vectors, such as Engel and
Granger (1987), the Johansen method is thought to be more powerful by using the full VAR
                                                                                                          20

system. and also has the advantage that the standard errors of the cointegrating vector(s) are

normally distributed.

        We first check for the number of cointegrating vectors. With five variables in our system,

the maximum number of cointegrating vectors obtained from the estimation is also five. By

construction, these vectors are independent. Since any linear combination of the cointegrating

relations is also stationary, finding five such relations would mean that all of the variables in the

system are stationary. We have already found that this is not the case for the unit root tests. A

reduction in the number of cointegrating vectors is tested by a likelihood ratio test, where the null

hypothesis is that the number is at most N. In Table 2 we report the results of these likelihood

ratio tests for each value of N) I

            The results in Table 2 show that we cannot reject the hypothesis that the number of

cointegrating vectors is at most 3 for France and Germany, but do reject the hypothesis that the

number is two or less. Thus, for these countries we conclude that there are three cointegrating

relations. For Canada we find two such relations at the 5% level, though it is quite likely that at the

10% level we would conclude there are three cointegrating vectors. For Japan and the U.K. we

find evidence of four cointegrating vectors at the 5% level, though minor changes in the VAR for

Japan results in a smaller number of such relations.12 While there is obviously some difference

across the countries, we will proceed by treating the number of cointegrating relations in each case

as three.

        Johansen and Juselius (1990) suggest that the first cointegrating vector - which is

associated with a certain maximum eigcnvalue - is of special significance in that it is the "most




' All empirical results in this section were computed on Econometric Views version 1.0, which
also provides the critical values for Table 1. For all countries, three quarterly lags of the
differenced variables were included, along with a constant term in each cointegrating relation, but
not in the VAR system.
I 2 The system (26) was estimated both with and without a constant term in the VAR, and the
Schwartz criterion indicated that the constant was generally not needed. For Japan, the Schaztz
craenon was ambiguous, and if the constant term is instead included then the number of
cointegrating vectors is reduced to two. This occurs because of a change in the critical values for
the LR test, with minimal change to the cointegration estimates.
                                                                                                            21
correlated with the stationary part of the model" (p. 192). For all live countries, we find that the

first cointegrating vector provides quite reasonable estimates of equation (21). In the first row for
each country in Table 3 we report this cointegrating vector, where we have normalized the

coefficient of the spo rate at unity, arid expressed the other coefficients as appearing on the right-
hand side of (21).

        The spot rates are measured as each country's currency per U.S. dollar, so the expected
coefficients on the wholesesale prices are unity for the country's own WPI, and negative one on
the U.S. WPI. The expected signs are obtained in most cases, but the magnitudes of the

coefficients differ considerably from unity. The coefficient of the relative tradede goods price can

be of either sign, and is highly significant for all countries. The interest rate differential is

measured as the U.S. relative to the foreign country's rate, and has a predicted coefficient of unity.
A point estimate of this magnitude is obtained for Japan, and a larger and highly significant
estimate is obtained for Germany, but for the other three countries the estimates obtained are

insignificantly different from zero. Thus, the relative trade goods price appears to be an important
determinant of the exchange rates in the PPP equation, but this result is not generally obtained for
the interest rate differentials.

        For all countries except Germany, the second unnormalized cointegrating vector (not
reported in Table 3) has its largest coefficient on the interest rate differential, and smallest

coefficient on the spot exchange rate, where these differ by at least ten times. This result is not
surprising since, for most countries, the results in Table 1 showed that interest rate differential

was stationary, or nearly so. For the purposes of this paper, this second cointegrating vector is not
of special interest in itself, but by taking a linear combination of the first and second vectors we can
solve for a cointegrating relation with a zero coefficient on the interest rate differential. This vector
is shown in the second row for each country (except Germany), again normalized as in (21).
        If we continue with this method, a third cointegrating relation can be obtained by using a

linear combination of the three estimated vectors, to obtain zero coefficients on the interest rate

differential and the relative traded goods price. This results is a stationary relation between the spot
rate and the foreign and U.S. WPI. Cheung and Lai (1993) have found that a stationary relation of
this type holds for a number of countries, and we obtain reasonable estimates for Canada, France

and Japan, which are reported in the third row for these countries.

        For Germany. the same exercise of eliminating the interest rate differential leads to

nonsensical results: the cointegrating vector obtained has coefficients of about 50 on the German

WPI and -25 on the U.S. WP!, with a very small coefficient on the relative traded goods price. If
we use these coefficients to measure the residual in equation (21), these deviations from PPP are
much greater than the fluctuations in the mark/dollar rate itself. The same result is obtained if we

consider eliminating the relative traded goods price instead. Thus, while the cointegraiing relation

obtained by eliminating the interest rate differential (or relative traded goods price) is in principle

stationary, the results obtained in this case are not meaningful.
        To obtain a second cointegrating vector for Germany, we make use of the fact that the

coefficients on the German and U.S. WPI in Table 3 are quite similar, but with opposite sign.
Thus, we consider imposing the "symmetry' restriction that these variables have the same
coefficient (with opposite sign) in the PPP equation. We use a linear combination of the first two
estimated vectors to obtain such a cointegrating relation, which is reported in the second row for
Germany. We see that the resulting coefficient of the WPI is 1.26, with a standard error of 0.17,
so it is insignificantly different from unity. A third cointegrating vector is then obtained by using a
linear combination of the three estimated vectors, to obtain a relation where the WPI have

coefficients of I and -1.
        Finally, for the U.K. the second vector reported in Table 3 was obtained by eliminating the
interest rate differential, but also eliminating the relative traded goods price leads to results that are

not meaningful: the resulting deviations from PPP, measured by the residual in (21), are larger
than the fluctuations in the pound/dollar rate. Instead, to obtain a third cointegrating vector we
again impose the "symmetry" restriction, and take a linear combination of the three estimated

vectors to obtain a zero coefficient on the interest rate differential and equal coefficients (with

opposite sign) on the wholesale prices. l'his cointegrating relation is reported in the third row for
                                                                                                          23
the U.K. The fourth row for both the U.K. and Germany is an OLS regression of the spot rate on
the wholesale prices, which is discussed below.
        Summing up, the first row of estimates in Table 5 is the first cointegrating vector, while the

second the third rows of estimates are obtained as linear combinations of the three estimated

vectors)3 The developed theory on cointegration offers little guidance on how to interpret
multiple vectors. The particular linear combinations we have chosen appear to be meaningful in
terms of the economic interpretation, and the coefficient values obtained. It is noteworthy that the
estimates in each cointegrating vector are consistent even as variables are omitted, because the

omitted linear combinations of variables are stationary.

        To obtain additional insight into the cointegrating relations, we substitute the coefficients

from Table 3 into (21) to calculate the residuals, which measure the deviations from PPP. These

deviations are shown in Figures 1-5. In each Figure, the bold line shows the deviations from PPP
as measured using only the data on the spot rate and wholesale prices. Thus, for Canada, France
and Japan, the bold line - labelled "PPP3" - is the residual from the third cointegrafing vector

reported in Table 3. In contrast, for Britian and Germany we did not report a cointegrating vector
between just the spot rate and wholesale prices, and instead use the residual from an OLS
regression between these variables (also shown in Table 3) to calculate the bold lines labelled
"PPPO." In Table 3 we also report the standard deviations of these calculated residuals.
       The dashed lines labelled PPPi in each figure are the residuals calculated from the i'th

cointegrating vector reported in Table 3. In all cases, these dashed lines show less variation than

the bold lines, and have lower standard deviations, as reported in Table 3. In addition, the dashed
lines are quite close. The similarity of PPP1 and PPP2 indicates that the interest rate differential is

not important in explaining deviations from PPP (except possibly for Germany). For all countries,


1) The standard errors reported in Table 3 are provided by Econometric Views, but should be
interpreted with caution. In particular, the standard errors on the Nth cointegrating vector in Table
3 (N= 1.2,3) are computed under the hypothesis that there are only N cointegrating vectors in the
system, whereas the correct standard errors would be computed under the assumption that there are
3 cointegrating vectors. The authors are presently in communication with David Lilean to revise
the presentation of the output in EViews, so that the desired standard errors can be obtamed.
                                                                                                             24

it is the relative traded goods price that is primarily responsible for explaining the deviation from
PPP. By comparing the standard deviation of PPPO or PPP3 with that of PPP1 or PPP2 in Table

3. we see that about one-half of the deviations from PPP is explained by the relative traded goods

price for Japan and the U.K.. and nearly two-thirds for Canada and Germany. In contrast, for
France less than one-quarter of the deviations from PPP is explained.
       The final column of Table 3 reports the log likelihood value for the 5-equation system in

(26). obtained under the hypothesis of 3 cointegrating vectors. These likelihood values will serve
as a benchmark as we consider alternative values of A..



4.3.   Sensitivity of Results
        In section 3.2, we argued that there was a problem in identifying the parameter A.. which

we avoided by using data on the currency of invoice for exports from the various countries. The

source of this identification problem was the identity (22), stating that the ratio of the bilateral price

indexes equals the spot exchange rate. Summing any multiple of this identity and the estimating

equation (21), we obtain an alternative estimating equation with different coefficient values, but the
same residuals. A particular example of this is provided by (25), which shows how the coefficient

values are affected when an incorrect value of A. (denoted by A.') is used. We expect this

identification problem to be most severe on our Canadian-U.S. data, because the identity (22)

holds for these Canadian export and U.S. import price indexes by construction. For the other

countries, multilateral price indexes were usedand these satisfy (22) only approximately.

        In Table 4, we report the results from estimating the cointegrating vectors with alternative

values of X. Only the first cointegrating vector is reported, along with the standard deviation of the

residuals from that vector, and the log likelihood of the system (26). For Canada, the results are in

arcordance with our discussion of the identification problem. Namely, thelog likelihood for the

system is constant for alternative values of A., though the coefficient values (and the residuals

obtained) vazy somewhat. The use of bilateral export and import price indexes in this case means
that alternative vales of A. cannot be distinguished by the data.
                                                                                                          25
        Jumping over the results for France, the results for the other three countries suggest that the
use of multilateral indexes allows A. to be identified. For all three countries, the likelihood values

obtain an interior maximum in the range A.€ (0,1). For Japan and the United Kingdom, the

likelihood value obtained for the A. value in Table 3 is higher than for any of the alternative values

in Table 4. Thus, for these two countries the currencies of invoice reported in Page (1981)
provided quite reasonable estimates for A.. For Germany, A.0.30 in Table 4 provides a higher
likelihood value than A.=O.5 1 in Table 3, which supports the hypothesis that Germany invoices

higher percentage of its exports in its own currency than the 49% value computed in (23).14 In
any case, the interior maximum for the likelihood function suggests that with multilateral price
indexes, A. can be identified and estimated.

        Turning to the results for France in Table 4, we obtain an unusual result: the standard
deviation of the residuals obtained by various values of A. are inversely related to the likelihood

values obtained. Thus, the lowest standard deviation is obtained by letting A.=O, so that the relative

traded goods price is simply measured by the French export prices relative to the French CPI. This
is because the French export price index is strongly correlated with the franc/dollar movements
(with a simple correlation of 0.96), so that small deviations from PPP are obtained when this
variable is included. However, using this variable in the 5-equation system (26) results in the
lowest likelihood value. The reason is that movements in the French export prices relative to the

CPI are nor well-explained within the VAR system: the standard error of the equation in (26)
explaining [X(InP-lnq1)+(1-A.)(lnP- lnc)] for France is 0.038 when ?.=0 is used, but 0.02 1
when A.=O.58 is used as in Table 3. These observations make the point that minimizing the

deviations from PPP is not the same as maximizing the likelihood value of the system (26), and
presumably, the latter is of greatest interest.




  As reported in note 8, Magee (1974) did find a higher percentage of German exports to the
U.S. invoiced in marks.
                                                                                                           26
5.      Conclusions
        Froot and Rogoff (1994) have recently surveyed the evidence on PPP, and considered

various explanations, including 'pricing to market" or pass-through behavior, to explain its failure.
They conclude that 'Pricing to market is an interesting and important issue. Because, however, it
ifundamentally derives from short-term rigidities, it seems unlikely to explain the medium and
long-term deviations from PPP that we have been focusing on here" (p. 43). In contrast to this
finding, we have found that pass-through behavior appears to explain a significant portion of the
deviations from PPP observed during the floating rate period since 1974. The variable we have
used to measure pass-through behavior is a weighted average of import relative to domestic prices,

and export prices relative to costs of production. Either of these relative traded goods prices are

often treated as the dependent variable in conventional pass-through equations, and by inverting

these equations, we obtain a PPP formulation where the weighted average appears (along with

wholesale or consumer prices) as a determinant of exchange rates. We have found this weighted

average is significantly correlated with exchange rate movements, and in some cases, can explain
more than one-half of the observed deviations from PPP.

        By inverting the passthrough equation, we have certainly not developed an equilibrium
theory of exchange rates, but rather, have only provided one explanation for the observed
deviations from PPP. It is possible that our approach can be used as a building block towards an

equilibrium theory. In particular, our PPP equation (21) could be integrated into a monetary model

of exchange rate determination, such as presented by Woo (1985) and West (1987). West (1987)
emphasizes that stochastic deviations from PPP (and shocks to money demand) play a crucial role

in his failure to reject the monetary model, and states that "It is therefore of interest in future work

to model these shocks as functions at least in part of observable economic variables" (p. 72). Our
PPP equation, obtained from the pass-through behavior of optimizing firms, can be considered a
first step along these lines.
                                                                                                       27
Appendix: Data Sources


        Sources for import price index construction are the Citibase tape file and various issues of
Survey of Current Business. Imports are given in both current and constant (1980) US dollars on

a quarterly basis from 1967.1 to 1992.1 Implicit prices are derived by dividing current by constant
dollar imports. A Divisia import price index was constructed from the following categories:

(1) Industrial supplies and materials excluding petroleum, (a) Durable and (b) Nondurable goods;
(2) Capital goods, except autos; (3) Consumer Goods, (a) Durable and (b) Nondurable goods;
(5) Other Goods, (a) Durable and (b) Nondurable goods.

                The rest of the series are from the DX-Online Database (Melbourne, Victoria)

containing United Nations International Financial Statistics, quarterly data from 1974.1 to 1992.1.

Exchange rates are line RF (period averages). Domestic price indices are line 63 (generally

wholesale or comparable price index) except for France which was line 64, the consumer price
index. For France the price relatives were matched with the US line 64. Interest rates are line
60C (90-day Treasury-Bill rate). For France, line 60B had to be used (Call Money Rate-Average)

and for Japan, line 60L (Deposit Rate [end of period]). The export price indices were from line
74. .D for each country. The Canadian export price index 74..D showed a sharp increase during
1979 due to the rise in oil prices. We would not expect this global shock to influence to

Canadian/U.S. exchange rate as specified by the PPP equation. To omit this effect, the Canadian
export price index was held constant at its 1979:1 value until 1980:1, and then it resumed its
growth relative to 1980:1.
                                                                                                    28


                                       REFERENCES

Baron. David P., 1976a, "flexible Exchange Rates, Forward Markets, and the Level of Trade,"
       American Economic Review 66, March, 253-266.

Baron, David P., 1976b, "Fluctuating Exchange Rates and the Pricing of Exports," Economic
       Inquiry 14, September, 425-438.
Dickey, D. A. and W. A. Fuller, 1991, "Likelihood Ratio Statistics for Autoregressive Time Series
      with a Unit Root," Econometrica, 49, 1057-1072.
Cheung. Yin-Wong and Kon S. Lai, 1993, Long-run Purchasing Power Parity During the Recent
      Float, Journal of International Economics, 34, 18 1-192.
Engle, Robert F. and C. W. J. Granger, 1987, "Co-integration and Error Correction:
       Representation, Estimation, and Testing," Econometrica, 55(2), March, 25 1-276.

Eldor, Rafael and Itzhak Zilcha, 1987, "Discriminating Monopoly, Forward Markets and
       International Trade," International Economic Review. 28(2), 459-468.
Ethier, Wilfred, 1973, 'International Trade and the Forward Exchange Market," American
        Economic Review 63(3), June, 494-503.
Feenstra, Robert C., 1989 "Symmetric Pass-Through of Tariffs and Exchange Rates Under
       Imperfect Competition: An Empirical Test. Journal of International Economics, 27,
       25-45.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Kenneth Rogoff, 1994, "Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Real
        Exchange Rates," Harvard and Princeton Universities, mimeo. Forthcoming in Gene
        Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics. North-
       Holland, Amsterdam.

Giovannini, Alberto, 1988, Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices. Journal of International
      Economics. 24, 45-68.

Grassman, Sven, 1973, "A Fundamental Symmetry in International Payment Patterns," Jounal of
       International Economics 3(2), May, 105-116.

Grassman, Sven, 1976, "Currency Distribution and Forward Cover in Foreign Trade: Sweden
      Revisited," Journal of International Economics 6(2), May, 2 15-221.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1989, "Risk, Uncertainty, and Exchange Rates", Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 23, 433-459.
Johansen, Soren, 1991 "Estimation and Hypothesis Testing of Cointegration Vectors in Gaussian
       Vector Autoregressive Models, Econometrica. 59, 155 1-1580.
Johansen, Soren, and Katriana Juselius, 1990, "Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Inference on
       Cointegration-with Applications to the Demand for Money," Oxford Bulletin of Economics
       and Statistics, 52, 169-2 10.
                                                                                                 29
Knetter, Michael M., 1989, "Pnce discrimination by U.S. and German exporters," American
   Economic Review, 79(1), March, 198-2 10.

Knetter, Michael M., 1993, "International comparisons of pricing-to-market behavior," American
   Economic Review, 83(3), June, 473-486.

Magee, Stephen, 1974, "U.S. Import Prices in the Currency-Contract Period," Brooking Papers
      on Economic Activity, I, 117-164.

Marston, Richard, 1990, "Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing, Journal of International
      Economics, 29, 2 17-236.

Page, S. A. B., 1981, "The Choice of Invoicing Currency in Merchandise Trade," National
       Institute Economic Review, 98, 60-72.

Pippenger, Michael K., 1993, "Cointegration Tests of Purchasing Power Parity: the Case of
      Swiss Exchange Rates," Journal of International Money and Finance. 12,46-61.
West. Kenneth D., 1987, "A Standard Monetary Model and the Variability of the Deutschemark-
       Dollar Exchange Rate," Journal of International Economics. 23(112), August, 57-76,

Woo, Wing T., 1985, "The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rate Determination Under Rational
      Expectations," Journal of International Economics 18, 1-16.
                                                                                                             30



                                                 Table 1
                       Unit Root Tests: Augmented Dickey-Fuller Statistic


Variable                           Canada         France        Germany        Japan        U.K.
Spot exchange rate
    Level                          -2.11         -1.59          -1.58         -2.54'        -2.23
    First-difference               3.2Oa         ..3•44a        ..297a        ..36(Ja       339a
Wholesale price index
    Level                          -1.72         -1.71          -1.25         -1.98         ..340t,b
    First-difference               327t,l,       -1.26          2.59a         3.36a         2.78b
Rel. traded goods price
    Level                          -1.73          -1.52         -2.02         -1.81         -1.91
    First-difference               -2.31         ..333a         ..322a        3.07a         3.46a
Interest rate differential
    Level                          3.09a         2.80a          -0.71'        -2.00         -2.51
    First-difference               -4.71 a       ..424a         -4.27'J       4.65a         ..57()a

Notes

All series are quarterly from 1974:1 to 1992:1, excluding 1992:1 for the French relative traded
    goods price and 1974:1-1975:2 for the German interest rate differential. The consumer price
    index rather than wholesale price index is used for France. The ADF tests were run with 3
    quarterly lags of the differences, except for the Canadian WPI which included 4 quarterly lags.

a
    Rejection of the null hypothesis of nonstationarity at the 10 per cent level, where the critical value
    is -2.59 with three lagged differences but no time trend.

b
    Rejection of the null hypothesis of nonstationarity at the 10 per cent level, where the critical value
    is .3.27 with three lagged differences and a time trend included.

         trend was significant at the 10% level, and was included in the ADF tesi
                                                                                       31




                                                 Table 2
            Likelihood Ratio Tests for the Number of Cointegrating Vectors


                       5% Critical Canada France
    Hypothesised                                             Germany Japan    U.K.
     Number              Value

    None                76.1            1O1.5a      114.4a   112.9a   11L5    125.3a

      1                 53.1            54.6b       69.7a    62.lb    69.9k   77.6a

      2                 34.9            31.0        349b     36.8b    36.Ob   42.7a

     3                  19.7            15.8        15.9     18.9     201b    2l.Ob

      4                  9.2             7.1         2.8      7.4      8.0     4.5



Notes

a Significant at the I percent level.

b Significant at the 5 percent level.
                                                                                                32

                            Table 3 - Cointegrating Relations
                             Relative     Country U S             Standard Log
                 Interest    Traded
   Country       Differ-                  WPI         WPI         Dev. of Likeli-
                 ential      Goods                                Residual hood
                             Price
   Canada        0.17        -0.48        0.30        -0.56       0.021       975.2
   (X=O.85)      (0.18)      (0.031)      (0.062)     (0.055)
                             -0.46        0.35        -0.60       0.024
                             (0.049)      (0.096)     (0.068)
                                          1.23        -1.12       0.064
                                          (0.18)      (0.23)
   France        -0.18       -1.11        3.19        -3.97       0.120        856.8
   (.=O.58) (0.61)           (0.20)       (0.55)      (0.61)
                             -1.13        3.08        -3.85       0.117
                             (0.19)       (0.53)      (0.60)
                                          4.11        -4.58       0.156
                                          (0.88)      (1.12)
   Germany       2.95        -1.10        2.28        -1.81       0.058       891.9
   (X=O.51)      (0.38)      (0.087)      (0.41)      (0.27)
                 3.05        -1.13        1.26        -1.26       0.070
                 (0.58)      (0.12)       (0.17)      (0.17)
                 2.72        -1.14        1.00        -1.00       0.056
                 (0.40)      (0.11)
     OLS                                  3.46        -2.46       0.148
                                          (0.58)      (0.38)
   Japan         1.09        -1.50        0.88        -1.24       0.053       869.1
   (X=O.72)      (0.42)      (0.13)       (0.17)      (0.052)
                             -1.57        1.02        -1.18       0.046
                             (0.11)       (0.11)      (0.045)
                                          2.67        -1.83       0.086
                                          (0.20)      (0.083)
   United  0.18                                       0.087       0.078       841.2
                             -2.59        -0.31
   Kingdom (0.38)            (0.14)       (0.11)      (0.15)
   (X=O.53)                  -2.59        -0.34       0.11        0.075
                             (0.14)       (0.077)     (0.13)
                             -2.76        -0.48        0.48       0.106
                             (0.21)       (1.31)      (1.31)
     OLS                                   1.16       -0.93       0.141
                                          (0.31)      (0.37)

Notes: The sample period for all countries is 1974:1-1992:1, excluding 1992:1 for France and
       1974:1-1975:2 for Germany. All cointegrating regressions aLso include a constant term.
                                                                                                33


                     Table 4 - Sensitivity of Cointegrating Relations

                       Interest                                         Standard Log
Country         X      Differ-                 Country u.s.             Dev. of Likeli-
                       ential      Goods       wii                      Residual hood
                                   Price
Canada        0.99     0.16         -0.45      0.34         -0.59       0.020       975.2
                       (0. 17)     (0.027)     (0.057)      (0.051)
              0.70     0.18         -0.52      0.30         -0.53       0.023       975.2
                       (0.19)      (0.036)     (0.062)      (0.060)
             0.0       0.29        -0.82       -0.19        -0.26       0.036       975.2
                       (0.30)      (0.088)     (0.15)       (0.11)
France       0.80      0.80        -1.17       3.51         -4.34       0.139       870.9
                       (0.79)      (0.26)      (0.49)       (0.55)
             0.40      -0.52       -1.13       2.57        -3.28        0.100       859.5
                       (0.50)      (0.15)      (0.52)      (0.59)
             0.0       -0.20       -1.17       0.71        -1.12        0.049       843.4
                       (0.26)      (0.050)     (0.24)      (0.27)
Germany      0.70      3.44        -1.28       2.52        -2.11        0.071       882.0
                      (0.45)       (0.14)      (0.53)      (0.32)
             0.30     2.57         -0.97       2.11        -1.57       0.048        894.4
                      (0.33)       (0.057)     (0.36)      (0.24)
             0.0       1.89        -0.87       1.63        -1.11       0.038        879.6
                      (0.32)       (0.038)     (0.36)       (0.24)
Japan        0.90     0.97         -2.06       1.23        -1.53       0.063       866.6
                      (0.45)       (0.19)      (0.12)      (0.033)
             0.50      1.79        -1.11       0.65        -1.03       0.063       861.6
                      (0.73)       (0.20)      (0.29)      (0.14)
             0.0      -8.02        -1.31       1.38        0.07        0.199       827.0
                      (6.05)      (0.45)       (1.43)      (0.62)
United  0.70          -1.48       -3.14        -0.15       -0.44       0.097       834.9
Kingdom               (0.82)      (0.14)       (0.20)      (0.23)
             0.30     -0.64       -2.45        -0.91       0.95        0.105       829.0
                      (0.63)      (0.23)       (0.19)      (0.24)
             0.0      -2.46       -2.38        -1.86       2.30        0.162       806.1
                      (1.36)      (0.39)       (0.47)      (0.60)


Notes: The sample period for all countries is 1974:1-1992:1, excluding 1992:1 for France and
       1974:1-1975:2 for Germany. All cointegrating regressions also include a constant term.
          Figure 1: Cointegrating Residuals for Canada
0.10


0.05


0.00


-0.05


-0.10


-0.15
        74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
            I      PPP3       - PPP1 ---— PPP2I
Figure 2: Cointegrating Residuals for France




                  82 84 86 88
I
        PPP3 -       PPP1         PPP2 I
     Figure 3: Cointegration Residuals for Germany




76      78     80    82    84     86    88     90

                    PPPo   ----- PPP2
                    PPP1 —-—-- PPP3
      Figure 4: Cointegrating Residuals for Japan
0.2




      J      PPP3          PPP2 ---- PPP1 I
Figure 5: Cointegrating Residuals for the U.K.




                PPPO   -----
                           PPP2
                PPP1 —-—-- PPP3
