                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    TIME-VARYING WORLD
                                    MARKET INTEGRATION




                                         Geert Bekaert
                                       Campbell R. Harvey




                                    Working Paper No. 4843



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1994


 We have benefitted from the Comments of Warren
                                                 Bailey, Bernard Dumas, Wayne Ferson, Steve
Grenadier, Burton Hollifield, Robert Hodrick and from useful discussions with Bruno Solnik and
Ren6 Stulz and seminar participants at The Ohio State University, the Board of Governors of the
FederaJ Reserve Bank, and the Western Finance Association in Santa Fe. We are especially
indebted to our RAs, Steve Gray and Michael Urias, for their comments and for the long hours
they devoted to the nonlinear estimation. Harvey's research is
                                                                supported by the Batterymarch
Fellowship. Bekaert acknowledges the financial support of an NSF grant and the Financial
Services Research Initiative and the Bass Faculty Fellowship of the Graduate School of Business
at Stanford. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Geert Bekaert and Campbell R. Harvey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
                                          quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4843
                                                                                August 1994

                                   TIME-VARYING WORLD
                                   MARKET INTEGRATION


                                           ABSTRACT


        We propose a conditional measure of capital market integration that allows us to
 characterize both the cross-section and time-series of expected returns in developed and emerging

 markets. Our measure, which arises from a conditional regime-switching model, allows us to

 describe expected returns in countries that are segmented from world capital markets in one part

of the sample and become integrated later in the sample. Our results suggest that a number of

emerging markets exhibit time-varying integration. Interestingly, some markets appear to be

more integrated than one might expect based on prior knowledge of investment restrictions.

Other markets appear segmented even though foreigners have relatively free access to their
capital markets.




Geert Bekaert
                                                           Campbell R. Harvey
Graduate School of Business                                Fuqua School of Business
Stanford University                                        Duke University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015                                    Durham, NC 27706
and NBER                                                   and NBER
  1. Introduction

       Why do different countries' market indices command different expected
                                                                                   re-
  turns? This question lies at the foundation of international finance. The
                                                                               answer
  follows from another question: What makes international finance different from
  finance in general? In studying assets in the United States, we would
                                                                             say that
 differing expected returns are due to differing risk exposures. In international
 markets, the answer is more difficult. Aside from the
                                                        obvious complications aris-
 ing from country-specific exchange rates, "risk" is hard to quantify if a country is
 not fully integrated into world capital markets.
      Markets are completely integrated if assets with the same risk have identical
 expected returns irrespective of the market. Risk refers to exposure to some
 common world factor. If a market is segmented from the rest of the world, its
 covariance with a COmmon world factor may have little or no ability to explain its
 expected return.
      The reward to risk is also an important consideration. In integrated world
 capital markets, there are common rewards to risk associated with risk exposures.
In explaining the cross-section ofexpected returns, the reward to risk is not impor-
tant because it is Common to all the integrated countries. However, in segmented
markets, the rewards to risk may not be the same because the risks are different.
     Asset pricing studies can be classified in three broad categories: segmented
markets, integrated markets or partially segmented markets. An example of an
asset pricing study which assumes market are segmented is one that "tests" a
model like the Capital Asset Pricing Model of Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965) and
Black (1970), using one country's data. Indeed, all of the seminal U.S. asset
pricing studies assume that the U.S. is a completely segmented market — or that
the market proxy represents a broader world market return. While this might
have been a reasonable working assumption through the 1970's, in the 1980's the
U.S. equity capitalization dropped below 50% of the world market capitalization.
Indeed, Japan's market capitalization exceeded the U.S. (albeit briefly) in 1989.


                                        1
       The second class of asset pricing studies assumes that world capital markets
 are perfectly integrated. These include studies of a world CAPM [see Harvey
 (1991a) and references therein], a world CAPM with exchange risk [see Dumas
 and Solnik (1993) and Dumas (1994)], world arbitrage pricing theory [see Solnjk
 (1980) and Senbet et a!. (1986)], world multibeta models [Ferson and Harvey
 (1993, 1994a,b)] and world latent factor models [Campbell and Hamao (1992),
 Bekaert and Hodrick (1992) and Harvey, Solnik and Zhou (1994)]. Rejection of
 these models can be viewed as a rejection of the fundamental asset pricing model,
 inefficiency in the market, — or rejection of market integration.
      A good example of the difficulty in interpreting the joint hypotheses is pre-.
 sented in Harvey (1991a). Using data through May 1989, Harvey finds that the
 conditionally expected returns in Japan are too high to be explained by asset
 pricing theory, or that the risk exposure was too small. In multivariate tests, the
 asset pricing model is not rejected. Is the rejection in Japan a result of using a one
 factor model, a function of Japanese stock prices deviating from their fundamental
 values (inefficiency) or an implication of imposing the null hypothesis of complete
 market integration?
     Yet another strand of the literature falls in between segmentation and integra-
tion — the
         so called mild segmentation model [see Errunza, Losq and Padmanabhan
(1992) and references therein]. The advantage of these models is that the polar
segmented/integrated cases are not assumed. The disadvantage of these models
is that the degree of segmentation is fixed through time. This runs counter to the
intuition (as do the polar cases) that some markets have become more integrated
through time.
     Our contribution is to propose a methodology that allows for the degree of
market integration to change through time. While this method can be applied to
a general multifactor model, the intuition can be readily obtained in a one factor
setting. We allow conditionally expected returns in any country to be affected
by their covariance with a world benchmark portfolio and by the variance of the
country return. In a perfectly integrated market, only the covariance counts. In
segmented markets, the variance is the relevant measure of country risk. Our inte-


                                         2
 gration measure is a time-varying weight which is applied to these two moments.
 The model allows for differing prices of variance risk across countries which de-
 pends on country-specific information and a world price of covariance risk which
 depends on global information. The model is conditional in the sense that pre-
 determined information is allowed to affect the expected returns, covariances,
 variances and the integration measure. Our procedure allows us to recover fitted
 values for the integration measure so that the degree and trend of a particular
 market's integration can be depicted through time.
      Our paper is organized as follows. In the second section, the asset pricing
 framework is presented. An outline of the econometric model is also detailed.
 The data on 33 national equity markets are described in the third section. In the
 fourth section, the results are analyzed. Some concluding remarks are offered in
 the final section.



2. Asset pricing with time-varying market integration
2.1 The model

In completely integrated markets and in the absence of exchange risk, a conditional
CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) imposes the restrictions that:
                               r Ai_—                  r A      1
                                        t_i_iovt_itr,,                            1

where Et_i{rE'} is the conditionally expected excess return on security A's
                                                                              equity
(in country i), r is the return on a value weighted world equity portfolio, Cov_1
is the conditional covariance operator and       is the conditionally expected world
price of covariance risk for time t. All expectations are conditioned on Zt_1 — the
information that investors use to set prices at time t — 1. The risk-free rate has
zero conditional variance because the return is determined at t —1. This model is
tested in Harvey (1991a).
       In the completely segmented market and under the same assumptions behind
(1):
                         r'..._ 1 rAi — Ai,t_
                                        ' 1 i-i..'ovt_ 1 rA
                                  Er,J                   t7',                    2

                                            3
 Security A is now priced off its covariance with the return of the market portfolio
 in country i, r1 and ) is the local price of risk. At the national level,

                           E__1 [r,t}   = )_iVart_i [r,t}.                         (3)

 Merton (1980) argues that ), is a measure of the representative investor's relative
 risk aversion. The model suggests that expected returns in a segmented marketare
 determined by the variance of returns in that market times the price of variance.
 The price of variance will depend on the weighted relative risk aversions of the
 investors in country i.
     Econometrically, these models can be combined:

              = i,t_iAt_iCovt_i[r,t, r,t] + (1 —
                                                                                  (4)

where ci,t...i is the conditional integration measure and fails in the interval [0,1].
 If j,t—i is one, it implies that only covariance with the world porfolio is priced
 and we can reject the null hypothesis of market segmentation. If           is zero,
 then only variance is priced. This is consistent with a segmented capital market.
In addition, the price of risks         and i,t—1 are allowed to differ. While (4)
is not implied by any particular equilibrium asset pricing theory, it could be a
reasonable approximation of the expected returns.1 In addition, our methodology
allows ns to recover the fitted integration parameters and hence characterize the
time path of integration in the market.
     The idea that both the covariance with the world return and the covariance
with the local market return affect securities' expected returns reaches back to
Errunza and Losq (1985) and Eun and Janakiramanan (1986). A recent example
of covariance and variance influencing conditionally expected national returns is
proposed in Chan, Karolyi and Stulz (1992) in their study of the U.S. and Japan.
They use the definition of covariance to show, for example, that the conditionally
  1 It is an approximation in at least two ways. First, a one factor model is
imposed. Section 2.3.3 considers the implications of a multifactor formulation.
Second, the hedging terms which are related to the covariances between local and
world marginal rates of substitution are ignored.

                                          4
 expected U.S. market return is affected by both the covariance with other countries
 and its own variance. The weights they place on the second moments are derived
 from actual market shares of the U.S. and Japan in the world market portfolio.
 While this intuition is critical for modelling the U.S. and Japan, explicitly using
 the market share weights is less important for most of the markets in our sample
 since they are so small.
     Following models like Stulz (1981), the returns in (1)-.-(4) should be real.
Given that reliable inflation data in many of the countries that we study is not
available and given a lack of short-term interest rate data (to form local excess
returns), we choose to calculate the local market volatility in U.S. dollar terms.
The excess return should approximate a real return.



2.2 Regime switching and integration

The model for expected returns in (4) may be considered in the class of regime-
switching models. In the first regime, markets are integrated and expected returns
adhere to (1). In the second regime, markets are segmented and expected returns
are given by (2). Let S be an unobserved state variable which takes on the value of
one when markets are integrated and a value of two when markets are segmented.
Then the parameter Q5i,t..i can be interpreted as the conditional probability of
being in regime 1, cb,t_.i = Prob[S = lIZt_iJ.
     Several models are available to estimate i,t1• In the regime switching model
 developed by Hamilton (1988, 1989, 1990), S follows a Markov process with
 constant transition probabilities. Recently, Diebold, Lee and Weinbach (1992),
 Ghysels (1992) and Gray (1993) have extended the Hamilton model to allow for
time-varying transition probabilities. Gray (1993) shows that all these models
are special cases of a general finite mixture distribution model with time-varying
weights, i.e. q5..4 = 4(Zt_1) with 4H) a functional form that constrains Q5i,t—1
to be between zero and one and Z_1 a set of variables in Z_1.
     The possibility of time-varying transition probabilities allows for an alterna-
tive interpretation of        Whether a market is integrated with world capital

                                         5
 markets or segmented is greatly influenced by economic and financial market poli-
cies followed by its government or other regulatory institutions. Hence,            ,
can be interpreted as a policy weight, varying with policies affecting the degree of
market integration. An obvious example is foreign ownership restrictions, often
imposed by developing countries.
     Barriers to investment (by foreigners in local markets or local participants
in foreign markets) can take many forms. Moreover, not all barriers to foreign
equity investment necessarily segment markets from the world capital market. For
instance, Bekaert (1994) shows that the presence of country funds might serve to
effectively integrate markets with the world capital market despite the existence of
severe restrictions on direct foreign equity ownership. In general, it is hard to infer
the actual degree of market segmentation from the complex set of capital market
restrictions in place. in a particular country at any one time. However, given that
the asset pricing model is correctly specified, the regime switching model allows
us to infer the degree of market segmentation.
      To infer c5i,t—i from the data, we explore two different regime switching mod-
els. The first is the standard Hamilton model. Although the switching probabil-
ities are time invariant, the regime probability and hence the degree of market
integration varies through time as new information changes the econometrician's
inference on the relative likelihood of the two regimes. Gray (1993) derives the
following recursive representation for the regime probability:

                                                    f1,t—1t—2
          t_i=(1—Q)+(P+Q—1)                              ,     'I
                                          J1,t—1'Pt—2 + J2,t_1l,L — 'Pt—2)
                                                                                  (5)


where the country i subscript has been suppressed and

                            P = Prob[St = liSt_i 11
                            Q = Prob[S = 21St_i = 2]

and    is the likelihood at time t conditional on being in regime j and time t — 1
information, Zt_i
      In the second formulation, we allow the transition probabilities P and Q to

                                         6
be time varying. In particular, we model them as logistic functions of Z_1:

                                      exp(/3Z1)

                                't
                                 —
                                     1+exp(/3'1Z_1)
                                      exp(/32Z_1)
                                     1+exp(3Z_1)
where /3, j = 1,2, are vectors of parameters.
      In implementing this model, we let Z_1 be a subset of Z_1 where Z1 is
a collection of information variables specific to country i which includes lagged
dividend yields and lagged equity market capitalization as a proportion of GDP.
Since all of these variables might be influenced by a change in policies affecting
market integration, they should influence the switching probabilities. Although
it is possible that global information variables are also important in determin-
ing the switching probabilities, we only allow the global variables to influence
the probabilities indirectly — through their correlation with the local information
variables.
     Cumby and Khanthavit (1992) also investigate a standard Hamilton model
for equity returns in Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. Although they do not formulate
an explicit model of time-varying integration, they attempt to relate their results
to the capital market policies followed in these countries. Below, we will compare
our results to theirs.


2.3 Estimation issues

2.3.1 The likelihood function

To complete the model described in (4), we need an auxiliary assumption on the
movement of expected returns on the world equity portfolio. Consequently, we
estimate a series of bivariate models for  = [r1,t, r,]':
        = i,t_iAt_iCovt_i[r,t, r,t] + (1 — i,t_i)A,t_iVart_i[ri,} +     tt
        = .Xt_iVart_i[r,tJ +

                                        7
Let et = [e,t, e,t}' and define e (er) as the disturbance vector under integration
(segmentation):
                          et   _J.
                               —       1
                                 p,t_ie + 11 — Ay1,t_1)e .                       8

      We assume that the residuals are heteroskedastic,
                                E[ee")Zt_i] =
                                E[ee'IZt_i] =
The conditional variance dynamics are modelled as ARCH(k) following Baba,
Engle, Kraft and Kroner (1989) (BEKK):2


                        = C' + (A')' [wk(et_ke_k)] A'
                                         k
                                                                              (10)
                        = Cs + (A5)' [wk(et_ke_k)] As

where C' and Cs are symmetric 2 x 2 matrices, A' and As are 2 x 2 matrices.
An advantage of this model of conditional variances is that it guarantees positive
definite conditional variance matrices under weak conditions. In addition, the
model imposes restrictions across equations and thereby economizes on parameters
relative to other multivariate ARCH models.
     To further limit parameter proliferation, we impose the additional restric-
tions:
                        C'(2,2) =
                        A'(j,j) = AS(j,j)        forj   1,2,
                       A'(1,2) = AS(1,2) = 0,                                 (11)
                            and
                       AS(2,1)= 0.
The first and second restrictions make the conditional variance of the world market
return independent of the regime. The restriction A' (1, 2) = As (1, 2) = 0 ensures
  2   Frankel (1982) and Engel and Frankel (1984) are examples of ARCH-M mod-
els that impose similar restrictions to ours. However, these models assume perfect
capital market integration.

                                             8
that country specific shocks do not affect the conditional variance of the world
market return. The restriction As(2, 1) = 0 ensures that the world market shocks
do not affect the conditional variance of the country return when the market
is segmented.3 The dynamics of the conditional variances are constrained to
be the same in both regimes. In the estimation, we set K = 3 and let Wk
2(K + 1 — k)/(K(K + 1)) as in Engle, Lilien and Robbins (1987). The resulting
weights on the three past residual vectors are 1/2, 1/3 and 1/6, respectively.
    The evidence presented in Campbell (1987) and Harvey (1989, 1991a) sug-
gests that the price of risk is time varying. In the most general version of the
model, we let:
                                       = exp(Ô'Zt_i)
                                                                               (12)
                                       = exp(6Z_1)
where Z represents global information variables and Z' represents a set of local
information variables. A similar assumption underlies much of the latent variables
literature [Hansen and Hodrick (1983) and Gibbons and Ferson (1985)] and has
recently been imposed by Dumas and Solnik (1993) and Dumas (1994). The
exponentiation imposes one of the necessary conditions of the asset pricing theory
— that the price of risk is positive.


     The model is estimated by maximum likelihood assuming normally dis-
tributed error terms. The log-likelihood function, apart from some initial con-
ditions, can be written:


             log L(Rj,T) =     log{,t_igi,j + (1 — q5i,t—1)92,t}
                 with gi,t = (21r)_hIE(I_hI2exp{_(e1(Ef)_1e)}         ,        (13)

                      g2,t =
                             (2ir)_hIEfI_h/2exp{_(e1(EY1e)}
                     R.i,T = [Ri,i, R,2,.. . , Ri,T]

    The assumption that the world shocks do not affect the local variance in the
segmented market is far stronger than the restriction that local shocks do not
affect the world variance process. The plausibility of this restriction is currently
being explored in Bekaert and Harvey (1994a).
                                          9
where T is the sample size and i,t—1 is the integration measure previously speci-
fied. The parameter vector is given by

       (9 = [5', 6,', Vech(C'), Cs(l, 1), Cs(l, 2), A'(l, 1), A'(2, 1), A'(2, 2), 3']',

where /3 summarizes the parameters needed to estimate                Under very
weak assumptions, including misspecification of the error distribution function
[see White (1982)], the vector of parameters, (9, is asymptotically normally dis-
tributed with covariance matrix A'BA', where A is the Hessian form and B
the outer product form of the information matrix. Below, we report "robust"
standard errors.4
     Rather than estimating the likelihood function in (13) directly, we proceed
in two steps. First, we estimate C'(2, 2), A'(2, 2) and 5 using the world market
return and the world information variables, Z. Second, we estimate (13) country
by country imposing the parameter estimates from the first stage. This procedure
imposes the restriction that the price of world market risk is the same in each
country, which leads to more powerful tests. A disadvantage to this approach is
that the usual standard errors are likely to be understated since we ignore the
sampling error in the first-stage parameter estimates.


2.3.2 Specification tests and diagnostics

Many of the markets in our sample show predictable variation in returns. In con-
trast to previous work, our model has three sources of time-variation in expected
returns: variation in the price of risk       A,_1), variation in the conditional
risk measures (covariance with world and local market variances) and variation
in the degree of market integration (jt...1). Our estimation technique allows us
   '     The estimator is the quasi-maximum likelihood estimator (QMLE). For
GARCH models, Boilerslev and Wooldridge (1992) show that the QMLE is gen-
erally consistent and has a limiting normal distribution as long as the first two
conditional moments are correctly specified. Gray (1993) has extended these re-
suits to standard regime switching models. Note that for ARCH-in-mean models
the asymptotic properties of the maximum likelihood estimators have not been
worked out.

                                              10
to recover the time path of all three components. To gauge the ability of the
model to capture the observed predictability of returns, we test where the time
t disturbance et is orthogonal to information Z_1 available at time t — 1 The
first set of diagnostics reports the R2 and a heteroskedasticity-consistent Wald
test of the joint significance of the coefficients of a linear regression of e,t onto
a set of information variables Z_i. If the model fails to replicate the observed
time-variation of expected returns, it is useful to track the source of the rejection.
Hence, we set Z = Z, Z = Z1, and Z = [Z, Zt]. Misspecification of the world
market return equation is also possible. Therefore, we also regress       onto   Z1.
    In addition to these informal diagnostics, we also perform a number of formal
Lagrange Multiplier (LM) tests.5 The alternative model that we consider is:


  r2t = C'Zt_i +                         r,t] + (1 — ,t_i)A,t_iVart_i [r,t],     (14)


and we test whether = 0. The choices for Z are the same as above. We report
the standard LM test computed as the uncentered R2 from a regression of the
unit vector on the matrix of scores under the null.
     We then estimate three alternative models embedded in the general specifi-
cation (5) to (11). In the first alternative, we assume constant prices of risk and
provide a likelihood ratio test of this restriction. The second alternative constrains
the conditional variances to be constant over time (no ARCH). This produces a
second likelihood ratio. Finally, in the third alternative, the degree of integration
is constrained to be constant over time. In the standard Hamilton model, this
alternative is nested by setting 1 — Q = P.8 It corresponds to a standard mixture
of normals model (see Everitt and Hand (1981)). This delivers the final likelihood
ratio.
    Finally, we also report a likelihood ratio test of the standard Hamilton model
versus a model with time-varying transition probabilities. When the Hamilton
    Computational difficulty in estimating even larger models prevents us from
considering Wald or likelihood ratio tests.
  6 In the model with time-varying transition probabilities, this restriction cannot

be imposed.
                                          11
model is rejected, the constant prices of risk and no ARCH models are estimated
using time-varying transition probabilities.


2.3.3 Other estimation approaches

Here we discuss some alternative approaches to estimation and extensions of the
model which we leave for further research. A third version of the regime switching
model allows the regime probabilities to be modelled directly as:
                                       I 1'7i
                             i,t1 = expk7LJ_l
                                       + exp(-yZ_1)'
where is a vector of coefficients. In this formulation, it makes sense to condition
the regime probabilities on local information variables.
    Given this structure of the regime probabilities, it is possible to estimate
a version of the time-varying integration model with the generalized method of
moments. The following moment conditions can be explored:

            uit = —                            —
                                                   (1   —
                                                                               (16)

where the integration parameter, cti,ti, is defined as above and , Wt are un-
expected returns on country i's national index and the world index, respectively,
which may be obtained in a first stage estimation. The world price of risk is
5'Z_1 and the local price of risk is 6Z_1. These functions can be constrained
to be positive using the exponential function.7
    For each asset, -y and 5, must be estimated. In addition, 5 are the common
coefficients which form the world price of risk. To identify this model, a number of
countries must be examined simultaneously. This makes the estimation difficult.
    Our framework can be extended to allow for multiple sources of risk. Indeed,
an omitted risk factor could potentially mask itself through evidence of time-
vp.rying integration. One immediate extension, following Adler and Dumas (1983,
  ' In this econometric specification, the dynamics of the conditional covariances
and variances need not be explicitly modelled. This follows Campbell (1987),
Harvey (1989), Dumas and Solnik (1992) and, recently, Kan and Zhang (1994).

                                        12
equation 14), Dumas and Solnik (1994) and Dumas (1994), involves the addition
of foreign exchange risk:

      Et....i[r,t] = q521_iA_1Covt_i[r,t, ft] + (1 — 4',t_i)A,t_iVart_i[r,t],    (17)

where
                             =   (r,t
                                 \. rc,i,t J
                                                    =
                                                        \
and   r,t is the currency excess return for country i,         is   the world price of
covariance risk, and   is the world price of foreign exchange rate risk. According
to the Duma and Solnik model, K — 1 currency returns should be priced, where
K is the number of countries. This leads to an intractable number of parameters.
Hence, it makes sense to follow Person and Harvey (1993, 1994a,b) and Bailey
and Jagtiani (1994) and present the local currency returns computed against a
trade-weighted basket of foreign currencies.
      Implementing the Dumas and Solnik (1994) approach explicitly accounts for
the role of foreign exchange rate risk. Indeed, strong assumptions (such as pur-
chasing power parity) are needed in order to justify (1) [see Stulz (1981, 1993)].
The Dumas and Solnik model assumes perfect market integration and is invariant
to the numeraire currency. However, if the market is segmented, the currency is-
sue arises again. Our model is ideally suited to jointly address the role of currency
risk and market integration.



3. Data and summary statistics
3.1 The data

Our sample of national equity markets includes data for both developed mar-
kets from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) and emerging markets
from the International Finance Corporation (IFC) of the World Bank. Our study
focusses on twelve emerging markets: Chile, Colombia, Greece, India, Jordan, Ko-
rea, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Taiwan, Thailand and Zimbabwe are presented.8
  8 The IFC tracks 20 emerging markets. Three of their countries, Indonesia,

                                               13
     The summary statistics are presented in Table 1 for the total available data
for each country. Most of the MSCI data begins in December 1969 and earliest
available data for 7 of the 12 emerging countries is December 1975. Our analysis
will concentrate on the U.S. dollar returns.9 The statistics include the average
(annualized) arithmetic and geometric return, standard deviation and autocor-
relations. The developed market snmmary statistics are presented over different
samples by other authors and appear for the purpose of comparison with the
emerging returns.
    The range of average returns is much greater for the emerging than the de-
veloped markets. The mean U.S. dollar returns for the emerging markets vary
from 43% (Colombia) to 3% (Nigeria) This sharply contrasts with the range of
average returns in the developed markets. In the MSCI sample, no country has
an average arithmetic return that exceeds 30%. In the IFC emerging sample, 4
countries (Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Taiwan) have average returns above 30%.
     Emerging market returns are characterized by high volatility. Standard de-
viations range from 18% (Jordan) to 53% (Taiwan). In contrast for the MSCI
countries, volatility ranges between 15% and 42%. There are 8 emerging coun-
tries with volatility higher than 30%.'°
    The emerging market returns are also more autocorrelated. In the MSCI
sample of 18 countries with data from December 1969, there are only five countries
with first-order autocorrelation that exceeds 10%. In contrast, 6 of the 12 emerging
countries have with autocorrelations greater than 10%. There are two countries
with autocorrelat ions above 20% (Colombia and Mexico). This suggests that the
returns in many of these countries are predictable (to some extent) based on past
returns alone.



Portugal and Turkey have very short samples.
     Calculating the returns in U.S. dollars eliminates the local inflation. However,
the U.S. inflation remains in the returns.
  10 Bekaert and Harvey (1994a) explore the reasons why volatility is different in
emerging versns developed markets and detail the time-series characteristics of
emerging market volatility.

                                        14
3.2 Predictability

A number of studies have documented the existence of predictable variation in
developed country returns." Recently, evidence of predictable variation in emerg-
ing market returns has been documented in Bekaert (1994), Buckberg (1993) and
Harvey (1993a,b, 1994).
   In our econometric model, we separate the total information set, Z, into local
components, Z' and global components, Z. It is also necessary to be parsimonious
with respect to the number of information variables presented. The global infor-
mation variables include: a constant, the world market dividend yield in excess
of the 30-day Eurodollar rate, the default spread (Moody's Baa minus Aaa bond
yields), the change in the term structure spread (U.S. 10-year bond yield minus
3—month U.S. bill), and the change in the 30-day Eurodollar rate. These variables
are designed to capture fluctuations in expectations of the world business cycle.'2
    The set of local information variables include: a constant, local equity re-
turns, local exchange rate changes, and local dividend yields and the ratio of
equity market capitalization to GDP. These variables are designed to capture ex-
pectations about local economic conditions. Obviously, some of these variables
will be correlated with the global variables — just as local economic growth may
be correlated with world economic growth. However, the degree of correlation
is small. For example, Ferson and Harvey (1994b) find less than 40% average
correlation among dividend yields in the MSCI countries.
    Table 2 presents heteroskedasticity-consistent tests of the null hypothesis that
expected returns are constant. In the first panel, tests are conducted on the devel-
oped markets. The multivariate test'3 of no predictability using the global infor-
 "   See   Harvey (1991a), Bekaert and Hodrick (1992), Campbell and Hamao
(1992), Ferson and Harvey (1993, 1994b), and Harvey, Solnik and Zhou (1994).
  12 While some of the variables are U.S. based, Harvey (1991b) shows that the
U.S. economic growth has 89% correlation with G-7 economic growth. He also
finds that measures of the U.S. term structure have 87% correlation with GDP
weighted measures of the world term structure.
  13 For a detailed analysis of this test and other multivariate tests of predictabil-

ity, see Kirby (1994).
                                         15
mation variables for 18 markets (Finland, Ireland and New Zealand are excluded
because their data begins in 1988) provides evidence against the null hypothesis.
In addition, the table shows that the combination of global and local variables
enhances the degree of predictability.
     The second panel considers the 12 emerging markets. In more than half of
these countries, the null hypothesis of no predictability is rejected at the 10%
level. A multivariate test using the global information variables also provides a
rejection of the null hypothesis at the 10% level of significance.


4. Results
4.1 The world price of covariance risk

Table 3 presents the estimation of the ARCH-M model for the world price of
covariance risk:
                                = At_iVart_i[r,t] + e,t
                                = exp(6'Zt_i)
where Vart_i[r,t], is given by:

                             h = C2 + a2 WkE2wt_k

and Z represents the global information variables. Consistent with the evidence
presented in Harvey (1991a), the hypothesis that the world price of risk is constant
is easily rejected. This is also seen in Figures la and lb which plot the fitted prices
of risk. Interestingly, there is a distinct business cycle pattern (NBER peaks and
troughs of the U.S. business cycle are denoted by arrows). The price of risk is
highest at economic troughs and lowest at economic peaks.
    There is less evidence that the variance dynamics follow an ARCH process.
The a parameter is significant at standard levels (t-ratio of 2.1) however the
x2 test of the null hypothesis that the variance is constant is not rejected at
conventional significance levels (p-value is 0.15). The fitted values of the full
model and the no ARCH model are presented in figure 1. Both series exhibit the

                                          16
same time-series characteristics. However, the no ARCH model price of risk has
some extreme values (over 100) at the beginning of 1980. Given the significance
of the a coefficient and the higher volatility (and unreasonable values) implied by
the no ARCH model, we choose to use the model with ARCH and time-varying
prices of risk in the subsequent analysis.


4.2 Estimation

The results for estimating the standard Hamilton model are presented in table
4. In this model, the transition probabilities are constant. The first column
reports the probability of being in the integrated state given that the previous state
was integration (P). The second column reports the probability of being in the
segmented state given that the previous state was segmented (Q). These transition
probabilities along with the lagged regime probabilities and the likelihood form
the conditional measure of integration in (4). The table also reports a likelihood
ratio test of the null hypothesis that the transition probabilities are constant.
     Both the standard Hamilton model and the model with time-varying tran-
sition probabilities are highly nonlinear and, as a result, special care must be
taken in the estimation. We first estimated the standard Hamilton model and
confirmed the optimum with at least 10 different sets of starting values. We use
the parameters from the Hamilton model as a starting point for the time-varying
transition probability or full model. This model has the most parameters and up
to 25 different sets of starting values were used to confirm the global optimum.'4
    For Chile, Greece, Jordan, Korea, Thailand and Zimbabwe, the model with
constant transition probabilities is clearly rejected. For Colombia and Mexico,
there is some weak evidence against the constant transition probability model.
Table 4 also reports the mean levels of the integration parameter over the entire
sample as well as over the last three years (post 1990). We will now examine, in
more detail, the results for each country.

 14 The nonlinear estimation, along with the large number of starting values,
demanded two weeks of workstation time — per country.

                                         17
4.2.1 Chile

    The average value of the integration parameter for Chile is 0.59 and in recent
years the value has dropped to .26. The trend towards segmentation is evident
in figure 2 which plots the cx ante probability of integration based on the model
with time-varying transition probabilities. The integration parameter is equal to
1.0 between 1981 and 1984 and then drops sharply.
    There are a priori reasons to expect some degree of segmentation in the
Chilean market. Foreign equity investors must pay a 35% tax on both dividends
and capital gains. Most importantly, there are currency controls [see World Bank
(1993)]. The official rate often diverges from the market rate and most foreign
investment flows are required to use the official rate. The market is illiquid and
dominated by only a few stocks (the top five stocks account for over 50% of the
market capitalization). To make things worse, for most of the sample, capital
repatriation was not allowed for five years. This has recently been changed to one
year.
     Chile has one of the lowest percentages of equity that is investable, namely
25%. Bekaert (1994), who provides detailed evidence of barriers to entry in emerg-
ing markets, ranks Chile 17th out of 20 in terms of investabiity. The institutional
barriers to investment are consistent with the estimates of the degree of integration
reported in table 4.

4.2.2 Colombia

    The results for Colombia also suggest that the market is more segmented
than integrated. Over the entire sample, the cx ante probability of integration
never exceeds 0.20. The P parameter is zero reflecting the difficulty in estimating
the probability of integration given that the previous state was integrated.
    The evidence of segmentation in Colombia is consistent with the investment
environment. The Colombian market is one of the most illiquid among the emerg-
ing markets. It ranks third last (just ahead of Chile and Nigeria) in terms of value
traded divided by market capitalization. In addition, four securities account for

                                         18
50% of trading volume. The potential liquidity problems are also evident from
the remarkable 49% serial correlation in returns reported in table 1.
    While there are some recent positive developments in Colombia such as recent
announcements of privatization programs, there is no evidence yet of increased
integration. Colombia is a good example of why integration cannot be accurately
measured by regulatory standing. The degree of investability is quite high in
Colombia. However, the lack of liquidity combined with the political risk induced
by the ongoing war with the drug cartels, has kept this market largely segmented.

4.2.3 Greece

    Greece     is no longer an emerging market with US$5,500 GDP per capita in
1990 (the World Bank definition of emerging market is less than $2,200 per capita
in 1990). However, when the IFC indices were formed in 1981, Greece fell within
the emerging markets category. The evidence presented in table 4 suggests that the
Greek market is integrated into world capital markets. The integration parameter
in the 1990's is 0.86.
     The integration of Greece is consistent with the investment environment.
Outside certain industries, such as banldng, shipping and insurance, there are no
foreign investment restrictions. The market capitalization is $US9.5 billion at the
end of 1992. There is a large foreign participation in the stock market (about 20%
of shares are owned by foreigners). Finally, there is reasonable liquidity with $9
million in average daily trading in 1992.

4.2.4 India

     It was difficult to develop a prior assessment of the degree of integration of
the Indian market. Factors favoring integration include the long history of equity
trading (Bombay exchange is 115 years old) and the large number of stocks that
trade (2556 securities listed in 1991 on 19 exchanges). The capitalization at the
end of 1992 was US$65.1 billion with reasonable trading volume (US$13.2 billion).
    On the other hand, India is a very poor country with only US$300 of per

                                        19
capita GDP. Stock market investment is limited to authorized investors only. That
is, foreigners need permission of the Reserve Bank of India to purchase shares.
However, once approved there is complete freedom to repatriate. Other factors
such as political and religious strife and the tensions with Pakistan could also
work against foreign investors participating in the Indian market.
     The results in table 4 suggest that India is not fully integrated into world
capital markets. The average degree of integration has decreased. In figure 1,
the time-series patterns in the degree of integration are striking. The model
suggests that India was fully integrated into world capital markets until the end
of 1984. The integration parameter then plummets to close to zero. Interestingly,
this closely coincides with the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi on
October 31, 1984. There is some recent evidence of a movement towards higher
levels of integrationb

4.2.5 Jordan

   The estimates suggest that Jordan is not fully integrated into world capital
markets. In table 4, the recent degree of integration is 79%. From figure 2, the
degree of integration has fluctuated between 40% and 90% over the past five years.
The Jordanian market is small with a market capitalization of US$3.2 billion at
the end of 1992. Foreigners are restricted to owning up to 49% of equity (with the
exception of tourism and agriculture where there are no limits). Importantly, 85%
of equities is owned by Jordanians. The remaining 15% is thought to be owned
mainly by investors from other Arab states. There are no ADRs and no country
funds. The only way to access the Jordanian market is to trade there directly.
These factors are consistent with our evidence.

4.2.6 Korea

    Korea also fails to qualify as an emerging market with per capita GDP ex-
ceeding US$5,000 in 1990. The evidence suggests that this market is integrated.
The ex ante probability of integration lies between 0.85 and 1.00 through the


                                       20
entire sample. Over the past 3 years, the integration parameter is 0.99.
       The Korean market definitely clears the liquidity hurdle. It is the third
most active emerging market (behind Taiwan and Thailand) with over 100% of
its market capitalization turning over each year. In terms of total capitalization,
Korea is also the third largest emerging market (behind Mexico and Taiwan) and
the 15th largest equity market in the world.
     However, if integration is measured by looking at the investment regulations,
one would probably conclude that the market was segmented for most of our sam-
ple. Regulations on foreign participation prohibited direct access to the Korean
market until January 1992. Even the recent liberalization does not seem that im-
pressive. Foreign ownership is limited to 10% in so-called unlimited industries and
8% in limited industries (which includes communications and defence). Recently,
the 10% ceiling was raised to 25% for 45 firms which hit the 10% cap.
       But there are other ways for foreigners to access the Korean market. At
last count, Korea has 17 U.s. dollar denominated country funds and 17 non-U.S.
dollar country funds. Many of these country funds have a long history (Korea
Trust began in 1981) and have allowed foreigners to participate, to some degree,
in the Korean market.'5
      Cumby and Khantavit (1992) also study a regime switching model for the Ko-
rean stock market jointly with the world market. They allow a different mean and
variance in each regime but there is no time-variation allowed in either. Hence, it
is difficult to compare their results to ours. Unlike our results, they find clearly dis-
tinguishable regimes in the Korean equity market, but find it difficult to attribute
the regime switches to policies concerning capital market integration. However,
consistent with our results, their graphs of the regime probabilities suggest that
the regime associated with capital market integration dominates during the sam-
ple.
 15
       Errunza, Losq and Padmanabhan (1992) report unconditional tests of market
integration (assuming the degree of integration is constant). They reject the polar
cases of complete integration and complete segmentation for three of our countries,
Chile, Greece and Korea. They fail to reject their hypothesis of mild segmentation
for these same countries.

                                           21
4.2.7 Malaysia

    For Malaysia, our priors tilted towards integration. The equity market is large
(US$94 billion at the end of 1992) with good trading volume (US$21.8 billion in
1992). Malaysia has experienced very mild inflation averaging only 4.6% over the
past 25 years. In addition, the currency is a free float and foreigners can have
Ringgit accounts.
    Importantly, foreigners play a large role in the Malaysian market. At the end
of 1992, foreign participation in Malaysian equities was 27%. Although foreign
investment is limited by the Foreign Investment Committee to 30% of equity, it
is not clear that this constraint is binding in our sample. In addition, foreigners
can access 11 closed end funds, 7 open-end funds and 13 ADRs.
     All of these factors suggest that the market is integrated. This is confirmed
in the data. Although the estimation for Malaysia was problematic, the results in
table 4 suggest that the market is integrated. The 1990's integration parameter
is 0.79 and has been fairly stable from the start of our data.

4.2.8 Mexico

    The results for Mexico are surprising. The model estimates suggest that
Mexico's equity market is segmented. There is a slight upturn since 1991 Figure
2. Today, Mexico has one of the highest capitalized markets (US$139 billion at
the end of 1992) with US$171 million in average daily trading volume. There are
36 ADRs and 6 US dollar based country funds. All of these factors point toward
market integration.
    While Mexican stocks get a lot of attention in the United States most ob-
servers don't realize that before 1991 only 1 Mexican ADR was trading. In the
1980s, there was only one country fund available. The major reforms are fairly
recent. The Mexican stock market was made 100% jnvestable (with the exception
of certain key sectors such as banldng) in May of 1989 and the dual exchange rate
was abolished in November 1991. In addition, there has been a lot of economic
turmoil. The debt crisis in 1982 deterred foreign investment. Mexico had the

                                        22
fourth highest inflation rate over the past 6 years (behind Brazil, Argentina and
Turkey). Given that most of the liberalizations occurred at the end of our sample,
the results appear more credible.

4.2.9 Nigeria

    We chose to expmine Nigeria because we had a strong prior that this was the
most likely market to be segmented. Per capita GDP is only US$295 in 1990 and
over 80% of the economy is linked to petroleum. The results in table 4 confirm
that this market is more segmented than integrated. Over the past three years,
the cx ante probability of integration is only 0.20.
    The evidence of segmentation is consistent with the investment environment.
The IFC categorizes the market as 0% investable and ranks Nigeria last among
the emerging markets. Liquidity is extremely thin. Only 1% of market capitaliza-
tion traded in 1992 (the average daily trading volume was only US$55,000). All
direct investment must be preapproved by the government. There are no Nigerian
country funds and no ADRs. While there was some reason for optimism about
reform after Nigeria's first democratic elections in late 1992, the military changed
their mind and decided not to recognize the results of the election.

4.2.10 Taiwan

    Taiwan was another country where it was difficult to form a prior opinion
about the degree of integration. Factors favoring integration included the high
market capitalization (US$101 biffion at the end of 1992) and the very large trad-
ing volume (US$214 billion). In addition, Taiwan no longer qualifies as an emerg-
ing market with 1992 GDP per capita of US$8815. The NT dollar is technically
floating, but the Central Bank of China keeps close control, i.e. it is not freely
traded. Foreign investors are allowed to repatriate once per quarter.
    Factors that work against integration are the regulations controlling the
amount of foreign equity ownership. Foreign ownership was first allowed in 1983
(our sample begins in 1985) but restricted to 4 approved investment funds. In


                                        23
January 1991, direct investment by institutional investors allowed. Foreign in-
dividuals cannot invest directly. In addition, some industries are not investable,
others have investment limits. Furthermore, no single investor can own more than
5% of a firm's equity.
     The model suggests that Taiwan is integrated. The average degree of integra-
tion in the 1990s is 0.89. Though foreign direct participation is limited, there are
8 closed-end funds, 9 open-end funds, and 4 investment trusts. These alternative
ways to access the market along with the direct institutional participation could
explain the estimated degree of integration.
     Cumby and Khantavit (1992) also study the degree of integration in Taiwan
and detail a stronger covariance between local returns and world returns in the
integrated state than in the nonintegrated state. Similar to our experience, the
short period of data availability (data begins in 1985) makes both estimation and
inference difficult.

4.2.11 Thailand

     The model estimates for Thailand show a dramatic increase in the ex ante
probability of integration beginning in 1986. Using a different methodology,
Cumby and Khantavit (1992) also show a dramatic shift in the degree of inte-
gration in 1986 (from 0.1 to 1.0). This change coincides with the beginning of
trading on the Alien board [see Bailey and Jagtiani (1994)]. Most Thai stocks
have foreign ownership limits. When these limits are met, identical shares (in
terms of dividends and voting rights) are traded on two exchanges, the Main
board — for resident Thais, and the Alien boardfor
                                                — nonresidents [see Bailey and
Jagtiani (1994)].
     The existence of the Alien and Main boards implies some direct access barriers
for foreigners. In addition, foreigners are not allowed to own property in Thailand.
As a result of the property restrictions, a corporation cannot have greater than
49% foreign ownership. Although there are ownership restrictions, the foreigners
have a long history of participation in the Thai market.


                                        24
     In addition, there are many ways to access the Thai market. As of December
1992, there were 26 closed-end and 11 open-end Thai funds trading world wide.
Direct investment, even with the ownership restrictions, is also relatively easy.
Foreigner holdings are estimated to represent up to 60% of the freely floating
shares.16 The market is large (US$58.3 billion in December 1992, 5th largest of
the emerging markets) and very liquid (US$72.1 billion in 1992) with the second
highest turnover ratio among the emerging markets. All of these factors, increase
the probability that the market is integrated.

4.2.12 Zimbabwe

     We chose to examine Zimbabwe, as we did Nigeria, because of a strong prior
that the country was not integrated into world capital markets. Zimbabwe is the
second poorest country in our sample with per capita GDP of US$621 per year in
1991 (Nigeria is last with US$295). The market capitalization is the smallest in
the sample at US$600 million and only US$85,000 in average daily trading volume.
While foreign investors are allowed in all but certain key sectors, the market is
classified as uninvestable because of strict foreign exchange controls.
     The evidence in table 2 confirms our prior that the market is not fully in-
tegrated. The average integration is 57% in the 1990's. However, much more
information can be obtained from figure 2. There is a sharp increase in the inte-
gration parameter in the late 1970s which coincides with the optimism leading to
independence which was officially achieved on April 18, 1980.
     In the mid 1980s, the integration parameter falls to zero. This coincides with
the time that the strict exchange controls are implemented. Recently, there has
been a sharp increase in the integration parameter which remains unexplained.




 16 See   Asiamoney (1994). The free float excludes the large blocks of shares
owned by family groups and banks.

                                        25
4.3 Diagnostics

Table 5 presents three sets of model diagnostics. First, we regress the model er-
rors (returns minus the model fitted values) for each country on the three sets
of information variables. This produces an adjusted R2 and a heteroskedasticity-
consistent X2-test. The 2-statistic tests the hypothesis that the regression co-
efficients on the instruments are equal to zero. Finally, we present a Lagrange
multiplier test of the alternative specified in (14). The test essentially adds a
time-varying intercept to (4). The coefficient on the constant is the analogue to
the Jensen (1969) "alpha." However, our alternative also tests for predictability
of the pricing errors.
    These tests are important for the interpretation of our results. There are
many reasons why the model diagnostics might present evidence against the spec-
ification. Foremost on this list of reasons is that we choose to examine a single
factor specification. Missing risk premiums could mask themselves in time-varying
risk premiums. Given a rejection of the specification, we need to exercise caution
in interpreting the estimated degree of integration.
     The specification test suggest that the model specification is rejected for
Chile, Greece, Korea, Mexico, and Zimbabwe. There is mixed evidence for In-
dia, Malaysia, Nigeria, Taiwan and Thailand. We fail to reject the model for
Colombia and Jordan.
     First, consider the countries where the model is rejected. Chile's model errors
are strongly correlated with local information. The R2 is close to 10% when the
errors are regressed on predetermined local information variables. While the R2
is small on the world information, both the Wald and Lagrange Multiplier tests
present evidence against the specification with the common world information. A
very similar pattern is found for Greece. The errors are highly correlated with local
information. However, the model is rejected by the Wald test with the common
world information variables.
    The rejections for Korea and Zimbabwe follow similar patterns. Parallel to
Chile and Greece, model errors are more correlated with local information van-


                                         26
ables. But the correlations are much smaller with R2s averaging only three per.
cent. Consistent with the other countries, both the Wald and Lagrange Multiplier
test provide convincing evidence against the specification.
    In contrast to the previous four countries, the Mexican rejection appears to
be equally driven by local and world information. The residual R2s are about the
same (6%) — as are the p-values for the more formal statistical tests.
    There is mixed evidence against the model for India and Taiwan. In all
cases, the model R2 are zero when measured against local information, world
information or the combined world and local information sets. For both countries,
the Wald test fails to reject the null hypothesis. However, when the time-varying
intercept is injected into the estimation, the Lagrange Multiplier test detects a
misspeciflcation.
    The evidence for Thailand depends on the information set used. With the
local information set, the Wald test fails to reject the null hypothesis and the
Lagrange Multiplier test delivers a p-value of 3.6%. More convincing evidence
against the model is furnished with the world information set.
     We classify Malaysia as mixed because of the estimation problems that we
encountered. Although the Wald tests do not reject the null hypothesis for any of
the information specifications, we could not confirm that we achieved the global
optimum. Disturbingly, the local price of risk is imprecisely measured and large
in magnitude.
     Neither the Wald test or Lagrange Multiplier test provide any evidence
against the null hypothesis for Nigeria. However, we classify theevidence as mixed
in this country because of the large model residual R2 with the local information.
    There is no hint of misspeciflcation for Colombia and Jordan. The residual
R2s are low in every case. Furthermore, both the Wald and Lagrange multiplier
tests fail to reject the model specification.
     These diagnostics suggest evidence against the model specification for a num-
ber of our sample countries. The strength of rejection and the source of the rejec-
tion generally differs across countries. A rejection does not imply that the model


                                          27
yields no useful information. Nevertheless, extreme caution should be exercised
when interpreting the integration measure, 4j,t..i, in those countries where there
is evidence against the model.



4.4 Integration and foreign exchange regimes

It is possible that the estimated degree of integration is capturing changes in
foreign exchange regimes rather than the broader notion of capital market inte-
gration. Table 6 presents tests of the following regression models:

                     4Ast+i = O +   jLS + c22t + £3t + Ct
                                                                              (18)
                         +1 = + *4St +           +e

where s is exchange rate versus the U.S. dollar, t is the interest rate, and c5t is
the estimated degree of integration. We report the difference between the adjusted
R2s of the two models as well as the x2 and p-value associated with C2 (coefficient
on the estimated integration) which has one degree of freedom.
     In (18), is a generated regressor and as a result, the OLS standard errors
are inappropriate. However, Pagan (1984) shows that the two stage estimators
are consistent but may not have the same limiting distribution as the maximum
likelihood estimator. In general, OLS will understate the true standard errors.
Hence, if we fail to reject c3 = 0 with OLS standard errors, we would surely fail
to reject with the adjusted standard errors. Hence, the tests we present in (18)
will be conservative.'7
     The results in Table 6 suggest there is little evidence that exchange rate
changes and the integration measure are interrelated. In four of 12 countries,
do the tests rejected the hypothesis that a3 = 0 (Chile, Colombia, Korea and
Malaysia). The p-values of these four countries' tests are all above 3%. Given
that the standard errors are understated, it is unlikely that the adjusted standard
  17 In some instances, testing a = 0 wifi yield correct inferences because under
the null hypothesis, = 0. See Pagan (1984).
                                        28
errors would present strong evidence against the null hypothesis in even these four
countries.



4.5 Estimation of the constrained alternatives

Table 7 presents likelihood ratio tests of three specific alternative hypotheses: con-
stant prices of risk, constant variance matrices and constant degree of integration.
Some summary statistics on the estimated parameters are also presented.
    The hypothesis that the price of local volatility is constant are rejected at the
5% level in Chile, Colombia, Greece, India, Jordan, Korea, Mexico and Taiwan.
There is no evidence against the hypothesis for Nigeria, Thailand or Zimbabwe.
We also fail to reject the constant local price of risk for Malaysia. However, the
estimation for this country was ill-behaved and we should be cautious in drawing
conclusions.
    Although the constant prices of risk assumption is rejected in most countries,
the parameter estimates are presented. The estimation imposes positivity and
forces the world price of risk to be identical across all countries. In 10 of the 12
countries, local prices of risk range from 43.59 in Jordan to 1.60 in Greece. The
local prices of risk are more than two standard errors from zero in nine of these
countries (Thailand's is 1.5 standard errors from zero).
     The remaining two countries, Taiwan and Malaysia, have very low and very
high local prices of risk. The low local price of risk in Taiwan is not necessarily
problematic because, first, the restriction is rejected and, second, the evidence in
table 4 suggests that Taiwan is integrated. As the degree of integration rises, it
becomes more difficult to estimate the local price of risk parameters (because a
very small weight is placed on them in the estimation).
     Malaysia's constant local price of risk is far too high to be considered rea-
sonable. The estimation for this country was ill-behaved and we are not certain
that we obtained the global optimum. As a result, we need to be extra cautious
in interpreting the results for Malaysia.


                                         29
     The hypothesis that the variance matrices are constant is also tested with a
likelihood ratio in Table 7. Constant variance matrices are rejected for eight of
the ten countries for which this test was feasible. The hypothesis is rejected at
the 10% level for the remaining two countries.
     The third likelihood ratio provides a test of the hypothesis that the degree
of integration is constant. This hypothesis is rejected for Chile, Greece, India,
Mexico, Nigeria, Taiwan, Thailand and Zimbabwe. The rejection is informally
confirmed by noticing the time variation in fitted integration measures in figure 2.
Constant integration is not rejected for Colombia, Jordan, Korea and Malaysia.
This can be confirmed by viewing the fitted integration measures for the first three
countries.



5. Conclusions and further research

    Most would agree that the degree to which many countries are integrated into
world capital markets has changed over time. However, all previous research has
made one of three assumptions: all markets are perfectly integrated, individual
markets are perfectly segmented or local markets are partially integrated with the
degree of integration being constant. We provide a framework which allows for
time-varying conditional market integration.
    The degree that a national capital market is integrated into world capital
markets is notoriously difficult to measure. Some have suggested that the correla-
tion of the local market return with the world return is a measure of integration.
However, this is flawed because a country could be perfectly integrated into world
markets but have a low or negative correlation because its industry mix is much
different from the average world mix.
     Others have looked to investment restrictions as an indicator of integration.
This measure is problematic because there are numerous types of restrictions with
some being more important than others across different countries. Importantly,
the investment restrictions may not be binding. That is, investors may be able


                                        30
to access the national market in other ways. As a result, it may be a mistake to
conclude that the market is segmented based on statutory investment restrictions.
    We measure the degree of integration directly from the returns data. Our
model nests the poiar cases of complete integration and complete segmentation.
The econometric method allows for the degree of integration to change through
time. Our results indicate time-varying integration for a number of countries.
      We do believe that information on 'investment regulations is useful. In fact,
our asset pricing framework can be used to assess the effects of regulatory changes.
it is possible to let the regime probabilities to be functions of indicator variables
that capture policy changes. For instance, Japan abolished many of its capital
market restrictions in the 1980s [see Bonser-Neal, Brauer, Neal and Wheatley
 (1990) and Campbell and Hamao (1992)]. A number of developing countries
removed or relaxed restrictions on foreign equity ownership in the nineties [see
Bekaert (1994) and Harvey (1993a)]. However, we do not find overwhelming
evidence pointing to increased integration (only four of the 12 countries have
higher integration measures in the 1990s). Our framework will allow us to test
directly whether these policy changes had a discernable affect on the degree of
market integration and whether the cost of capital was altered. This research is
currently being pursued in Bekaert and Harvey (1994b).




                                         31
References

Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio selection and corporation
     finance: A synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925—984.
Baba, Yoshihisa, Robert F. Engle, Dennis F. Kraft and Kenneth F. Kroner, 1989, Multivariate
     simultaneous generalized ARCH, Working paper, University of California, San Diego,
     CA.
Bailey, Warren and Julapa Jagtiani, 1994, Foreign ownership restrictions and premiums for
     international investment: Some evidence from the Thai capital market, Journal of Fi-
     nancial Economics, forthcoming.
Bansal, Ravi, David Hsieh and S. Viswanathan, 1993, A new approach to international arbi-
     trage pricing, Journal of Finance 48, 1719—1747.
Bekaert, Geert, 1994, Market integration and investment barriers in emerging equity markets,
      World Bank Economic Review, forthcoming.
Bekaert,
-
         Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994a, Volatility control in emerging market equity
     portfolios, Working notes, Duke University and Stanford University.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994b, The effect of liberalization policies on capital
     market integration and the cost of capital in emerging markets, Working notes, Duke
     University and Stanford University.
Bekaert, Geert and Robert Hodrick, 1992, Characterizing predictable components in excess
     returns on equity and foreign exchange markets, Journal of Finance 47, 467—509.
Black, Fischer, 1972, Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing, Journal of Finance
     45, 444-455.
Boilerslev, Tim, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, 1992, Quasi-maximum likelihood estimation and
     inference in dynamic models with time-varying covariances, Econometric Reviews 11,
      143—172.
Bonser-Neal, Catherine, Gregory Brauer, Robert Neal and Simon Wheatley, 1990, Interna-
    tional investment restrictions and closed-end country fund prices, Journal of Finance
     45, 523—548.
Buckberg, Elaine, 1993, Emerging stock markets and international asset pricing, in Stijn
    Claessens and Sudarshan Gooptu, eds., Portfolio investment in developing countries,
    (Washington: World Bank).
Campbell, John Y., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics 18, 373—400.
Campbell, John Y. and Yasushi Hamao, 1992, Predictable bond and stock returns in the
    United States and Japan: A study of long-term capital market integration, Journal of
     Finance 47, 43—70.
Chan, K. C., 0. Andrew Karolyl and René Stulz, 1992, Global financial markets and the risk
     premium on U.S. equity, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 137—168.




                                              32
Cumby, Robert E. and Jack D. Glen, 1990, Evaluating the performance of international mutual
    funds, Journal of Finance 45, 497—521.
Cumby, Robert E. and Anya Khanthavit, 1992, A Markov switching model of market integra-
    tion, Unpublished working paper, New York University.
Diebold, F. X., J-H. Lee and G. C. Weinbach, 1992, Regime switching with time-varying
     transition probabilities, in C. Hargreaves, ed., Nonstationary time senes analysis and
     cointegration, (London: Oxford University Press) forthcoming.
Dumas, Bernard, 1994, A test of the international CAPM using business cycles indicators
    as instrumental variables, in Jeffrey Fankel, ed., The Internationalization of Equity
    Markets, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), forthcoming.
Dumas, Bernard and Bruno Solnik, 1992, The world price of foreign exchange rate risk, Work-
    ing paper, Group HEC, February.
Dumas, Bernard and Bruno Solnik, 1994, The world price of foreign exchange rate risk, Work-
    ing paper, Group HEC.
Engel, Charles M. and Jeffrey A. Frankel, 1984, Do asset demand functions optimize over
     the mean and variance of real returns? A six currency test, Journal of International
      Economics 17, 309—323.
Engle, Robert F., David M Lilien and Russell P. Robbins, 1987, Estimating time varying risk
     premia in the term structure: The ARCH-M model, Econometrica 55, 391—407.
Errunza, Vihang R. and Etienne Losq, 1985, International asset pricing under mild segmenta-
     tion: Theory and test, Journal of Finance 40, 105—124.
Errunza, Vihang R., Etienne Losq and Prasad Padmanabhan, 1992, Tests of integration, mild
     segmentation and segmentation hypotheses, Journal of Banking and Finance 16, 949—
     972.
Eun, Cheol S. and S. Janaldramanan, 1986, A model of international asset pricing with a
     constraint on the foreign equity ownership, Journal of Finance 41, 897—9 14.
Everitt, B. S. and 0. J. Hand, 1981, Finite mixture distributions, London: Chapman and Hall.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, The risk and predictability of international
      equity returns, Review of Financial Studies 6, 527—566.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994a, Sources of risk and expected returns in
     global equity markets, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1994b, An exploratory investigation of the fun-
     damental determinants of national equity market returns, in Jeffrey Frankel, ed., The
     Internationalization of Equity Markets, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), forth-
     coming.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1982, In search of the exchange risk premium: A six currency test assuming
     mean-variance optimization, Journal of International Money and Finance 1, 255—274.
Gibbons, Michael R. and Wayne E. Ferson, 1985, Tests of asset pricing models with changing
      expectations and an unobservable market portfolio, Journal of Financial Economics 14,
      217—236.
Gray, Stephen F., 1993, Capturing the nonlinearities in short-term interest rates: A new class
     of regime-switching models, Unpublished working paper, Stanford University.
Ghysels, Eric, 1993, A time-series model with periodic stochastic regime switches, Working




                                                33
    paper, University of Montréal.
Hamilton, J. D., 1988, Rational expectations econometric analysis of changes in regime: An
    investigation of the term structure of interest rates, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
      Control 12, 385—423.
Hamilton, J. D., 1989, A new approach of the economic analysis of nonstationary time series
     and the business cycle, Econometrica 57, 357—384.
Hamilton, J. D., 1990, Analysis of time series subject to changes in regime, Journal of Econo-
      metrics 45, 39—70.
Hansen, Lars P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators,
      Econometrica 50, 1029—1054.
Hansen, Lars P. and Robert J. Hodrick, 1983, Risk averse speculation in forward foreign
    exchange markets: An econometric analysis of linear models, in Jacob A. Frenkel, ed.,:
      Exchange rates and international macroeconomics (University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
      IL).
Harvey, Campbell R., 1989, Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing
     models, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 289—317.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1991a, The world price of covariance risk, Journal of Fmance 46, 111—
      157.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1991b, The term structure and world economic growth, Journal of Fired
      Income 1, 4—17.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1993a, Portfolio enhancement with emerging markets and conditioning
      information; in Stijn Claessens, and Sudarshan Gooptu, eds., Portfolio investment in
      developing countries, (Washington: World Bank).
Harvey, Campbell R., 1993b, Conditional asset allocation in emerging markets, Working paper,
      Duke University, Durham, NC.
Harvey, Campbell R., 1994, Predictable risk and returns in emerging markets, Working paper,
      Duke University, Durham, NC.
Harvey, Campbell R., Bruno H. Solnik and Guofu Zhou, 1994, What determines expected
      international asset returns?, Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
International Finance Corporation, 1993, IFC index methodology, Washington: World Bank.
Kan, Raymond and Chu Zhang, 1994, A test of conditional asset pricing models, Working
      paper, University of Alberta.
Kirby, Christopher M., 1994 A multivariate analysis of predictability in stock and bond returns,
      Working paper, Duke University, Durham, NC.
Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
      portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13—37.
Merton, Robert C., 1980, On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory
      investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323—361.
Pagan, Adrian, 1984, Econometric issues in the analysis of regressions with generated regres-
      sors, International Economic Review 25, 221—247.
Sharpe, William, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions
      of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425—442.




                                                34
Solnik, Bruno, 1974, An equilibrium model of the international capital market, Journal of
     Economic Theory 8, 500—524.
Stulz, René, 1981, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 9,
     383-406.
Stulz, René, 1993, International portfolio choice and asset pricing: An integrative survey,
      Working paper, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
White, Halbert, 1982, Maximum likelihood estimation of misspecifled models, Econornetrica
     50, 1—26.
World Bank, 1993, Emerging stock markets factbook, International Finance Corporation,
     Washington, D.C.




                                              35
</ref_section>
Table 1
Means, standard deviations and autocorrelations of international equity returns through December 1992

                                     Anth.       Ceo.                                 Autocorrelation
        Country            Start      mean       mean     Std. dev.    P1      P2      p2        P4     P12     p24



Morgan Stanley Capital lntern&tlonal-Developed
U.S. dollar returns
             Australia      70.01      11.40      7.56     26.95      0.00    -0.05   -0.00     -0.00   -0.04    0.04
               Austria      70.01      14.20     11.81     21.97      0.15     0.03    0.05      0.10    0.03    0.02
               Belgium      70.01      16.08     14.01     20.19      0.09     0.04    0.03      0.04    0.04    0.04
               Canada       70.01      10.66      8.75     19.35      0.00    -0.09    0.07     -003    -0.04    0.05
             Denmark        70.01      14.37      12.44    19.52      0.04     0.14    0.09      0.10   -0.11    0.07
               Finland      88.01     -10.25     -13.18    24.05      0.14    -0.36   -0.17     -0.04    0.01    0.42
                France      70.01      14.62      11.55    24.64      0.08    -0.00    0.12      0.03   -0.03   -0.00
             Germany        70.01      12.78      10.47    21.36      0.01    -0.02   0.10       0.07   -0.05    0.02
          Hong Kong        70.01      27.21       18.66    41.58       0.06   -0.04   -0.01     -0.05   -0.01   -0.02
              Ireland      88.01       8.03        5.24    23.95      -0.14   -0.09   -0.10      0.19   -0.23    0.41
                Italy      70.01       8.08        4.59    26.62      0.11    -0.01   0.09       0.08   0.03     0.04
               Japan       70.01      18.00       15.32    22.97       0.06   0.00    0.10       0.04    0.06   0.01
         Netherlands       70.01      15.69      13.91     18.53       0.04   .004     0.05     -0.10    0.06   -0.00
        New Zealand        88.01      -2.20       .5.38    26.01      -0.05   -0.09   -0.11     -0.14   -0.10    0.07
             Norway        70.01      14.92      10.88     28.30       0.16   -0.01    0.14     -0.05    0.02    0.04
  Singapore/Malaysia       70.01      18.84      14.08     30.95       0.17   -0.01   -0.08      005     0.04    0.00
               Spain       70:01       9.80       7.19     22.75      0.12    .0.02   -0.03      007    .0.01    0.13
              Sweden       70.01      15.67      13.13     22.31      0.08    -0.02    0.04     -0.01    0.03    0.05
         Switzerland       70.01      13.36      11.38     19.73      0.05    —0.07    0.04     -0.00    0.01   -001
     United Kmgdom         70.01      15.42      12.04     26.52      0.09    -0.10    0.06      0.01   -0.01   005
       United States       70.01      11.54      10.24     15.90      0.02    -0.04    0.00     -0.01    0.04   -0.01

International Finance Corporation-Emerging
US. dollar returnS
                 Chile     76.01      36.67      29.06     39.58      0.17     0.26   -0.01     -0.03    0.08   006
             Colombia      85.01      43.6.4     38.48     32.14      0.49     0.15   -0.03     -0.16   -0.06   -0.08
                Greece     76.01       7.47       1.54     36.22      0.13     0.18    0.03     -0.06   -0.04    0.06
                 India     76.01      20.20      16.54     27.23       0.08   -0.10   -0.03     -0.11   -0.08   -0.01
              Jordan       79.01      10.75       9.15     17.89       0.00    0.02    0.18      0.00   -0.00   -0.00
              Korea        76.01      21.26      16.27     32.34      -0.00    0.08    0.02     -0.02    0.09    0.05
            Malaysia       85.01      13.84      10.24     26.35       0.05    0.06   -0.07     -0.01   -0.10    0.09
             Mexico        76.01      30.39      19.20     44.56       0.25   -0.07   -0.04      0 04   -0.01    0.02
              Nigeria      85.01       2.70       .5.49    36.50       0.09   -0.13   -0.21     0.03    -0.06   -002
              Taiwan       85.01      34.02      20.21     52.90       0.07    0.05   -0.04      0.07    0.14   -0.08
            Thailand       76.01      22.33      18.87     25.76      0.11     0.15    0.01     -0.12    0.04   -0.07
           Zimbabwe        76.01       7.77       1.99     34.17      0.14     0.16    0.25      0 17   -0.01   -0.03
Table 2
Predictability using local and global information

                                              Exclude                            Exclude                      Exclude
           Country                            global                              local                   global+local
                                                        p-value                            p-value                      p-vaiue

Morgan Stanley Capital International-Developed
U.S. dollar returns
                 Australia           11.22               0.024           5.07               0.280      8.07              0.427
                   Austria           14.82               0.005           6.85               0.144     1677               0033
                  Belgium             7.62               0.107           4.86               0.302      8.73              0.366
                   Canada             6.32               0.177           6.70               0.153     18.46              0.018
                 Denmark              4.82               0.306           3.82               0.431      6 29              0 405
                  Finland             4.48               0.344           6.34               0.175     14 08              0 080
                    France            3.39               0.495           3.83               0.430      6.82              0.556
                 Germany              7.04               0.134           3.88               0.422     16.92              0 031
               Hong Kong              1.35               0.853           4.52               0.341      6 24              0.620
                   Ireland            5.38               0.250           3.88               0.422     14 00              0 082
                      Italy           0.79               0.939           8.01               0.091      9.60              0 294
                     Japan            7.95               0.093          17.70               0.001     28 06              0 001
            Netherlands               6.51               0.164           6.42               0.170     21.75              0005
           New Zealand                4.30               0.368            2.22              0 696     22 50              0.004
                Norway                 2.85              0.58.3          5.37               0.252     23 73              0.003
     Singapore/Malaysia               10.39              0.034           5.41               0.248      863               0 375
                  Spain               9.88               0.043            2.62              0.624     23 40              0.003
                Sweden                8.43               0.077           3.89               0.421     II 00              0.202
             Switzerland               5.88              0.208           4.24               0.374     17.89              0.022
        United Kingdom                3.63               0.459           3.68               0.451      4.95              0 763
           United States              13.85              0.008           4.89               0.299     14.55              0069
            18 countries                  -              0.086               -                  -         -                  .

International Finance Corporation-Emerging
U.S. dollar returns
                     Chile          15.99                0.003           4.09               0.394     12.55              0.128
                 Colombia            3.01                0.556            5.43              0.246     15.10              0.057
                    Greece           8.29                0.082           16.28              0.003    181.63              0.000
                      India          5.96                0.202           3.13               0.537      6.38              0 604
                    Jordan           9.16                0.057            4.79              0.309      6.59              0.581
                     Korea           8.06                0.090            1.88              0.599     13.76              0.056
                 Malaysia            0.97                0.914            2.83              0.586      3.44              0.904
                  Mexico              15.83              0.003            3.09              0.542     18.55              0.018
                  Nigeria              2.16              0.707           0.96               0.916      6.96              0.541
                  Taiwan             21.24               0.000            3.18              0.529     16.06              0.042
                Thailand              4.80               0.309            5.13              0.274     13 51              0 095
               Zimbabwe                4.83              0.305            5.43              0.246     22 62              0 004
              9 countries                  .             0.049               -                -           -                  .
     All tests heteroekedasticity consistent. Country tests are based on univariate regressions.
Table 3
The world price of covariance risk

The model estimated is:
                                                   = .X_iVar_i [r,,,tJ +
                                                   —   ezpiu ti
where r is the world market return, A is the world price of covariance risk and the conditional variance,
h=Var_i(r,t], is given by:
                                                h = c2 +         E Wk,t_k
A: Full model
        51               52                53                   64                5           C        0
       0.217           -0.280            0.291                1.564         -0.123          0039      0.345
      (0.930)         (0.112)            (0.116)             (0.49.4)       (0.202)        (0.003)   (0.161)




B: Conitant varlance model
                         52                53                   54                             C
        51

       0.154           -0.351             0.343               1.656            -0.063       0042      2.078
      (0.712)          (0.124)           (0.163)             (0.474)          (0.176)      (0003)     0 l49


C: Conetant puce of rl.k
           A                     c                     a                  2
         1.876                0.040                 0.361               11.166
        (1.535)               (0.00.4)             (0.152)              10.025]
The       test in panel B has one degree of freedom. The test in panel C has 4 degrees of freedom.
Table 4
Estimation of the model with constant transition probabilities


                                   I
                                                                       Degree of Degree of
     Country            Transition probabilities            X2        integration ntegration
                                   I       Q             [i-value)    full sample post-1990


International Finance Corporation-Emerging
U.S. dollar returns
        Chile          0.9414            0.8688           12.198         0.59          0.26
                      (0.0230)          (0.0892)          [0.016]
    Colombia           0.0000            0.8322            6.382          0.14         0.14
                      (0.0000)          (0.0202)          [0.172]
       Greece          0.9868            0.6244           28.731          0.89         0.86
                      (0.0011)          (0.0155)          (0.000]
         India         0.9962            0.9941            6.332          0.54         0.10
                      (0.0054)          (0.0081)          [0.176]
       Jordan          0.9022            0.1710            j4.570         0.85         0.79
                      (0.0113)          (0.0099)          (0.006]
       Koreaa          0.9573            0.0000           11.462          0.97         0.99
                      (0.0028)          (0.0000)          (0.0221
    Malaysiaa          0.8185            0.3214            4.123          0.79         0.79
                      (0.0316)          (0.0286)           (0.390]
       Mexico          0.9363            0.9839            6.962          0.21         0.04
                      (0.0427)          (0.0113)           [0.155)
       Nigeria         .0.7402           0.8941             1.115         0.27         0.20
                      (0.1486)          (0.0847)           [0.892]
       Taiwan          0.9309            0.3086                           0.89         0.90
                      (0.0090)          (0.0312)
                                                              -
    ThailandC          0.9062            0.9804            14.369         0.77         1.00
                      (0.0078)          (0.0018)           [0.006]
    Zimbabwe            0.9808           0.9699            10.387         0.47         0.52
                       (0.0098)         (0.0146)           [0.0341
     The X2 statistic is from a likelihood ratio test for constant transition probabilities and
has 4 degrees of freedom. The transition probabilities are from the simple Hamilton model
(constant transition probabilities). The mean degrees of integration are from the model with
time-varying transition probabilities, unless the simple Hamilton model is not rejected. In the
latter case, the degrees of integration are based on the Hamilton model estimates.
eThe estimation for Korea was extremely ill-behaved and the lull model for Malaysia failed to
satisfy all convergence criteria. The results for the full model have not been confirmed as the
global optimum.
bWe failed to find an optimum with a likelihood value higher than that of the Hamilton model.
CDue to an ill-conditioning problem, standard errors were computed from the inverse of the
Hessian.
Table 5
Model diagnostics: Correlation of the country asset pricing errors with information

                               World information Z                        Local information Z                 World plus local Z=[Z.   Z]
    Country                            W              LM          2               W              LM                        W            LM




International Finance Corporation-Emerging
U.S. dollar returns
                                      38.64          21.32      0.0945           6139           25.41      0 1004        83.51          28.33
        Chile'        0.0097
                                     (0.0001         [0.0001                    (0.000)         [0.000]                  (0.000]       (0.0011
                     -0.0262          4.94            3.02      -0.0362           3.31           6.49      00234          8.48          10.53
     Colombia
                                     [0.423]         (0.697)                    [0.652]         [0.261]                  [0.487)       (0.309]
                                                                0.2726           42.06
                                                                                                  °        0.2681         57.64
      Greece'        -0.0069          29.83
                                                        -                                          -                                        .
                                     (0.000)                                    (0.0001                                  (0.000]
         India       -0.0012          6.55            25.80     -0.0163           1.27           31.08     -0.0111        1116          33.74
                                     (0.257)         (0.0001                    (0.938]         (0.000]                  (0.265]       [0.000]
      Jordan         -0.0171          3.33            8.34       0.0444           3.74            9.99     0.0280          4.08         11.38
                                                     (0.1381                    [0.587]         [0.075]                  (0.906]       (0.251]
       Korea          0.0074
                                     (0.6481
                                      17.49
                                                        •        0.0243          30.71
                                                                                                  •        0.0443         42.03
                                                        -                                          -                     (0.0001
                                                                                                                                            .
                                     (0.0041                                    (0.000)
                                                                                                           -0.0523         7.73
                                                                                                                                            5
     Malaysia        -0.0452           1.84                     -0.0060           6.45
                                     (0.871)            -                        (0.2651
                                                                                                   -                     (0.562]            -

       Mexico         0.0580          21.82           29.64      0.0657          13.38           33.72     0.1266         42.80         44.53
                                     (0.001)         (0.000)                     [0.020]        [0.000]                  (0.000]       (0.000]
       Nigeria        -0.0355         4.05             5.24      0.3830           7.11            3.28     0 3900          948           9,85
                                     (0.543]         [0.388]                     (0.213]        (0.657]                  (0.395]        0.363)
       Taiwan         -0.0232          5.99           26.59      0.0290           4.10          2081       0.0006         14.03         30.27
                                     [0.307]         [0.000)                     (0.535]        [0.001]                  [0.121]        (0000]
    Thailand          0.0394           19.55          13.23      0.0627           6.33           11.94     0.0793         25.86          20.58
                                      [0.002]        (0.021)              .      [0.275)        [0.0361                   (0.002)       (0.015]
   Zimbabwe'          0.0106           9.44           19.44      0.0281           17.75          19.55     0.0720          28.86         25 16
                                      [0.0931        (0.002]                     [0.003]        [0.002]                   (0.001]       [0.003]
     The asterisk indicate, that the model is estimated with time-varying rather than constant transition probabilities. The      statistics are
adjusted for degrees of freedom and result from a regression of the error term       on the set of instruments: Z global information. Z' local
information or Z global and local informa&ion. The W-statistics are heteroskedasticity-consistent Wald tests on the joint significance of the
coefficients in that regression. The pva1ues are based on a X2 distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the number of included regressors
The LM test, are standard Lagrange multiplier tests of the alternative specified in equation (14). They are asymptotically distributed
with degrees of freedom equal to the number of elements in Z, Z' or Z if the error distribution ii correctly specified
• The moment matrix of the scores was singular.
Table 6
The interaction between integration and foreign exchange regimes

Two regressions are estimated for each country:

                     L3+i = a + aist + a2tt + t3t + Ct
                            =a    + aEs + c4i + e
where s is exchange rate versus the U.S. dollar, t is the interest rate, and
t  is the estimated degree of integation. We report the difference between the
adjusted R2s of the two models as well as the x2 and p-value associated with
c (coefficient on the estimated integration).


         Country                        2                x2
          Chile                     0.0197              4.081
                                                       [0.043]
        Colombia                    0.0093              4.344
                                                       [0.037]
          Greece                    0.0015              1.779
                                                       [0.182]
          India                     0.0072              2.964
                                                       [0.085]
          Jordan                    -0.0066            0.0013
                                                       [0.971]
          Korea                     0.0125              4.536
                                                       [0.033]
         Malaysia                   0.0618              4.576
                                                       [0.032]
          Mexico                    0.0012             0.8513
                                                       (0.356]
         Nigeria                    0.0328              2.683
                                                       [0.101]
         Taiwan                     -0.0116            0.0436
                                                       (0.8351
         Thailand                   0.0005              2.512
                                                       [0.113]
        Zimbabwe                    0.0076              2.798
                                                       [0.094)
The ) test has one degree of freedom.
Table 7
Estimation results for the constrained alternatives

                                    Constant                                          Constant            Constant degree
           Country                 price of risk                )tS                   variance             of integration
                                       LR1                                              LR2                     LR3
               Chile                  28.95                   6.82b                     6.93                    6.49
                                     [0.000]                  (0.23)                   [0.031)                 [0.011]
           Colombia                   23.28                    4.58                     4.83                   0.533
                                     [0.000]                  (2.28)                   (0.090]                 [0.466]
             Greece                   49.05                     1.60                    52.34                   8.99
                                     [0.000]                   (0.09)                  [0.000)                 [0.0031
               India                  11.30                     9.92                    14.78                   8.89
                                     [0.023]                   (4.02)                  [0.001]                10.0031
             Jordan                   17.75                    43.59                    8.90                    0.34
                                     [0.001]                  (14.15)                  [0.012]                [0.560]
              Korea                   27.34                    24.79                    27.21                   117
                                     [0.000]                   (1,70)                  [0.000)                [0.281]
           Malaysia                   7.10                   10 312,4L                  5.62                    0.77
                                     [0.131]                  (53.8)                   [0.060]                [0.380]
             Mexico                   12.73                     3.01                    10.28                  18.54
                                     [0.013]                   (1.15)                  [0.036]                [0.0001
                                      6.22                     10,87c                     a                     9.93
             Nigeria                                                                      -
                                     [0.183]                   (3.84)                                          (0.002)
             Taiwan                   23.92                   0.00002                   18.21                    4.08
                                     [0.000)                 (0.00004)                 [0.000)                 [0.043)
           Thailand                   4.30                      1.97                      a                     21.32
                                     [0.367)                   (1.45)                     -                    [0.000]
          Zimbabwe                    4.51                      5.87                    8.51                    10.25
                                     [0.342)                   (2.30)                  [0.014)                 [0.001]
        LRs (s=1,2,3) is the likelihood ratio statistic testing the restrictions in the panel heading and is distributed with
4,2, and 1 degree of freedom.        is the local price of variance risk estimated under the restriction of constant prices of
risk.
°The likelihood value is higher in the constrained model. This is possible since the first-stage estimation prevents a
complete nesting of the two models.
bDue to an ill-conditioning problem, standard errors were computed from the inverse of the Hessian.
CSiflce the Hessian failed to invert, .tandard errors were computed from the cross-product of first derivatives.
dtimation was ill-behaved and this optimum has not been confirmed as the global optimum.
Figure 1
Time-variation in the wodd price of risk


                                           World Price of Risk
                                           Constant Variance Model
40


30


20


10



 0


     rrrrrr                          .         r-    - - ,- ,- ,- ,-0) y-
                                                     Date
                                                                       0) F i      0) 0) 0)


     NBER peaks and troughs tabefled with arrows.




                                           World Price of Risk
40



30



20



10



 0

     0)  0 N-' C
     co N-     N- C)
                  N- N- N-t)N-CO
                               N- N- COCO
                                  N- N- 0)CO
                                           0 FCO CO                  t) CO N- CO 0) 0 ' C.1
                                                                     CO CO CO CO CO 0) 0) 0)
     F        1 q r 1 F I W F W- F - F 0)0)0)0)0)0)0)0)
                                       FFFFF F
                                                     Date

      NBER peaks and troughs labelled with arrows.
 Figure 2
 Time-varying integration measures




                               Chile                                                    Colombia
                  Ex Ante Probability of Integration                          Ex Ante Probabdity of Integration
                                                              1



O.8


I:
 0.2


   77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91        92         86    87      88          89          90         91   '92
                                  Date                                                           Date


                              Greece                                                        India
                  Ex Ante Probability of Integration                          Ex Ante Probability of Integration
                                                              I                 V


                                                            0.8
 0.6                                                         0.6

 0.4                                                         0.4

 0.2                                                         0.2

  0                                                           0                                     AJL/LJ
   77 76 79 80 81     82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91    92         77 78 79 80 81 82    83   84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91           92
                                  Date                                                        Date
 Figure 2 (continued)




                                     Jordan                                                                                Korea
                         Ex Ante Probability of Integration                                                    Ex Ante Probability 04 Integration




>s   0.8
                                                                                 .0
                                                                                 a
                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                 0.
                                                                                 a,
1::
                                                                                       0.2


                          82 83 84 85 86 87                   88 89 90 91   92          077    78   79 80 81    82   83    8.4    85 86 87 88 89    90 91   92
                                         Date                                                                                    Date


                                    Malaysia                                                                              Mexico
                         Ex Ante Probability of Integration                                               Ex Ante Probability of Integration



>. 0.8                                                                           0,8
                                                                                 .0
                                                                                 a
                                                                                 .0 0.6
                                                                                 2
                                                                                 0.
                                                                                  a,
1::
     0.2                                                                               0.2


       0—                                                                                    77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92
           77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92
                                          Date                                                                                   Date
Figure 2 (continued)




                                   Nigeria                                                                     Taiwan
                                                                                                   Ex Ante Probability of Integration
                       Ex Ante Probability of Integration



'     0.8                                                                  .?;'   0.8
.0                                                                         .0
      0.6                                                                         0.6
3.
                                                                            a)
                                                                            E

.10.4
      0.2                                                                         0.2

       0
        86       87      88        89          90           91   92                 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87                    88   89 90 91   92
                                        Date                                                                       Date


                                  Thailand                                                                   Zimbabwe
                                                                                                   Ex Ante Probability of Integration
                       Ex Ante Probabihty of Integration




.0
.0
2
a.
a)

 a)
      0.2


        077   78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91               92                78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89
                                        Date                                                                        Date
