NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT IN U.S.
EDUCATION AND TRAINING

Jacob Mincer

Working Paper No. 4844

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1994

Paper presented at the International Conference on Human Capital Investments and Economic
Performance at Santa Barbara, November 17-19, 1993. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

1994 by Jacob Mincer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4844
August 1994
INVESTMENT IN U.S.
EDUCATION AND TRAINING

ABflAC'F
The current high rates of return to human capital stimulate a supply response via increased

investments in education and training. The so increased human capital stock exerts downward
pressures on the rates of return that reduce the skill differential in wages.
This paper reports estimates of: the responses of investments in post-secondary education.
measured by enrollments, to changes in the rate of return; responses of investment in job training,

measured by incidence; and effects of accumulated human capital stocks, measured by
educational attainment, on educational wage differentials. Enrollment responses and attainment
effects are shown to be separated by a time lag of about a decade.
The parameter estimates are based on annual CPS and NCES data, covering a recent 25
year period. If demands for human capital cease their acceleration, the rate of return is expected

to decline about 25% over the current decade, judging by the estimated parameters and lags.

Jacob Mincer
Department of Economics
International Affairs Building
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER

2

Investments in Education and Training in the U.S.'
(Levels and changes since the 1960's)

Introduction

A look at the contemporary American educational system is a
study in contrasts and paradoxes:

1.

In quantitative tens, levels of enrollment and
attainment measured in years of schooling remain among

the highest in the world. So are the expenditures on
schooling which amount to about 7% of GNP without the
inclusion of student opportunity costs, and over 10% when

they are included. The total cost is high not merely as
a result of the large numbers of students enrolled, but
also in terms of cost per student year; In 1989 this was

about $4300 per student enrolled in elementary and
secondary schooling, and about $10,000 per student in

post—secondary schooling2, without the inclusion of
opportunity costs. As is oft repeated, U.S. costs per
student are the highest in the world.

Qualitative assessments present two contrasts:
Funding by the National Science Foundation is gratefully
The work benefitted from excellent research
acknowledged.
assistance provided by John Higgins.

By 1990—91, these costs per student rose to $5,300 and
over $12,000, respectively.
2

3

While by international standards, U.S. outlays for
education are very high, by the same standard students at

high school levels and below do regularly less well than
their peers abroad on tests of knowledge and achievement.

Despite the longest schooling (about 80% completed high

school) a recent study of the Department of Education
reports that nearly a half of U.S. adults cannot read
English properly or handle arithmetic for the purpose of

elementary tasks.3

At the same time, the higher

educational system in the U.S. is still considered to be

a model of excellence. One wonders how long the supply
of students to higher education can remain unaffected by

prior educational experience, especially if school
education continues to expand in response to growing
demand for a skilled labor force and/or if selectivity
standards in admissions begin to decline.

2.

The past two decades were especially turbulent:
first decelerating then accelerating demands for human
capital were accompanied by apparently perverse changes

in supplies: Thus the proportion of college graduates
increased rapidly in the 1970's, while it stabilized in
the 1980's just when demand for skills accelerated.

Source: Educational testing Service, Princeton, N.J., as
reported in the New York Times, September 9, 1993

4

Data on schooling levels, costs, and rates of return

are available and are not controversial. The challenge

in analyzing the developments of the past two dec-des
lies in identifying changing demands for human cap.tal

and the supply responses, if any.

In Part I of this

paper I present a brief survey of the current levels, and

an analysis of the recent trends in demand and supply
resulting in and responding to changing profitabilities
of education.

A comparable survey of job training investments

3.

encounters the biggest hurdle in the diffidulties of

estimating the guahtitative levels or volumes of
training, and in gauging profitabilities or rates of
return on these investments. I have recently published
a report on such estimates (Mincer, 1991) .

These are

somewhat more reliable with current data, which were not

available 30 years ago when I first (Mincer, 1962)
ventured to estimate national levels of job training. In

Part

II I briefly describe the results and analyze the

trends in profitability and volumes of investments in job

training. Did the growth

in demand

for human capital in

the 1980's apply to job training as well, and did job
training investments increase as a result? The answers
based on indirect as well as more direct evidence appear
to be positive.

S

In both analyses of school education and of job
training, the evidence shows that investments in human
capital respond positively to profitability, that is to

changing skill differentials.

Yet the supply of

the

acciunulated stock has not as yet (1991) begun to reduce

current profitabilities which are high by historical
standards. Lags in the educational pipeline, growing
costs, and perverse demographics represent delays and
impediments to timely supply effects.

It is also very

likely that the poor performance of elementary and high

school students represents a major bottleneck for the
supply adjustment,

6

I. School education

1.

Levels. Enrollments. Costs. Attainment

In 1989 46 million students were enrolled in elementary and

secondary schools. In the same year 13.1 million students were
enrolled in post—secondary education, including 3.8 million in 2-

year colleges, 6.8 million in 4- year colleges and universities,
and 2.5 million in postgraduate schooling.

The educational attainment of young people, most at whom
completed schooling, is described in Table 1.

The Table shows

increases in high school and college completions in the 1970's and

a levelling off in the 19805.

Table 2 shows educational attainments in international
perspective.

Among six foremost developed countries, the U.S. working age
population (25—64) has the highest educational levels measured in
school years completed. However, in the younger population (25—34)

Japan and Germany overtook the U.S. in the proportion of high

school graduates, and Japan comes close to the U.S. in the
proportion of college graduates.

The more rapid expansion of

education in Japan and Germany in the

past

2—3 decades is

consistent with their high rates of income growth.

7

To visualize the process by which the human capital stock.
measured by attainment, arises in the figures of Table 1, it is
necessary to look at investment behavior measured by enrollments in

Table 3.

Here, all three columns show moderate declines in

enrollment rates in the 1970's and large increases in the 1980's.
Note the difference between the investment behavior shown in Table

3 and the human capital stock behavior shown in Table 1.

The

filtering of enrollments to ultimate attainments during this period

can be described simply: Of the 80—85% of the 25-29 year old
population who were high—school graduates (col. 1, Table 1) 50-60%

enrolled in college in October after graduation during the 1980's

(col.l, Table 1) but only one—third of high-school graduates

continued to be enrolled through ages 18—24 (col. 2).

This

represents about 25%—30% of the (18—24) population group (col. 3).

Half a dozen years later a somewhat smaller proportion of the age

group (25—29) attained at least 16 years of schooling (col. 2 in
Table 1).

Table 4 shows the expenditures on elementary and high—school

students and on post—secondary education (public and private) in

current dollars and as a proportion of GNP.

In 1989 the

expenditures on elementary and high—school students were over $200
billion, or about $4,300 per

student,

and constituted 4.1% of GM?.

Expenditure of $131 billion on post—secondary education constituted

2.7% of CUP, amounting to about $to,000 per student. These figures

exclude opportunity costs of students. The latter are on average

a

as high as the direct

about

costs

at the post—secondary

level.

Adding those at that level only yields a total f ure (for all
levels) of $462 billion which was close to 10% of GF

Although no

comparative Table is shown, the average annual cost per student is
higher in the U.S. than in other countries. In l

S U.S. costs per

college student (excluding opportunity costs) were at least 50%
higher

2.

than in countries next in rank.'

changes Over Tine

Table 1 shows that educational attainment

of

the population in

the early working ages (25—29) grew strongly in the 1970's but
stagnated in the So's. Figure 1 portrays the annual time series.
Figure 2 shows the concurrent time series of the rates of return to

school education, or the college "wage premium" measured by the

percent wage differential between college and high school
graduates, at 6—10 years of experience3.

As Figure 1 shows,

attainment rose steadily to a historic high in the late
70's when "rates of return" (Fig. 2) reached a historic low. But
there has been no increase in attainment since then, while it

educational

Those were West Germany and Sweden, according to
Clotfelter et. al, 1991 (p. 23)
The pattern is similar though more shallow when the iole

labor

force is included.

The "rats of return" here is on

opportunity costs alone, excluding tuition net of student subsx4ies
and earnings. "Wage Premium" is another term for this. Measures

of the college wage premium at the end of the first decade of
working life is last contaminated by differential job training

(see Mincer, 1974 on "overtaking"). Similar patterns are produced
by coefficients of schooling in wage functions.

9

appears that the need for a more highly skilled labor force
accelerated as suggested by the rising "rate of return".

The

apparently perverse behavior of the educational supply of human
capital, in relation to profitability of school education, poses
several questions: Economic theory predicts a positive response of

the supply of human capital to its profitability. Is the response

missing, or perverse? Or is the rate of return a consequence of
exogenous shifts in educational supplies, such as changes in public

subsidies or family income?

To answer these questions it is important to disentangle the

demand and supply factors which produce changes in the rates of
return.

And it is important to keep in mind the distinction

between stocks of human capital (attainment) and investment flows
(enrollment). It is the flows that respond to profitability, while

the stocks accumulated over a number of years affect the
profitability later on.

3.

Anatomy of changing Drofitabilities of education in the past
Quarter

A lively

Century
literature has grown in the past few years concerned

with the dramatic changes in the rates of return to education.6
These have grown in the sixties, fell in the 70's to reach a low
6

Murphy and Welch (1989), Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman
(1990), Katz and Murphy (1991), Bound and Johnson (1991), Mincer
(1991).

10

level of about 4%, a decline which was labelled or diagnosed as
"overeducation" at the time. They have since rebounded in the Go's

to reach heights at 12% or more in the past half a dozen years.
The much increased inequality in labor incomes over the past decade

is widely viewed as a corollary of this development.'

By now a consensus has emerged that the decline of the rate of

return in the 70's was mainly due to the rapid influx of the large

baby boom generation of college graduates into the labor market,

and the steep rise of the rate of return in the 80's was due
primarily to increases in skill biased or labor saving demand,
while supply remained stagnant, as the "baby bust" generation began

to enter the work force.

In€ernational competition in low—skill

intensive products, the growth of unskilled immigration, and the
decline in union density played some, though apparently minor parts

in the changing wage structure. Most studies agreed that skill-

biased labor demand was the major factor in the 1980's, but
inferences Ofl

the

technologically—based increases in demand were

mainly of a residual sort, rather than directly estimated. Only

two studies identified demand shifts empirically.

Of these,

Krueger (1991) estimated the contribution of computerization to the

growth of educational wage differentials in the 1980's, and my own

work (1991, 1993) utilized information on R & D intensity as the

demand shifter, covering the period 1963—1987 annually.

This

variable grew in the 60's, stagnated in the 70's, and grew rapidly
Juin, Pierce, andflurphy (1992), Levy and Murriafle (1992).

it

in the 80's.

Tables 5a&b shows the results of my regression equations which

best pert orned in explaining the variation over time in "rates of

return" to college education. As shown in Figure 2, the year—to—
year educational percent wage differentials between young college
and high school graduates are very

closely tracked (ccl. 3 in Table

5a) by relative supplies of college graduates (REST) with negative
sign and positively by changes in relative demand for educated
workers.

The latter is indexed by research and development

expenditures per worker (ROE) as well as by trends in relative
service employment (RSG). Pt all the factors, ROE accounts for
most of the explanatory power.

with the decline of average productivity growth, the labor
saving changes in demand took the f on of increases in demand for
workers with post—secondary education and decreases in demand f or
workers at lower educational levels. The reduction in wages of the
latter in the 1980's may in part be attributed to the growth of the

negative balance in international trade, but as col. 1 of Table 5a

suggests, its explanatory power is weaker, and when the ROE
variable is included the effects of the trade balance vanish.

When the time series is extended back to 1957 and up to 1990,

12

in Table Sb the results are qualitatively similar, and the
elasticities of the demand variables close to unity, and of
relative supply in the young labor force (age 25-29) is about -.7.

A number of micro—level studies (Allen, 1993; Griliches, 199])

show that the technologically based skill—biased demand hypothesis

is consistent with a variety of observed changes at detailed
industry levels.

Equations 4 and S in Table Sa point also to

capital—skill complementarity as a factor in growing demands for
educated workers. Capital intensity was measured by expenditures

on new equipment per worker (EQ) which grew in the 1980's. It is

not clear, however, whether the skill bias of new equipment
represents anything different than the effects of new technologies
embodied in the equipment.

4.

suonly Responses to Changing Demand

While supplies of educated workers played a part in the drama,

they appeared to behave perversely, especially in the 80's when
demand took off. As already indicated this does not signify a lack

of response of supply to changes in demand. Since tF.
human capital (here educational attainment) that is t:.

stock of
supply

which affects wage differentials is built up over a nw er of

years, the flow of investments (i.e.

enrollments) mt.;t be

It should be noted that Table 5a covers the more
homogenous groups of white males, while Sb covers all males.
Differences will be explored in future research.

13

investigated to detect responses to profitability. I now report on
the response of enrollments in post—secondary education as observed

annually over the 1967—1990 period:

Economic theory tells us that investments in education respond

positively to prospective rates of return, as well as to parental
education and income. More precisely, those with sufficient access

to investment funds compare rates of return on school education
with profitabilities of alternative investments, such as financial

rates. Most, however, are limited by family income.

(Parental

education is an index of it, as well as of preferences for
educational investments). Since our measure of educational wage
premia is not a rate of return, as it misses direct costs, (net)
tuition costs must be taken into account as well. Avoiding a more
laborious effort, I used gross tuition costs, as these apparently

behaved similarly to the net costs:

Subsidies to students and

earnings of students did not grow in the SO's while tuition costs

rose greatly (Clotfelter,1991). The proper measure of financial
rates of return is the real expected long term rate.

We tried

several expectationa). hypotheses to construct such rates without

much success in the regression analysis. When put alongside the

educational premium,

the

variable

was

not

significant.

Conventional financial wisdom claims that the real rates (nominal
minus inflation) are usually very low. Educational rates of return
(here r1) are substantially higher, so the differential would move

very much as the r1 does.

The prospective wage premia are

14

visualized

(presumably

by

families

and

the

"teenage

econometricians") as the ratio of wages of college to high school

graduates about a decade after graduation (6—10 years of
experience) which they currently observe. This is the "overtaking

stage" of experience which is minimally affected by job training

(Mincer, 1974) another dimension of human capital investment on
which I report In Part II.

In Table 6 I report results of three regressions of successive

educational flows:

enrollment rates in October following high

school graduation (cal. 1), enrollment rates of high school
graduates in the following years (ages 18—24) (col. 2), and the

resulting proportion of population of young people ClS—24)
enrolled (col. 3).

Roughly 6—10 years later this population

reaches the "overtaking" age and constitutes the effective relative

supply (shown in Figure 1 and RESY in cal. 1 of Tables Sa & b)
which in turn affects educational wage differentials at that point

(almost a decade later).

A more comprehensive, though not

necessarily better measure of relative educational supply includes

people of all ages, not merely the younger ones.

This variable

(REST) was used in the regressions of Table 5a, beyond cal. 1.

At all stages shown in Table 6, the response to wage premia is

positive and significant, tuition has a negative effect and the
proxy f or parental education (andor permanent income) is positive.

All are

significant

except for tuition for continuing students and

15

together track the time series of enrollment quite well (with

75, 69, and 79%, respectively) as shown in the three
panels of Figure 3•9 When the residual u—hat of the first column
regression is added as a variable for continuing students (column
adjusted R' of

2 & 3) it is positive and significant. It

82 and 88 percent respectively.

raises the R-squares to

The variable u—hat represents

unmeasured factors, such as learning ability and achievement prior

to high school graduation that promotes persistence in further
schooling once enrolled in college.

The educational pipeline from enrollment to attainment implies

a lag which is shown in Figure 4. The optimal lag, determined by
a regression of attainment in the young population (Figure 1) on
enrollment of roughly the same cohort was 8 years. This regression

yielded an

— 0.93, when the proportion of college graduates in

the 25—29 age group is regressed on enrollments of 18—24 year olds
8 years before. Similarly, if the dependent variable is the cohort
at 6—10 years of working age (years since completion of schooling)

the optimal lag is again 8 years, and R' = 0.89.

A similar,

slightly weaker result is obtained when the cohort with 1—10 years

It is interesting to note that, with only one exception
(Mattila, 1982), none of the voluminous research on the demand for

education related it to the (prospective) rate of return to
education; various studies single out components of costs and/or of

returns for investigation (see Freeman, 1986).

In the cross—

some of the variables which we could not capture (or were
silent) in time series are shown to be significant, as for example
number of siblings, single parents, and local unemployment (Hecknan
section,

and Cameron, 1993).

16

of experience is used as the relative supply (proportion with 16+
of schooling) variable.

It is this relative supply variable which affects the ran of
return negatively, holding demand variables constant - as shown in

Table Sa&b. Figure 4 shows how well the enrollment series (lagged
8 years) fits relative supply, by shifting the attainment series of

the young population 8 years back. Enrollment growth in the GO's
produces the growth of attainment prior to 1975, Jhile the static
enrollment rate in the 70's leads to the stagnation in the supply

in the SO'S.

In turn, the growh of enrollment in the 80's

predicts an increasing relative supply in the 90's among the young
cohorts, as shown in the extrapolation of the lower graph in Figure
4.

The predicted increase in attainment from 1991 to 2000 is,

according to Figure 4, about 8 percent points.

Parameter estimates of REST in Tables Sa&b imply an elasticity

of —0.72 of the wage premium with respect to the relative supply.
The predicted increase in attainment of 35% in the young population

(8/23 in Figure 4) would reduce the college premium by 35% x 0.72

= 25.2%.

If the current college premium is about 12%, the supply

response would return the college premium nearly two—thirds

the

way toward its long—run average (1957—1990) a decade from 19

In this scenario over halt of the skill, shortages would be
eliminated by the end of the decade following the year 1993. This

17

prediction relies on supply effects alone, and assumes no further
growth in demand, in direct costs of schooling (such as tuition),

and no changes in the composition of the work force.

These

assumptions are considered in the concluding section.

II. Job Training Investments

1. Aacsreclate Casts

There are no official data on national investments in job
training comparable to data on enrollments and costs of schooling,

published by the U.S. Department of Education. Three decades ago,

I attempted to estimate job training volumes based on the human
capital hypothesis which attributes growth of life—cycle wages to

investments in formal and informal job training and learning as
well as to investments in job search and mobility (Mincer, 1962).

The availability of direct information on job training in
recent data panels, though far from adequate, makes it feasible to
attempt once again estimates of investment volumes and of rates of

return to job training. Empirically grounded direct estimates are

preferable to the largely hypothetical procedure of thirty
years ago. In addition, some information is now also available on
clearly

employer
In

investments in training of workers.

my recent study (Mincer, 1991, 1993) I estimated costs of

18

job training in the economy for 1976 and 1987 using three entirely
different methods: (1) In the "direct" method time (hours) spent in
training per year was valued at wage rates prior to training, or of

comparable non—trainees.

(2) A second method uses information on

casts of formal training programs and on time spent on them, and
inflates the cost to a total training level, using information on
time

spent in all training,

the bulk.

(3)

including informal training which is

The third method is the "indirect" one which uses

wage profiles, as in the old (1962) paper, but with wage gains due

to mobility netted out.

The direct estimates (1) and (2) are

rather close. The indirect estimate (3) exceeds the former two by
about one—third. This suggests that human capital investments can
account for three—fourths of the growth of the (cross—sectional)

wage profile, leaving a minor role to other, not mutually
exclusive, explanations.

The "indirect" approach dates back to my 1962 work which was

based on Census data for 1959.

Costs of job training were

estimated from typical (cross—sectional) wage profiles of male
workers, classified by education level: Increments of wages over
each

year of experience in the cross-sectio&° were summed over

experience and across education groups and capitalized by internal

tO

in part wage
Actual (longitudinal) increments contain
which are not returns

changes due to aggregate growth
on individual investments.

and cycles,

19

rates of return." The arithmetic is straightforward: The annual
wage increment is:

tsw.=rc

where r is the internal rate of return and ; the investment cost

over the year t. The conclusion was that total costs of human
capital investments during the working ages were large, almost a

half of total costs (including opportunity costs) of school
education.

No "direct" estimates of training costs were available at that

time. These became feasible for 1976 when a special time—usa study

of the PSID (Duncan and Stafford, 1980) reported job training
information. Wage data were available for the same year in the
regular PSID panel. Thus for 1976 both "direct" and "indirect"
estimates can be constructed and compared.

The "indirect" approach based on wage profiles was implemented

on the 1976 data in a much less laborious fashion (Mincer, 1991)

than in the 1962 study. The simplification was made possible by
the use of a parametric wage function. A semi—log wage function
(Mincer, 1974)

" The rates were estimated from pairs of successive education

wage profiles.

20

in wtaZ +

rk)C

-

OX2

+

ln(1-k0+.X)

contains on the right-hand side a vector of variables 1 which
includes years of school education, the experience variable X, and
the parameters of the linear investment profile k,k0_(k0/T)*X, where

k, is the initial fraction of earning

capacity devoted to

investment, and T the investment period. All the parameters were
estimated in a non—linear procedure by H. Rosen (1982).

Based on the Rosen estimates Table (7) shows my calculation of

inferred investment costs)2 With w the average wage in each age
bracket, N the number of workers in it and k, the mean investment
ratio in the age bracket,

1= ENWk

summed over all brackets yields the average ratio of training
investments per hour to wage per hour. The resulting 8.5% ratio
was applied to the wage bill in 1976 National Income Accounts and
yielded a figure of $88 billion of worker post—school investments.

Netting out mobility investments estimated as 15% of the above
figure (JovanoviC and Mincer, 1981) leaves the indirect estimate of

For greater detail, see Mincer (1991). Rosen's parameters
are estimated on wages of males. My estimates average male and
female investment ratios, with the latter assumed to be a half of
females which was about
the toner, and applied to the wage bill of

40% ot the total in 1976.

21

job training investment costs that would produce the observed
(within fins) wage growth at $75 billion in 1976.

All that is needed for the "direct" estimate of job training
investment costs is the time spent in training per period and the

period opportunity cost of that training. The 1976 PSID Time Use
Survey is the only such survey of time allocation on the job during

a week's period. The data are shown in Table (8). The calculation

is simple: It is the product of columns 1 through 4 summed over
all ages: Total costs per week

Tr=E w*PJ

where w is the wage foregone, h hours of training per week,13 and

N, the number of workers receiving training during the week.

So

estimated, total annual costs of job training amounted to about $56

billion in 1976.

One check on this order of magnitude which may be viewed as
another method of estimating on-the—job training is available from

a survey of companies published in Training Magazine. The survey

reported expenditures on tonal training of about $40 billion in
1987.

The time spent in tonal training was about a week per

The Time Use Survey lists separately training time without
production and time with production ongoing. Only a third of the
latter was (conservatively) estimated as training time. The two
components are summed in col. 2.

22

trainee. This does not include time spent in informal training or
learning on the job which is the preponderant manner of training in

the U.S. Indeed, the PSID Time Use Survey suggests an average of
about five weeks (200 hours) of training per year, so if the time
spent in all forms of training in 1987 was the same as in 1976, the

report from firms would suggest a figure of about 200 billion of

1987 dollars in 1987.

Projecting the 55.7 billion (in 1976

dollars) to 19B7 (assuming the same ratio of training expenditures

to the wage bill) yields about $150 billion in 1987 dollars.
Apparently the training ratio increased by 1987,11 50 the estimates
based on the two entirely different and independent surveys are not
far apart.

The "indirect" estimates of job training expenditures based on

wage profiles and the "direct" ones using the PSID Time Use Survey

provide the best comparison as they were taken in the same year
(1976). since growth in the wage profile over the working age is
likely to include factors other than job training it is reasonable
to find the "indirect" estimate to be larger (75 billion) than the

direct estimate (56 billion). This suggests that roughly 75% of
the (cross—sectionally) observed intra-f in wage growth over the
life—cycle is attributable to job training or learning, while 25%

is likely to contain factors which produce an upward sloping 4age

14 see section 3 below.

23

profile other than human capital investments.'5

2. profitability of Job Training Investments

Another objective of the study was to estimate profitabilities

of job training. That wage growth is related to in-firm training
is a finding in many studies. Viewing this growth as a return on
the investment costs produces positive rates of return which vary
depending on the data, demographic group, and period.

Table 9 presents components of rates of return on investments

in job training. Estimates -of effects of a year with training on
wage (w) growth shown in column 1 are not comparable to effects of
an additional year of schooling at the average level of schooling.

The reason is that job training is not a full—time (full—year)
activity. If it takes 25 per cent of worktime during an average

week of a year with training, the rates of return on worker
opportunity costs are four times higher than the estimated rates of
wage growth.

A series of rough calculations suggests that a generous
margin of error could lower this ratio to 65% or raise it to 85%.
The other models which posit an upward slope of the wage profile,
aside from job training, include employer schemes to economize on

costs of monitoring (tazear), on costs of turnover (Salop and
Salop) and wage outcomes of job matching (Jovanovic). No empirical
evidence exists on the quantitative empirical importance of these
undoubtedly plausible models.
As I show below, growth of the cross—section wage profile is
affected also by changes in the age distribution. These changes
were pronounced in the 70's, and reversed in the SO's. Indirect

(wage profile) estimates of job training investments are,
therefore, overstated in the 70's and understated in the 80's.

24

Let k = h/H, the fraction of work time devoted to job
training.

Here h is hours of training during the period (week,

month, or year) and H average hours of work during the period. Let

w be the pre—training and w the post-training wage.

Then the

(uncorrected) rate of return on training is r' = ((w1— w,) * H]
*

h].

/

Here the numerator is the annual dollar increase in

earnings, the return on the investment, while the denominator is

the opportunity cost of training.

Let C = (w1 - w0)/w, be the

percent increase in wages due to training; then the (uncorrected)
rate of return is r' =

4/k.

The first three columns of Table 9 show

estimates of w, k and r' based on the PSID, the EOPP, and the two
young

cohorts of the IlLS.
The r' rates appear to be implausibly high. However, they need

to be corrected downward, if skills acquired in training
depreciate,

and if the payoff period is short.

If training is

portable, the latter factor may be ignored, as the median age of

trainees is about 30, so that, without depreciation, the payoff

period may exceed 30 years.

Depreciation, however, can be

substantial, as suggested by Lillard and Tan (1986) .

For the

previous NtS young cohort, they estimate an initial wage tin of

10.8 per cent due to training and a subsequent decline of 1. per
cent per year following training. This translates
cent

exponential

into a .

per

rate of decline due to depreciation in return.., per

year. My attempts to estimate a depreciation rate in the 'SW
using the Liflard and Tan (1986) procedure yielded a depreciation

25

rate close to 4 per cent. This smaller figure in the PSID may be
due to the broader coverage of all males, compared to younger males

in NLS: if training has substantial elements of specificity,
mobility would create wage depreciation. Since mobility of young

workers exceeds substantially the mobility of older workers, a
smaller depreciation rate in the PSID may be reasonable.

The estimate of corrected rates of return (r) is obtained as
follows: given annual depreciation rates (d), and the payoff period

T, equate costs or foregone earnings while training (kw0) to the
present value of the stream of gains (Aw) the first year following
training,

l+r

the next year,

the year after, and so on:

1÷r
l+r + (1•d)2

kit0 =

=

r+d

when

+

... 1r

2' =

More generally,

Sw

k
,

i—d

r+d

-

lr

It follows that corrected r
r(1—d) (1 -

(.Z)fl
1r

— d

(1)

Column 4 shows estimates of r, with 'P assumed >= 30.

since

the estimates of d were obtained by ignoring labor mobility, they
could reflect negative effects of mobility on gains from (partly)

26

firm specific (nontransferable) training. The polar alternative is

complete specificity which makes the payoff period T equal to the

length of tenure in the firm in which training was received, and
d=O, if there is no obsolescence within the tenure period T. (The
observed average values of T are shown in col. (7)

r =

r'(l

—

In this case,

(l+r)11 according to equation 1; r was solved by

iteration, and the results are shown in col. (5) .

These numbers

are rather surprisingly close to those in col. (4).

Thus, the

estimates do not depend much on whether the observed depreciation
is true and training is largely transferable, or it is an artifact

due to substantial specificity.

To calculate the profitability rate of employer's investments
in training we need to know their returns and costs. In principle,

the way to assess returns is to compare increases in productivity
resulting from training with increases in wages. The excess is the

return on costs borne by the firm. Two recent studies using very

different data and approaches suggest that the productivity

increase is over twice that of the wage increase caused by
training. This is found by Barron et al. (1989) in the EOPP data,

where a productivity scale is used to gauge the increase.
Blakemore and Hoffman (1988) use production and turnover data by
industry to estimate effects of tenure on wages and on output per

find a doubling of productivity compared to
wages, implying that returns to employers are similar to returns to
workers. If employer costs are also about the same as those of
unit of time. They

27

workers, the uncorrected r' ( in col. 3 of Table 9) would be the

same for employers as for workers.

And if depreciation is

negligible, the employer rate of return would be again the same as

that of workers as listed in col. (5) in which observed tenure is
thern assumed payoff period. Note that this is always true for the

employer who gains only as long as trainees stay in the fin -

whether or not training is transferable. However, if depreciation
is positive during workers' stay in the training firm,
rates are lower than those indicated in cols (5) or (4)

employers'
.

Using

a

4 per cent depreciation rate for the PSID and 12 per cent for the
young NLS group results in a lower limit for employer profitability

rates, shown in col. (6). only in the case of complete specificity

of training would worker rates also be the same.

The assumption that employer costs are just about equal to
worker costs is more speculative than the proposition of roughly
equal return (r') .

It

can be defended, if we consider time costs

of workers (E kw0) to be absorbed by workers, while time costs of
supervisors, trainers, and of coworkers are absorbed by employers.
Except for the time when trainees learn by watching others at work,

the time spent on training is the same for trainers and trainees.
If so, the EOPP data (Table 1 in Barron et al., 1989) suggest that
trainers spend two—thirds of the 150 hours of training reported

to

be spent by trainees during the three months of new hires. Since
wages of trainers, supervisors and co—workers are higher than wages

of trainees, employer costs are likely to be about as high as

28

employee tine costs in the groups covered by the LOP?. Whether
this ratio of employer to employee time inputs can be generalized

is unknown. Neither iS there any evidence that employees absorb
precisely the costs of time they spent and employers the rest. In
the absence of information on the actual division of costs between

employers and workers, we can still consider the profitability of
training if we know total costs and total returns. The fragmentary

evidence described above suggests that these totals are roughly

double the costs ascribed to workers and returns observed for
workers. consequently, the profitability rates in cols. (4), (5),
and (6) remain conceptually valid, as measures of profitability of

training, regardless of who bears the cost.

What does the range of estimates in Table 5a tell us about
adequacy of training? As soft as it may be, this evidence is all

that could be marshalled.

Are the rates too high, suggesting

under—investment? Column (5) in which depreciation within the firm

is negligible but training is not portable suggest quite ample
profitability, even if trainees stay in the firm no longer than
non—trainees! In other words, average worker mobility would deter

neither them nor employers from investment in training. However,

depreciation is probably not zero, so the correct figures are
between col. (4), (5) and (6). We also need to keep in mind that:
(a) the rates in Table 5a are average, not marginal.

Bishop (1989)

suggests that marginal rates in the EON' are about half the size of

29

average rate'6; (b) rates of return to training are expected to
exceed those on schooling because they do not include consumption
returns.

Finally, the trade—off between training and mobility

investments, especially at younger ages, needs to be considered
before underinvestment in training can be determined.

Consequently, there is no definite evidence of under-•
investment in these data sets, though it clearly cannot be ruled
out, given the average magnitudes within the range of estimates in

Table 3 (cols. 4, 5, and 6).

3. Job Training Response to. Growing Demand for Human Capital

The growth of demand for human capital which accelerated in
the past decade resulted in increased rates of return to schooling

and induced positive supply responses in enrollments. Do we find

corresponding increases in profitabilities and volumes of job
training? Several pieces of evidence yield affirmative answers:

Indirect evidence on the growth of profitability and volumes

is provided by analyses of changing wage profiles over the 1964—

1990 period. Two basic factors affect the slope of the (cross-

"
The EOPP sample shows the lowest rates of return.
consists mainly of inexperienced, unskilled young workers.
"

It

Gains from mobility amount to one—third of wage growth of

male workers during the first decade of work experience (Jovanovic
and Mincer, 1981).

30

sectional) wage profile, that is the magnitude of age (experience)

differentials in wages: (1) Increased profitability andfor volumes
of job training steepen the profile, according to the human capital

wage function. Here the slope of the profile, (or it's early slope

measured by the coefficient of the linear ten of the experience
variable (X) )

is

the product rk,, where r is the rate of return on

post—school investments (read: mainly job training and learning)
and k the fraction of time spent in training. If demand for skill

training increases, the coefficient of X should rise because of
increased profitability and the induced increase in training.

The recent gyrations in the U.S. age distribution and subsequent baby bust age.

resulted

the

(2)

baby boom

in changes in relative wages by

The change in relative demographic supplies, or age

distribution, is therefore another factor apart from r and k to
affect the slope of the cross—sectional wage profiles. As studies

by Freeman (1979) and by Welch (1979) have shown the influx of
large numbers of "baby boomers" into the markets of the 1970's
increased the slope of the wage profiles, especially of college

graduates, less so for high school graduates.

However, as the

"baby bust" cohorts entered the markets of the 1980's, the profiles

did not flatten. They remained steep for college graduates, and
steepened strongly for high school graduates.

Table (10) shows that these changes in slopes of wage

31

profile&' are explainable by both demographic changes (D) and the

changing profitability of human capital (r). Wage profiles were
fit separately to CPS samples of high-school graduates and college
In turn the

graduates using quadratic wage functions each year.

coefficient of experience at X=i0, was used as the dependent
variable. Three independent variables were: 0 —

the

ratio of young

male workers (1 to 5 years of experience) to all (up to 40 years of

experience) in the respective schooling group; r1 —

the rate of

return to schooling, measured as the percent wage differential
between college and high school graduates with 6-10 years of work
experience. The third variable (u) is the male unemployment rate,

which is particularly large and sensitive to cyclical changes in
demand for young and less skilled workers.

Clearly, the effect of declining profitability (r,) of college

education on the slope of the wage profile in the 1970's was more

than offset by the effect of the baby boom cohort entering the
market while the growing demand for skills in the 80's indicated by
the increased rate of return to schooling resulted in the increased

profitability ( and volume) of training, hence steeper profiles

especially among high school graduates, and partly among college

graduates. The increased demand for job training steepened the
high school wage profile, and prevented the college profile from

Here and elsewhere the analyses use wage profiles of
males.

Additional factors affect wage profiles of women,

especially discontinuity in labor force participation.

32

flattening. The weaker fit to the male college profile in Table

(10) may be a consequence of the growth of numbers of female
college graduates. and of post—graduates - a question that needs to

be investigated.

Similar experiments with wage profiles were reported by S.

Allen (1993) at a disaggregated level, within industries: Allen

correlated educational wage differentials within two-digit
industries with slopes of wage functions estimated in cross-section

and over time (

late

70's to late 80's)

The correlation were

positive and significant.

The analysis of wage profiles indicates that either
profitability (r) or volumes (k) of training or both increased in

the So's. The findings do not distinguish between r and k, though
in parallel to school education we would expect that both rates of
return and volumes of training increased, the latter in response to

the former, as demand for skills increased.

Direct evidence on increases in volumes of training over the
1980's is available from two BLS Surveys (1983 and 1991).

This is

the only pair of job training surveys in the 1980's that are
comparable as their design is identical.

The first survey was a supplement to the January 1983 CI'S

33

(BLS

Bulletin

2226) and the second a similar supplement in iggi.

The surveys report on the incidence (frequency) of job training of

the work force, and, to a lesser extent on its duration.

(A

complete accounting would require reports on the product of the two

components, amounting to total manhours of training).

Table (11) reports some of the salient levels and changes in
the incidence of job training between 1983 and 1991. two purposes
of training were distinguished in the surveys: (1) Training needed
to qualify for the current job, and (2) Training to improve skills

on the current job.

While training requirements for jobs changed little, the
incidence of training for skill improvement on the current job
increased from 35% to 41% of all workers. In both surveys, the
dominant sources of qualifying training were schools and informal
on—the—job training, but for skill improvement, the distribution of

sources was almost unif on. A major change between 1983 and 1991

was the relative increase in incidence and duration of formal
company programs. According to Bartel and Sicherman (1993) formal

training programs are more closely correlated with
technological change than other forms of training.
company

About 72% of workers whose prior training

p.ialified them for

"How Workers Get Their Training", and "How Workers Get
Their Training — an Update".

34

the job underwent skill improvement training as well, suggesting
that training activities tend to be continuous, though diminishing

over the working age. Some of the skill improvement training is
retraining, a component of training that is likely to grow in the
face of changing technology.

En both surveys levels of qualifying and of skill improvement

training were positively related to the level of schooling.
Increases in training over time occurred in all schooling and age

groups, though somewhat more in the more educated and more
experienced groups.

The positive correlation bttween training and school education

has been noted in many studies. Two explanations of this finding
may be proposed: those with greater learning abilities and facing

lower discount rates (subjective and objective) are likely to
invest in more schooling and, for the same reasons, in more job
training. Alternatively, when schooling and training are viewed as

heterogeneous tons of human capital, the same conclusion follows,
if as productive inputs, training and schooling are complementary:
That is to say, better schooling results in more efficient training

on the job. It is difficult to distinguish these hypotheses. One

piece of evidence (Bartel and Sichenan, 1993) is that not :ily

years of schooling but also the quality of learning at given
numbers of years of schooling, measured in aptitude scores, is
positively related to training. If complementarity is the proper

35

hypothesis, it implies that the optimal way to improve skills is to

improve school learning. Indeed, employer complaints about their
being forced into providing remedial literacy and nuneracy programs
is a case in point.

At any rate, although the data on training are far from
adequate, there is enough evidence to indicate that in recent

decades, education and training responded positively to the
changing profitability of human capital.

If training and schooling are complementary, a conclusion that

we are under—investing in training would follow, at least in a
potential sense: Improvement in school learning would reduce the

costs (increase the efficiency) of training, so rates of return
would rise inducing an increased demand f or training.

36

Some Prognosis. Once Again.

Since investments in human capital respond positivel'; to
profitability, we should expect reductions in the rates of r:turn

over the 1990's stemming from the accumulated supply due to the
growth of enrollment rates and of training in the 1980's. If so,
skill differentials in wages and overall wage and income inequality

should also tend to narrow in the 1990's. The question is:

how

much of a reduction can we expect?

On the assumption that demand remains at current levels, that

is without further growth, we can look at the predicted growth of

the relative supply in the 1990's and the parameter estimates of

the supply effect on the rate of return: The relevant growth in
the educational supply of young workers is already knot.m: Figure
(4) shows its prospective growth of educational attainment in the
90's resulting from increased enrollment rates in the 80's. If the

relevant supply is restricted to young people, the chart predicts
an increase of the proportion with at least college education from

23 currently to 31 percent by the year 2000, an increase of 35%.
Multiplying this increase by the relevant supply elasticity (-0.7)

yields a 25% reduction in the wage premium by the year 200220

if

"normal" rates of return to schooling are 6—8%, this reduction
would get us back at least half way toward the long—term average a

Note in Table 5 that the supply effect on the wage
premium lags 2 years.

37

decade from now.
relevant

supply

The reduction is likely to be smaller if the

is not restricted to young (X<=lO) workers, but is

a function of relative school attainment (% of college plus) in the

overall work force.

Two issues must be faced before we can accept these
predictions:

(1) Parameter estimates in Table Sa may not be the

most reliable — a task for econometricians to explore. We can,
however, use available alternative estimates to do some checking.

The supply effect on the college wage premium comparable to our
REST parameter in Table 4 which covers the whole labor force is
estimated by Katz and Murphy (1991) in elasticity terms to be -0.71

(their Table 9). This implies a somewhat larger elasticity for the

younger population, as stated above.

(2) The assumption that demand for human capital will stop
rising is probably unrealistic. In the 1980's the rate of return
to education zoomed up 8 percent points, and this was due almost

entirely to accelerated growth of demand for human capital as
supply

remained static.

Even if the growth of demand were to

continue at half that pace, the upward pressure on the wage premium
would just about neutralize the supply effect, leaving skill
differentials as wide as they are now, implying a continuation of

Our R&D index of demand stopped growing since the mid—
However, its growth may well resume, once military
eighties.
cutbacks are completed. Net tuition costs may also stop growing,
as subsidies increase, but budget deficits may prevent such moves.

38

pronounced skill shortages.

These shortages might even increase if needed supply responses
are impeded by demography, including adverse changes in the family,
stagnating family income for a large part of the population, rising

tuition, and the inadequacies of learning at home, school and on
the job. As already noted, the learning bottleneck represents an

impediment to the expansion of job training as well, given
complementarity between learning at school and training.

Some

information and much advocacy is available. Yet a closer analysis

of these causes and of policy options remains urgent before we
embark on bureaucratic solutions.

39

References

Allen, S.G.,

"Technology and the wage Structure", Research
Paper, North Carolina State University, 1993.

Barron, J., Black, 0, and M, Lowenstein, "Job Matching and on—the—

Job Training", Journal of Labor Economics, 1989.

Bartel, A. and N. Sicherman, "Technological Change and On-the—Job
Training of Young Workers", paper presented at NBER

Summer Institute, June 1993.
Barton, P.E., "Training to be Competitive", Policy Information
Report. ti's,

Princeton,

N.J., 1993.

Berman, E., Bound, J., and Z. Griliches,, "Changes in the Demand
for

Skilled

Labor

in

U.S.

Manufacturing

Industries", NBER WP 4255, Jan. 1993.

Bishop, 3., "On—the-Job Training of New Hires", in Market Failure
in Job Training?, Ritzen and Stern, eds., Springer
Verlag, 1991.

Blackburn, M.L. and 0. Bloom, R. Freeman, "Changes in Earnings
Differentials in the 1980's", NBER, WP 3901, 1991.
Blakemore, A., and 0. Hoffman, "Seniority Rules and Productivity",

Review of Economic Studies, 1992.
Bound, J. and C. Johnson, "Changes in the Structure of Wages During

the 1980's", Anerican Economic Review, June 1992.
Clotfelter, C.T., "Demand for Undergraduate Education", Part 1 of

Clotfelter et. al., Economic Challenges in Miaher
Education, University of Chicago Press, 1991.

40

Duncan, C. and F. Stafford, "The Use of Time and Technology by

Households in

the U.S.", Research in

Labor

Economics, vol. 3, 1980.
Freeman, R.B., The Overeducated Juierican, Academic press, 1976.

Freeman, R.B., "The Effect of Demographic Factors on the AgeEarnings Prof ile in the U.S., Journal of Human
Resources, Summer 1979.
Freeman, R.B., "Demand for Education", Ch. 6 in Handbook of Labor

Economics, Ashenfelter and Layard ed., UorthHolland, 1986.

Criliches, z.,

"capital—Skill

Complementarity", The Review of

Economics and statistics, 1969.
Recknan, J. and S. Cameron, "Determinants of Young Male Schooling

and Training Cinices", HBER WP 4327, April 1993.
Jovanovic, B., "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover", Journal
of Political Economy, October 1919.

Jovanovic, B. and J.

Mincer, "Labor Mobility and Wages" in S.

Rosen, ed., studies in Labor Markets, University of
chicago Press, 1981.
Juhn, C., IC. Murphy, with K. Murphy and B. Pierce, "Wage Inequality

and the Rise in the Returns to Skill", QuarterlY
Journal of Economics, 1992.

Katz, L., and K. Murphy,

"Changes in Relative Wages: 1963-l97",

J4t. WP 3927, December 1991.
Krueger,

A., "How Computers Rave Changed the wage Structure", NBER
WP

3858, October 1991.

41

Lazear, E., "Why Is

There Mandatory Retirement?", Journal of

Political

Economy, 1979.

Levy, F. and R.J. Humane, "U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings

Inequality", Journal of Economic Literature,
September, 1992.
Lillard, L. and H. Tan, Private—Sector Training, Rand Report, 1986.

Mattila, J.P., "Determinants of Male School Enrollments", The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 1982.

Mincer, J,, "On—the—Job Training: Costs, Returns, and

Duplications", Journal of Political

Economy,

October 1962, Supplement.
Mincer,

S.,

Schooling.

Ernerience.

and Earnings,

Columbia

University Press, 1914.

Mincer, J., "Sob Training, Wage Growth, and Labor Turnover", NBER

WP 1988, published as chapter 8 in J. Mincer,
Studies in Human Capital, E. Elgar 1993.

Mincer, J., "Job Training: Costs, Returns, and Wage Profiles", in
Market Failure in Job Training?, Retzen and Stern,
eds., Reprinted as Chapter 9 in J. Mincer, Studies
in Human Canital, E. Elgar, 1993.
Mincer,

J.,

Capital, Technology, and the Wage Structure",
NBER WP 3581, Jan. 1991. Published as Chapter 13
in J. Mincer, Studies in Human Capital, E. Elgar

"Human

1993.

Murphy, K. and F. Welch, "Wage Premiums for College Graduates",
Educational Researcher, May 1989.

42

Murphy, K. and F. Welch, "The Structure of Wages', QlA4rterly
Journal of Economics, 1992.

43

Rosen, H., "Taxation and On—the—Job Training Decisions", Review of

Economics and statistics: August 1982.
salop, J. and S. salop, "Self Selection and Turnover in the Labor

Market", quarterly Journal of Economics, November
1976.

U.S. Department of Education, Condition of Education, NCES Report,
1991 and 1992.

U.S. Department of Labor, ELS Bulletin 2331, The Impact of

Research and Development on Productivity Growth,
September 1989.

U.S. Department of Labor,

BLS Bulletin,

"Mow Workers Get Their

Training", 1985, and BLS

Bulletin

2407, "Mi

Update", August 1992.

Welch, F., "Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings", Journal of
Political Economy, October, 1979.

Table 1

Educational Attainment of Population, Age 25-29

YEAR

Percent completed

Percent of HS

High School

grads who

completed College
1971

78%

22%
28%

1977
1979

tnt

85%
26%

1987

1989

85%

1991

Source:

27%

The condition of Education, DOE, National Center for
Education statistics, 1992.

Table 2
Educational Attainment in Six Industrial Countries
Percent who completed at least

College

High School

CntryfAge

25 to 64

25 to 34

25 to 64

25 to 34

U.S.*

82

86.6

23.4

24.2

Canada

71

83.5

15.1

16.1

Japan

70

90.6

13.3

22.9

W. Germany

78

91.5

10.2

11.8

U.K.

65

76.7

9.2

11.2

France

48

63.0

7.0

7.6

* Includes
Source:

Graduate Equivalency Diplomas
The condition of Education, 1992.

Table 3

Enrollment Rates

tn October

High School

Population

Following High

Grads Enrolled

Enrolled

YEAR

School Complet'n

Ages 18—24

Ages 18—24

1968

55.4
35.3

27.3

31.2

25.2

37.3

30.3

1969

1979

49.4

1988
1989

Source:

59.6

Clotfelter (1992), with USDE (1989, 1991), and US Bureau

of the Census P—20, 443 & 469.

Table 4
Exoenditut-es on Education

YEAR

Element'y

Post—

Post—

and

Secondary

Secondary

Secondary

(A)

(B)

$

$

$

Total

Total

(A)

(B)

$

$

bil

GNP

bil

GNP

bil

CUP

bil

GNP

bil

GNP

1969

43

4.5

25

2.6

50

5.2

68

7.1

93

9.7

1979

103

4.].

62

2.5

124

5.0

1.65

6.6

225

9.1

1989

200

4.1

131.

2.7

262

5.4

331

6.8

462

9.5

Source:

Clotfe].ter, op. cit.

Column B includes foregone earnings

Table Ea
Ethicouonal waçe dftjirenuals (college — hi!h school)

Coefficients
(3)

VagjabI

(I)

(2)

Intercept

—0.09

—0.59

—0.41

(1.4)

(3.4)

(4.6)

REST..,

—0.086

—0:080

(1.9)

(3.0)

DR..1

—0.20
(4.6)
0.45

REST..7

(4)

(5)

0.06

—0.14

(1.01

(3.5)

196 3 — 1987.

—0.065

(2.21

PG

1.12

(2.1)
0.88

(1.9)

0.00024
(12.3)

R&D.1

LW

(1.1)

0.002
(0.2)

—0.14

(1.00)

(2.2)

RIlE

0.081

0.00025
(9.0)

—0.011

(4.5)
0.088
(4.1)

0.044
(3.5)
0.000064

EQ

0.80

0.69
Main

ía p.ZCntha. Ft.th.4i.A ,.zjabjn sot

yw p 3.var ac

D.W. - Ourbiu-Wusoa

0.91

(2.11

0.75

0.89

ssçsuat SQL..... -' and ., dante 12-

,tsmda.

DR — Ratio of young Cap

ten years) to total

PG — Total

0.000022

(3.4)

less than or eaual to

-iorkforce

Factor Productivity growth (Jcrgenson

measure)

- Merchandise Trade Balance as a ratio to GDP
Other variables

defined in text.

TABLE Sb
Time series rearession of rates of return
(errors in parentheses; elasticities in asterisks)

____________ logs
intercept
RDE.2

levels

—7.52

—0.025

(0.97)

(0.010)

0.88
(0.15)

7.9E—5
(l.XE—5)

RSG

1.03
(0.22)

*0.96*
0.033
(0.005)
*1.07*

RS12

—0.70

—0.003

(0.16)

(0.0006)

*—0.71*

Adj R'

0.69

0.8].

period

1957—90

1957—90

VARIABLES

dependent

r1

for workers with 6—10 years experience, the log of

of the average real wage of those with

the ratio

schooling years equal to 16 over those with schooling
years equal to 12; March CPS tapes for 1963—1990;
patchwork
RSG

ratio

backwards using Mattila to 1955.

of

employment;
RDE1

service employment

to goods-producing

US; Economic Report of the President, 1993

per—worker expenditure on research and development;
lagged two years; 1982 dollars.

Rsyl

percent of population
years of schooling.

25—29 years old who have 16 or more

Table 6
Enrollment Rates (1967—l99O
(T—statistics in parentheses; elasticities in asterisks)
% of HS Grads
Enrolled, Age 18—

% of Population
Age 18-24 Enrolled

Exogenous
Variables
Are 3—yr
moving
avgs

% of HS
Graduates
Enrolled
next Oct

college
Wage
Premium

2.9

1.3

1.3

0.77

(5.1)

(3.2)

(4.3)

(2.8)

*0.45*

*0.31*

*0.31*

*0.23*

*0.23*

parental
Education2

3.7

1.2
(1.7)

1.2
(2.3)

1.6

(3.7)

(3.4)

*0.84*

*0.42*

*0.43*

1.6
(4.5)

*0.73*

*0.74*

—0.007

—0.002

—0.002

—0.0004

—0.0003

(2.9)

(0.96)

(1.1)

(—0.3)

*O.29*

*—0.26*

*.O.O8*

*—•*

27.7

18.8

18.8

(3.1)

(3.1)

(4.1)

3.2
(0.7)

3.2
(1.0)

Tuition

Intercept

1

residual
from first

24

.

0.77
(3.6)

(—0.3)

0.46

0.32

(3.9)

(3.9)

regress ion

0.75

R1

0.69

0.82

0.79

0.88

Endogenous—variable sources:
Column (1): condition of Education1 1992, Table 7-1
school Enrollment — Social and Economic
Columns (2—5):
characteristics of Students: October, 1992, P20-474

2

Average

experience.

schooling of males with 26-30 years of

Table 7
Calculadon of 1976 Worker 0]? Investments

Derived from Wage Funedon

Sources: k cnmm1 from Rosen (1982); N and w from Table 2.

table 3:
Worker Opportunity Cost of lob Training, 1976
Age
.

Hourly

Hours of

Wage
(wJ

Tninhg per
Week (Ii)

Pat
with
Tr2ining
(p)

Number
of

Costs (Smil)

Employee

(w,hND

peWeek

sel-

mifilnias)
(1)

<25

33.7

25-34

5.6

(2)
I

6.4

f

(3)

(4)

76

20.0

L 72

22.5

(5)

360
I

390

6.2

3.8

58

16.5

225

45-54

6.7

2.2

48

16.1

114

55-64

6.3

Li

29

10.9

fl

Total
Cost

$1411

Sources: CaL (1),
and (3) from Thtnnii and Sffard, 1980
T.."g hours in. caL (3) alcubsed as kum of sanz hours in tnin4ng and one-third of ho
spat jointly in uSing and pwducdon.
CaL (4) from Ethplayment and Eings, BLS, 1976.
CaL (5) is
pzoduof caL (1) through (4).

Table 9
Rates ct return on investments In job IraInOtg

Data set

w

k

r'

(I)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

6.5
0

g
3

correcttd r

Avenge
tenure

PSID. all males
EOpp'.

4.4
4.7

0.15
0.20

29.3

215

23.5
8.7

25.0
8.5

young new hires
NLS1C, new young

7.0

0.22

31.8

16.0

16.2

5.2

10.8

0.2.5

43.2

26.0

31.0

:13

cohon
NLS?, previous
young cohort
Your

on Mint 19Ua1: * (ma Duna sad Sisfford (19$Ot
'Based on HoI=rIt9Sfl
•Bsnd on Lyvacfl 1919L
'Based on LAUssd sad
—

w.*.

Ta tIflG): k (torn Dwaa sad Saffotd.

C.L(4),— vfl — Il — bned.4J44nthefllD.O.I2intheothndsfl5tU.
— (Ill • r19 TusbownsncoL(fl
CaL(S): p —
— (I — dII +
— hndasincoL(4).
CoL(6)r — .91 —

3

Table 10
Slone of Wage Prot'j].e*

('F-stats in parentheses; elasticities in asterisks)

High School
intercept

-0.0165

t

College

I

n.s.

(—2.9)
r,

DR

U

0.31

0.12

(7.8)

(3.6)

*0.68*

*0.27*

0.06

0.06

(5.1)

(6.0)

*0.61*

*0.76*

0.0011

n.s.

-

(5.2)

*0.17*
R2

0.91

0.60

All endogenous and exogenous variables are for males only.

Two sets (one each for the two different columns above,
corresponding to high school and college) of each of the endogenous
and exogenous variables are used.
rates of return to schooling.
r, —
DR —
ratios of numbers of workers of 1—10 yrs experience
to all workers 1—40 yrs experience.
—
u
unemployment rates for recent grads.
*
rk at experience = 10 years, where r is the rate of return on
post—school investments and k is the time—equivalent

fraction spent acquiring those investments.

Table 11: Part I
Job Trainina: Incidence oLoualifvina and of Skill IInorovemnt
(81.5, 1983 and 1991)

qualifying in 1983
Education

Source Dist'n

Age

School

33%

High School

40%

20 — 24

46%

Informal

27

Some
College

60

25 — 44

63

Formal
Company
Other

12

College

80

45—64

53

on

10

Table 11: Part II
Skill Improvement: Sources
All
1983

35%

1991

41

School__f
12%
13

OJT

Company

Other

14%

11%

4%

15

16

7

skill Improvepent: Education and Age
Education

Age
55—64

YEAR

US

SC

1983

26%

41%

54%

28%

41%

31%

1991

29

46

61

31

48

37

Source:

Paul E. Bartels,
Report, 1993.

Coll

20—24

[

"Training to be competitive", ETS

Ficure 1

L' 'RADS OR MORE FOR AGE 15—:?

/0

& mole S coil groøs or + 1—10 yrs nD

24

23 —
22
21

20 19 -

Is I? 16

Is
14
13
12

I'

63155167169171 731 isI,i1igIe1ies1i?Fiita'gF
64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
0 mole Rd grd.xal—l0

+

call grods.25—29

Figure 2
ACTUAL & PREDICTED flTES OF RETURN TO COLLEGZ
0-ti

3966 67

6$

eatal

Yar

(by

84 65 86 87

col. 3, table 5)

Figure 3
DOLL ENROLLMENT H OCT FTEF.
is % of HS grocs. Dreoucteo onc octuol
51

60
59

58 57 -

/1

56 —
55
54

53
52
51

50
49
£8

4,
46

ii i 69 I
68

70

I

72

I
I 77 I 79 1 8I183 I 85 I 87 I 89 I
74 76 78 80 82 84 86 98 90

0 octuol

+ predicted

Figure 3

COLL ENROLLMT

cont'd

r --flr\r aea

M3 'Né-'LL
Qreo,cted and actual

£3
'2
41

40
/

39

38

37
36
35

34
33
32

31

30
29

67169171173175177179181183185187189191
68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92
4a actual
predicted

COLL ENROLLMENT as a % POP 18—24
predicted and actual

/

35
34
33

—

32 -

3; —
30
29

20 27

-

26

-

25

-

24
23

i I74i I76ii 78
I

61 69 I 71
68 70 72
I

0 actual

I at 83 85 81 I
I 91 I
80 82 84 86 88 90 92
I

I

+ predicted

Ficzure 4

't 'flht
LL.C

nAflr fl •jie
,rcnLJ
snhltd 8 yr. versus 18—24 enrolirnt rote

36

L
32 34

30 26 26 —
24 —

predicted
values

22
20
18

16 14 12

'0

161163 ls 1i9 jul73 75 H7 jig
1i3 Is
I
56 60 6264666870 7274 767880 82 84 86889092

C enrolirni rote.l8—24

+ % coil ed. 25—29

'±aure 5
SLOPE OF THE WAGE ZRoFL:
COlleGe rod atlounenl
0.041

3.04

0.039
0.038
0.037
0.036
0.035
0.034
0.033
0.032
0.031

0.03

0.029
0.028
0.027
0.026
0.025

3 I 65 I 67 I 69 I ii j

75 77

I

I 83 I 85 I 87 89 I

64 66 68 70 72 74 76 73 80 82 84 66 88 90
0 actual

+

predicted

SLOPE OF THE WAGE PROFILE
high school attainment

0.043
0.042
0.041

0.04
0.039
0.038
0.037
0.036
0.035
0.034
0.033
0.032
0.031

0.03
0.029

0.028
0.Ô27

0.026

631 651 &iI

I ii I 731 75 Iii I 791 8% I 83 I 851 871 891

64 66 68 70 72 74 75 78 80 82 84 85 88 90
0 octuol

+ predicted

