                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THREATS AND PROMISES




                                      Jonathan Eaton
                                      Maxim Engers




                                 Working Paper No. 4849



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 September 1994




We thank B. Peter Rosendorff, Marie C. Thursby, and participants at the NBER-Universities
Conference on International Trade Rules and Institutions, Cambridge. MA, December 1993, and
at the Summer Meetings of the North American Econometric Society, Quebec. Canada, June
1994, for comments. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation
under grant number SES-9111647. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Jonathan Eaton and Maxim Engers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4849
                                                                           September 1994


                                ThREATS AND PROMISES


                                         ABSTRACT


       Global environmental concerns have increased the sensitivity of governments and other

parties to the actions of those outside their national jurisdiction. Parties have tried to extend

influence extraterritorially both by promising to reward desired behavior and by threatening to

punish undesired behavior. If information were perfect, the Coase theorem would suggest that

either method of seeking influence could pmvide an efficient outcome, if the parties in question

have incomplete information about each other's costs and benefits from different actions,

however, either method can be costly, both to those seeking influence and in terms of overall

efficiency. We compare various methods of seeking influence. A particular issue is dissembling:

taking an action to mislead the other party about the cost or benefit of that action. By creating

an incentive to dissemble, attempts to influence another's behavior can have the perverse effect

of actually encouraging the action that one is trying to discourage.




Jonathan Eaton                                             Maxim Engers
Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
Boston University                                          Rouss Hall
270 Bay State Road                                         University of Virginia
Boston, MA 02215                                           Charlottesville, VA 22901
and NBER                                                   and NBER
I. Introduction



       The correction of externalities requires that individuals affected by the

decisions of others have ways of influencing those decisions. Within national

boundaries laws and contracts typically perform this function. A third party,

the legal system, can enforce laws against undesired actions, or subsidize

rewards for desirable actions. It can also enforce long-term contracts among

the interested parties. Parties who are in different countries, or who are

themselves governments of different countries, may lack a third party

enforcement mechanism. The parties involved must then rely on their own

devices to try     to   influence the decisions of others.

       One   way to do this is through what Schelling (1960, 1965) calls brute
forces taking direct physical control of the action in question. In this

paper we consider less extreme forms of seeking influence: rewarding others

for refraining from undesired actions, or punishing others for carrying them

out.t In an international context, the punishments involved are usually

called sanctions.

       Our main aim is to understand and to evaluate international institutions

to preserve the quality of the environment, treaties to protect the

environment have contained various provisions both to reward countries for

pursuing environmentally sound policies, and to punish them for polluting.2

       The problems of limiting nuclear proliferation provide further

motivation. Recent United States policy has varied between threatening to

punish   North Korea for violating the International Atomic Energy Agreement and

'Dixit   (1987) provides a    lucid discussion of these   issues.
2The   Ottawa convention governing the use of chlorofluorocarbons   is an example.
It   calls both for sanctions against violators and rewards for compliance.
Parson (1991) provides a description.
promising to reward it for compliance.

     In a situation of symmetric information the Coase Theorem (1960) suggests

that the only issue is distributional: Seeking influence by either method

ensures an efficient outcome.' As is now widely recognized, however, if the

relevant parties have incomplete information about the costs and benefits of

various actions to each other then the question of how to achieve an efficient

outcome is more complex.'

     Our purpose here is to consider the relative benefits of seeking

influence by promising rewards and by threatening punishments, both from the

perspective of the sender and of efficiency in general. to do so we consider

the interaction over time of two parties, called, in the tradition of the

literature on sanctions, the sender and the the tareet.' The sender would

like to discourage the target from taking an action that benefits the target

but harms the sender. The sender can do so by threatening sanctions if the

target takes the action, or by promising a reward for not taking it. Both

means are costly: Sanctions impose &     cost   on the sender as well as on the

target, while rewarding the target requires giving up resources.

     We use two devices to aid exposition. First, to help identify the

antecedents of pronouns, we assign a gender to each party, treating the sender

as feminine and the target as masculine. Second, since our focus is on

preventing environmental degradation, we call the offending action of the

target pollution (although in principle it could be any action that the target




5We explore the use of sanctions in a situation of complete information
elsewhere (1992).
'Our analysis relates closely to the literature on sequential bargaining under
incomplete information. Yudenberg and tirole (1991) provide a discussion and
references to the literature.
'See Hufbauer et al. (1990). Other contributions to the literature on
sanctions are Daoudi and Dajani (1983) and ltaempfer and Lowenberg (1988).
                                      -3-



could take that is to his own benefit and to the sender's detriment).

     Given the range of possible rewards and punishments, and alternative

information structures, there are myriad possible specifications of the

relationship between the parties. We do not attempt to provide even a partial

taxonomy. Instead, we focus on situations that illustrate clearly some

possible merits and deficiencies of using alternative methods of influence.

     Since the most serious problems emerge when the sender does not know the

extent to which the, target benefits from polluting, we focus on this

informational asymmetry. Specifically, the sender is unsure whether the

target benefits from polluting by only a small amount, in which case he is

"clean," or by a large amount, in which case he is "dirty." A basic issue is

what the target reveals about his type through his response to the sender's

attempt to influence him. We therefore consider their repeated interaction.

     We consider three tools that the sender might use to discourage

pollution:   (i) a reward for not polluting; (ii) a mild punishment that is

enough to deter a clean but not a dirty target from polluting; and (iii) a

draconian punishment so severe that it would deter either type of target, but

at a higher cost than the mild one. We consider situations in which the

sender has access to these three tools in various combinations.

     Among other things, we consider the following questions: To what extent

do different combinations of tools work to the sender's advantage? What

inefficiencies can arise in different situations? When would the sender

benefit by committing herself to a policy for the duration of the relationship

rather than by choosing a policy each period? Could she ever do better by

committing herself to "laissez-faire," taking fl2 action to influence the

target?

     No single method among the cases we consider dominates any of the others,
                                     -4-




either in terms of benefiting the sender or in avoiding inefficient outcomes.

What is best for the sender or most efficient overall depends on the specific

situation. We find that the sender often could do better by committing to a

policy over the two periods. In some cases the sender faces the dilemrDa that

her attempts to seek influence lead to a worse outcome for her, and to more

poliption. than would a policy of laissez-faire, if she could commit to   such a


policy.
     Basic to our results is the way that the sender would treat targets of

different types. Unless the sender has access to the draconian sanction, she

treats a dirty target more favorably than a clean one: If using rewards, she

would promise a larger one to a dirty type, since he requires greater

compensation not to pollute, while she would not incur the cost of the mild

sanction in dealing with a dirty target, since it would not work.

     Because the sender treats a dirty target more favorably, a clean one has

an incentive to bluff,' i.e., to try to pass himself off as dirty: A clean

target might pollute rather than accept a reward that exceeds his benefit from

polluting to try to elicit a higher reward later. Alternatively, a clean

target might pollute and suffer sanctions to try to make the sender think that

is not worth renewing them.

     When the sender has access to both a draconian sanction and a mild

sanction, however, the clean target no longer has an incentive to make the

sender think that he is dirty. Once the sender is sure enough that she is

dealing with a dirty target she simply resorts to the draconian sanction.

Hence in this case the dirty target, rather than the clean one, has the

incentive to conceal his type, acting as   a wolf   in sheep's clothing:' The

dirty target mimics the clean target to convince the sender that she does not

need the draconian sanction to deter pollution. Having fooled the sender the
                                         -5-



target then goes ahead and pollutes1 suffering only the mild sanction.

    We proceed as follows: Section II presents the basic structure of our

analysis. Sections III through VI consider specific situations in detail.

Section VII offers some concluding remarks.



II. The Basic Structure



     We use D to denote the amount of damage done to the sender by the

target's pollution. This amount is known to both. The target's benefit from

polluting could either be a high amount H if he is dirty or a low amount L

(where H >   L > 0) if   he is clean. The true amount is known by the target, but

the sender is unsure. She initially believes that the target is dirty with

probability 8 and is clean with probability l8l. The han that the target's

action inflicts on the sender exceeds whatever benefit the target derives from

it. Hence D > H > L.       From a social perspective, then, the target's action is

inefficient.'

     The two parties interact for two periods, the smallest number allowing us

to examine how the target might modify his actions in one period to influence

the sender's subsequent beliefs. For simplicity we assume no discounting.

     Within each period the two parties interact as follows: The sender

begins period i believing that the target is dirty with probability O. On

the basis of this belief she either promises the target a reward for not

polluting, threatens to punish him if he does pollute, or does both in some

combination. In order to punish the target that period, the sender must, at



'If D is less than H the problem, with rewards, is triviAl: If D > L the
sender offers L. This offer is accepted by a clean target and rejected by a
dirty one. The clean target has no prospect of eliciting a higher reward
later. If D < L the sender offers no reward. Pollution always occurs. In
both cases the outcome is efficient.
                                         -6-




this point, incur a   sunk   cost C regardless of whether or not she then punishes

the target. This cost could represent, for example, the cost of maintaining a

military, which the sender must incur before knowing whether or not the target

will pollute. We assume that the cost of the sanction C is less than than the

amount of damage D that the sender sustains from pollution (or the sanction

would never be used).

     Once the sender has made her threats or promises, the target chooses

whether or not to pollute. Polluting raises the target's payoff, depending on

his type, by H or L, and lowers the sender's by D.

     What happens next depends on the threats and promises made by the sender

at the beginning of the period and the target's subsequent action. If the

sender had promised a reward then it is paid if and only if the target has

refrained from polluting.' If the sender threatened a punishment and incurred

the sunk cost C then the sender punishes the target, at no additional cost to

herself but at a cost P to the target, if and only if the target has polluted.'

Hence the target's receipt of either the reward or the punishment is

contingent upon the target's behavior, as is the sender's payment of the

reward. The sender must incur the cost of arranging the sanction regardless

of what the target does and whether or not the sanction is actually

implemented.


'We assume that the sender can make a coitment actually to pay R contingent
on the target's not polluting. There are various reasons why the sender would
follow through on her promise. She may, for example, have to deal with
multiple targets, and wish to maintain a reputation for honesty.
Alternatively she may be able to put the payment in escrow under the control
of a third party instructed to make payment to the target if he desists from
polluting and to return the reward to the sender if he pollutes.
'Since at this point the incremental cost of punishing is zero, the commitment
to impose sanctions is weakly credible. We have explored the implications of
introducing a (strictly positive) incremental cost to sanctions (continuing to
asste that the sender is committed to imposing them if the target acts), but
deemed the additional insights yielded by this modification not worth the
added complications.
                                             .7-



          Je consider four specific situations which do not exhaust all logical

possibilities, but together illustrate basic issues that arise in other, more

complicated, circumstances. First are the two pure cases of a sender seeking

influence only through rewards or only through a single sanction. We focus on

the only interesting situation, in which the sanction is mild, i.e.,

H >   P   >    L.'   We then consider & sender having access to both methods of

influence in combination. Finally, we consider the situation of a sender with

access to either of two sanctions, one of which is mild while the other is

draconian, meaning that the harm that it does to the target exceeds the gain

from polluting of even a dirty target, i.e., P > H. The draconian sanction,

however, requires a larger sunk cost F than the mild sanction, but this sunk

cost is still less than the damage done to the sender by the target's

pollution, i. e., F <0.

          We    characterize the relationship between the sender and target in terms
of the         perfect Bayesian equilibrium of their interaction: Whenever parties

would make decisions, their strategies are optimal given their beliefs, and

they update their beliefs using equilibrium strategies and observed actions

according to Bayes' Rule.'°

          For each of our four cases we derive the sender's expected total cost of

dealing with the target, including the cost of paying rewards, imposing

sanctions, and the damage if she fails to deter pollution. We also examine

how inefficient the outcome is.

          We now turn to the specifics of each case.




'If the sanction is draconian (P > H) then the sender would use it, and
successfully deter all pollution. If it is totally ineffectual (P < L) it
would never be used.
10See, for example, Fudenberg and Tirole (1991, Chapter 8).
                                           -8-


III.     Rewarding Good Behavior



        We first consider a sender who is trying to deter pollution by offering a

reward for not polluting. What happens depends upon the        relationship   between

the sender's initial belief about the target and the payoffs. Depending on

parameter    values • there   are three kinds of equilibrium outcome.



I. Comtlete PoolinE: If •l >         9 where 7 — (H-L)j(D-L). then the sender
simply    offers H each period. Whatever the target's type, he accepts.



        In this outcome there is no pollution, and the sender never learns

anything about the target's type. The clean target successfully exploits the

sender's ignorance for two      periods.


2. Ziuffine: If          <    , where ; — 1(H-R)/(D-R) and R can be any number
between t and H, then the sender offers It the first period. The dirty target

rejects this offer while the clean target rejects it with probability

where       satisfies:



                                             •1
                                                                          (1)
                                           + (l-91)R


If the offer is accepted then in period 2 the sender offers only I., which is

accepted. If the offer is rejected the sender then offers H with probability
 H                                                        satisfies:
       and L with remaining probability l•r1, where



                                    a — (115L +                           (2)
                                           -9-



The high    offer   is accepted by either type while the low offer is accepted only

by a clean target.



      In this case not only does the dirty target pollute in period 1, but so

might the clean target, who pollutes to try to increase its reward in period

2. In the second period the clean target does not pollute, while the dirty

target does not pollute only if the sender makes a high offer.



3.   The Hold-Un: If S >          >   then the sender offers H in period 1, which is

accepted, and L in period 2, which is accepted only by the clean target.



     There is no pollution in the first period, while in the second period the

dirty target pollutes while the clean one does not.



     We first describe the parties' optimal strategies at each point in their

interaction, and then show how this behavior yields these three equilibrium

outcomes.




A. Optimal Strategies



     We begin with the second period. Since this is the last period of their

interaction the target has no incentive to alter his decisions to affect the

sender's future beliefs. Hence a clean target will accept any reward above L

not to pollute and &     dirty   one will accept any reward above H not to pollute.

Depending on the target's type, offers below these amounts are rejected, and

lead to pollution. (We assume that offers just equal to the target's benefit

from polluting are accepted.)
                                          -10-



          For the sender, offering a reward of L    is   better than offering any reward

between L and H while offering H ii      better    than any remaining offer. A reward

of H will be accepted by the target regardless of his type, and so will deter

pollution for sure. An offer of L will be accepted by a clean target but

rejected by a dirty one. Based on her initial beliefs and on what happened

the first period, the sender at this point believes that the target is dirty

with probability 9 Hence she believes the low offer will deter pollution

with probability lD2. but will fail to do so with probability 2•

          What the sender does depends upon how this probability compares with the

threshold level 9. The sender will offer I. if             < 1 and offer H if 62 >

If    2
           — then she is indifferent between these two offers. In this case we

let         denote the probability with which she makes the high offer1 so that she

makes the low offer with probability 1-)'.

          The dirty target's payoff in the final period is H regardless of which

offer the sender makes: She either rewards him for not polluting with an

amount H, or offers I., in which case he rejects the offer and pollutes,

deriving a benefit of H. Since the clean target accepts either offer, his

benefit is whatever the sender offers, so he prefers the high offer.

      We now turn to the first period, beginning with the target's decision.

Since the dirty target enjoys H the second period regardless, he has no

incentive to alter the sender's beliefs about his type. Hence he behaves just

as in the second period, rejecting any offer below H but accepting H or above.

      For the clean target things are more complicated. He will obviously

accept any offer above H: It will more than compensate him for the benefit of

polluting and accepting it will not diminish the sender's belief that he is *

dirty     type (since he ii doing the only thing that a dirty type would do).

      By accepting a reward below H, however, a clean target reveals his type
                                                    -11-



to the sender. Since acceptance means that 82 —                     0,     the sender will offer only

L in period 2. Hence accepting any offer P C H yields the clean target R-s-L

over the two periods. (Obviously the target will reject an offer below L

since that would leave him less than the payoff 2L, which he can get by

rejecting all offers).

        If the clean target rejects a low reward R, where I, s a < H, his payoff

over the two periods is 2L if the sender offers a reward L in the second

period and Li-H if the sender offers a reward H in the second period. These

two payoffs bracket R+L, the payoff from accepting the offer. Hence what the

clean target does depends on the implications of rejecting the low offer for

the sender's offer the next period.

        If the sender makes a low offer and the target rejects it, from Bayes'

rule the sender's posterior belief that the target is dirty is:




                                                               P                           (3)
                                                   +



where       is the probability that a clean target rejects an offer of a low

reward.



B. Equilibrium Outcomes



      lie now show how this behavior gives rise to the three equilibria.




1. Complete Pooling



      II 8 >     S   then the sender will offer H in period 2, even if the clean
                                             -12-



target rejects low offers with probability one (i"..l). Even though she knows

that the clean target would always bluff, she is sufficiently sure that the

target is dirty that, if an offer of ft in round 1 were rejected, she would

offer H in period 2. In this case, by rejecting any low offer the clean

target would get L+}l, which exceeds what he would get by accepting a low offer

and blowing his cover. Hence, regardless of his type, the target would always

reject low offers in period 1. Since the sender would learn nothing about the

target's type from the rejection of a low offer, she would offer H for sure in

period 2: Making a low offer in period 1 would cost her D-+}l over the two

periods, while offering H, which is accepted by either type, costs her

  —   211.   Thus her best strategy is to offer H each period, which is accepted

by the target regardless of his type.



Th,   sender's   cost and   the   amount of pollution

       In this equilibrium the sender's cost is 211, the dirty target's benefit

from polluting. Since there is no pollution the outcome is efficient. The

sender could not improve her situation if she could commit to some different

strategy, since offering H in each period is the best strategy even if

commitment were possible.



       If l < I then things become much more complicated. At    the   low end of

this range the sander makes a low offer (strictly below H but not strictly

below L), and the clean target bluffs with positive probability. At the high

end the sender offers H in period 1 to forestall bluffing, but then offers 1.

in period 2. By credibly threatening to bluff in response to a low

first-period offer, the clean target Tholds up the sender for a high offer.

We now discuss these two outcomes in greater detail.
                                     -13-



2. Bluffing



     Suppose that the sender offers a reward R, where L C R C H, in period 1.

If the clean target always rejected this offer then, since 61 C 0, the sender

is sufficiently sure that the target is clean that after rejection she would

offer L in period 2   But the clean type would then always want to accept the

reward P. in period 1. But if the clean target always accepted the reward P. in

period 1 then the sender would know that a rejection meant that the target was

dirty, so she would offer H in period 2. The clean type would then reject K

in period 1. The only way out of this conundrum is for the sender and the

clean target to play mixed strategies, with the sender responding to rejection

of a low reward in period 1 by mixing between rewards of H and L in period 2,

and the clean target mixing between accepting and rejecting P. in period 1.

The sender's probability of making a high offer in period 2 must leave the

clean target indifferent between accepting and rejecting low offers in period

1, while the clean target's probability of rejecting low offers in period 1

must leave the sender indifferent between offering rewards H and L in

period 2.

     Since the sender is indifferent only when 2 — 6, '        must satisfy (1).''

Mixing by the clean target means that he must be equally willing to accept and

to reject low offers, which means that   it11   must satisfy (2). There are a

continuum of equilibrium outcomes in which         varies from 0 to 1, with the



lljf the clean target were to reject low offers with higher probability then
the sender would be sure enough that she was dealing with a bluffer that she
would offer only L in period 2, in which case the clean target should always
accept a low offer. But if the clean target were to reject low offers with
lower probability then the sender would be so sure that she was dealing with a
dirty type that she would offer only H in period 2. in which case the clean
target should always reject a low offer. Only when the clean target rejects
with this probability can he provide the sender an incentive to behave in a
way that is consistent with his decision.
                                              -14-



corresponding R varying froze 1. to H.1'




The cost to th. nnder and th. pollution amount

     The total expected cost to the sender in the bluffing equilibrium is:



                                    — (1-7)(R+L) + 7(0+13)                     (4a)




where



                     7 —    8+(l.8),R     —
                                              8k/i
                                                     —
                                                         81(D-L)/(H-L)         (5)




denotes the unconditional probability with which the target rejects a low

offer in period 1, either because he is dirty or because he is clean but

bluffing. substituting (5) into (4a) we get:



                        —
                            (l-81)(R+L) + 2810 + •(D-H)(D-R)                   (4b)




     We can index the continuum of bluffing equilibria by R, which can range

between 1.. and H, and the corresponding r11.         Iii the one that is best for the

sender R — L and     — 0.       In this case the clean target fails to grab any

informational rent from the sender's ignorance about his type, since his

payoff is just 21. (what he would get if the sender were not trying to


"If the first-period offer a equals 1. then the sender uses & pure strategy,
always offering 1. when this offer is rejected. The clean target is
indifferent between accepting and rejecting the first-period offer. If ii
denotes the probability that he rejects this offer, there are a continuum of
equilibria in which ii varies between one and n as given in equation (1). We
focus on the best one for the sender, which has ii — x. This involves no real
loss of generality since the target is indifferent among all these and the
sender can force —         by   choosing a    to   be slightly above L.
                                             -15-



influence him).   In   the worst one   for    the sender R — U and         — 1, in which

case the clean target receives the dirty target's reward for one period.

     Note, from (4a), that bluffers take themselves as costly to the sender as

truly dirty targets. Hence bluffing raises the sender's cost. This point is

made clearer bysplitting the sender's expected cost of dealing with the

target (4a) into three terms:



                  —
                       (l-81)(R+L) +   61(D4-H)
                                                    +
                                                        (7-11)I(D+H)-(R+L)].     (4c)




The first is the sender's expected cost of compensating a clean target if he

were always to reveal his type in period 1, the second is her expected cost of

dealing with a dirty target, and the third is the cost created by the clean

target's bluffing. In a world in which the target's type were automatically

revealed to the sender at the end of the first period1 only the first two

terms would remain since the target could not bluff.

     How does the sender's expected cost of dealing with the target respond to

changes in exogenous parameters? As one would expect, her cost increases with

D, the damage she herself suffers from pollution, with L, the extent to which

the clean target benefits from pollution, and with l' the initial likelihood

that the target is dirty. Increases in D and L not only raise her cost

directly, but increase the amount of bluffing. An increase in H, the dirty

target's payoff from pollution raises her direct costs but reduces the

incentive to bluff. The reason is that, as H rises toward D, the cost of

buying off a suspected dirty target approaches the cost of pollution itself.

The sender must be increasingly sure that she is dealing with a dirty type to

find offering H instead of suffering D worthwhile. Hence less and less

bluffing can occur in order for her to be willing to offer H. The effect of
                                         •16 -


                                                                        the
an increase in H in curtailing bluffing more than offsets its effect on
sender's direct cost. Hence the more a dirty target benefits from pollution
                                                                       I


the better off is the sender.

      In   the bluffing equilibrium pollution occurs in period I with probability

7 and in period 2 with probability °l' Hence offering rewards fails to

achieve the efficient outcome of no pollution. Because of bluffing there is

even more pollution than would occur if the sender could commit to offering

only L both periods. This strategy would eliminate the incentive for           the

clean target to bluff. Only a dirty type would ever pollute. so that

pollution would occur each period with probability 81 C 7.



Th. sender's dil.a

      A slight variation of the model shows how the sender might do better if

she could convincingly refrain from trying to exert any influence over the

target at all. Let L be slightly negative, so that, in the absence of any

incentive to bluff, the clean target would strictly prefer not to pollute. By

committing to laissez faire the sender could achieve a cost of 281D. But as

long as L is close to zero, her desire to pay a suspected dirty target not to

pollute creates an incentive for a clean target to bluff, even though

pollution is costly for him. Her cost even in the best outcome for her (when

L —   it — 0   in rxpression (4b)), then rises.



3.    The Hold Up



       Instead of making a low offer in period 1, however, the sender could make

an offer H that would be accepted for sure by either type of target. She

would learn nothing about the target's type in period 1, so that           —
                                               -17-



Since we are now dealing with the case in which                   < 9, she would then offer

only L in period 2. Her total cost offering H in period 1 would then be:



                                      — H +         + (l-91)L.                     (6)




Comparing (6) with (4b), this strategy is better than offering a low reward in

period 1 if •l exceeds the critical value L



The sender's cost and the amount of pollution

       In this outcome the sender again would benefit if she could commit to

offering L both periods. Here, however, the outcome is more efficient than

with commitment since commitment would entail more pollution, in contrast to

the bluffing equilibrium, where committing to pay just L would reduce

pollution.



IV. Punishing with a Mild Sanction



       Now consider a sender who is trying to influence the target's decision by

threatening    a mild punishment. At the beginning of each period the sender
decides whether or not to spend C to allow her to punish the target if                   he

pollutes that period. If she makes            the   expenditure   and the target pollutes

she   inflicts a cost P on him at no further cost to herself. Here we assume
that H >   P   >   L,   so that the threat of the punishment deters a clean but not a
dirty target.
      As with seeking influence with rewards, there are three kinds of

equilibrium outcomes, depending on the sender's initial prior about the

target's   type:
                                         -18-



1. Cornolete Pooling: Again, pooling occurs if           exceeds a threshold 6,

where now U — (D-C)/D.      If the sender is initially this sure that the target

is dirty, she never imposes sanctions and never learns the target's type.

Either type   of   target always pollutes.'3



2. Bluffing: If l <           then the sender threatens sanctions in period 1.

The dirty target balks, suffering the punishment, as does the clean target

with positive probability. The sender renews the threat for sure if it worked

the first period and renews it with positive probability even if it failed.

The new threat always works against the clean target but never against the

dirty.



3. Delayed Sanctions: If the sender initially thinks that the target is

dirty with probability l' where 82 C            < 6, then she waits until the second

period to threaten sanctions. Both types of target pollute the first period

as does the dirty target in the second period.



A. Optimal Strategies



     To derive the parties' equilibrium strategies we again begin with second

period. At this point the threat of sanctions always works against the clean

target, but not against the dirty one. The sender believes that the target is




'3We ignore another perfect Bayesian (pooling) equilibrium in the range #1 > 8
which can arise if P > 2H. The sender threatens sanctions in period 1,
renewing them if and only if the target target did pollute. Neither target
pollutes in period 1, while both do in period 2. The beliefs needed to
support this equilibrium have the contrived property that period 1 pollution
makes the sender think that the target is more likely to be clean, even though
the dirty target has a stronger incentive to pollute.
                                       -19-



dirty with probability 82 so that the expected cost of threatening sanctions

is C +          If she does nothing either type of target will pollute, so her
         82D.
cost is D. Comparing these costs determines the threshold 0.

     Either type of target would prefer that the sender not threaten the

sanction. The threat lowers the payoff of the clean target from L to 0 and of

the dirty target from H to H - P.

     Turn now to period 1. The threat of sanctions would not deter a dirty -
target   from polluting both because the benefit of polluting exceeds the harm

of the punishment and because pollution will make the sender at least as

confident that the target is dirty.

     The clean target's decision is more complicated. Knuckling under gives

away his type, so that      — 0 and the sender will definitely renew the threat

in period 2. His total payoff over the two periods is zero. But if he

pollutes the sender may think it sufficiently likely that he is dirty that she

may decide not to renew the threat. His payoff then is L.P+(lwS)L. where

is the probability that the sender will renew the threat if the target

pollutes.

     One possibility is that P > 2L.    In this case the clean target's gain

from pollution is so low relative to the pain inflicted by the sanction that

it is not worth suffering the penalty even one period in order to pollute both

periods. The threat will always deter a clean target.

     More interesting is the case in which P < 2L. Here the clean target

would be willing to pollute and suffer the penalty in period I if he were sure

that it would lead to the lifting of sanctions the next period; the clean

target has an incentive to bluff. Here bluffing occurs to get sanctions

removed rather than to get a higher reward.

     If the target does pollute in period 1, the sender believes that the
                                           -20-



target is dirty at the beginning of the next period with probability given by

(3), where now          is the probability that the clean target balks at the threat

and pollutes in period 1.



B. Equilibrium Outcomes



         The three equilibria emerge from this behavior as follows:




1. complete Pooling



                > $ then the sender is sufficiently sure that she is dealing with a

dirty target that she will not threaten sanctions in period 2 even if she knew

that the clean target always bluffed in period 1. Hence the clean target

would necessarily bluff. The sender's payoff threatening sanctions in period

1   is   D+c.   In   period 2 she would not threaten sanctions, so her payoff would

be D.      This is   worse for her than refraining from the threat at the beginning

of period 1. The threat is not worth using in either period, so the sender

suffers the cost of pollution each period.



2. Bluffing



         If     <      the sender threatens the sanction in period 1 and the clean

target sometimes bluffs to try to get the sender to drop sanctions.         If the

threat fails the first time the sender nevertheless renews it with positive

probability. Mixing occurs for the same reason that it does when the sender

uses rewards: If the clean target always bluffed then the sender would remain

sufficiently sure that the target was clean that she would always renew
                                         -21-



sanctions. But then the clean target would have no reason to bluff. But if

the clean target never bluffed then the sender would always drop sanctions if

they failed in the first period, giving the clean target reason to bluff. The

only equilibrium outcome is in mixed strategies: To make the parties

indifferent between their respective choices: (i) the clean target must bluff

with the probability      at which      —   U   (which continues to be given by

expression (1)) and (ii) the sender must renew sanctions after pollution

occurs with probability      — (2L-P)/L.


The cost to the sender and th. amount of pollution

        In the bluffing outcome the expected cost to the sender of threatening

sanctions in period 1 is:



                             Cs —    (l-7)2C    + 1(2D+C).



                                —
                                     (l-81)2C + 91(2D+C) + (6-81)(2D-C)
where



                         7 — 9 +(l-S        —        — 91D/(D-c)


is the probability that the target will balk at sanctions in period 1, either

because he is dirty or because he is clean but bluffing.

        In the second expression for C the sender's expected cost of dealing

with the target is again the probability-weighted sum of the cost of dealing

with a target who reveals himself to be clean, the cost of dealing with a

dirty target, and the cost from bluffing. Again, dealing with a target who

acts dirty is more costly than dealing with a target who comes clean the first
                                          -22-



period, so that a third cost is due to the bluffing caused by the sender's

attempts at influence.

    Again, if the sender could commit to a policy, here imposing the sanction

each period regardless of the first-period response, then the clean target

would have no incentive to bluff. The sender's cost would be 2(61D+C), which

is less than her cost in the bluffing outcome. There is also less pollution.



3. Delayed Sanctions



     When 82 <    <    I   and the sender does not impose sanctions in period 1

then both types of target would pollute. Since she learns nothing 2 —             and
                                                                            61
she would impose sanctions in period 2. Her expected cost from taking this

course of action is:



                                     —            ÷ C,
                                         (l+O}D

which is lower than the cost of imposing sanctions if 6 >

     Here potential bluffing causes the sender to eschew sanctions the first

period. The clean target exploits the sender's ignorance, but for one period,

rather than two, as in the pooling equilibrium. As in the equilibrium with

bluffing, the sender would benefit from an ability to commit to imposing

sanctions in period 2 regardless of the sender's period 1 actions. Unlike the

situation with rewards, where the threat of bluffing led to a hold up and lass

pollution than would occur if the sender could commit to a course of action,

here the potential for bluffing delays sanctions, so that there is more

pollution.
                                        -23-



C. Mild Threats vs. Promises



    How does the sender fare threatening mild punishments rather than making

promises? To answer this question we compare her payoffs in the pooling,

bluffing, and intermediate outcomes, although the ranges over which these

outcomes occur typically differ between the two situations.

     In the pooling equilibrium with threats the sender's cost is 2D, instead

of 214, the pooling payoff with rewards. Hence if the sender is very sure that

the target is dirty she is better off in a regime of rewards than of mild

sanctions.

     in the intermediate equilibrium with threats the sender's cost is

(l+91)D + C.   With rewards it is H +          +              It follows that rewards
                                        91D        (l-61)L.
are less costly as long as the cost of sanctions C exceed the clean target's

benefit of polluting L.

     The comparison of the two bluffing outcomes is more complicated.

Comparing each component of the sender's cost, the relative cost of dealing

with a clean target who acquiesces in the first period is higher or lower

using rewards as C is higher or lower than L. Since sanctions ultimately do

not deter a dirty type, the cost of dealing with a target who acts dirty is

always higher using sanctions. Whether more bluffing occurs when the sender

uses sanctions is ambiguous. Sanctions are relatively immune from bluffing

when C is low, so that the sender is quite likely to impose them even when she

is quite doubtful that the target is dirty. Rewards are relatively immune

when H is near D, so that the sender must be quite sure that the target is

dirty before she offers H. Given that bluffing is going on, the sender will

find that it is less costly to influence the target with threats if sanctions

do not require any direct cost (i.e., if C — 0), even though, unlike rewards,
                                       -24-



sanctions fail to deter a dirty target. As the cost of implementing sanctions

rises, however, rewards become the lower cost method of achieving influence.



V. Combining Threats and Promises



    What happens if the sender can use both the promise of a reward and the

threat of the mild sanction in combination? In general the analysis is much

more complicated, and we do not provide a complete characterization. Rather

we discuss   an interesting point that the joint use of   the two instruments

raises, showing how the sender's ability to use both can make her worse off

than if she were restricted to using just one or the other in isolation.

     For simplicity we make the additional assumption that C C L.      Under this

restriction, the sender will always threaten sanctions in period 2. They

deter a clean target more cheaply than an offer of L, and if she plans to

reward a dirty target not to pollute she need offer only H-F, rather than H,

for a net savings of P-C. (Recall that C C I.     < P C H).
     Hence her only decision is whether to offer H-P and deter pollution by

both types or not to offer anything, thereby deterring only the clean type.

The threshold probability is now 9 —   (H-P)/D.    If     exceeds this amount the

sender will offer the reward as well as impose sanctions, while if         is less

she will only impose sanctions.

     As in the previous cases, if the sender's initial prior exceeds this

amount there is complete pooling. Compared with the case of the simple

reward, either target's payoff is lower since by using the sanction the sender

lowers the transfer that she makes to either type. The outcome is

nevertheless inefficient, since the threat imposes a real resource cost.

     Consider what happens in the bluffing equilibrium, however. Having
                                           -25-


access to the sanction changes the sender's payoff from (4b) to:



                     —                                  + 2C.
                         (l-6)R +   291D
                                           +                           (4d)


     The threat acts to reduce the sender's cost in that she no longer has to

pay I. to a nonbluffing clean target (although she must incur the cost of the

threat over two periods). Moreover, the threat lowers the cost of buying out

a suspected dirty target in period 2. But as a consequence the sender is more

prone to go ahead and offer the reward to a possible dirty type. There is

thus more scope for bluffing than if the sender used only rewards in

isolation. Since bluffing hurts the sender, the net effect of having access

to the penalty (comparing the equilibria that are best for her in each case)

can easily be negative. This happens, for example, if I.. is near zero. As a

consequence, when the sender initially strongly suspects that the target is

clean, so that a bluffing equilibrium emerges, her total cost using both

instruments can be higher than if she could use just the reward. She would be

better off destroying her own ability to use the punishment. Even though

threatening the mild punishment in conjunction with promising rewards lowers

her direct cost of dealing with each type of target, threats can increase

bluffing to such an extent that she is worse off.



VI. Mild and Draconian Sanctions: Wolves in Sheep's Clothing



     We now add to the sender's arsenal a draconian sanction that imposes so

much harm on the target that it would deter either type from polluting.

Threatening it costs the sender an amount F. The sender still has access to

the mild sanction that would deter the clean but not the dirty target. to
                                        -26-



keep things simple we assume that threatening the mild sanction is costless.

     In period 2. then, the gender's relevant decision is whether to impose

the draconian sanction and deter pollution for sure, at cost F < D, or to

impose only the mild sanction, risking pollution by the clean target, at an

expected cost 62D. Uhat she does thus depends upon the relationship between

her belief the target is dirty and the threshold level 9 — F/D.

     In period 1 the clean target knows that whatever the sender does in

period 2, he will not want to pollute. His payoff is zero regardless.     He

consequently does not care whether the sender leans his type, and so will not

pollute as long as either sanction is threatened in period I.

     Hence, if the dirty target balks at the mild sanction in period 1, he

blows his cover,       — 1, and the sender threatens the draconian sanction in

period 2. His payoff over both periods from balking at the mild sanction is

thus H-P.

     If he acquiesces, however, his payoff is zero now but H-P if the sender

uses only mild sanctions the next period. Hence, if he thinks she would drop

 them in period 2 he would be indifferent between polluting now and polluting

 later. A mixing outcome can then emerge. Denote by        the probability with

which the dirty target acquiesces to the mild sanction.     1hen confronted with

 a target who acquiesced in the face of the mild sanction, the sender will

 suspect that he is dirty with probability:


                                               IJ


                                 82 —      elww


 As long as the dirty target acquiesces to the first period sanction with a

                   low enough to keep 87 below $ he will dissuade the sender from
 probability
                                     -27-



the draconian threat in period 2.

     The dirty target will want to choose       in this range. If he acquiesced

with higher probability then the sender would impose the draconian sanction

even if he acquiesced the first period. His payoff from this Is 0, while

balking the first period would bring him H-P.

     Hence the dirty target is willing to mix between acquiescing and balking

to the mild sanction with any probability between 0 and (l-91)F/[91(D.F)] (or

one1 if this amount exceeds one).

     The sender is not indifferent to what the dirty target does, however.

Her payoff as a function of    is:




                   —       + 8(l)(D4-F) —
                                                90 +   (lW)F)


which falls as    rises. The dirty target's mimicking of the clean target to

reduce sanctions the next period works to the sender's advantage.

     The reason is that, if she imposes the mild sanction in period 1, the

dirty target is going to pollute exactly once, either in period 1, in which

case she will impose the draconian sanction in period 2, or wait until period

2. In the second case she avoids the cost of the draconian sanction. While

the dirty target is indifferent among a continuum of mixing probabilities, the

sender could coax him to the best one for her that is consistent with no

period 2 sanctions by offering a very small reward for not polluting in

period 1.

     The sender could, of course, threaten the draconian sanction in period 1.

Her payoff would be       if she dropped it in period 2 and 2F if she

maintained it for both periods. She does better threatening the mild sanction

in period 1 as long as    C (F/D)(2-F/D). In one period of interaction she
                                         -28-



would impose the draconian sanction as long as         > F/D. With repeated

interaction, however, she can use     the   dirty target's fear of subsequent

draconian threats to dissuade him from polluting currently. Hence for higher

values of      she does better not making the draconian threat in the first

period. Rather, she uses the possibility of threatening it in the second

period to deter pollution in the first.



VII. Conclusion



     We have shown how one's attempts to influence the actions of another can

be costly, futile, and even self-defeating. These problems can arise whether

one is seeking influence by promising to reward good behavior or threatening

to punish bad behavior.

     Of the various situations we consider, the sender does best when she can

threaten a punishment that imposes more harm on the target than the maximum

benefit   that he could obtain from taking the undesired course of action. In

this case the target's attempts to dissemble work in the sender's favor. In

order to avoid the threat the target behaves to try       to   signal that the threat

is unnecessary.

     In the absence of a draconian penalty, however, offering rewards or

threatening mild punishments can work to the sender's disadvantage. These

encourage behavior to increase the reward or to avoid the punishment:         With

rewards   the target wants to show that he needs &     large reward to desist. With
mild punishments the target wants to show that they will not work. Bluffing

is most pervasive when the sender is most sure that the target is not really

benefiting that much from the action that she is trying to stop.

     Our    analysis   suggests just some of the quandaries that limitations on our
                                       -29-



knowledge of others cause in trying   to   influence them. We have assumed that

all parameters except the target's benefit from taking an undesired action are

common knowledge. Other possible differences in information might pertain to

the target's suffering from the available penalties, as well as the damage

done to the sender by the target's actions, and the sender's cost of imposing

sanctions and paying rewards. These forms of informational asymmetries pose

additional problems. Our analysis preserves their exploration as topics for

future research.
                                      -30-



                                  REFERENCES

Coase, K. "The Problem of Social Cost," Journal of Law   and   Economics,

    3 (1960): 1-44.

Daoudi, M.S,, and Dajani, M.S. Economic Sanctions: Ideals and Exterfence.

    London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983.

Dixit, Avinash K. "How Should the United States Respond to Other Countrtes

    Trade Policies?" In U.S. trade Policies in a Chanping World Environment,

     edited by Robert M. Stern. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1987.

Eaton, J. and K. Engers "Sanctions," Journal of Political Economy,

     100 (october. 1992): 899-928.

Fudenberg, D. and .1. Tirole Came Theory Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Hufbauer, Gary C., Schott, Jeffrey.J., and Elliott, Kimberly A. Economic

     Sanctions Reconsidered. 2nd ed. Washington D.C.: Institute for

     International Economics, 1990.

Kaempfer, William H. • and Lowenberg. Anton D. "The Theory of International

     Economic Sanctions: A Public Choice Approach." American Economic Review

     78 (september 1988): 786-793.

Parson, Edward A. "Stratospheric Ozone and CFCs: International

     Institutions." Manuscript. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, 1991.

Schelling, Thomas C. The Straterr of Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard

     University Press, 1960.

Schelling, Thomas C. Arms and Influence. New Haven, Conn. :      Yale University

     Press, 1965.
