                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   TAX POLICY AND
                             INTERNATIONAL CAPiTAL FLOWS




                                        Martin Feldstein




                                   Working Paper No. 4851



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 1994




These remarks were presented as the Bernhard Harms Prize Lecture on June 24, 1994 in Kid,
Gemiany. I am grateful to Todd Sinai for help with the statistical estimates presented in section
2 of this paper and to Kathryn Dominguez, Jeffrey Frankel and Kenneth Froot for comments on
an earlier draft. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Finance and
Macroeconomics, International Trade and Investment and Public Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Martin Feldstein. AU rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4851
                                                                            September 1994

                                  TAX POLICY AND
                            INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS

                                         ABSTRACT

       Although capital is now generally free to move across national borders, there is strong

evidence that savings tend to remain and to be invested in the countiy where the saving takes

place. The current paper examines the apparent conflict between the potential mobility of capital

and 'the observed de facto segmentation of the global capital market

       The key to reconciling this "Feldstein-Horioka paradox" is that, although capital is free

to move, its owners, and especially the agents who are responsible for institutional investments,

prefer to keep funds close to home because of a combination of risk aversion, ignorance and a

desire to show prudence in their investing behavior.

       The paper presents evidence on the capital mobility and on capital market segmentation.

The role of hedging and the difference between gross and net capital movements for individual

investors and borrowers are discussed. The special place of foreign direct investment is also

considered.

       The segmentation of the global capital market affects the impact of capital income taxes

and subsidies. This is discussed in the fmal section of the paper.

       This paper was presented as the 1994 Bernhard Harms lecture.



Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard University
                             Tax Policy and International Capital Flows

                                            Martin Feldstein*

          I am delighted to be here in Kiel at the Institut fir Weltwirtschaft. It is a great honor for

me to have been selected as the 1994 recipient of the Bernhard Harms prize and it is a pleasure

to join you in paying tribute to Bernhard Harms on this 80th anniversary of his founding of the

Institute.

          An occasion like this is a pleasant way of linking one generation to the next within the

economics profession. The fifteen recipients of the Harms prize since it was established in 1964

include the man with whom I first studied international economics, Sir Roy Harrod of Oxford,

who received the prize in 1966 while I was a graduate student in Oxford. A few years later, the

prize went to Wassily Leontief and then to Gottfried Haberler, both of whom were active

members of the Harvard Economics department that I had just joined. So it is a special pleasure

and indeed a great honor to have been included with these men in the group that the Kiel

Institute has honored.

          As you know, the Harms prize is based on contributions to international economics while

my own research over the years has focused on the economics of the public sector, especially the

problems of taxation, government spending and social insurance. Most research in public



*professor of Economics, Harvard University and President of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. These remarks were presented as the Bernhard Harms Prize Lecture on June 24, 1994
in Kid, Germany. I am grateflul to Todd Sinai for help with the statistical estimates presented in
section 2 of this paper and to Kathryn Dominguez, Jefiuey Frankel and Kenneth Froot for
comments on an earlier draft
kiel.082494
economics, including my own, focuses on microeconomic issues: how public policies affect the

behavior of households and firms and how to design policies that lead to preferred outcomes.

 However, much of my own work has been motivated by aggregate national issues like the

causes of high unemployment, the impact of inflation, and the determinants and consequences of

aggregate capital formation.

        It was my research on the link between public policies and domestic capital formation

that led me to deal with explicitly international issues. About twenty years ago, I began to worry

about whether the growing importance of international capital flows required a radical revision

of the theory of how taxes affect our national economies. If capital moves among countries to

achieve the highest available rate of return, national policies that change the domestic saving rate

will not affect domestic investment. For example, if domestic tax incentives raise the private

saving rate, the additional capital will simply be distributed around the world. Or if social

security retirement benefits reduce domestic saving, the domestic investment rate will be

maintained by an inflow of capital from the rest of the world. Moreover, a tax on corporate

profits would not reduce the after-tax rate of return to savers because individuals will simply

reduce their domestic investment and send capital abroad until the after-tax return is the same as

the rate of return available elsewhere. The corporate tax burden would fall on labor income and

land rents.

       It was crucial therefore to my study of public finance to know the extent to which capital

does move among countries to equalize the after-tax rate of return on long-term capital and more

generally, to offset differences in national saving rates. To my surprise, the economists who

specialize in international economics had not resolved this issue. Indeed, although there was


                                                 2
research on the extent to which capital market rules inhibited the equalization of domestic and

foreign interest rates for similar securities denominated in the same currency (e.g., Euroyen

deposits in London and similar maturity yen deposits in Tokyo), there was no research that

answered the broader questions that I was asking.

       With the help of a Harvard graduate student, Charles Horioka, I therefore began a study

of international capital flows that looked directly at the relation between decade-average

domestic saving rates in the industrial countries of the OECD and the corresponding domestic

investment rates in those countries. We found that countries with high sustained saving rates had

high sustained investment rates while countries with low saving rates had low ratios of

investment to GDP (Feldstein and Horioka, 1980). There was no indication that an increase in

national savings would simply be dispersed through the global capital market. Instead, our

estimated "savings retention coefficients" indicated that in the I 960s and I 970s more than two-

thirds of incremental domestic savings tended to remain and to be invested in the country in

which the saving occurred. A later study that I did with Philippe Bacchetta (Feldstein and

Bacchetta, 99l) found similar results for the 1980s, though it did show a small decline in the

coefficient.

        The interpretation of this strong relation between domestic saving and domestic

investment, which has been verified in subsequent research by a large number of researchers for

different time periods and different groups of countries, has created a great deal of controversy.1




   'The recent survey papers by Frankel (1992), Mussa and Goldstein (1994) and Obstfeldt
(1993) review the evidence on the relation between domestic saving and investment and discuss
the controversy over the interpretation of this finding. See also the specific contributions of
Dooley et. al. (1987), Murphy (1987), Sinn (1992) and Tesar (1991).

                                                 3
The observed absence of offsetting international capital flows in response to domestic savings

differences seems in conflict with the strong evidence of a well integrated world capital market.

There is no doubt that the formal barriers to international capital flows are small and that the

growth of the derivatives market has made it possible for cross-border investors to hedge long-

term as well as short term currency and interest rate risks. There is ample evidence of cross-

border investments by institutional portfolio managers and individual investors. And the interest

rates that prevail in the Eurocurrency markets show that capital movements can and do eliminate

any international differences in the yields on similar securities in the same currencies.

        And yet the evidence on the savings-investment relation, as well as other evidence that I

will summarize in a moment, implies a de facto segmentation of global capital markets. My first

aim in this lecture is to reconcile the apparent conflict between the evidence on capital mobility

and on domestic savings retention. I hope to convince you that, although capital is free to move

across national boundaries, the owners and managers of the capital do not want to move it as

much as would be necessary to make the level of investment in each country and the rate of

return in each country independent of that country's domestic saving rate. This de facto

segmentation of global capital markets reflects investors' preferences rather than institutional

barriers.

        The savings retention rates will therefore not be the same in all countries or at all times.

The estimates based on cross-country regressions are averages, not immutable constants. A

small country like the Netherlands with a currency that is closely linked to the Deutschemark is

likely to have a much smaller saving retention rate than a large country like Germany, Japan or

the United States. However, even a relatively small country may have a very high saving


                                                  4
retention rate if foreign investment involves a substantial currency risk.

       After discussing these questions, I will turn to the special role of foreign direct

investment. Like the components of portfolio investment, foreign direct investment does not

respond to differences in national saving rates but is determined by operating business goals. It

does however play an important part in transferring national saving across borders. Each

incremental dollar of outbound foreign direct investment appears on average to decrease

domestic investment by a dollar. This stands in sharp contrast to what would be expected in a

completely integrated capital market. Outbound FDI is also important because firms that invest

abroad appear to use substantially more foreign borrowing than they otherwise would, thereby

circumventing the direct segmentation of portfolio capital flows. This use of foreign debt is an

important consideration in the design of appropriate policies toward outbound foreign

investment.

       The analysis and design of national tax rules and other public policies that affect

domestic saving and investment should therefore not begin, as a recent OECD study suggested,

by "assuming that international capital markets are perfectly integrated." (OECD, 1994, page

136) Each country must assess its own saving retention rate and consider its implications for the

effect of domestic policies on capital formation and tax incidence. Some suggestions along these

lines will be the subject of the final part of my remarks today.



1.      Reconciling Capital Mobility and Global Capital Market Segmentation

        These is a substantial body of irrefutable evidence that indicates that capital is mobile

between countries and that substantial actual capital movements do occur. I will quickly


                                                   5
summarize that evidence as well as the evidence that savings are nevertheless invested in the

country in which they originate. I will then discuss why these two bodies of evidence are not

really in conflict and will speculate on the reason why portfolio investors do not choose to shift

capital to equalize rates of return among all industrial countries.



1.1     The Mobility of Capital

       The most direct evidence that capital is mobile across national borders is the equality of

interest rates on identical securities in different markets. Back in the I 970s, before the Japanese

government eliminated explicit capital controls, the interest rate on short term yen deposits in

Tokyo differed from the Euroyen rate by as much as several hundred basis points for sustained

periods. Such differences no longer exist in either the short-term or long-term markets for any of

the major currencies.

       Closely related to this equality of rates for the same security is the existence of covered

interest parity. Interest rates on comparable securities denominated in different currencies differ

only by the amount of the forward discount between the currencies. In other words, there is no

unexploited opportunity for a riskiess profit as there would be if institutional rules precluded

certain cross-border transactions or if financial institutions were unwilling to seize such

opportunities for cross-border riskiess arbitrage.

       Not all of the capital movements are riskiess arbitrage. At the opposite extreme, the

collapse of the European Monetary System in September 1992 was accompanied by massive

private capital flows seeking to take advantage of the expected devaluations. Mussa and

Goldstein (1994) estimate that more than $200 billion was ventured by currency speculators


                                                     6
during that episode.

        A much more mundane example of international capital movements is the cross-border

flows of bank deposits within Europe by individuals who are seeking to evade tax on their

interest income. Although I have seen no estimates of the amount of capital that evades the tax

authorities in this way, the high levels of tax rates on domestic interest income makes me believe

that these amounts of illicit deposits might well be quite large.

       There are of course substantial amounts of legal international portfolio diversification.

The Morgan Guaranty Trust Company (1994) recently estimated that international holdings of

foreign currency bonds and equities rose from approximately 9 percent of global securities

investments in 1983 to 15 percent at the end of 1992.

        Finally, but more difficult to make commensurate with ordinary capital investments, the

notional volume of derivative securities, many of which involve cross-border currency and

interest rate transactions, now exceeds some $10 trillion.

        So there is ample evidence that capital can and does move across borders. And yet there

is also strong evidence that global capital markets are segmented and that capital does not move

across national borders in the same way that it does within countries.



1.2     Evidence of Global Capital Market Segmentation

        The most striking evidence of global capital market segmentation comes from the

investment-savings equations of the type that I estimated with Charles Horioka. When the

decade average ratio of domestic investment to GDP is regressed on the decade average ratio of

saving to GDP across the countries of the OECD, the coefficient of the savings ratio implies that


                                                   7
about two-thirds of an incremental amount of national savings is retained locally in the form of

domestic investment.

       This estimated saving retention coefficient has declined from more than 0.8 in the I 960s

to about 0.6 in the 1980s but remains very much greater than the value of approximately zero

that would be implied by a completely integrated market. It is also clear from the raw data that

the very high saving countries like Japan continue to have very high investment rates while the

low saving countries like the United States have low investment rates. Even in the 198 Os, when

Japan had its largest current account surpluses, Japan exported less than seven percent of its

gross domestic saving. Japanese gross investment was 29 percent of GDP while U.S. gross

investment was only 18 percent of GDP.

       A variety of statistical explanations have been suggested in an attempt to dismiss the high

savings retention coefficients and thereby to reconcile these estimates with the theoretical picture

of perfect capital mobility and complete global capital market arbitrage. It has been suggested,

for example, that the high savings retention coefficients could arise from productivity shocks or

business cycle conditions. Although these might be valid criticisms of investment-savings

regressions estimated with time series data for a single country (Feldstein, 1983; Baxter and

Crucini, 1993), they are not relevant to the decade-average cross country regressions that I have

been discussing. A second type of statistical explanation that seeks to dismiss the high savings-

retention coefficients is that some variables are omitted in the simple cross-country regressions

that raise both saving and investment in a country. Obstfeldt (1986) pointed to the demographic

structure of a country and its rate of economic growth as factors that could potentially cause the

savings retention coefficient to be overestimated. However, estimating extensions of the


                                                 8
Feldstein-Horioka equations that explicitly include these variables does not alter the original

conclusion about the high level of the savings retention coefficient (Feldstein and Bacchetta,

1991; Frankel, 1992). Finally, although some critics have suggested the possibility of

simultaneous equations bias because the saving rate is an endogenous variable, instrumental

variable estimates confirm the original results (Feldstein and Horioka, 1980; Frankel, 1991,

1992). My reading of the recent literature on this subject (e.g., Frankel (1992), Mussa and

Goldstein (1994) and Obstfeldt (1993)) indicates that there is now a general agreement among

those who have studied this issue that the high savings retention coefficients cannot be explained

away as some kind of statistical artifact.2

        A more economic explanation, first suggested by Branson and developed by Summers

(1988), is that the high savings retention coefficient could reflect explicit government policies

aimed at preventing large current account imbalances. According to this view, each government

adjusts its budget deficit to offset changes in private saving (or private investment). My reading

of the economic history of budget deficits makes me very skeptical of this view of government

behavior. A more natural explanation of the relation among these three variables is that private

investment responds equally to differences in private saving and in government budget

surpluses, an interpretation that is supported by regression equations that disaggregate national

saving in this way (Feldstein and Bacchetta, 1991).




   2The evidence on savings retention coefficients estimated for regions within a single country
supports the interpretation of the cross-country savings retention coefficients as true measuresof
de facto international capital market segmentation. Within countries the savings retention
coefficients are approximately zero, just as one would expect in a fully integrated capital market.
For references to cross-region studies in the U.K., the U.S., Canada and Japan, see Frankel
(1993).
                                                  9
        The investment savings regressions are not the only evidence pointing to the de facto

segmentation of global capital markets. Maddison (1991) studied the evolution of the ratio of

the capital stock to GDP in six OECD countries between 1973 and 1987. He reasoned that if the

capital markets are effectively integrated, the ratios of capital to GDP would tend to converge

over time, with faster growth of the capital-income ratios of the countries that initially had low

capital-income ratios. In fact, he found no such convergence.

        There is also substantial evidence of a "home country bias" in investment portfolios.

French and Poterba (1990) noted that 94 percent of U.S. portfolios are invested in American

securities and 98 percent of Japanese portfolios are invested in Japanese securities. Mussa and

Goldstein (1994) noted that less than 10 percent of the portfolios of the 500 largest institutional

investors around the world are invested in foreign securities.3 And Tesar and Werner (1992)

calculated that this home bias relative to an optimally diversified global portfolio costs American

investors the equivalent of 200 basis points of yield because of the possibility of reducing risk by

diversification.

        Finally, although covered interest parity holds for major currencies, uncovered interest

parity and real interest parity do not hold. Frankel (1992) has noted that this implies that

expected real rates of return will not be equalized everywhere due to the existence of a "currency

premium" associated with differences in the currencies in which assets are issued (as distinct

from a "country premium" associated with cross-border differences per se). That it in turn

reflects the fact that purchasing power parity does not hold even over relatively long periods of

time.



   3See also the discussion in French (1991) and in Brainard and Tobin (1992).

                                                 10
1.3    Reconciling Capital Mobility and High Saving Retention Rates

       The conflict between the evidence that there is global capital mobility and the evidence

that there is global capital market segmentation is more apparent than real. Capital is mobile but

its owners generally prefer to keep it at home. Evidence that capital can move and that some

capital does move is not the same as evidence that capital is allocated globally without regard to

national boundaries.

       Those who are uncomfortable with the idea that the global capital market is more

segmented than national capital markets have focussed too much attention on demonstrating that

capital can move across borders. Although there are indeed still many substantial restrictions on

the amount that various institutional investors like insurance companies and pension funds can

invest abroad, the important issue is not the legal or institutional restrictions on capital mobility

but the fact that investors prefer not to move capital internationally in the same way that they do

domestically.

        Although some capital may be truly global and devoted to obtaining the highest expected

rate of return available anywhere, that is simply not true of most investors. The evidence on

investment-saving correlations and portfolio composition reflects the fact that ignorance, risk

aversion and prudence keep capital close to home.

        For most individual savers, the neighborhood bank or savings institution is the depository

of fl.mds. Those institutions, faced with nominal obligations in the domestic currency, prefer to

have similar assets.

        Large institutional investors that can and do obtain information about investing in foreign

securities are nevertheless reluctant to accept the risk of investing in markets with which they are


                                                   11
less familiar than their domestic markets. They do make some such investments but they seize

opportunities abroad in a more limited way than opportunities at home.

       Risk aversion means that the gains from true cross-border portfolio investment may not

be large enough to induce actual capital flows. A recent report from the Morgan Guaranty Trust

Company (1994) suggested that, for a U.S. investor, the minimum variance global bond portfolio

would be invested 90 percent in U.S. bonds. Only by accepting a substantial increase in risk

could a more diversified portfolio add an additional 100 basis points of expected yield. So even

an optimizing and well advised investor might decide to leave its capital at home despite the

availability of higher yields abroad. Only a very risk-neutral investor would choose to maximize

return by investing its entire portfolio in foreign bonds.4

        A recent study by Campbell Harvey (1994) of equity investing in emerging markets

indicated that U.S. investors could improve the risk-return tradeoff in their portfolios by

including equities in emerging markets but the gains were not very large relative to the

fundamental uncertainty of investments in emerging markets.

        These two studies point to the importance of two aspects of the risk of international

investing: political risk and currency risk. Although there may be little political risk associated

with portfolio investments within the OECD countries, there are more substantial risks when

investments are made in the emerging markets. Even within the OECD there is always the risk

of some kind of capital controls or convertibility restrictions. These risks, which are not

reflected in the covariance matrices that analysts use to calculate risk-return trade-offs of



   4Such consideration of risk aversion and desired portfolio diversification show why Summers
was not correct when he wrote (Summers, 1988, p. 365): "AS long as some mobile funds are
located almost everywhere there is a presumption that rates of return must be equalized."

                                                   12
internationally diversified portfolios, tend to make portfolio investors more reluctant to invest

abroad.5

         The risks of changes in government policies are even more important for direct foreign

investments than for portfolio investments since direct investments are much more difficult to

reverse. Even OECD governments can change tax rules, government procurement rules and

other regulations in ways that are particularly disadvantageous to foreign investors.

         Currency risk is particularly important in cross-border portfolio investments. Frankel

(1991, 1993) showed the importance of currency risks in explaining real interest rate differentials

among countries. The Morgan Guaranty study that I mentioned a moment ago shows that if

currency risk is eliminated by hedging the foreign bonds, the optimal portfolio would be very

different than the unhedged portfolio. On the basis of the historic experience with hedged bonds

that was analyzed in the Morgan study, a portfolio invested 100 percent in U.S. bonds gave the

highest yield to a dollar based investor. Adding hedged foreign bonds to that portfolio could

reduce the risk of the portfolio but only by reducing the expected return. A sufficiently risk-

averse investor would minimize the portfolio risk by investing approximately two-thirds of the

portfolio in non-U.S. bonds on a hedged basis, giving up less than fifty basis points of expected

yield and reducing the portfolio risk (relative to a 100 percent U.S. bond portfolio) by about one-

third.

         As the Morgan study suggests, the importance of currency risk causes many portfolio

managers to hedge substantial amounts of their foreign portfolio investments. This appears to be




    5See Eichengreen (1990) on the role of political risk in reducing cross-country capital flows
in the period between the two wars.

                                                  13
true for equity as well as debt securities, even though foreign equities over long periods of time

may be much more "self hedging" than bonds.6 Portfolio managers may choose to hedge

because they are concerned about the short-term performance of the funds measured in their

home currency. This in turn may reflect pure short-term risk aversion, or an "agency problem"

in reporting results to the owners of the funds, or regulatory standards that focus on short-term

market values, or any of a number of other influences.

       Hedging foreign investments is particularly important because hedging an investment can

offset a gross cross-border transfer of capital and leave no net cross-border transfer of capital.

Since much of the observed cross border investing and borrowing is hedged, it is very important

to recognize that the existence of such hedged investments is not evidence for intercountry

capital flows. Indeed, the prevalence of hedging is evidence of the segmented nature of the

global capital market. With the help of currency hedges, investors can take positions in foreign

securities without a net transfer of capital across borders.

        Two examples will show how cross border investing and borrowing may not achieve net

international capital flows when the currency is hedged. Consider an American pension fund

that wants to invest in long-term German bonds. If the pension fund decides to avoid the

currency risk of the cross-border investment, it can hedge its position by selling marks forward

for dollars. That foreign currency hedging transaction is exactly equivalent to borrowing the




   6A rise in the general price level in the foreign country will tend in the long run to cause the
currency of that country to depreciate by an equiproportional amount. Since the nominal foreign-
currency value of equities should rise in parallel to the general price level, the value of the
equities in the home currency of the investor ("dollars") will be unaffected by the foreign
currency depreciation. In contrast, there is no similar adjustment in the nominal value of the
foreign bond. See Froot (1993).

                                                  14
funds in the short-term market in Germany. Indeed, the bank or other firm that buys forward

marks from the bond investor will generally hedge that transaction by borrowing marks in the

spot market, converting them to dollars and having a marks obligation that can be satisfied when

the bond investor delivers the marks for conversion into dollars.

       As this example makes clear, a hedged investment in German bonds by an American

investor need not involve a net cross-border flow of capital. The American shifts the

composition of demand for securities within Germany but the entire transaction involves only

German capital. The shift in the composition of securities may influence the way that real

physical capital investment is allocated in Germany but it does not increase the amount of

investment that can be undertaken. The same is clearly true for foreign equity investments

financed by hedging (or, equivalently, by borrowing in the country in which the equities are

issued.)

       Multinational firms that finance by borrowing abroad and hedging the currency may also

not be making a net transfer of capital across borders. An American firm that needs capital in

the United States to finance some investment in plant and equipment may discover that it can

borrow dollars more cheaply by issuing a ten year bond in Europe denominated in DM and

hedging the foreign currency exposure. This hedging is equivalent to lending the funds in the

short-term market in Germany. The American firm gains because the DM long-short, spread that

it faces is more favorable than the corresponding spread in dollars. It lowers its cost of investing

in the United States not because it brings German capital to the United States but because it takes

advantage of its access to the foreign market to make a financial profit on a currency transaction.

Of course, since that transaction does involve long term borrowing, it is a transaction that it


                                                 15
would not have been willing to do had it not been making the domestic U.S. investment in plant

and equipment. The two activities -- the domestic physical investment and the foreign hedged

borrowing --- are a package that the American firm considers together because the risks of the

long-term borrowing are balanced by the long-term physical investment. But the foreign

borrowing and hedging do not effect a cross-border transfer of capital.

       The key point in both of these examples is that what appears to be a cross-border flow of

capital may in fact not be that at all. It is wrong therefore to look at the amount of foreign

portfolio investment or foreign borrowing and try to draw any inferences about the

corresponding amount of true cross border capital movements.

       With this discussion in mind, let's look at some of the evidence of apparent capital

mobility that I discussed earlier (in section 1.1). Consider first the fact that interest rates on

identical securities in different national markets are equal. The transactions required to achieve

this equality are essentially riskless arbitrage. The equality of these interest rates shows only

that capital can move when there is a riskiess incentive to make the transaction. It provides no

evidence of a willingness to move capital when risk is involved. The same is true for covered

interest parity. Moreover, these are hedged transactions that may simply be offset by borrowing

the arbitraged funds.

        The high-risk high-reward currency speculation of the type that occurred at the time of

the EMS collapse is indeed a cross border movement of capital. The existence of such short-

term speculative capital movements shows that there are no barriers to capital movements. But it

provides no evidence of a willingness of investors to commit substantial amounts of capital for

extended periods of time.


                                                   16
       Although data on individuals who move capital across borders to avoid taxes on interest

income is obviously hard to obtain, the discussions that I have had with both individuals and

bankers in Europe suggest that such foreign deposits are typically made in the currency of the

home country whenever significant amounts are involved. A Frenchman who deposits funds in a

Belgian bank is likely to hold a French franc deposit. Since the Belgian bank will hedge any

increased currency exposure (by making a wholesale deposit in a French bank or purchasing a

French franc security), there is no net transfer of capital from France to Belgium.

       The substantial amount of international holding of foreign bonds and securities,

amounting to more than 15 percent of total global securities investments, is also not evidence of

an equal amount of inter-country capital flows since much of this portfolio investment is hedged.

Recall that hedging can eliminate the cross-border capital flow if either side of the transaction is

hedged -- the portfolio investor who buys a foreign bond or the company that borrows in a

foreign currency.

        Finally there are the international derivative securities that are attracting so much

attention these days. Although such securities can be used to take substantially leveraged risks,

the major institutions that create such securities are generally operating with hedged positions

that effectively mean that no net capital flows result from what they themselves are doing.

Again, the activity in the derivatives market shows that capital can flow across borders, but its

actual effect is probably to make it easier for borrowers and investors to hedge transactions so

that the volume of cash transactions (i.e., purchases of foreign shares and overseas borrowing)

increases with little or no corresponding increase in net cross border flows

        In summary, then, we live in a world in which capital can flow and in which riskless


                                                  17
arbitrage works very smoothly. Some high risk short term capital movements are also very

visible. But much of the apparent cross-border position taking does not involve actual cross-

border capital flows because of de facto currency hedging. None of this is incompatible with the

picture of global capital market segmentation implied by the high saving retention coefficients,

the home bias observed in portfolios, and the persistence of international differences in capital

income ratios. Although capital is mobile, its owners generally prefer to keep it close to home.

The rewards for committing capital in foreign markets do not seem large enough despite

differences in saving rates to overcome the hurdles imposed by inertia, risk aversion, ignorance,

and prudence.



2.     The Special Role of Foreign Direct Investment

       Since I have been focussing on the limited effect of portfolio investment in transferring

national savings abroad, it is important to consider the role of direct foreign investment. The

evidence that I will now describe suggests that outbound foreign direct investment does

contribute to real cross-border capital flows and, in an indirect sense, permits domestic

corporations to utilize foreign portfolio capital.

       The magnitudes of international flows of foreign direct investment are moderate but

significant. During the decade of the 1980s, the flow of inbound foreign direct investment

averaged 0.8 percent of GDP in the G-7 countries7, ranging from essentially zero in Japan (0.02

percent of Japan's GDP) to 1.8 percent of GDP in the United States. The flow of outbound FDI




   7lhis and subsequent figures on foreign direct investment are from the unpublished data of
the International Monetary Fund available on computer tape.

                                                     18
during the same decade averaged 1.5 percent of GDP, ranging from 0.4 percent of GDP in the

United States and Italy to 2.7 percent of GDP in the UK.

       The accumulated stock of outbound foreign direct investment by U.S. parents is now

about four percent of total private wealth and therefore about twice as large as the amount of

U.S. holdings of foreign bonds and corporate stocks. The stock of foreign direct investment in

the United States is nearly as large as U.S. outbound foreign direct investment.

       To assess the sensitivity of outbound and inbound foreign direct investment to

differences in national saving rates, I have extended the original Feldstein-Horioka investment-

savings equation to relate outbound and inbound foreign direct investment (expressed as

percentages of GDP) to the domestic saving rates for the OECD countries. The coefficients are

very small and do not differ in a statistically significant way from zero. For example, during the

1980s a one percentage point increase in gross saving relative to gross domestic product (e.g.,

from 15 percent of GDP to 16 percent of G1 ) reduced inbound flows of direct investment by

0.047 percent of GDP (e.g., from the average inflow of 0.8 percent of GDP to 0.75 percent of

GDP) with a standard error of 0.041. To put that number in perspective, a rise in the U.S. saving

rate by one percent of GDP would add about $70 billion to annual savings but would reduce the

inflow of foreign direct investment by only $3.3 billion. The results are similar for the 1970s.

Outbound FDI in both decades is negatively related to the domestic saving rate, contrary to what

might have been expected, but these coefficients are also not significantly different from zero.!

       The statistical evidence that FDI is not sensitive to domestic saving rates is not




    These estimates, as well as estimates for several components of international portfolio
capital flows, are reported in Feldstein and Sinai (1994).

                                                 19
surprising. Companies make foreign direct investments in response to a variety of direct

business needs -- being close to customers, obtaining lower cost labor, responding to pressure

from governments where sales occur, etc -- rather than as a way of shifting capital from countries

where capital has a generally low marginal product to countries where the marginal product of

capital in general is high.

        But even though FDI is not sensitive to domestic saving differences, its impact on

domestic investment and on foreign borrowing are important for the tax treatment of

multinational corporations. In a recent study (Feldstein, 1994a), I extended the original

Feldstein-Horioka investment-savings equation to study the effect of outbound and inbound

foreign direct investment on the level of domestic investment. I found that outbound foreign

direct investment reduced domestic investment by an approximately equal amount For example,

looking at the experience of 18 OECD counfries for the decade of the l980s, I found that raising

a country's rate of outbound FDI by one percent of GDP reduced its domestic investment by 0 R

percent of GDP (with a standard error of about 0.5 percent of GDP). The results were very

similar for the I 970s.

        I believe that this virtually one-for-one displacement of domestic investment by outbound

foreign direct investment can be explained by a combination of two things.9 The first is the

nature of corporate capital budgeting in multinational corporations. Since the capital budgeting

process is carried out at the level of the corporation as a whole (and not separately for the

domestic parent company and its individual foreign subsidiaries), any portion of the capital

budget that is used for one investment reduces the funds available for other investments In



    9This explanation is developed more fully in Feldstein (I 994a).

                                                 20
particular, an increase in the total amount of outbound FDI (whether financed by retained

earnings or borrowing) reduces the amount of capital available for domestic investment within

the firm by an equal amount. The second piece of the explanation of the one-for-one

displacement of domestic investment by outbound FDI is the segmentation of the global market

for portfolio capital. That is, when outbound FiN depresses the volume of hinds available for

domestic investment, there is no automatic tendency for foreign portfolio capital to enter and

replace it.

        Outbound FDI is also important to the home economy for a second reason. Outbound

foreign direct investment induces parent firms to use much more foreign debt than they

otherwise would. I have studied the financing of FDI for the United States (see Feldstein 1994a)

but have not been able to get comparable data for other countries. For the United States, I found

that the vast majority of the capital stock of the foreign subsidiaries of US. multinational

corporations does not come from the United States but is accumulated or raised locally by the

subsidiary. More specifically, only about 20 percent of the assets owned abroad by U.S.

multinationals is financed by cross border flows from the United States. An additional 18

percent represents retained earnings attributable to U.S. parents. And the remaining 62 percent is

financed locally by foreign debt and equity, of which foreign debt is overwhelmingly the more

important part (constituting 53 percent while foreign equity is only 9 percent).
        This use of foreign capital is far greater than it would be for additional domestic

investments. The foreign borrowing by subsidiaries may be undertaken, at least in the case of

U.S. corporations, in order to get a tax deduction for the lull amount of interest paid. The use of

foreign debt may also reflect a greater willingness of foreign banks and other lenders to provide


                                                 21
credit to firms that have local assets as collateral.

        Informal inquiries with corporations and banks suggests that the obligations incurred by

subsidiaries are generally kept in the local currency while the obligation incurred when the

parent borrows abroad for use at home is generally hedged back into the home currency. The

multinational parent may thus use local borrowing explicitly as a way to hedge the effect of

currency fluctuations on the value of future earnings. Since the subsidiary's borrowed funds are

used locally, there is no cross-border transfer of capital.

        Although the use of foreign borrowing by multinational subsidiaries does not involve a

cross-border transfer of funds, it does give the parent firm the use of foreign debt capital that,

given the segmentation of global capital markets, would not otherwise have been available at

home. This is important at the level of the nation. When a U.S. subsidiary borrows abroad at an

after-tax cost of funds that is substantially kss than the real return on capital, the process confers

a net benefit to the United States. In contrast, if the firm borrows locally in the United States to

finance a domestic investment, the gap between the return on capital and the net cost of

borrowing is simply a redistribution between equity owners, lenders and the U.S. government

with no net impact on U.S. national income.

        The borrowing that accompanies outbound foreign direct investment is therefore

significant because the global capital market is segmented. The foreign borrowing by the

subsidiary cuts through the de facto barrier to international capital flows to transfer to the parent

country not the capital itself but the benefit of the lower cost funds that would not have been

available without the subsidiaries' foreign direct investment.




                                                    22
3.     Some Implications for the Taxation of Capital Income

       I turn now to the relation between the aspects of international capital mobility that I have

been discussing and the effects of alternative ways of taxing capital income. For this purpose,

the key features of the global capital market can be summarized as follows:



       (1)     Although capital can move freely among the major national economies, the

       preferences of the owners and managers of capital cause most of the incremental capital

       that results from increased national saving to remain in the country where the saving is

       done. The tendency of capital to move across borders to seek the investments with the

       highest rates of return in the world is quite limited in practice.

       (2)     The extent to which national boundaries do segment capital markets will vary

       from one pair of countries to the next, depending in particular on exchange rate

       arrangements and on the relative size of the economies. For example, the tight link

       between the Dutch guilder and the German mark probably means that the two capital

       markets are more fully integrated in practice than other pairs of industrial countries.

       Nevertheless, even in this case, the difference in sizes of the two countries means that the

       savings retention coefficient is likely to be much higher in Germany than in the

       Netherlands.

       (3)     Portfolio investors and corporate borrowers can participate in foreign equity and

        debt markets without actually transferring capital across borders. Portfolio investors who

        invest in foreign markets in pursuit of higher expected returns or in order to diversify

        market risk but who hedge the currency aspect of their investments have separated the


                                                  23
       asset risk-taking aspect of investment from the cross-border capital transfer. Similarly,

       multinational corporations that borrow abroad while hedging the currency risk do not

       effect capital transfers.

       (4)     Outbound foreign direct investment does transfer funds abroad that would not

       otherwise have been transferred but neither the outflow of FDI nor the inflow of FDI is

       related to national differences in saving rates.

       (5)     The foreign subsidiaries of multinational corporations make greater use of

       unhedged foreign borrowing than the parent company would otherwise have done.

       Although these funds do not cross the border back to the parent, the parent company and

       the nation in which its owners reside benefit from the use of the lower cost foreign funds

       that, because of the segmentation of global capital markets, would not otherwise have

       been available as portfolio capital.



       The effects of taxing capital income will therefore differ substantially from what would

be expected in a world of perfect capital mobility.'0 That difference will moreover not be the

same for all countries. A Dutch finance minister will face different effects from his policies than

a finance minister in Germany or the United States. Within that framework, I will consider five

questions:

       Who bears the tax on corporate profits?

       If long-term investment capital flowed among countries to equalize the rate of return that



    '°Roger Gordon (1986) examined the effects of capital income taxes on the assumption
of perfect capital mobility and this assumption is made in the recent OECD study of the potential
effects of alternative tax-based savings policies (OECD 1994).

                                                 24
capital owners received everywhere (before personal taxes), changes in domestic tax rates on

corporate profits or on business capital in general would be borne by labor and by the owners of

land. Capital owners would be unaffected. In reality, the opposite is probably closer to the truth

for most (but not all) countries. A tax on business capital will be borne by the owners of capital

except to the extent that it influences the rate of domestic capital accumulation. The incidence of

a tax on capital in the corporate sector alone will be more complex but will not be significantly

influenced by the potential ability of capital to move abroad.

        Can savings incentives be used to increase the domestic rate of investment in plant
        and equipment?

        With complete integration of the global capital markets, domestic policies that alter

national savings do not change domestic investment. The Feldstein-Horioka evidence implies

the opposite. A tax change that causes a sustained rise in domestic saving causes a substantial

rise in domestic investment in the typical OECD country. That rise in investment is likely to be

somewhat less than the rise in saving. In some smaller countries, the difference will be more

substantial than others.

        If the countries of Europe do eventually adopt a single currency, an increase in domestic

saving in any European country would tend to be difflised among the European Union as a

whole." A monetary union would cause member countries to lose their ability to use fiscal

policies to affect domestic investment rates as well as their ability to have independent monetary

policies.




    "There is some evidence that this has already begun within Europe, with lower savings
retention rates among the European countries as a group than among the OECD as a whole
(Feldstein and Bacchetta, 1991.)
                                                 25
        In a large integrated capital market in which domestic savings do not translate into

domestic investment, governments may be tempted to raise tax rates on the income from savings.

That would be wrong from the point of view of domestic economic welfare. A tax on domestic

saving decreases domestic economic welfare even if global capital market integration means that

the rate of domestic capital investment is unaffected. Individual savers nevertheless face a

different net rate of return and that distorts their individual decisions about their own

intertemporal resource allocation. This is true even if the change in tax rules or tax rates does

not alter the rate of saving. What matters for the analysis of economic welfare is the distortion in

the choice between current and future consumption. A tax on interest and dividend income that

leaves the domestic saving rate unchanged implies a significant reduction in future consumption

The relative efficiency of taxes on labor income and on investment income depends on the
                                                                               12
relative sensitivity of labor supply and of future consumption (not savings)

        Can Investment Incentives be Used to Affect the Rate of Domestic Business
        Investment?

        Here the result is just the opposite of saving incentives. With complete global capital

market integration, incentives for businesses to invest in local plant and equipment will attract

finds from abroad and achieve higher investment. Domestic saving rates are unchanged since

the domestic rate of return to savers is unaffected by the more favorable tax treatment of

investment. The investment incentives probably would reduce global economic welfare because

their primary effect would be to distort the allocation of investment among countries.




   '21n Feidstein (1978)! showed that a labor income tax is more efficient than a general income
tax (that includes capital income as well as labor income in the tax base) even if changes in the
capital income tax rate do not alter the rate of saving.

                                                  26
       But with the more limited mobility of global capital that actually prevails, domestic

investment incentives in most countries draw little capital from abroad and only increase

domestic investment to the extent that domestic saving is increased. The incentive to invest

domestically has relatively less effect on domestic investment but may increase economic

efficiency by reducing the bias in favor of certain kinds of investments that currently exist (e.g.,

investments in owner occupied housing or intangible business investments like advertising) or by

counterbalancing the anti-saving effects of domestic income tax rules.

       Can Governments Collect Taxes on Individual Dividend and Interest Income?

       The ability of individuals to evade taxation by shifting finds across national borders is

independent of whether this action involves a net cross border capital flow or is offset by a

hedging transaction that brings the finds back to the individual home country. The substitution

of tax deductions at source, i.e., a tax on interest and dividend income collected from the payers

of that income, will only accrue to the country of residence of the individual capital owner if the

finds that are sent abroad to evade tax are ultimately invested back in the original country. If

there is complete net capital movement, as there might be with a monetary union, the countries

would not be able to collect tax revenue on the income of their own nationals even by

withholding at source. All taxes on capital income would become taxes on the capital

independent of ownership.



        What rule for taxing the income of foreign subsidiaries maximizes national
        income?

        The United States taxes the income of multinationals when profits are repatriated but




                                                  27
gives a credit for taxes paid to foreign governments. Some critics of this approach'3 note that if

firms invest until the after-tax rate of return is equalized at home and abroad, the national return

to the U.S. on the foreign investment is lower than the return on domestic investment by the

amount of the tax paid to the foreign government. The same criticism would apply if the United

States adopted the system used by many countries that do not tax profits on foreign investment at

all. These critics suggest that the national income of the United States would be maximized by

changing the credit for foreign taxes to a deduction so that the U.S. firm would invest abroad

only until the after-tax return abroad was equal to the pretax return in the United States. The

same argument would suggest that those countries that exempt the income of foreign subsidiaries

should subject that income to tax but allow a deduction for foreign taxes paid.

       This argument is wrong when the segmentation of global capital markets is recognized.

The share of the subsidiary1s return that is lost in the form of taxes collected by the foreign

government must be balanced against the advantage of increased use of foreign borrowing. This

advantageous use of foreign borrowing would not be a consideration in a completely integrated

capital market because the amount of foreign capital available to U.S. firms would not depend on

the amount of outbound foreign direct investment. In a recent study (Feldstein, I 994b) I

evaluated the relative importance of the lost tax revenue and the gain from foreign borrowing

and concluded that the advantage of foreign borrowing outweighed the loss of tax revenue. A

tax rule aimed at increasing U.S. national income would seek to encourage more foreign direct

investment, particularly investment that employs substantial amounts of foreign debt per dollar

of U.S. capital.



   '3See, e.g., Richman (1963), Musgrave (1969) and Horst (1977).
                                                  28
4.     A Concluding Comment

       The segmentation of the global market for long term capital investments is compatible

with the observed evidence that capital can now move quite freely among major countries. The

extent of that segmentation also differs among countries and is likely to evolve over time. For

those who are concerned with tax policy in individual countries, a high priority is to try to

understand the extent to which that country's capital market is fully integrated with the market of

one or more other countries. More generally, those who think about changing the exchange rate

relations within Europe or more generally should think about the implications of moving from

our relatively segmented capital market to a more fully integrated one in which governments lose

the ability to influence the domestic rate of investment in plant and equipment.




                                                 29
                                         References



Baxter, Marianne, and Mario J. Crucini, "Explaining Saving/Investment Correlations," American

      Economic Review 83 (June 1993), pp. 416-436.

Brainard, William C., and James Tobin, "On the Internationalization of Portfolios," Oxford

      Economic Papers 44 (April 1992), pp. 53 3-565.

Dooley, Michael, Jeffrey Frankel, and Donald J. Mathieson, "International Capital Mobility:

       What Do Saving-Investment Correlations Tell Us?" International Monetary Fund Staff

      Papers 34 (September 1987), pp. 503-530.

Eichengreen, Barry, "Trends and Cycles in Foreign Lending," in Horst Siebert, ed., Capital

       Flows in the World Economy, Tubingen. J.C.B. Mohr, 1990, pp. 3-28.

Feldstein, Martin, "The Effects of Outbound Foreign Direct Investment on Domestic Capital

       Stock," NBER Working Paper No, 4668a, March 1994.

Feldstein, Martin, "Taxes, Leverage and the National Return on Outbound Foreign Direct

       Investment," NBER Working Paper No. 4689b, March 1994.

Feldstein, Martin, "The Case Against EMU," The Economist, June 13, 1992.

Feldstein, Martin, "Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements in the Long Run and

       the Short Run," European Economic Review 21 (March/April 1983), pp. 129-151.

Feldstein, Martin, "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation," Journal of Political Economy,

       Vol. 86, No. 2, Part 2, 1978.

Feldstein, Martin, and Phillipe Bacchetta, "National Saving and International Investment," in


                                              30
       B. Douglas Bernheim and John B. Shoven, eds., National Saving and Economic

       Performance, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Feldstein, Martin, and Charles Horioka, TMDomestic Saving and International Capital Flows,"

       E.conomic Journal 90 (June 1980) pp. 3 14-329.

Feldstein, Martin, and Todd Sinai,"The Response of International Capital Flow Components to

       National Saving Rates," (1994) forthcoming.

Frankel, Jeffley A., "Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the 1980s," in D. Bernheim

       and J. Shoven, eds., National Saving and Economic Performance. Chicago: University

       Chicago Press, 1991.

Frankel, Jeffley, A., "Measuring International Capitli Mobility: A Review," American Economic

       Review, May 1992.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., "Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the I 980s," in On Exchange

       Rates, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 1993.

French, Kenneth R., and James M. Poterba, "Japanese and U.S. Cross-border Common Stock

       Investments," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 4 (December 1990), pp.

       476-493.

French, Kenneth R., "Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets," American

       Economic Review 81 (May 1991), pp. 222-226.

Froot, Kenneth, "Currency Hedging Over Long Horizons," NBER Working Paper No. 4355, May

       1993.

Gordon, Roger H., and A. Lans Bovenberg, "Why is Capital so Immobile Internationally:

       Possible Explanations and Implications for Capital Income Taxation,"


                                              31
Gordon, Roger H., "Taxation of Investment and Savings in a World Economy," American

       Economic Review 76, (1986), pp. 1086-1102.

Harvey, Campbell, "Predictable Risk and Expected Returns in Emerging Markets," NBER

       Working Paper No. 4634, (1994).

Horst, Thomas, "A Note on Optimal Taxation of International Investment Income," Quarterly

       Journal of Economics XCIV, (June 1980). pp. 793-99.

Maddison, Angus, Dynamic Forces in Capitalist Development, Oxford, Oxford University Press,

       1991.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "Are Real Interest Rates Equal Across Countries? An Empirical Investigation

       of International Parity Conditions," Journal of Finance 39, (1984), pp. 1345-1357.

Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., Diversification from a U.S. $ Perspective, March 1994.

Murphy, Robert G., "Capital Mobility and the Relationship between Saving and Investment

       Rates in OECD Countries," Journal of International Money and Finance 3 (December

       1984), pp. 327-342.

Musgrave, Peggy B., United States Taxation of Foreign Investment Income: Issues and Arguments,

       Cambridge: The Law School of Harvard University (1969).

Mussa, Michael and Morris Goldstein, "The Integration of World Capital Markets," Changing

       Capital Markets: Implications for Monetary Policy," Symposium sponsored by Federal

       Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 1993.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and Measurement,"

       Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 24 (Spring 1986), pp. 55-103.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "International Capital Mobility in the 1990s," NBER Working Paper No.


                                               32
       4534, November 1993.

OECD, "Taxation and Household Saving," Working Paper No. 2 on Tax Analysis and Tax

       Statistics of the CommiVtee on Fiscal Affairs, May 1994.

Richman, Peggy B., Taxation of Foreign Investment Income: An Economic Analysis, Baltimore.

       Johns Hopkins Press, 1963.

Sinn, S., "Saving-Investment Correlations and Capital Mobility," Economic Journal, vol. 102,

       September 1992.

Summers, Lawrence., "Tax Policy and International Competitiveness," in International Aspects

       of Fiscal Policies, ed., (1988) by Jacob Frenkel (Chicago: Chicago University Press).

Tesar, Linda., "Savings, Investment, and International Capital Flows," Journal of International

       Economics 31 (August 1991), pp. 55-78.

Tesar, Linda., and Ingrid M. Werner, "Home Bias and the Globalization of Securities Markets,"

       NBER Working Paper No. 4218. November 1992. Forthcoming in J. Frankel (ed)

       Internationalization of Equity Markets, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994)

Turner, P. Capital Flows in the I 980s: A Survey of Major Trends, BIS Economic Papers, No.

       30, BasIc: Bank for International Settlements, April 1991.




                                               33
</ref_section>
