NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STATE ABORTION RATES: THE
IMPACT OF POLICIES, PROVIDERS.
POLITICS, DEMOGRAPHICS, AND
ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT

Rebecca M. Blank
Christine C. George
Rebecca A. London

Working Paper No. 4853

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1994

Partial support for this project came from the Center for Urban Affairs and Policy Research,
Northwestern University. Jennifer Bivens and Jonathan Mamey provided excellent assistance
with data collection. Useful comments were received from participants in seminars at Rand,
Harvard, Princeton. and Northwestern, and from Stanley Ilenshaw and Robert Plotiiick. This
paper is part of NBER's research programs in Health Economics and Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
(b 1994 by Rebecca M. Blank, Christine C. George and Rebecca A. London. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicitpermission
provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4853
September 1994
STATE ABORTION RATES: THE
IMPACT OF POLICIES, PROVIDERS,

poLrrlcS, DEMOGRAPmCS, AND
ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT

ABSTRACT
This paper uses data on abortion rates, by state and year from 1974-88, to estimate two-

stage least squares models with fixed state and year effects. The results indicate that
implementing restrictions on Medicaid funding for abortion results in lower aggregate abortion
rates in-state and higher abortion rates among nearby states, suggesting one of the main effects

of these policies is to induce cross-state migration for abortion services. The effect of these

restrictions on actual abortions among state residents is much smalIer a maximal estimate
suggests that 22 percent of the abortions among low-income women that are publiclyfunded do

not take place after funding is eliminated. We also have substantial evidence that a larger
number of abortion providers in a state increases the abortion rate within the state, primarily
through inducing cross-state migration, with nonhospital providers being particularly important

Political affiliation variables have mixed effects and are difficult to interpret Controlling for
state fixed effects, the effect of changes in demographic and economic variables over time is
typically small, although a rise in unemployment has consistently positive effects on abortion
rates.

Rebecca M. Blank
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
Rebecca A. London
Human Developnnt & Social Policy Program
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL. 60208

Christine C. George
Human Developnent & Social Policy Program

Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208

Introduction
Abortion rates rose rapidly in this country after the 1973 Supreme Court
ruled in Row v. Wade that the constitutional right to privacy includes the right

of pregnant women to have an abortion. Abortion rates peaked in 1981, and
have fallen somewhat in the years since then. At least part of this decline has
been attributed to concerted efforts to limit the availability of abortion through

public policies, such as restrictions on public finding of abortion or parental
consent laws. Others have attributed the decline to the decreasing availability

of abortion providers in many areas, often linked to public protests aimed at

abortion providers in many cities. Others point to changing demographic
factors. Despite very heated public discussion, however, the research on the
determinants of abortion rates is limited.
This paper investigates the impact of public policy, provider availability,

the political environment, and demographic and economic factors on the
determinants of state abortion rates between 1974 and 1988. As noted below,
most previous work has focused on cross-sectional estimates of state abortion

rates. In contrast, we have 13 years of data for 51 states) This data set
allows us to look at the impact on abortion rates of changes in explanatory
variables over time within a state, controlling for underlying state-specific
fixed effects. Panel data analysis provides much more accurate estimates of

the impact of changes over time in policy or in environmental factors on
abortion usage.

Our primary results are summarized here:

1fl District ot Columbia is included along with the 50 states.
1

2

(1) The implementation of restrictions on medicaid funding are
correlated with a 14 percent decline in in-state abortion rates. Actual abortion

rates among state residents decline only 5

percent,

indicating that the

implementation of these laws leads to substantial cross-state migration for
abortions. There appear to be strong correlations with the passage of medicaid
funding restrictions and changes in behavior and attitudes within states among

all women. This is most clearly apparent in the fact that even enacted but
unenforced laws are correlated with lower in-state abortion rates. A maximal

estimate of the impact of these laws on abortions among medicaid-eligible
women is that 22 percent of the abortions that would otherwise occur do not
take place when public funding is limited.

(2) There is clear evidence in this study of the cross-migration of
women between states for an abortion, consistent with Tiebout-type theories

about movements across competing jurisdictions. This cross-migration is
predominantly correlated with changes in medicaid funding laws, including
both own-state and border-state legislation.

(3) The availability of abortion providers within a state increases
abortion rates, even after controlling for the simultaneity between abortion

supply and demand. Nonhospital providers are particularly important in
abortion availability, and appear to be the marginal provider. The availability
of providers appears to predominantly affect cross-state migration for abortion,

not the actual propensity to have an abortion.
(4) Patterns of party control in a state and voting patterns among

representatives from a state do not appear related to abortions in any easily
explained pattern.
(5) Economic and demographic variables, strongly correlated with

cross-sectional abortion rates, have smaller effects in panel data with state
fixed effects. Increases in unemployment and state per capita income show a

3

strong positive correlation with abortion, while increases in maniage rates and

in the black population share show a negative correlation with abortion rates.

(6) In contrast to the strong effects of medicaid funding restrictions,
parental consent requirements for teen abortions appear to have few effects on
aggregate abortion rates. There are few differences in the determinants of teen
versus nonteen abortion rates or white versus nonwhite abortion rates, although

this conclusion is limited by the fact that we have information on these
subgroup abortion rates only for a nonrandom sample of states and years.

II

Existing Research on Abortion Determinants

A standard approach to analyzing abortion rates involves cross-sectional
regression of state abortion rates against .a variety of demographic, social and

policy-related variables.2 Such regressions indicate that state characteristics,

such as metropolitan population share, marriage rates, religious affiliation,

median income levels, and avenge education levels, are significantly
correlated with abortion rates across states. Variables measuring abortion

availability, either by price or number of abortion providers, are also
significant. In addition, this research often includes controls for abortionrelated policies, usually the availability of public funds for abortions among
medicaid-eligible women, and finds these policies highly significant.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to control for the full range of state-specific

differences in these sort of cross-sectional regressions. As a result, many of
the estimated coefficients could be biased, reflecting correlations between the

included independent variables and a variety of omitted variables. One might
believe that this is particularly true of the policy variables; states that provide

2Examples of this include Sina, 1986; Medoff, 1988; and Gagbacz, 1990; Bordcis and
Cutrlght, 1979, usc crou-.cctional SMSA data.

4

funding for medicaid abortions may vary in a number of ways not measured
through the independent 'variables, biasing the policy coefficients upward. In
addition, several of these analyses also fail to recognize that there are serious
endogeneity problems with including a measure of abortion providers (supply

of abortions) when estimating abortion demand.

Since the two are

simultaneously determined, regressions that do not take this simultaneity into
account will produce a biased estimate of the abortion provider coefficient.3

This paper improves on past analyses in three ways. First, we use a
panel data set of state abortion rates over time. Including state fixed effects
to control for unmeasured heterogeneity between the states that is not captured

in the independent variables, we can estimate the effect of changes in
demographic, economic, and policy variables over time within states on
abortion rates.

This is a much better approach to understanding the

determinants of abortion than relying upon cross-sectional state variation.4
Second, we instrument the abortion provider variable. Third, we have put a

great deal of time and effort into coding a wide variety of independent
variables across states and years, in order to estimate more complete policy
and political climate effects.

In contrast to those studies investigating aggregate state abortion rates,

a limited number of studies have used individual micro-data to analyze

3Exceptions to this are Medoff (1988), who estimates the effect of prices on abortion
with a two-stage least squares procedure, and Hans-Wilson (1993a) who instruments the
number of abortion providers.

recent working paper by Hans-Wilson (199Th) uses state panel data to estlinate 5

years of abortion rates in the 1980g. She cannot use state fixed effects, however, because
several of her independent variables do not vary over time within the state; this Loses much

of th. advantag, of panel data.

S

abortion decisions.5 These studies provide a better analysis of individual
decision-making than any estimate based on aggregate state abortion rates, and

they indicate some of the key variables (such as labor force participation,
marital status, income levels, and metropolitan location) that one would like

to control for in estimating state aggregate abortion rates. But we lack microdata that track

the abortion decisions of sequential samples of women over

time.

A number of studies have focused particularly on the enactment of public

policies related to abortion. Perhaps the major public policy debate has
revolved around whether public funding for abortions should be available
through medicaid, the public health insurance program available to low income

women.6 In 1976 Congress cut off federal funding of abortion for medicaid
clients through legislation known as the Hyde Amendment. This restriction

was initially blocked by a court restraining order, but went into effect in
August 1977 and has remained in effect ever siüce, except for a 7 month

period in 1980 when it was temporarily blocked by another restraining
order.7 As discussed below in more detail, a number of states have chosen
to continue to fund medicaid abortions using state funds.

A variety of studies investigated the immediate effects of the cut-off of
federal funding for medicaid abortions in the late l970s by studying abortion
behavior in selected locations before and after the Hyde amendment went into

5Micro-data estimatesof abortion duerminants among .dolcsccntsarc doneby Lundberg
and Plotnick (1990), Joyce (1988), and Cooksey (1990). Tones and Forrest (1988) survey
women's reasons for choosing abortion.

6Access to medicaid has historically been primarily available to participants in the Aid
to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program.
7Thc exceptions to the Hyde Amendment have also tightened. Since June 1981 • the only
case in which the federal government will pay for an abortion through medicaid is when the
pregnancy endangers the woman's life.

6

effect.8 In general, these studies indicate that 20 to 25 percent of the women

who would have received publicly funded abortions instead gave birth when
that funding became unavailable. In the cross-sectional analyses of abortion
rates cited above (typically based on a selected year in the 1980s) state public

funding for medicaid abortions always has a significant positive effect on

abortion rates. Similarly, simple comparisons of states with and without
public funding indicate abortion rates are higher in these states (Haas-Wilson,

1993a). But, as noted above, in these latter studies this effect may reflect
other unmeasured state-specific differences between states that do and do not
fund medicaid abortions.

The other most contentious state policy debate has been over state
parental notification and consent. laws for minors seeking abortions. The legal
history of these laws' evolution is complex; a substantial number of states have

laws on the books that are or were enjoined at particular times by the courts.
In addition, the Supreme Court itself has issued a series of evolving decisions,

including a requirement that any such law have some form of judicial bypass

available for minors. A number of studies have looked at the implementation

of parental consent and notification laws in particular states,9 and indicated
that immediately after the implementation of these laws, the number of teen

abortions within the state falls. Cartoof and Kierman (1986), investigating
changes in the Massachusetts law, find that few teens affected by the law did

not get abortions, but a substantial fraction traveled out of state for them.
Haas-Wilson (l993a) indicates that states without parental notification have
higher teen abortion rates on average.

tkubin, etal., 1979; Gold, 1980; Trusscll, et.al. 1980; Catca, 1981; Henshaw and
Walhiach, 1984.

9Cartoof and Klennan, 1986; Rogers, Ct. al.. 1991.

7
In short, the existing literature on the determinants of abortion indicates
that a substantial number of economic and demographic variables appear to be

correlated with state abortions rates ata point in time. Similarly, restrictions

on medicaid funding and the presence of parental notification appear to
decrease abortion rates within a state. Most of these studies are focused on
cross-sectional estimates from a single year, or study the implementation of
various policies in a specific location at a particular point in time. This paper
is the first research to use all available data on abortion rates across states and

years to measure how abortion rates change as changes occur in policy,

political climate, economic and demographic variables, and provider
availability.
Ill

Data on Abortion and its Related Determinants
This section summarizes the data we use in this paper, with particular

attention to the abortion data and policy variables. We describe this data in
some detail, in part because the value of this paper depends heavily upon the
careful collection of stale-year data relating to abortion. Appendix 1 provides

detailed information on sources and coding for all the variables used in the
paper, while appendix tables I and 2 provide summary statistics.

A.

Abortion Data
There are two primary sources of abortion data available in this country.

The Center for Disease Control (CDC) publishes annual numbers on reported

legal abortions from state central health agencies.1° These data are available

from 1974 through 1990, but not all states report these data in every year.

1% some cases, they supplement this data from additionai sources.

8

These data are also incomplete in many states, without information from all
providers.

In addition to total abortions, CDC also publishes abortion

numbers by race and by age for those states that collect this information.

These are the only available data on abortion among subgroups of the
population, albeit from a nonrandom sample of states.

The second source of abortion data is the Alan Guttmacher Institute
(Aol), which conducts a periodic survey of all identified abortion providers
in the United States. This provides data on the number of abortions performed

in all states from 1973-92, with the exception of 1983, 1986, 1989, 1990,
when surveys were not conducted.11 The AG! data are more complete, both
because they cover all states in all available years but also because AOl works

hard to compile a complete list of all abortion providers, thereby collecting
information from many smaller clinics that are missing from the CDC data.

Figure 1 shows the trend in abortion usage over time. The solid line
shows the total number of abortions reported by AG! data for all states from

1973-92. The dotted line plots the AG! data for the subset of 35 states for
which CDC data is available from 1974-90 and the dashed line plots the CDC

data for these states. While the AOl data consistently report more abortions

than the CDC data, the trends are very similar. The correlation between the

two series in the restricted sample of states and years for which both are
available is 0.988. Figure 2 plots the average annual number of abortions in
all states for AG! data and in the 35 states which have CDC data from 197488 and indicates that the similarity between these two data sources is visible

11flenshaw and Van Von (1992) provide detailed information on the AGI survey and

its methodology. The 1991 and 1992 AG! abortion data have Jun been released;
unfortunately, many of our dependent variabies arc not yet available for these years. Thus.
although we show the 1991 and 1992 data in the graphs in this section, in the estimation
section we use only the 13 years of data from 1974 to 1988, excluding the missing years of
1983 and 1986.

9

not just in aggregate, but state-by-state as well)2 Given these similarities
and the more complete reporting for the AG! data, we will use AG! data in
ow analysis of aggregate abortion rates.
The abortion variable most often cited is the abortion rate, the number

of abortions per 1000 women between the ages of 15-44 (which we refer to

as the female fertile population) for each state and year)3 This number

indicates the abortion rate among the population at risk of conception.
Changes in this rate will reflect both changes in conception rates, as well as

changes in abortion rates, conditional upon conception.t4 The solid line in
figure 3 plots the abortion rate overtime, showing a slow decLine since 1981.

The abortion data collected by both AG! and CDC provide information
on the number of abortions that occur within a state, which creates a potential

inconsistency problem in the abortion rate: The numerator, number of
abortions, is reported in the state where they occur, but the denominator,
female fertile population, is based on state of residence. To the extent that
women travel across state lines for abortions, some jurisdictions may report
very high abortion rates. This is most noticeable in the District of Columbia.

which has an abortion rate 4 times higher than any other jurisdiction (165
abortions per 1000 fertile women), reflecting the number of women from the

12The state numbers in figure 2 correspond to an alphabetical ordering of the states. A
key is provided in Appendix Table 2, which shows average state abortion data from 1974-88
using AGI and (where available) CDC data.

t3Calling this age group of women the female fertile population is not entirely
not all of these women are fertile, but this is the best available approximation
accurate, since
to the fertile population.
140ne can calculate the abortion ratio, abortions per pregnancy, but the data on
on
pregnancies are less accurate. This paper investigates the total effect of our variables
abortion rates. It is difficult to separate this into the indirect effect (through changes in
coaception) and the direct effect (on abortions post-conception); we leave this to future
raseareb.

10

surrounding region who go to D.C. for abortions. This is not necessarily a
problem.

If we want to measure the effects of differences in state

characteristics and policy on in-state abortion rates, the effect of changes in

these variables on the number of women who enter or leave the state for
abortions is as important as their effect on the resident population.
If, however, we are interested in the effects of state characteristics and
policy on the actual number of state residents who have an abortion (whether
in-state or out-of-state), then we need alternative abortion data. AG! estimates
the number of abortions among state residents, based on their abortion data by

state of occurrence.t5 The dashed line in figure 3 shows abortion rates by
state of residence.16

Figure 4 shows 1988 abortion rates by state of

occurrence versus abortion rates by state of residence. As should be clear,
there is substantial cross-state migration in some cases. While the resident
abortion data has two problems (it is available over a shorter period and it is

estimated less accurately than the occurrence abortion data), we will
investigate the differences in the determinants of these two series below.
While AG! collects only aggregate abortion numbers, CDC also reports
state-specific information on abortions by age and race in states whose public

health agencies collect such data. The absence of national information on
abortions by age and by race means that the generalizability of any results for

these subgroups may be less than when we look at aggregate abortion rates.

AG!

uses

a relatively complex algorithm for this calculation, described in Henshaw

and Van Vort (1992). The data arc available in a consistent form from 1978-88 (omitting
1983 and 3986). Earlier estimates using a different calculation procedure for 1974-77 are

available, but they appear to be quite different from the later data, and we do not usc them.

The difference bctween abortion rates by residence and occurrence reflects both
potential inaccuracies in the estimates of residence abortions, as well as abortions perfonned
outside the country.

11

Information on differences in abortion rates between teens and nonteens

is available from the CDC for 24 states from 197490.h7 This is less
complete data for a nonrandom sample of states than the AOL aggregate
abortion numbers provide, but it is the only available information on age-

specific abortion rates. Figure 5 plots teen abortion rates per 1000 fertile

teens and nonteen abortion rates per 1000 fertile nonteens.'8

For

comparison, figure 5 also plots the avenge abortion rate for the entire
population in all states. While the majority of abortions are to nonteens, the
teen abortion rate is approximately 1.4 times higher than the nonteen abortion

rate. The teen abortion rate also peaks later and falls less over the 1980s; the
overall cot-relation between the teen and nonteen abortion rate series is 0.934.

The AOL data on aggregate abortion rates in all states tracks the nonteen
abortion rate relatively closely (its higher level reflects the greater number of
abortions in the AOL versus the CDC data.)

Figure 6 plots abortion levels and abortion rates for the white and
nonwhite population, based on the 18 states that report this information from

l97490.19 Although the vast majority of abortions are to white women,
nonwhite women have dramatically higher abortion rates over this time period.

t7Most other states either do not report this data at all, or report it only for a very small
number of years. These 24 states account for 42.2 percent of all abortions on average over
these years.
18The denominator for the teen abortion rate is the number of women between the ages
of 15 and 20 in the state. The denominator for the nonteen abortion rate is the number of

womcnbetweentheagesof2land44 inthcstazc.
19Aggregate abortions in these 18 states represent 30.3 percent of all abortions over
these years. The definition of nonwhite' varies depending on how state health agencies
collect this infonnatioo. For each year and state, we calculate the white fertile population
as the percent white in the state, multiplied by the female fertile population. We calculate
the nonwhite fertile population as the percent black in the state, multiplied by the female
fertile population. To the extent that CDC data includes persons who arc not black in the
nonwhite count, this will overstate the nonwhite abortion rate.

12

The trends in the two data series are also quite different, as evinced by their
correlation of -0.134.

B.

Abortion Provider Data
The AC reports on the total number of abortion providers by state from

1973-88, in all years except 1983 and 1986, and also separates this total into
the number of hospital and nonhospital abortion providers. Figure 7 plots the

total number of abortion providers between 1974 and 1988 per 1000 fertile
women, as well as the number of hospital and nonhospital providers per 1000

fertile women. The relative number of providers rises until around 1978, is
essentially flat through 1982, and then falls steadily through the rest of the
1980s. The relative number of hospital providers falls throughout much of this

period, while the number of nonhospital providers rises. Dividing the
total number of abortions by the total number of providers, this ratio rises
from 497 in 1975 to 742 by 1988.
If the number of abortions in each state and year reflect a supply/demand

equilibrium, it is not clear why we would be interested in controlling for the
number of abortion providers. There are two reasons to include this variable

as one of the determinants of abortion, however. First, some claim that the
protests against abortion providers have constrained their numbers, in which

case we would want to take this constraint into account. Second, we lack
price information on abortions by state and year. One can view the number

of providers in a state as a proxy for prices. Travel distance may also be a
proxy for price and constraint. We pick up distance effects, however, in the

state fixed effect since state size is unchanged over time; in part, we also

control for distance by controlling for the share of the nonmetropolitan

20This change is not unique to abortions. A variety of minor surgical procedures moved
front hospital to out-patient clink. over this time period.

13

population in a state in each year. Henshaw (1991) discusses the fish range
of possible constraints on access to abortion.

C. Policy Variables
Publicfunding laws. As discussed above, a number of states have used
state funds to pay for medicaid abortions for low-income women since the

passage of the Hyde Amendment prohibited federal funding. We code a
variable between 0 and 1, equal to the share of the year in which a medicaid-

eligible woman in that state has no access to public funding for an abortion
(either federal or state).21

The solid line in figure 8 plots this variable over time, weighted by the

share of the female fertile population in each state; the result is the share of
the population in states without public funding of medicaid abortions in each

year. The share starts at under. 10 percent in 1974, jumps in 1977 with the
implementation of federal restrictions, drops briefly during the 1980 embargo

on the federal law, and then gradually increases through the l980s. In 1990,
over 60 percent of women live in states where publicly funded abortions are
not available.
In addition to the indicator variable for state funding of abortions, plotted

in figure 8, we also experiment with two measures of the quantity of women

eligible for publicly funded abortions. First, we have some data on the
number of publicly funded abortions in a state. Combining information from
several sources (see Appendix 1), we created data on the number of publicly

funded abortions by state for the years 1978-83, 1985, and 1987. We have

21We spent a great deal of time collecting accurate information on this variable. A
lengthy appendix describing our data sources and coding nate-by-state is available from the
authors on request. Some cmtn allow only vet' limited state funding for medicaid
abortions, such as in situations of rape or incest. We group these states with those that
provide no state funding.

14

hesitations about this data, however. It is available for only a limited number
of years and, given it comes from a variety of sources for each state and year,

we suspect that this series is not highly accurate.
Second, we also use information on AFDC caseloads for single parents.

Over our time period, all AFDC recipients are "categorically eligible" for

medicaid. A few states have a few alternative eligibility options for low-

income women, but these compose a very small share of the medicaid
caseload. Thus, the AFDC caseload is the best estimate of the number of
women eligible for publicly funded abortions, in the states that make such
funding available. Because AFDC eligibility rules differ substantially across

states, the share of the female population on AFDC varies across states; as
AFDC caseloads rise, one might expect abortions to rise in states that provide
public funding to this Population.

Parental consent laws. As diséussed above, over the 1980s a growing

number of states enacted various parental consent or notification laws for
teenagers seeking abortions. While we have experimented with coding a more
disaggregated variable that distinguishes between no law, and requirements for

parental notification, parental consent, or adult counselling, we end up using
a variable that simply equals 1 if either notification or consent restrictions on

teens are in place in any state and year. The dashed line in figure 8 plots the
share of the teenage population (ages 15-20) that are in states covered by such

legislation in each year. This share grows from less than 5 percent to over 20

percent from 1979 to 1990. Compared to medicaid funding restrictions,
however, these laws are much less common and impact only younger women.

Given this, we would expect teen restrictions to have weaker affects on
aggregate abortion rates.

Border state policies. If there is migration across state boundaries for
abortion, abortions in a state should be affected not only by the state's own

15

laws, but also by the laws of surrounding states. Thus, we also create two
border state policy variables, measuring the policies of surrounding states with

regard to medicaid funding and teen restrictions. These variables are based

on policies in all physically contiguous states. The closer these states, the
more likely that their policies will induce migration of women across state
lines for abortion. Thus, we create a variable which is the weighted avenge
of the policy variable in all border states, using the (inverse) distance between

the capital of the given state and the capital of each border state as
weights.22 If all surrounding states have restricted policies, this variable
equals I; if none have restrictive policies, the variable equals 0.
1IFDC benefit lewlc. Finally, we also control for the maximum AFDC

benefits available to a single woman with 3 children in each state and year.

Some have claimed that higher AFDC benefits create an incentive for
unmarried women to have children, by providing them financial support as
single parents.

D. Political Climate Variables
Enjoined laws. In addition to policy variables based on actively enforced
laws, there are a number of states that passed restrictions on medicaid funding,

but had these laws enjoined by the courts for a period of time due to their
explicit formulation. Such enjoined laws may be viewed as indicating that the

climate of a state is more hostile than in states with no enjoined restrictions.
This may affect the behavior of abortion providers, the likelihood that women

leave or enter the state for abortion, and the ease with which low income
women are able to receive medicaid funding for abortions. To measure the

As it turns out, wcizting by didance has little effect. The results reported below arc
vinually identical if an unwcightcd avenge of border state policies is used instead. We also
experimented with population weights.

16

impact of this on abortion, we code a 0/1 variable that identifies years in

which specific states have passed laws restricting public finding of medicaid
abortions and where these laws have been ruled unconstitutional by the state
courts. We identify this as a political climate variable, because we believe that
it is a proxy for state opposition to abortion, but we realize that this could also

be considered a direct policy variable.
Parry affiliation. We have coded information on party affiliation in each

state. For each year, we have coded whether the state governor is Republican,

whether the state House is controlled by Republicans, and whether the state

Senate is controlled by Republicans. The effects of these variables, entered
separately or used in various combinations or lags, are discussed below.
COPE rankings. Party affiliation is often considered a weak positional

indicator on the abortion issue. Its meaning also varies across regions, so that
southern Democrats in some states may be more conservative on social issues

than northern Republicans in other states. As an alternative coding for the

state social policy climate, we coded the rankings from the AFL-CIO
Committee on Political Education (COPE), based on the roll call voting
behavior of a state's federal Senators on domestic policy issuesP

E.

Other Demographic and Economic Variables

In addition to those variables directly related to abortion, we have
collected state-by-year data on a wide variety of other state indicators. These

include demographic information on marriage rates, birth rates, the share of

teenagers among all fertile women, the share of older women (ages 35-44)

Thc evidence indicates that measures of political ideology bascd on roll call votes are

reliable. A varicty of thcse rankings are available, but are all highly correlated with each
other. We use the COPE rankings bccausc they focus on domestic policy issues, which we
cxpectto be more correlated with abortion ideology. See Holbrook-Provowand Poe (1987).

17

among all fertile women, the black share of the population, and the share of
the population living in nonmetropolitan regions. We also include economic

information on unemployment rates, per capita income, and labor force
participation among women. In general, we tried to select aggregate state
variables that were consistent with micro-level evidence on the determinants
of pregnancy and abortion, as discussed above.

lv
Estimation Methodology
We are primarily interested in the determinants of abortion rates. For
any state s and year t, we specify this in the following way:

(1) AbortionRateg =

a1P + a2Cg + a3Y + a4X + + (01 + st

where P is a vector of policy variables, C is a vector of political climate

variables, Y is the number of abortion providers in each year and state, X is
&

vector of state and year specific economic and demographic variables, g5 is

a vector of state-specific fixed effects, w is a vector of year-specific fixed
effects, and e is a random error term that varies by state and year. The state
fixed effects capture any permanent differences in abortion rates across states,

such as differences due to religious or ethnic composition. The year fixed
effects capture any components in abortion rates that are common across all

states in year t, such as the effect of national economic trends. Note that in
standard cross-sectional estimates of abortion rates, the inability to control for
the unmeasured differences that are captured in these fixed effects means that

the coefficients on other variables can become contaminated by omitted
variables that are state and year specific.

One fundamental problem with equation (1) is that the variable Y is
endogenous, since the availability of abortion providers is at least partially

18

determined by the demand for abortion. Without attention to this problem, the

estimated coefficient on provider availability is biased. The classical solution
to this problem is to find instruments for Y, variables that are correlated with
the number of abortion providers but which are independent from the demand
for abortion. We utilize two instruments, the total number of physicians and

the total number of hospitals in each state and year (see appendix 1 for
sources). While both of these variables may be related to the overall demand

for medical services in a state, there is little reason to believe that they are
significantly impacted by the demand for abortion.24 Yet, areas with more
physicians per person or hospitals per person, are also likely to have more

abortion providers. Using these instruments, we can estimate the effect of
providers using a standard two stage least squares (TSLS) procedure, whereby

the availability of abortion providers is estimated in a first stage equation:

(2) Y = fl1Phy31 ÷ P2Hosp1 + $3Pd +

+

+ 03 + +

where Phy and i-iosp are the number of physicians and the number of hospitals

in each state and year, P, C, and X are the vectors of policy, political climate,
demographic and economic variables included in equation (1), and 0 and X are

state and year effects for abortion providers. The estimated result from this

equation, i'5, is then used in place of the actual variable, Y, in estimating
equation (1).

V
The Determinants of Abortion

We start by estimating the log of abortion rates between 1974 and 1988

for all states, for the 13 years in which AG! data is available. We drop 1973

24la fact, Tatalovichand Daynes (1989) indicaxethat only 35 percent of hospitalsoffered
abortion services in 1986.

19

because

it is clearly a transition year; abortion is not generally available

this country until 1974. The resulting sample contains 650
observations, with 50 states and 13 years of data in each state.
throughout

A. Abortion Rates by State of Occurrence
Table 1 prósents our standard specification.27 Column 1 presents the
estimates for the determinants of abortion rates, by state of occurrence, with

a complete set of state and year fixed effects. Column 2 presents the same
estimates without any fixed effects; in this case, the data is essentially treated

as a large cross section. The inclusion of fixed effects—particularly state
effects—significantly changes the estimated coefficients. Many variables that

are correlated across states and significant in column 2 have little effect in
column 1. For instance, while log per capital income is highly significant in
column 2, much of this effect is due to the fact that states with higher incomes

throughout this time period are also states which have consistently higher
abortion rates throughout the time period. Over time within a state, the effect

of changes in per capita income on the abortion rate is much smaller. This is
consistent with the belief that there are omitted variables that vary across states

noted above, although we have 1991 and 1992 data on abortion rascs,•we lack data
on these years for a number of our independent variables.
26Ncbraska is excluded from the regression analysis, bringing us from 51 to 50 daZes.
This is because Nebraska has a unicameral and nonpartisan state legislature, which cannot
be coded for party affiliation.

27In addition to those specifications presented below, we inveigaicd a number of other
alternatives, including using lagged policy variables; letting the first year of a policy change
have a different effect than subsequent years; interacting the policy changes with
demographic variables; and using the log of the number of abortions as the dependent

variable, with the log of the population on the right hand aide of the equation. None of
these alternatives produced substantially different results.

20

and that are correlated with the included variables and abortion rates, which
bias

the results from cross-sectional regressions.28
The first coefficient in column 1 indicates that a state that moves from

a large and
funding to not funding medicaid abortions will experience
significant decrease in the abortion rate. Column 1 of table 2 translates the
coefficients on a few of the key policy variables into their estimated impact on

abortion rates. Table 2 indicates that a state at the mean of all other variables

will experience a 13.4 percent drop in its abortion rate when it restricts
funding for abortion, a decline of 3.5 abortions per 1000 women. This is
surprisingly large, and suggests that this variable may be measuring more than

the direct effect of the state law on abortions among low-income women. If
state restrictions on medicaid-funded abortions are enacted at the same time as

the general climate toward abortion is becoming more conservative, then this
variable would pick up both the direct effects of the restrictions on low-income
women and the related effects of attitudinal change in the state, which could

lead to either a decrease in the number of higher-income women who obtain
abortions or an increase in the number of women who leave the state for

abortions. We return to this below.
The impact of teenage restrictions in table 1 is essentially zero, with a
perverse sign. Table 2 indicates that imposing teen restrictions appears to lead
to a 4.7 percent increase in in-state abortion rates. Given the small share of
teenage abortions among all abortions, it is perhaps not surprising that

28Among the possible omitted variables arc religious affiliation (not available by state
for each year, but varies little within .nsn over time) and laws regarding contraceptive
availability (mostly passed in the 1930s sad 60s, so do not vary much over time). These and

other variables which differ acrou ,'.'n but not over time are subsumed in state faxed
effects. One variable which will vary over Lime within dates is pro-life political activity.
We have no measure of this by state and year. The highly organized and targeted protests
did not start until after 19*8, the end of our data.

21

aggregate abortion rates are not significantly affected by this variable. Border

state restrictions on teen abortions also have no effect.

Bordering state restrictions on medicaid fimding for abortion have a

significant effect on in-state abortion rates in table 1. If 1 of 4 equidistant

bordering states initiates abortion restrictions, the in-state abortion rate
increases by 5.2 percent (see table 2.) This cross-state effect on the location
of abortion is consistent with the Tiebout hypothesis about people's response
to competing opportunities in different potiticaljurisdictions. The correlation

between changes in border state medicaid funding policy and changes in the
number of women receiving a within-state abortion is also further evidence for
the proposition that there are other changes in behavior and attitudes occurring

at the same time that restrictions on abortion funding for low-income women

are implemented in a state.

Medicaid-eligible residents in a state with

restrictions cannot qualify for medicaid-paid abortions in another state. Given

this, there is little reason for low-income women to go to another state and
expend travel costs. Thus, the in-state increases in abortion due to changes in

nearby state laws must almost entirely reflect behavioral changes that affect
women other than low-income women and that occur at the same time as the
medicaid funding changes.

Changes in AFDC benefits have no affect on abortion rates over time in

these states. At least in part, this is because AFDC benefits change little over
time in these states, therefore the inclusion of state fixed effects absorbs most

of the variation in public assistance in the data.

Changes in the political climate variables have interesting effects. A
state that passes restrictions on medicaid funding, but has that law enjoined by

the courts, experiences a 6.7 percent drop in abortion rates (see table 2.) An
enjoined law should have no direct effects on abortion, since no restrictions
have been imposed on the funding of abortions for low-income women. The

significance of this variable again suggests that the passage of funding

22

restriction laws are correlated with other changes in abortion availability and
women's willingness to seek abortions.

Party affiliation within the state has no significant effect on abortion
rates. Extensive Republican or Democratic control in a state is uncorrelated
with abortion rates. We explore alternative specifications for party affiliation
below.

The availability of abortion providers is highly significant in column I

of table 1, even after instrumenting this variable to eliminate any potential

endogeneity through the two stage least squares procedures described
above.29 The magnitude of the coefficient indicates that a 10 percent
increase in the number of abortion providers at the mean leads to a 5.7 percent

increase in the abortion rate (table 2). Column 3 of table 1 presents the results
from simple OLS procedure that does not account for endogeneity between the

demand for and supply of abortions. The coefficient from the TSLS
estimation is similar to the coefficient from the OLS procedure, but estimated

with less precision. A Hausman test indicates that the TSLS and OLS
coefficients are not significantly different. While we continue to use the TSLS

procedure in all further estimates presented below, these results indicate that
the effect of provider availability on the rate of abortion that occurs within a
state is not the result of endogeneity bias.
Once state and year fixed effects are included, changes in economic or
demographic variables over time within a state appear to have relatively small

effects on state abortion rates. The strongest remaining effect is the positive

relationship between unemployment and abortion rates. As the economy
moves into recession, a 1-point rise in the unemployment rate leads to about

a 3 percent increase in abortion rates. Estimated with slightly less precision

but still significant at the 5 percent level, decreases in marriage rates and

Appendix table 3 reports the first stage regression results.

23

increases in per capita income lead to an increase in the abortion rate. More

surprisingly, increases in the percent of the black population in a state are
correlated with reductions in abortion rates, controlling for all other variables

in the regression and for fixed differences across states. . Given the high
nonwhite abortion rates noted above, this is surprising. Since changes in the
percent of the black population in the state are almost entirely due to changes
black state residency over this time period, this potentially suggests that black

in-migrants are self-selected to be less likely to utilize abortion.
The general conclusions from the regressions in columns 1 to 3 of table

1 on the determinants of abortion rates by state of occurrence are that
restrictions on medicaid funding for abortion have strong effects over time on

the abortion rate within states and on the movement of women across states,

while restrictions on teenagers have little effect on aggregate rates. Political

climate appears to be important, particularly as proxied by the presence of
enjoined laws. Party affiliation in the state matters less. The availability of
abortion providers has strong effects on abortion rates, even after adjusting for

endogeneity. State demographic characteristics are less important once state

fixed effects are included, although changes in the unemployment rate, the

marriage rate, per capita income and the black population share do affect
abortion rates over time within a state.

The year effects estimated in column 1 provide a measure of the
unexplained variation across years that remains in the data after controlling for

all the variables in the model. Figure 9 plots the 13 year effects estimated
from the regression in column 1. (By definition, all of these are measured
relative to the omitted (1988) effect, which is zero.) This plot indicates that
there is some unexplained increase in abortion rates over the 1970s, an effect
we suspect is related to increasing acceptance of abortion as a viable medical

option by many women. An unexplained decline in abortion rates occurs
between 1980 and 1982, for which we have no good explanation. After 1982,

24

there is no remaining unexplained trend in the data, indicating that our model

fully captures movements in abortion rates during the 1980s.

B.

Abortion Rates by State of Residence
The results in columns 1-3 of table 1 suggest a substantial amount of

cross-state migration is induced by policy changes in nearby states. They also

indicate surprisingly large effects of policy (even unenforced policy) on the
number of abortions performed within a state.
An alternative question is to investigate the impact of these variables on

the abortion rate of women who live within the state, regardless of where the

abortion actually occurred. Such estimates provide a measure of the effect of

policy on women's likelihood of having an abortion, while the previous
estimates looked at the effect of policy on in-state abortion rates. Columns 4

and 5 of table 1 provide TSLS and OLS estimates of the determinants of

abortion by state of residence, using the same specification as before. As
discussed above, these estimates are limited to the 9 years between 1978-88
when AG! published consistent estimates of abortions by state of residence.

The most striking result in column 4 is that the impact of medicaid

policy on abortions by state of residence is less than half of its effect on

abortion by state of occurrence. Table 2 indicates that the imposition of
medicaid restrictions reduces abortions among residents by 4.8 percent,
compared to a 13.4 percent reduction of in-state abortions. This suggests that
a large share of the measured policy effect in column I occurs because women

go across state boundaries for an abortion, which changes thelocation of their

abortion, but does not change the fict that they have an abortion. Consistent

with this result, border state medicaid policies have almost no effect on
abortion rates by state of residence.

As with abortion rates by state of occurrence, teen restrictions and
AFDC benefit levels have little effect on aggregate abortion rates by state of

25

residence. The effect of enjoined restrictions on abortion rates among
residents is insignificant and has a positive coefficient. The political affiliation

variables are somewhat puzzling, showing a significant negative effect on
abortions when a state is under strong Democratic control, and no effect to
Republican control. The demographic variables have generally similar effects

in column 4 as in column 1, although their standard errors are larger as the
sample size shrinks.
The impact of provider availability on abortions by state of residence is

poorly determined, with an unexpected negative sign. Column S shows the
equivalent OLS regression, in which the provider variable is not instrumented.
While instrumentation had little effect on the measured impact of providers on

abortion rates by state of occurrence, it has a strong effect on the impact of

providers on abortion rates by state of residence. Specifically, once the
variable is purged of any simultaneity with the dependent variable, it has no

correlation with abortion rates by state of residence. This suggests that
provider availability induces women to change the location of their abortions

(as the number of providers shrinks, more women go out-of-state for an
abortion), but it has little affect on whether women have an abortion or not.

Further evidence on the extent of movement across states is given in
column 6 of table 1. This column uses the difference in the log abortion rate

by state of occurrence and the log abortion rate by state of residence as the
dependent variable. This a measure of net abortion migration in or out of a
state.3° These results indicate that three policy variables drive net abortion

migration: more women tend to go out-state for an abortion when the state

Ideally, one would like to talce the log of the difference between the abortion rates by
data of occurrence and date of residence as the depcndcntvarisble, but this involves taking
S log of a negative number in some instances. We have tried a variety of other forms for
the dependent variable In column 6 (such as the unlogged difference in abortion rates, or the
log of the raw numerical differences). While the numbers differ somewhat, the general
conclusions are identical with these other specifications.

26
implements restrictions on medicaid funding (whether enforced or not), while

more women come in-state for an abortion when neighboring states put on
funding restrictions.

Overall, what do these results indicate about the impact of abortion

policy on abortion rates? Teen restrictions appear to have no significant
affects on aggregate abortion rates, no matter how measured. (They may have

a significant affect on teen abortion rates, but it is not so large an effect as to

impact total abortion rates.) In contrast, medicaid funding policy is highly
related to abortion rates. Our results indicate that medicaid restrictions seem

to be correlated with other changes in the perceived or actual availability of
abortion within a state, and induce a substantial number of women to go out-

state for an abortion. Since there is no advantage to low-income women for
following this strategy (in fact, it only increases the cost of abortion to them),

this suggests that other things are changing in the state at the same time as

these laws change and driving women of all income levels to change their
abortion-seeking behavior. Call this the "indirect effect" of medicaid funding

laws, as opposed to their direct effect on low income women.
The best evidence of this indirect effect is the significant drop in in-state

abortions that occur at the time that laws are enacted, even when the actual
implementation of these laws is enjoined by the courts. We can only speculate

about what might be causing this indirect effect. The publicity given to the

legislative fight over medicaid funding restrictions might be a signal to all
women that there is more hostility to abortion in the state; the enactment of

these laws might indicate that anti-abortion groups have been actively
conducting information and publicity campaigns in the state, changing some
women's behavior; these legislative fights might also make abortion providers

more cautious about the number of abortions they perform, and lead them to
discourage potential clients.

27

It is difficult from this data to estimate the direct impact of medicaid
funding restrictions on low-income women only, since we have no information

on abortion rates among women by income category. We do, however, have

several potential estimates of this effect. The differences in the coefficients
on medicaid policy between columns 1 and 2 of table 2 indicate that about 8.6
percent (13.4-4.8) of women in a state have out-state abortions when medicaid

funding restrictions are enacted (a potential measure of the "indirect effect"),

while only 4.8 percent forego an abortion. If this latter coefficient is entirely
a measure of the direct effect (i.e., all of the women actually discouraged from
having an abortion are medicaid-eligible women) and if we utilize the fact that

22 percent of all abortions are publicly funded (in the states that fund
abortions), this means that about 22 percent of all previously publicly-funded

abortions are being prevented.31 This is surely a maximal estimate. If the
"indirect effect" of changes in the state environment for abortion are strong
enough to induce 8.6 percent of the (probably nonmedicaid eligible) women

seeking abortions to go out of state, it is not unreasonable to expect that it
might lead to an actual reduction in abortion among these women as well.
A similar estimate is arrived at by comparing the effects of enforced and

unenforced restrictions on medicaid from column 1 in table 2. Assume that
the indirect effects of medicaid laws are measured by the impact of enjoined

laws (which should affect few low income women). If we subtract -6.7
percent from -13.4 percent, this suggests that the direct impact on abortion

rates among low-income women due to the enactment of the law is a -6.7
percent decline in abortions, only slightly higher than the 4.8 percent estimate

based on abortion among residents.

31This is surprisingly close to the 20-25 pcrccnt estimates from studies cited ahoy; that

look at the implementation of laws in p&ticutar dRte..

28

C.

Robustness of the Policy Effects
Table 3 investigates the robustness of our results on medicaid funding

restrictions to changes in specification. The results in this table (and all
subsequent tables) are for abortion rates by state of occurrence. Results on

abortion by state of residence show generally similar patterns to those
discussed here, unless otherwise noted. Column 1 repeats the results from

column 1 in table 1, showing only the coefficients on medicaid funding
restrictions, on border state medicaid funding restrictions, and on enacted but
unenforced medicaid restrictions. Column 2 estimates the same regression, but

omits both the border state policy variables and the unenforced restrictions
variable. The results indicate that the significant negative effect of medicaid

restrictions on aggregate abortion rates is relatively robust to these
specification changes, although its magnitude drops by half when these other
variables are omitted. This suggests that the inclusion of these other variables

is important. For instance, if states are more likely to disallow medicaid
funding for abortions when neighboring states also have this policy, failing to

control for border state policies results in a coefficient estimate on in-state
medicaid restrictions that is less negative than otherwise, as it combines both
the in-state effect of medicaid restrictions on abortion rates (which is negative)

and the positive effect of more restrictive border state policies, with which it
is correlated.

Columns 3 to 6 test the effect of medicaid restrictions using alternative

measures of the willingness of a state to fund medicaid abortions. As noted

in section 3, for a selected sample of states and years we have data on the
number of publicly funded abortions. This data is available for only 6 years
in selected states, providing 306 observations. Column 3 of table 3 shows the

coefficient on medicaid funding restrictions within this more limited sample,
while column 4 shows the estimates when the medicaid funding policy variable

is replaced with the log of the number of publicly funded abortions within a

29
state.

Surprisingly, the number of publicly funded abortions have no

significant effect on abortion rates.32 Investigation indicates that this is
primarily the result of the more restricted sample and the nature of this data,
which is not very reliable. Over these limited sample years, most states either

fund or do not fund medicaid abortions in all years; in those states that do
fund medicaid abortions, the number funded is largely constant. Thus, the
variation in publicly handed abortions is largely invariant within states over
time, meaning that it is highly collinear with the state fixed effects and has no

additional explanatory power.

An alternative measure is to use the AFDC caseload in a state. As
explained above, this is a good proxy for the number of women eligible for

publicly funded abortions. Columns 5 and 6 present two specifications using
APDC caseloads. Column S includes both the variable indicating when a state

does not fund public abortions as well as the interaction of the inverse of this

variable with the AFDC caseload as a share of the female fertile population.
This latter. variable measures the effect of caseload changes over time in states

that fund public abortions. If increases in caseload stimulate increases in
abortion in these states, then the second variable should show a significant
coefficient, but it does not. Column 6 includes the AFDC caseload as a share
of the female fertile population, with separate coefficients for those years when

states fund abortions and when they do not. The coefficients indicate that
abortion rates are higher in times when public funding of abortion occurs, and

there is a small not-quite-significant effect of increases in caseloads during
these periods.

The conclusion from these results is that the primary effect of public

funding on abortion occurs because of the implementation or

32Similar results occur if we usc the log of the public abortion rate, or the log of
medicaid dollars spcnt on abortion.

30

nonimplementation of restrictions. The availability of medicaid within the
state, as proxied by either the number of publicly funded abortions in a state,
or the AFDC caseload in the state, has much less effect on the abortion rate.
States that fund medicaid abortions appear to hind about the same number over

this period, with little variation over time.

D.

Robustness of

the Provider Availability Effects

We are also concerned with the robustness of the estimated effect of the
number of abortion providers on abortion rates. Table 4 provides several

alternative estimates. The first column repeats the coefficient on abortion
providers from column 1 of table 1, using number of physicians and number

of hospitals as instruments. The second column estimates the impact of
hospital providers only on abortion rates, while the third column estimates the

impact of nonhospital providers (in both of these columns, hospital and

nonhospital providers are instrumented with the same variables used to

instrument total providers.) Column 2 indicates that the availability of
nonhospital providers has the same significant positive effect on abortion rates

as do total providers. In contrast, the estimated coefficient in column 3 for

hospital providers is insignificant. This suggests that it is primarily the
availability of nonhospital providers that affects abortion rates. This is perhaps

not surprising, since these are the more 'marginal" providers who will enter
or leave the market more readily as the climate for abortion changes.33

Finally, the last column of table 4 assumes that the division between

hospital and nonhospital providers is not endogenous to the demand for

33Furthcr cvidcncc that hospital and nonhospital providers do not play the same role in

the abortion mar¼ ii provided by their relative price structure. In 1989, a lOwcck
abortion corn $245 at the average clinic; in 1991 • the average hospital abortion cod $1757.
In part, this reflects the tact that women who use hospitals tend to have more health
complications relatad to abortion (Henshaw, 1991).

31

abortion and enters the share of hospital providers together with the
instrumented total provider variable. The results confirm that an increase in
nonhospital providers is associated with an increase in abortion rates in a state,

even after controlling for total providers.

E. Robustness of Political Climate Effects
We have experimented with a wide variety of specifications regarding

political climate. Table 5 presents some of these results. The first column of
table 5 repeats the coefficients from column 1 of table 1. As noted above,
these results indicate there is no effect of substantial party control within the

state on abortion rates. Column 2 of table 5 enters the political composition

of each of the three state branches of government separately. The results
indicate that a move to a Republican-controlled house is correlated with an

increase in abortion rates, while a move to a Republican-controlled senate
appears to have significant negative effects on abortion. Republican governors

have no significant effect. We have no ready explanation for these results, but

they are quite robust to specification changes in other variables.
The third and fourth columns enter the same two specifications, but use

the moving average of these variables over the last 4 years, assuming that it

takes time for political changes to impact legislation. It could be that high
abortion rates are one of the factors causing dissatisfaction among some of the

electorate and leading to the election of Republicans; in this case the
contemporaneous correlation between party affiliation and abortion rates is

spurious. The coefficients on lagged party affiliation are similar, however,
although they are estimated with less precision.

As discussed in section 3, we also have a variable that codes political
climate in a state based on the votes of its federal congressional delegation on

domestic policy issues, the COPE rankings, We enter this variable in column

32
5 and 6 (with party affiliation and alone). In neither case do these rankings

show any significant effects on abortion rates.34

Our overall conclusion is that party affiliation and federal voting patterns
interact in a complex way with the political climate for abortion and the results

are not readily explainable.35 As recent elections in a number of states have
shown, support for abortion does not divide up neatly across party lines. In

addition, the courts have played a key role in a number of states in
determining abortion policy, and we have no easy way of coding court
composition or how courts and legislatures interact.

F.

Robustness of Results to the Data Sample
Given our earlier discussion about AG! versus CDC data, it seems useful

in table 6 to show the robustness of our findings to the data that we use.
Column 1 repeats column 1 from table 1, which uses the AG! data on abortion

rates for all years and states in which it is available. Columns 2 and 3 divide

this data into two samples, with column 2 showing results over the first half
of the sample (1974-SO) and column 3 showing results over the second half

(1981-88, excluding 1983 and 1986). Columns 4 and 5 compare AG! and
CDC data. Column 4 uses AG! data on abortion rates, but is based only on

the restricted sample for which CDC data is also available. Column 5
provides comparative estimates using CDC data on abortion rates.
We were pleased (and somewhat surprised) at how similar the results are

across these different data samples. The smaller samples over the 1970s and

34When estimated with abortion rates by state of residence, the COPE ratings appear to
have a significant positive effect op abortions, i.e. • in ept.. with a more liberal federal
representatives, abortion rates are higher.
35Rescarch investigating the dctcnninani.s of state abortion laws discusses the complexity
of
appropriate political climate variables for abortion policy (Meicr and McFarlane,
1992 and 1993.)

33

1980s produce larger

standard errors and the coefficients on some of the

demographic variables are somewhat unstable, but the point estimates from the

two samples are very close on most policy, climate, and provider variables.
Estimated on the restricted sample for which CDC data is also available,

the AOl abortion rate estimates in column 4 show results that are generally
similar to those from the full data sample. The most striking difference is that

in the restricted sample the medicaid funding restrictions and the unenforced

medicaid restrictions have a smaller and less significant effect on abortion
rates, while AFDC benefit maximums have a positive and significant effect
and Democratic control of the state has a significant negative effect. Column

5 shows the equivalent estimates using CDC data. While signs and magnitudes
of most coefficients are generally similar, there are differences. Most striking,

within the CDC sample the effects of medicaid funding restrictions and of
unenforced medicaid restrictions on abortion rates have become insignificant

and positive. This may be due to the incompleteness of the CDC data in
reporting abortions among smaller clinics. To the extent that it is the smaller
nonhospital providers which are most responsive to political climate and policy

changes, then data that undercounts the abortion use at these clinics may show

less responsiveness to policy.

Overall, we are reassured by the results in tables 3 to 6, indicating that
differences in variable definition and specification tend not to have large

effects on the results.

There is substantial evidence that implementing

restrictions on medicaid funding for abortion results in lower aggregate
abortion rates. The fact that border states' restrictions impact where women

have abortions and that even enjoined restrictions impact abortion rates
suggests that such restrictions are correlated with the general attitude toward

abortion in a state and measure both general climate effects as well as the
direct effects of the law. The effect of these restrictions on actual abortions
among state residents is much smaller, suggesting one of the main effects of

34

these policies is to induce cross-state migration for abortion services. We also
have substantial evidence that a greater number of abortion providers in a state

increases the abortion rate within the state, primarily through inducing crossstate migration, with nonhospital providers being particularly important. Party
control in the state has mixed effects and is difficult to interpret. The abortion

rate is also directly correlated with the unemployment rate and per capita
income, and negatively correlated with the black population share and the
marriage a-ate.

VI

The Determinants of Abortion by A9e and Race
A.

Teen versus Nonteen Abortion Rates
The CDC reports abortions for teens and nonteens for a selected sample

of states, as discussed in section 3 above.

In this section we look at

differences in teen and nonteen abortion determinants. Because this data is
from a different source and is available only for a smaller sample, we want to

warn against drawing strong conclusions from these results.

Columns 1 and 2 of table 7 present estimates of teen and nonteen

abortion rates, using our standard specification, and based on the 555
observations

from the 45 states that ever report abortion numbers by age.

Using the CDC data, column 1 presents teen abortion determinants and column

2 presents nonteen abortion determinants.
The determinants of teen and nonteen abortion rates are generally similar

in columns I and 2. Most puzzling, while restrictions on teen abortions
significantly reduce the teen abortion rate within these states, they appear to

35

reduce the nonteen abortion rate by almost as much.36 This suggests that
the passage of teen restrictions in these states is correlated with a growing
climate of hostility (or at least reluctance) toward abortion, in ways that is not

picked up. by other variables in the model. It is important to remember that
this variable does not necessarily indicate a decrease in the number of women

who have abortions, but only indicates that the number of women who have

abortions in this state declines when teenage restrictions are implemented.
Unfortunately, we have no information on teen abortions by state of residence.

Teen abortion rates appear as responsive to provider availability and
other climate variables as nonteen abortion rates. Both nonteens and teens
show declines in the abortion rate when the black population share grows.
Teen abortion rates are less responsive to unemployment rates than are nonteen

abortion rates. As with the aggregate CDC data in table 6, AFDC benefit
levels again appear important in these estimates.

We want to emphasize the problem of interpreting any of these
teen/nonteen comparisons, given the selected nature of the data. Only those
states that collect information on abortion by age are included in the sample;

one might believe that this is a group of states that is particularly aware of
problems and concerns regarding abortion among teenagers. The fact that
legal restrictions on teen abortions are significant in this group of states but not

in the full sample is evidence of this. Thus, it is difficult to generalize these

results to the aggregate U.S. population. A similar caveat applies to the
results on nonwhite and white abortion rates.

¼stimaxing the AG! data on the same sample of states and years also results in a
aegative and significant coefficient on teen restrictions, unlike the results for the entire
sample of states and years.

36

B.

Nonwhite versus White Abortion Rates
For a selected group of states and years, CDC data is also available on

white and nonwhite abortions. Columns 3 and 4 of table 7 presents this data

in the same form as we presented the teen/nonteen data, for the 479
observations from 41 states that ever report abortion numbers by race.

The estimated determinants of abortion among white and nonwhite

women are generally similar in columns 3 and 4. Pàrhaps reflecting the
problems with CDC data, the impact of medicaid funding, restrictions is
insignificant for both groups, and even appears positive for nonwhite women.
Although the sample selection results in different estimates than we find in a

full sample of the population, there is no evidence here of subEtantial
differences in the determination of state abortion rates among black and white
women.

VII

Final Comments
There are several limits to the data used in this paper that constrain out

analysis. In particular, we can look only at the impact of laws on aggregate

abortion rates. Since we have no information on the availability and use of
abortion by income level, we cannot investigate the effects of public funding
restrictions on abortion decisions across the income distribution, and separate

out these direct effects from larger climate changes that are correlated with
legal changes.

The largest caveat on these results is that our regressions only be
estimated on data through 1988, as a variety of our explanatory variables are
not available yet for later years. Since 1988, the political and policy landscape

for abortion has changed substantially. In particular, the rise of anti-abortion
protests, organized nationally and targeted at presumably vulnerable states and

37

cities, may have substantially increased the role of "climate" in affecting both
provider availability and the willingness of women to seek abortions. In 1992,

the Supreme Court ruled that states could regulate the abortion process, as
long as they did not impose an undue burden on women seeking abortions.
Since then, a number of states have enacted or are discussing such provisions

as waiting periods. Empirical evidence of the impact of these actions and
laws, however, must await future data analysis.

38

References
Borders, Jeff A. and Phillips Cutright. 'Community Determinants of U.S.

Legal Abortion Rates." Family Planning Perspectives.

Vol 11:4,

July/August 1979. p227-33.
Cartoof, Virginia G. and Lorraine V. Kierman. 'Parental Consent for
Abortion: Impact of the Massachusetts Law.' American Journal of

Public Health. Vol 76:4, April 1986. p397-400.
Cates, Willard, Jr. 'The Hyde Amendment in Action." Journal of the

American Medical Association. Vol 246:10. September 4, 1981.
p1 109-28.

Cooksey, Elizabeth C. "Factors in the Resolution of Adolescent Premarital
Pregnancies." Demography. Vol 27:2, May 1990. p207-i8.

Duan, Naihua. "Smearing Estimate: A Nonparametric Retransformation
Method.' Journal of the American Statistical Association. Vol 78:383,
Sept 1983. p6O5-1O.

Garbacz, Christopher. "Abortion Demand.' Population Research and Policy

Review. Vol 9, 1990. plSl-60.
Gold, Rachel Benson. 'After the Hyde Amendment: Public Funding for

Abortion in FY 1978." Family Planning Perspectives. Vol 12:3,
May/June 1980. p131-34.
Greenberger, Marcia D. and Katherine Connor. 'Parental Notice and Consent
for Abortion: Out of Step with Family Law Principles and Policies."

Family Planning Perspectives. Vol 23:1, Jan/Feb 1991. p31-5.
Haas-Wilson, Deborah. 'The Economic Impact of State Restrictions on
Abortion: Parental Consent and Notification Laws and Medicaid

Funding Restrictions." Journal of Policy Aizalysis and Management.
Vol 12:3, Summer 1993a. p498-Sil.

39

Haas-Wilson, Deborah. "Endogenous Abortion Regulation: The Impact on
the Demand and Availability of Abortion Services." Unpublishedpaper.
November 1993b.
Henshaw, Stanley K. "The Accessibility of Abortion Services in the United

States." Family Planning Perspediws.

Vol 23:6, NovlDec 1991.

p246-53.

Henshaw, Stanley K. and Jennifer Van Von. Abortion Facibook, 1992
Edition. New York: The Alan Guttmacher Institute. April 1992.

Henshaw, Stanley K. and Jennifer Van Von. 'Abortion Services in the U.S.
1991-1992." Family Planning Perspeaives. Vol 26:3, May/June 1994.
plo0-6.

Henshaw, Stanley K. and Lynn S. Wallisch. The Medicaid Cutoff and
Abortion Services for the Poor." Family Planning Perspectives. Vol
16:4, July/Aug 1984. p170-SO.
Holbrook-Provow, Thomas M. and Steven C. Poe. "Measuring State Political
Ideology." American Politics Quarterly. Vol 15:3; July 1987. p399416.

"The Social and Economic Correlates of Pregnancy
Resolution Among Adolescents in New York City, by Race and
Ethnicity." American Journal of Public Health. Vol 78:6, June 1988.

Joyce, Theodore.

p626-31.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert D. Plotnick. "Effects of State Welfare, Abortion
and Family Planning Policies on Premarital Childbearing Among White
Adolescents.' Family Planning Perspectives. Vol 22:6, NovlDec 1990.
p246-251, 275.

Medoff, Marshall H. "An Economic Analysis of the Demand for Abortions."
Economic Inquiry. Vol 26, April 1988. p353-59.

Meier, Kenneth J. and Deborah R. McFarlane. 'State Policies on Funding of
Abortions: A Pooled Time Series Analysis." Social Science Quarterly.
Vol 73:3, Sept 1992. p690-S.

40

Meier, Kenneth LI. and Deborah R. McFarlane. 'The Politics of Funding
Abortion. American Politics Quarterly. Vol 21:1, January 1993. p81101.

Miller, Michael K., C. Shannon Stokes and Rex H. Warland. 'The Effects
of Legalization and Public Funding of Abortion on Neonatal Mortality:
An Intervention Analysis.' Population Research and Policy Review.
Vol 7, 1988. p79-92.

Rogers, James L., Robert F. Boruch, George B. Stoms, and Dorothy
DeMoya. 'Impact of the Minnesota Parental Notification Law on
Abortion and Birth.' American Journal of Public Health. Vol 81:3,
March 1991. p294.8.
Rubin, George L., Julian Gold, and Willard nte-g 'Response of Low Income

Women and Abortion Facilities to Restriction of Public Funds for
Abortion: A Study of a Large Metropolitan Area. American Journal of
Public Health. Vol 69:9, September 1979. p948-50.

Singh, Susheela. 'Adolescent Pregnancy in the United States: An Interstate
Analysis. Family Planning Perspectives. Vol 18:5, Sept/Oct 1986.
p210-20.

Tatalovich, Raymond and Byron W. Daynes. 'The Geographic Distribution
of U.S. Hospitals with Abortion Facilities." Family Planning
Perspectives. Vol 21:2, Mar/Apr 1989. p814.

Torres, Aida and Jacqueline Darroch Forrest. 'Why Do Women Have
Abortions?' Family Planning Perspectives. Vol 20:4, July/Aug 1988.
p169-76.

Tnsssell, James, Jane Menken, Barbara L. Lindheim, and Barbara Vaughan.
'The Impact of Restricting Medicaid Financing for Abortion.' Family
Planning Perspectives. Vol 12:3, May/June 1980. p120-30.

Appendix 1
Data Sources
This appendix lists sources of data used in this paper, and indicates any
adjustments to the data that were made.
Abortion Data

A.

Alan Guttmacher Institute (AG!).

1. Total abortions by state and year. Available from 1973-1992,
with no data for 1983, 1986, 1989 and 1990. The data come from
regular surveys of abortion providers, conducted by AGI. Sources:
1973-1988 data from Henshaw and Van Vort (1992), Table 7;
199 1-1992 data from Henshaw and Van Von (1994).

2. Abortion providers by state and year.

Available from
1973-1988, with no data for 1983 and 1986. Source: 1973-1988,

Henshaw and Van Von (1992), Table 11. Additional data on providers
by type were provided by Stanley Henshaw at AG!.

3. Abortion rates for state residents only, by state and year.
Available from 1978-1988, with no data for 1983 and 1986. These data
are constructed by AG! from various sources, described in the source.
Source: Henshaw and Van Von (1992), Table 9.
B.

Center for Disease Control (CDC).

1. Total abortions by state and year. Available for rlected states
from 1973-1987, and all states far 1988-1990. The data are
predominantly based on reports by state health agencies to the CDC.
Source: 1973-1981 come from various issues Abortion Surveillance and
1982-1990 data are from issues of Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report.

2. Abortions rates by age and by race, by state and year.
Available for selected states from 1973-1990, with substantial missing
data. The data come from reports by state health agencies to the CDC.
Same source as previous variable except 1982-1988 abortion by race data
were obtained directly from the CDC.

41

42

U.

Policy Data

1. Dummy variable on whether a state disallows medicaid
funding for abortions. Coded by the authors from a variety of sources
in different years. When information was not available, the authors
called state agencies and organizations to identi& whether restrictions
were in place in particular years. In years in which restrictions occurred
for only pad of the year, the share of the year in which the restrictions

were in place is coded.

An extensive description of the data

determination for each state is available upon request.

2. Numbers of abortions paid for by public funds. Coded by the
authors from two primary sources of information. The Health Care
Financing Agency (HCFA) reported data from 1976-1983 on abortions
charged by the states to the federal government, not including statefunded abortions. AG! also publishes data, including both state and
federal-funded medicaid abortions, for 1978, 1980, 1981, 1983, 1985,
1987, and 1990. We use the AG! data when available, and use the
HCFA data for 1979 and 1982 to make an informed interpolation for
these two years.

3. Dummy variable on whether a state imposes parental
notification or consent requirements on teen abortions. Data on
state laws available in Greenberger and Connor (1991). The variable is

coded from these data. A more extensive description of the data is
available upon request.

4. Dummy variable on whether physically bordering states
disallow medicaid funding for abortions. Weighted average of the
dummy variable indicating medicaid funding restrictions in each
physically contiguous state, where weights are the inverse distances
between the state capital of the own state and the state capital of each
surrounding state.

5. Dummy variable on whether physically bordering states
impose parental notification or consent requirements on teen
abortions. Weighted average of the dummy variable indicating teen
restrictions in each physically contiguous state, where weights are the
inverse distances between the state capital of the own state and the state
capital of each surrounding state.

43

6. AFDC caseload numbers. Available for 1973-1992. Data for
1973-1980 from various editions of Public Assistance Statistics and that

for 1981-1992 from various editions of The Green Book.

7. AFDC maximum benefit levels. Available for 1973-1992.
Data for 1973-1980 from Characteristics of State AFDC Plans, various
years; 1981-1992 data from various editions of The Green Boo/c

III.

Political Climate Data

1. Dummy variable for whether state has enacted restrictions
disallowing medicaid funding for abortions, which have been
enjoined by the courts due to their formulation. Coded byauthors
from a variety of sources in different years. Among all states which

have no medicaid funding restrictions in operation, this variable
distinguishes between those states which have passed legislation that
limits medicaid funding, but which has been enjoined by the courts. In
some cases, this has been intentional (i.e., at the time of passage, it was
clear the law would not be enforced), in other cases it was not clear

whether the courts would uphold the law or not. A more extensive
description of the data is available upon request.

2. Dummy variable for whether state governor is Republican.
Coded from information in various editions of The Book of the States.

Where possible, we confirmed this information using American
Governors and Gubernatorial Elections, 1979-87.

3. Dummy variable for whether state senate is Republicancontrolled. Coded from information in various editions of The Book of
the States. In years where there is an exact tie between the number of
Republican and Democratic senators, we code the variable 0.5.

4. Dummy variable for whether state house is Republicancontrolled. Same source as previous variable.

5. COPE rankings (AFL-CIO Committee on Political Education).
Available from 1973-1992 for all states except Washington, D.C.
Source: Almanac ofAmerican Politics, various years.

44

IV. Demographic and Economic Data
1. State population by year. Available for all years through the
Current Population Reports, P25 series.

2. Female population, ages 15-44, ages 15-20 (teens), and
ages 31-44 (older women). From 1973-1979, total population by
state and age is available in Current Population Reports, P25 series. We
calculate the female share by dividing the relevant age group in half.
From 1980-1992, total population by state and age and sex is available
in Current Population Reports, P25 series.

3. Marriage rates per 1000 women. Available from Vital Statistics
for years 1973-1990.

4. Labor force participation of women. 1970 Census data
available; 1974-75 data available for some states; all states and years
available 1976-1992. We interpolate 1973 for all states, and 1974-75 for
states where the data are missing, using the 1970 data. Data in U.S.

Department of Labor, Geographic Profile of Employment and
Unemployment various editions.

Population not residing in a
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, 1973-1979; population not
residing in a Metropolitan Statistical Area, 1980-1990. Data are
available for 1973-1978; 1980-1988; 1990. 1979 and 1989 are

5. Nonmetropolitan population.

interpolated.

6. Unemployment rate by state and year. Available 1973-1992.
Published in Employment and Earnings, various years.

7. Per capita income by state and year. Available 1973-1992.
Published in the Survey of Current Business, various years.
8. Number of live births by state and year. Available 1973-1990.
Published in Vital Statistics, various years.

9. Number of blacks by state and year. Available 1973, 1975,
1976, 1980-1985, and 1988-1990. Missing years interpolated. Data
from the Current Population Reports, Series P23 (1973 and 1975),
Series P20 (1976), and Series P25 (1980 and forward).

45

10.

Number of physicians and number of obstetricians and

gynecologists, by state and year. Available 1974-1979, 1981-1984,
1986, 1989-1992. Data are the number of non-Federal physicians (or

ob-gyn practitioners) in each state.

Source: American Medical
Association, Physician Characteristics and Distribution in the U.S.,
various years.

11. Number of hospitals, by state and year.

Available

1973-1992. Data are the total number of hospitals in each state.
Source: American Hospital Association, Hospital Statistics, various
years, table 10-B.

Appendix Table 1
State Abortions and Abortion Rates, AGI and CDC Data
Ad: Average annual data by state, 1974-88, except 1983 and 1986
CDC: Average annual data by state, 1974-88, (or Cat.. with data in all years

CDC Data

AGI Data
State

Avenge

Avenge

Annual
No. of

Annual
Abortion

Abortions

Rate

1 Alabama

15,994

2 Alaska
3 Arizona

2,292

4

Arkansas

5 California
6 Colorado
7 Connecticut
8 Delaware

9 D.C.
Florida
11 Georgia
12 Hawaii
13 Idaho
14 Illinois
15 Indiana
16 Iowa
17 Kansas
18 Kentucky
19 Louisiana
20 Maine
21 Maryland
22 Massachusetts
23 Michigan
24 Minnesota
25 Mississippi
26 Missouri
27 Montana
10

15,688
5,194

252,445
20,397
19,157

3,934
28,387
67,823
34,563
8,715
2,137
67,015
14,155
8,418
12,948
10,751
15,738

17.5
20.0
23.7
10.2
43.1
27.3
26.3
26.6
165.2
31.4
25.4
37.1

9.8
25.3
11.1
13.1

4,366
28,277
39,766
58,706

24.5
12.3
15.4
16.8
26.8
29.1
27.2

17,262

18.1

4,287

7.3
15.7

17,673
3,126

Average
Annual

.

Average

Abortions

Annual
Abortion
Rate

1,559

13.8

5,162

10.1
37.6
19.3
21.7

No.

of

222,794
14,355
15,764

25,210
49,399
32,022
5,693

146.5

62,437
12,938

23.6

8,762
7,998
13,451

16.6
9.3
13.0

23,644
36,958

22.5
27.0

16,294
3,863
16,484

17.0
6.6

22.7
23.6
24.5
10.1

14.7

17.1
(conthzued)

Appendix Table 1—Continued
AGI Data,

.

.

State

Avenge
Annual

No. of
Abortions

28 Nebraska
29 Nevada
30 New Hampshire
31 New Jersey
32 New Mexico
33 New York
34 North Carolina
35 North Dakota
36 Ohio
37 Oklahoma
38 Oregon
39 Pennsylvania
40 Rhode Island
41 South Carolina
42 South Dakota
43 Tennessee
44 Texas
45 Utah
46 Vermont
47 Virginia
48 Washington
49 West Virginia
50 Wisconsin
51 Wyoming

5,698
7,724
4,543
53,838
6,392
183,787
30,804

2,381
55,591
10,705
15,213
58,266

6,095
11,482
1,464
23,118
88,050

3,730
3,228
30,494
30,354
2,811
17,623
852

Average
Annual
Abortion
Rate
16.8

37.7
19.8

31.2
20.4
44.5
21.6
16.0
22.3
15.2
25.3
22.0
27.6
14.8
9.7
21.5
24.9
10.7

26.0
22.8
31.1

6.5
16.4

7.8

CDC Data
Average
Annual

No. of
Abortions

Avenge
Annual
Abortion
Rate

5,123
5,420
3,186

14.4
26.8
3.8

153,292
29,614
2,275

37.2
20.8

12,637
55,524
6,043
10,390
1,412
19,212

21.0
21.0
27.3

3,554
2,949
28,932
27,275

15.3

13.4

9.4
17.7
10.2

23.7
21.6
28.0

Appendix Table 2
Means and Standard Deviations of Variables
Across State-Year Observations

Variable

Number of
Observations

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Avenges

.

1. Abortion Rates
State of occurrence (AOl)

650
450

26.8
28.1
22.9
28.2
20.9

Standard
Deviation
Across State

17.9
69.3

13.5
10.4
12.0
14.0
11.8
13.5
86.5

13.5
12.7
11.1
13.2
11.0
12.7
74.4

750

.428

.478

.344

750

.088

.283

.189

750

.549

.350

.196

750

.111

.184

.095

356

13,695

27,966

28,773

750

6.6

2.3

1.9

750

373.5

160.7

140.4

Unenforced restrictions
on medicaid? (1 =yes)

750

.222

.416

.269

Governor/House/senate
all Republican? (1=yes)

750

.048

.213

.134

Governor/House/Sete

750

.433

•.496

.328

all Democratic? (1=yes)
Governor GOP? (1=yes)
House GOP? (1=yes)
Senate GOP? (1=yes)
COPE rankings

750
750
750
735

.388
.129
.240
56.1

.487
.334
.425
25.4

.265
.250
.358
21.3

State of residence (AOL)

State of occurrence (CDC) 722
Teen (CDC)
Nonteen (CDC)
White (CDC)
Nonwhite (CDC)

555
555
474
474

2. Policy Variables
Medicaid funding

disallowed? (1 = yes)
Teen restrictions?
(1 =yes)
Border states' policy:
Medicaid disallowed?'1
Border states policy:
Teen restrictions?"
Numbers of publicly
funded abortions
AFDC Casetoad per
1000 women
Maximum AFDC benefits

3. Climate Variables

(conilnued)

Appendix Table 2—Continued
Standard

Vanable

Number of
.
Observations

Deviation
cross
Averages

Mean

Standard
.
Deviation

132

165

74
58

100
73

750
750
750
750

10.3
23.1
26.3
11.9
24.2

7.9
4.0
2.7
8.2

8.3

17.5

17.6

750

51.9

4.9

3.5

750
750

15,276
7.3

2,509

1,898
1.2

4. Provider Variables (in 1000.)
650
Total providers
650
Hospital providers
650
Nonhospital providers

162
tOO

63

5. Demographic/Economic Variables

Marriage rate/l000 women 750
Percentage teens (15.20/'
Percentage older (35-44/'
Percentage black'
Percentage in nonmetropolitan areat
Labor force participation
rate among women
Per-capita income
Unemployment rate

2.1

7.3
1.2

0.9

All data is weighted by state female fertile population.
°Average policy in surrounding states, weighted by distance. See text.

bAmong all fertile women.
Cwithin the total population.

Appendix Table 3
First Stage Regression for TSLS Specification
Dependent Variable: log(abortion providers)
1. lnstnam.nts for Provider Variable
Log(nuniber of hospitals)

.477"
(.204)

Log(number of physicians)

.77C
(.201)

2. Policy Variable.
Medicaid funding disallowed? (I yes)

.036

(.029)

Teen restrictions? (1 =yes)

.081"
(.031)

Border states' policy: Medicaid disallowed?
Border states' policy: teen restrictions?

Log(AFDC maximum benefit levels)

-.153"
(.047)
-.013
(.053)
.022
(.067)

3. Climate Variables
Unenforced restrictions on Medicaid? (I —yes)

.068"
(.025)

Governor/House/Senate all Republican? (I =yes)

Governor/HouselSenatc all Democratic? (h"ycs)

.055
(.034)
.031
(.017)

4. Demographic/Economic Variables
Marriage ratc/l000wornen
Percentage teens

Percentage older (ages 35-44)
Percentage black
Percentage in nonmetropolitan areas

.001
(.004)
.008
(.006)
-.010
(.009)
.005
(.018)
.003
(.003)

Labor force panic ipation rate among women

-.007
(.005)

Log(per-capita income)

.495
(.235)
..014

Unemployment rate

(.007)

R-squared
Number of' observations

.987
650

Standard deviations in parentheses; Significanzat 5% level; "Significaniat 1% level.
Regression includes a full set of state and year effects and is run on an identical ample
described for the results in column I, table 1.

Table 1

Determinants of Abortions Rates
1974-88 within 50 Statesa

Dependent Variable Log Abortion Rate by

State of Occurrence
TSLS
(1)

TSLS OLS
(2)

-.049

-.033

-.064°

(.039)

(.037)

(.035)

(.026)

(.020)

-.155°

.049

-.024
(.021)

-.025
(.018)

.008
(.012)

(.038)

.046

(.041) (.049) (.039)

.203° .082'

.199° -.03 1 -.017
Medicaid disallowed? (.058) (.049) (.056) (.047) (.039)

Border states' policy:

Borderstates policy:
Teen restrictions?
Log(AFDC maximum
benefit levels)

-.023 -.170' -.025
(.066) (.084) (.065)
-M29

(.085)

(6)

-.141"

disallowed? (1=yes)

(lyes)

TSLS

(5)

-.144" -.047

Teen restrictions?

TSLS OLS
(4)

1. Policy Variabln
Medicaid ftinding

(3)

State of
Residence

Difference
in Log
Abortion
Rates

.165"
(.050)

-.017 -.026
(.034) (.027)

.084°
(.027)
.018
(.019)

-.027

-.001

-.048

-M68

(.085)

(.076)

(.050)

(.043)

.051

.021

-.039'

2. CIlmats Varkblss
Unenforced restrictions

-.069' -.111" -.066'

on medicaid? (lryes) (.034)

(.032)

(.031)

(.037)

(.020)

(.021)

-.094'
all Republican? (1=ycs)(.046) (.054)

.017
(.043)

-.021
(.034)

-.043'

.011
(.019)

-.005

-.016

-.054° -.042° -.00002

(.025)

(.021)

(.016)

(]ovemorfHouse/Senatc

.013

GovernorlHouselScnate -.018
all Democratic?(1 =ycs) (.022)

(.022)

(.010)

(.009)

3. Providn Veriabis
L.og(total providers)b

.578" .134" .530"
(.204)

(.020)

(.051)

-.285

(.417)

.158°

(.033)

.172
(.237)

(continued)

Table 1—Continued

Difference

Dependent Variable=Log Abortion Rate by
State of
State of Occurrence
Residence

TSLS TSLS OLS
(2)

(1)

4.

(3)

TSLS OLS
(4)

in Log
Abortion
Rates

TSLS
(6)

(5)

Demographic/EconomiC

Variables

Marriage ratc/
1000 women
Percentage teens

Percentage older
(ages 35-44)

Percentage black

(.005) (.002) (.005)
.006

.009

(.007)

(.007)

.006
(.007)

.014
(.011)

-.040'

.013

(.010)

(.011)

metropolitan areas

Statceffects

Yeareffects
k-squared
Number of observations
Standard

(.004)

(.003)

(.002)

.007" -.003
(.003)

.016"

(.002)
.003

(.005)

-.osC' .009' -.058"

.010

-.004

.007

(.002)

(.022)

(.021)

(.014)

(.012)

-.0001 -.009" -.0002
(.004) (.001) (.004)

.004

.001

.002

(.004)

(.003)

(.002)

-.003

-.001

-.001

(.005)

(.004)

(.003)

.017" ..011

(.004)

(.007)

.876" .725" .456" .416" -.004

.684'
(.332)

Unemployment rate

.005

.002

(.005)

Labor force participation -.010
rate among women
(.007)
Log(per-capita income)

(.004)

-.0004

.010
(.008)

(.023)
Percentage in non-

.004' -.012" -.002

-.012'

(.221)

.035"

.014'

(289)
.034"

(.175)

(.141)

(.100)

-.003
(.009)

.004
(.005)

.009'
(.005)

(.009)

(.007)

(.008)

Yes
Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

.899

.708

.899

.960

.896

650

650

650

450

.973
450

deviations in parentheses;

'Significantat 5% level; "Significantat 1% level.
Ncbraska is omitted from all models (ace text); D.C. is included.
1. 2, 4 and 6 instrument this variable, as discussed in the text.

450

Table 2
Estimated Effects of Policy Changes on Abortion Rates
Abottion
Within

Base calculation:
Abortion rate for a state

without restriction?

(

)

Abortion Rates
Among Residents
of States
(2)

26.13

26.92

Own state imposes medicaid
restrictions only
(Percentage change from base)

22.63
(-13.4)

25.64
(-4.8)

Own state imposes teen restrictions
only
(Percentage change from base)

27.37
(4.7)

6.29
(-2.3)

No own-state restrictions, one
additional border state imposes
restrictions
(Percentage change from base)

27.49
(5.2)

26.71
(-.78)

Own state enacts medicaid
restrictions that are enjoined
by the courts
(Percentage change from base)

24.38
(-6.7)

28.34
(5.3)

27.61

26.20
(-2.7)

No own-state restrictions, provider
numbers increase by 10 percent
within the state
(Percentage change from base)

(5.7)

4Calculated at means of all variables, except setting medicaid restrictions = 0;
teen restrictions = 0; and unenforced restrictions on medicaid = 0. Column 1
estimates based on coefficients from regression shown in column 1, table 1;
Column 2 estimates based on coefficients from regression shown in column 4,
table 1.
All estimates use the smearing technique to transform estimated log abortion
rates into actual abortion rates (Duan, 1983).

Table 3
The Effect of Medicaid Restrictions on Abortion Rates.
Various Specifications. 1974-88
log(abortion rate by state of occurrence)

Dependent variable

Full Sample
(1)

Medicaid funding
disallowed? (1 =yes)

(3)

-.144° -.086° -.102°
(.038)

.203°

Border states' policy:
Medicaid disallowed?

(.058)

Unenforced restrictions

-.069'

on Medicaid? (1 yes)

(.034)

L.og(number of publicly
funded abortions)

(2)

Restricted Sample

—

—

(.037)

—

.048
(.048)

.050
(.051)

-.002

—

(5)

-.173°

—

.204°

.161°

(.058)

(.057)

-.068'

(.040)

.036
(.037)

(.u.$4)

-.034
(.033)

—

.001

—

—

—

(.005)

—

—

-.004
(.006)

.009
(.006)

—

—

—

-.0001

Medicaid funding not
allowed (AFDC
—

—

(.008)

population)

R-squared
Number of observations

(6)

(.054)

(.032)

Medicaid funding
allowed' (AFDC
caseloads/female
population)

caseloads/female

(4)

Full Sample

.899
650

.892
650

.975
306

.972
306

.899
650

.897
650

Standard errors in parentheses;

'Significant at 5% level; "S

fi

tat 1% level.

All regressions are based on TSLS estimates, including state and year effects, as
well as the entire set of independent variables shown in table 1: teen restrictions,
border states' teen restrictions, log(AFDC benefits), Cov/}iouse/Sen all Republican,
GovfHouse/Sen all Democratic, log(total providers), marriage rateIl000 women,
percentage teen, percentage older, percentage black, percentage in nonznctropolitan
areas, labor force participation rates among women, log(per-capita income), and
unemployment rates.

Table 4
The Effect of Provider Availability on Abortion Rates,
Various Specifications. 1974-88
Dependent variable
log(abortion rate by state of occurrence)
(1)

Log(total providers)

(2)

(3)

—

.5781*

(.204)
Log(nonhospital providers)

—

(4)

.496
(.188)

.5631*

(.156)

Log(hospital providers)

—

—

-.011
(.384)

—

Percentage of total providers
that are hospital providers

—

—

—

-1.021'

R-squared
Number of observations

.899
650

(.109)

.

.894
650

.880
650

.913

650

Standard errors in parentheses;

Signiflcantat5% level; °Significantat 1% level.

All regressions are based on TSLS estimates, including state and year effects,
as well as the entire set of independent variables listed in table 1: medicaid
funding disallowed, teen restrictions, border states' medicaid funding limits,
border states' teen restrictions, log(AFDC benefits), unenforced restrictions on
medicaid, Gov/House/Sen all Republican, Gov!House/Sen all Democratic,
marriage rate/1000 women, percentage teen, percentage older, percentage
black, percentage in nonmetropolitan areas, labor force participation rates
among women, log(per-capita income), and unemployment rates.

Table 5
The Effect of State Party Affiliation on Abortion Rates,
Various Specifications, 197488
Dependent variable = log(abortion rate by state of occurrence)

Using
Current Values

Governor/HouseiSenate
all

Republican? (1 yes)

GovernorlHousc/Senatc

all Democratic?(1 ycs)

(1)

(2)

.013

—

-.018
(.022)

—

—

.022

(1 =yes)

House GOP?

—

(lyes)
SenateGOP?

COPE rankings

R-squared

Number of observations

(4)

(5)

(6)

-.027

—

.021

—

-.033

(.i.8)

—

—

.022

(.020)

(.026)

.05C

.100

(.034)

(.082)

-.067
(.033)

—

-.057
(.042)

—

—

—

—

.899
650

.900

.899

650

650

-.014

—

(.023)

(.030)

—

(1 =yes)

Using
Current Values

(3)

(.056)

(.046)

Governor GOP?

Using Avenge
Values Over the

.900
647"

—

—

—

—

—

—

.0003

.0002

(.001)

(.001)

.896

.896

ô3l

37b

Standard errors in parentheses;

Significantat 5% Level; "Significantat 1% level.
°Wc lose three observations from Minnesota in the four-year lag, since prior to 1973
Minnesota's legislature was nonpartisan.
bCOPE ratings do not include D.C.
All regressions are based on TSLS estimates, including state and year effects, as well as
the entire set of independent variables listed in table I: Medicaid funding disallowed,

teen restrictions, border states' Medicaid funding limits, border fls' teen restrictions,
Iog(AFDC benefits), unenforced restrictions on Medicaid, log(total providers), marriage
rate/WOO women, percentage teen, percentage older, percentage black, percentage in
nonmetropolitan areas, labor force participation rates among women, log(per-capita
income), and unemployment rates.

Table 6
Determinants of Abortions Rates, Various Data Samples
Dependent Variable — log(abortioa rate by state of occurrence)

AGI Data
Full Sample

OnCDC

.

All

1. Policy Variables
Màdicaid fundinj
disallowed?

(Itycs)

Teen restrictions?

(1 =yes)
Border states' policy:
Medicaid disallowed?

1974-

Years

1980

19811988

(I)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Data
Sample

CDC
Data

-.144"

-.131

-.193"

-.060'

.014

(.038)

(.068)

(.077)

(.034)

(.050)

.046

-.134
(.139)

.017
(.111)

.031

.013

(.034)

(.050)

.164

-.029

(.058)

(.101)

(.129)

(.050)

(.074)
-.09!
(.079)

(.04!)

.203"

.228"

.309"

Border states' policy:
Teen restrictions?

-.023

-.313

-.042

-.003

(.066)

(.3 16)

(.070)

(.054)

Log(AFDC maximum

-.029

-.018

-.169

.145

(.085)

(.165)

(.136)

(.073)

(.107)

-.069'

-.075
(.062)

-.035
(.030)

.013

(.034)

-. ioC
(.054)

(.044)

.013

.090

-.052

.031

.014

(.046)

(.075)

(.088)

(.039)

(.057)

-.018
(.022)

-.004

-.017

-.033

-.093"

(.054)

(.057)

(.0 18)

(.026)

benefit levels)

2. Clirnats Variables
Unenforced restrictions
on Medicaid? (1 =yes)
Governor/}{ouse/Senatc
all Republican? (I =yes)
Governor/House/Senate

alt Democratic? (1 =yes)

.298"

3. Provider Variable
Log(total providers)1'

.578"
(.204)

.715"
(.303)

.722
(1.101)

.544"
(.166)

1.077"
(.244)
(continued)

Table 6—Continued
AG! Data
Full Sample

On CDC

All
Years
(I)

4. Demographic/Economic
Variables
-.012
Marriage rate/l000 women
(.005)

1974-

1981-

Data

1980

1988

Sample

(2)

(3)

CDC
Data

(4)

(5)

-.029"

.001

-.011"

-.006

(.0 12)

(.025)

(.004)

(.006)

.006

.009

-.008

.005

.005

(.007)

(.012)

(.052)

(.006)

(.008)

Percentage older

.014
(.011)

.003
(.017)

.02f

(ages 35-44)

.035
(.019)

-.058"

-202"

-.031

(.023)

(.061)

(.051)

Percentage in nonmetropolitan-.000I
areas
(.004)

-.001

Labor force participation
rate among women

-.0 10

Log(per-capitaincome)

.684
(.332)

Percentage teens

Percentage black

Unemployment raze

k-squared
Number of observations

(.007)

.035"

(.010)

(.015)

-.030
(.019)

- .086"

-.003

-.002

(.008)

-.019
(.045)

(.004)

(.005)

.003
(.013)

-.003
(.006)

-.0 if
(.006)

-.022
(.009)

.400

.491

.121

(.815)

.117
(.408)

(.268)

(.394)

.03C

.010

.02C

.02f

(.028)

(.009)

(.016)

(.014)

(.007)

(.011)

.899
650

.909

.968
300

.923
622

.849

350

Standard deviation. in parentheses;
Significantax 5% level; "Significantat 1% level.
All regressions include a full set of state and year effects.

622

Table 7
Determinants of Abortion Rates by Age and Race
(On

samples (or which abortions by age
and race arc available from CDC)

restricted

CDC data

1.

Teens

Noatcens

(1)

(2)

Nonwhites

Whites

(4)

(3)

Policy Variables

Medicaid

funding
disallowed? (1 =ycs)

Teen restrictions?

(l=yes)
•
Border states policy:
Medicaid disallowed?
Border states' policy:
Teen restrictions?

Log(AFDC maximum

-.031

-.053

-.006

.028

(.061)

(.062)

(.084)

(.074)

-.132"

-.007

-.112

(.073)

-.160'
(.075)

(.103)

(.091)

.370

.333

.458

.403

(.081)

(.083)

(.137)

(.120)

.098

.226'

.057

.423'

(.100)

(.102)

(.250)

(.221)

.410'

.421"

'S

.481"

5*

.577"

bcneflt lcveJE)

(.136)

(.139)

(.198)

(.174)

2. Climate Variables
Unenforced restrictions
on Medicaid? (I —yes)

-.072

-.078

.043

.006

(.055)

(.056)

(.070)

(.062)

Governor/House/Senate
all Republican? (lsyes)

-.023

-.013

.095

(.066)

(.068)

-.012
(.088)

Governor/House/Senate

-.118
(.036)

-.091

1.343"
(.313)

1.452"

all Democratic? (1 —yes)

.5

5•

(.036)

(.100)

-.059
(.042)

5

-.081
(.037)

3. ProvIder Variables
L.og(total providers)

(.320)

.860"
(.361)

1.398"
(.318)
(conthused)

Table 7—Continued
CDC data

4.

Nonwhites

Whites

Teens

Nonteens

(I)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.004
(.006)

.0003
(.006)

.006

.003

(.008)

(.007)

—

•.02f

-.02C

(.013)

(.011)

—

-.011

(.025)

(.022)

DemographIc/Economic

Variables

Marriage rate/I000 women

Percentage teens

Percentage older
(ages 35-44)

-.010

-.122"

-.096"

(.030)

(.030)

-.0001
(.006)

-.002
(.006)

.014
(.009)

(.008)

Labor force participation
rate among women

-.016
(.010)

-.003
(.010)

-.018
(.012)

-.012
(.011)

Log(per-capita income)

.283
(.526)

.434

1 .569

(.538)

(.868)

-.949
(.765)

Percentage black

Percentage in nonmetropolitan areas

Unemployment rate

R-squared
Number of observations

S

•5

.005

•

.030
(.013)

.049

.045

(.013)

(.017)

.034
(.015)

.833

.828

555

555

.909
474

.797
474

Standard deviations in parentheses;
Signiflcantat 5% level; "Significantat 1% level.
All regressions include a Cull set of state and year effects.

Figure 1

Total Number of Abortions 1973-1992
Sum over 51 and 35 States

0
1
0

0

C',

0

'a-.

0
LI

3)

-o

a

z

73

75

77

79

81

83
Year

85

87

Note that years 1983, 19R6. 1989 and 19O are missing in the AOl dats and are smoothed (or the purpose o( this graph.

89

91

93

FIgure 2

State Abortion Data
Annual Averages, 1974-1988

C

0
0

.0
C-

C

0

i-I
I?

.0

F

z

State

L_i AG! Abortion Data

CDC Abortion Dataj

Figure 3

Abortion Rates by State of Occurrence
and State of Residence
Weighted Average over 51 States

V
E

I
Year
Note that years 1983, 1286, 1989 and 1990 are missing in the dala and arc smoothed [or the purpose of this graph. Weights arc based on
the female fertile population in each slate.

Figure 4

State Abortion Rates
1988
180

411
S
C

C
C

00

0

3J18
State

____ State of Occurrence

State of Residence

Figur. S

Abortion Rates by Age Group
Weighted Average over 24 and 51 States

Teen (COC - 24 staLes)

0
C

Aggregate (AGI -51 states

C

t
0

C
.0

'C

2

Non-Teen (CDC - 24 states)

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

Year

Figut 6

Abortion Rates by Race
Weighted Average over 18 and 51 States

Non-White (CDC - 18 states)
0
C

C
C

0
.0

Aggregate (Ad -51 states)

White (CDC -18 states)
76

78

0

2

84

86

88

90

Year
N... Sst sn 19E3. 19*41919, ad15 srq aIoi.t I. it. AOl dn. ..d •n saooihS
.. it. i.t.t. (.dll. P.P.i.SO. t.n.t ml.

(or tie p.rpon ci this gin Vt tifl u.reFi,ed

FIgure 7

Abortion Provider Rates
Weighted Average over 51 States

V
A

0

C
C
C
Is

V

04

V

Pt

0
Is

I0
.0

88

Year
female
Note that years 1983 and 1986 are missing in the data and arc smoothed For the purpose of this graphS Weights are based on the
IcilHe pi'piitalion n each state

Figure 8

Population Shares Affected by
Policy Restrictions on Abortion
Os

Percent of women living in states
without public funding of abortion

0.
C
U
Is
LI)

4)

,0

0.4'

PC

4)

.4-I

Percent of teens living in slates
with restrictions on teen abortions

U

4)
44
4)

I-c

0.2

Cl)

0.1

74

76

78

80

82

Year

84

86

88

90

Fl ure9

Unexplained Movement Over Time
Abortions by State of Occurrence

to

C
4.)

E
0.)

0

0
4?

C

.—

Ct

flu

-0.1

0.)

C

-0.15
-0.2

74

76

78

80

82

Year

86

