                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            STICKY PRICES: NEW EVIDENCE
                               FROM RETAIL CATALOGS




                                      Anil K. Kashyap




                                  Working Paper No. 4855


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 1994

This paper was inspired by a conversation with Julio Roteznberg; he, Olivia Blanchard, Ricaido
Caballero, Stanley Fischer and David Romer deserve urn than the usual credit for helpful
comments and conversations. I also benefited from many insightful suggestions from Laurence
Ball, Samuel Bentolila, Giuseppe Bextola, Andrew Caplin, Benjamin Hermalin, Takeo Hoshi,
Gary Loveman, Katherine Merrdll, James Symanowski and three anonymous referees. I thank
Christopher Geczy for outstanding research assistance. The project would not have been possible
without the permission and help of LI. Bean, inc., The Owls Company, Inc. and Recreational
Equipment Inc. Among the many people from these companies who helped me I would like to
thank Kilt Andrew, Michael Collins, Michael Crenshaw, Catherine Hartnett, Maurice Hilton,
Byron Ives, (the late) David Kashner, Bonnie Miller, Lester Noelk, Leigh Perkins, Jr., Leigh
Perkins, Sr., Thomas Rosenbauer and Lea Talcott. The data appendix to this paper was published
as part of Federal Reserve Board FEDS Working Paper #112. I thank the National Science
Foundation and the Federal Reserve Bank of Qilcago for research suppoit This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Monetanj Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the companies and institutions that supported this work, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Anil K. Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs. may be quoted without expli:it permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4855
                                                                                September 1994



                             STICKY PRICES: NEW EVIDENCE
                                FROM RETAIL CATALOGS


                                         ABSTRACF



       This paper presents new results on the size, frequency, and synchronization of price

changes for twelve selected retail goods over the past 35 years. Three basic facts about the data

are uncovered: first, nominal prices are typically fixed for more than one year although the time

between changes is very irregular, second, prices change more often during periods of high

overall inflation; third, when prices do change, the sizes of the changes are widely dispersed.

Both "large" and "small" changes occur for the same item and the sizes of these changes do not

closely depend on overall inflation.




Anil K. Kashyap
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago. IL 60637
and NBER
                                     I. INTRODUCTION

       Despite the central importance of the debate in macroeconomics over whether prices

are flexible, there is very little direct evidence on how actual transaction prices evolve over

time. For instance, in Gordon's [19901 recent survey of "New Keynesian Economics", he is

only able to identify three time series studies on price flexibility. This paper contributes to

the small empirical literature on price rigidity by describing the evolution of prices of twelve

selected retail goods over the past 35 years.

       The findings can be summarized in terms of the size, frequency and synchronization of

price changes. I uncover three basic facts about these data: first, nominal prices are typically

fixed for more than one year and the time between changes is very inegular second, prices

change more often during periods of high overall inflation; third, when prices do change. the

sizes of the changes are widely dispersed. Both "large" and "small" changes occur for the

same item and the sizes of these changes do not closely depend on overall inflation. These

facts challenge many of the recent theories put forward to explain price rigidities and suggest

certain directions in which to extend existing models.

       The remainder of the paper is separated into five sections. In the next section, I

explain why these data are particularly appropriate for testing many of the leading theories of

price rigidity. In the following section, I describe the method of data collection and items in

the study. The fourth section of the paper documents the facts mentioned above. The fifth

section of the paper discusses how these facts bear on the leading theories of price setting.

The final section summarizes my findings and suggests several promising directions for future

research.
                               II The Relevance of Catalog Data

     The data were collected from the mail-order catalogs of L.L. Bean, Inc., The Orvis

 Company, Inc., and Recreational Equipment, Inc. (REI). This section explains why catalog

 data are appropriate for testing many hypotheses about price rigidity.

A. Reasons Why Catalog Price Movements are Representative

        The most obvious concern about    these   data is that by their very nature, prices

advertised in catalogs might be suspected of being artificially more rigid than those in retail

stores. Indeed, to be useful the prices appearing in any given catalog must be applicable over

some non-trivial time horizon. Of course, this does not mean that the same nominal price

must be operative at all times; it would be straightforward to index the prices in the catalog.

As a practical matter, however, index prices are rarely used, at least in the U.S. Thus a key

issue is how much is lost by studying the flexibility of catalog prices.

       All three of the companies in this study fix their prices for six month intervals)

Consequently, a maximum of two price changes per year are possible for these data. There

are several reasons that this restriction does not necessarily limit the relevance of these data.

First, Rees [1961] has shown that aside from goods that are rapidlychanging because of

technological improvements, broad movements in catalog prices clOsely track price

movements in conventional retail stores.2 In fact for the six items in this study for which

data are continuously available from 1953 to 1987, a regression of the cumulative change in

catalog prices on the cumulative change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban

consumers yields a coefficient of 1.07 with a standard error of .10. So at low frequencies

these prices provide a good indicator of general price movements.


                                                  2
       Next, one must ask whether any useful information about higher frequency pricing

patterns can be inferred from these data. Given that firms have the option of resetting the

nominal price twice a year, there is infonuation implicit in the decision not to reset the price.

In other words, if catalog prices track general prices by always changing, but by a different

amount each six months, then the semi-annual measurement would be particularly limiting.

For all the items in this study there axe sometimes long spells, say longer than four years, of

fixed nominal prices, so the marketing considerations that seem to prevent very high

frequency price revisions do not render these prices uninteresting -- particularly for students

of business cycles.3

       Furthermore, there is an offsetting feature of the mail order business that should work

to make these prices potentially more flexible than other prices that axe often studied. Most

of the existing empirical work on prices focuses on intermediate goods transactions between

buyers and sellers who have long-term relationships. Carlton [1986]. in a careful study of

such transactions, shows that these prices are quite sticky. As he points out, however, this

need not imply any inefficiency because, in this situation, price is only one of the instruments

which can be used to allocate goods. Blinder's [19911 survey results reinforte the view that

this flexibility is important: survey participants often cite the ability to vary the nonprice

attributes of a good as a mason for price rigidity. Since most of the goods in my sample are

quite popular and have been carried by the companies for a long time, stock-outs axe

uncommon and delivery lags are not too variable. This suggests that prices may have to do

more of the work in adjusting to clear these markets than in other situations. In this case, one

might suspect that.these prices might be more flexible than the prices involved in many other


                                                 3
 transactions.

        On balance, it seems fair to conclude that although there are some idiosyncracies

 associated with catalog prices, in many respects these prices should be representative. More

importantly, there are several specific attributes of the mail order business that make it ideal

for studying the determinants of price rigidity.

B. The Specific Advantages of Catalog Prices

        One useful aspect of catalog data is that they allow us to study a particular form of

adjustment costs. Since putting together the layout of a catalog is costly, the catalog

companies necessarily incur some expenses in making the price of their products known. By

the time that the next catalog cycle starts, a finn will have to repay the fixed layout costs if it

wants to change anything about a particular page in the catalog. These costs in no way

depend on the size of any price changes that are made, so that costs of changing the posted

prices are unrelated to the size of any price changes that axe undertaken. This characteristic

of the cataloging business is presumably the reason why Sheshinski and Weiss, in their

classic 1977 article on price setting, motivate their model by describing the pricing problem

facing a mail-order retailer.

        Similarly, because catalog prices can be reset every six months, models emphasizing a

fixed time period between price changes (e.g. Blanchard [1983]) also seem to be relevanL So

these data should also be applicable for testing the performance of the type of fixed timing

models that have often been suggested in the literature on price rigidity.

       Mother motivation for looking at catalog prices is that catalog sales are economically

significant. According to Patterson [1994], United States mail order companies had total sales


                                                4
of fifty five billion dollars in 1993 and sales for 1994 were expected to grow by about seven

percent Additionally, since the items in this study axe core business items for the finns,

they all can be purchased in retail stores and for the most part are high volume items. Indeed

the management of one of these companies regularly draws up a formal list of competitors

which includes many non-mail-order firms and checks to see that their own prices are

comparable to this reference group's prices.

       Finally, by carefully selecting well-established, popular selling items that have

undergone minimal quality changes it is possible to eliminate some of the noise in prices that

might otherwise be present. For instance, by considering items that are representative of the

finn's product line I can abstract from any pricing behavior that may occur when a firm is

trying to break into a new market Likewise, by studying large revenue items, I insure that

firms have incentives to carefully scrutinize the prices. Also, by studying staple items that

have undergone very little quality change, I can focus on pure pricing behavior.4 Obviously.

these considerations limit the number of goods that can be studied and the types of questions

that can be analyzed. But, on balance, I believe these costs are significantly outweighed by

the benefits of being able to study high quality data on transactions prices.



                     Ill. DATA COLLECTION AND DESCRIPTION

A. Data Collection

       The prices were assembled by directly copying prices from old catalogs. I collected

the information from Bean and Orvis, while the RE data were processed by a member of

their staff. Although these companies issue many catalogs per year, the prices advertised in


                                                5
 the Spring and Fall catalogs for each company effectively cover the next six months. If an

 item does not appear in a particular catalog, the last advertised price was used, which minors

 the policy of all three companies to sell an item at its last advertised price if it does not

 appear in the current catalog. The majority of the items studied appear in both the Spring

 and Fall catalogs each year, so that empirically this issue is not very important5 However,

 the Orvis fishing items are often advertised only in the Spring catalog, so that the duration

 between price changes for these items must be interpreted appropriately.

        A second caveat is that the prices discussed below refer only to the list prices in the
 standard catalogs for one unit of an item. Hence, I ignore the very slight discounts for bulk

 purchases which have been offered occasionally by each of the companies. I also ignore sale

prices which may have been available for very short periods. Each of the companies from

time to time offers discounts if an item is over-stocked or a particular model is being

discontinued. Similarly, each of these firms operate retail outlets where the goods in the

catalogs can be purchased in person at the catalog prices.' Again, the retail ouUets

sometimes offer short-lived sales that are not available to catalog customers. For the items in

this study, sales are very infrequent.

       In using only stated catalog prices I am also ignoring any postage and handling

charges. This can be justified for at least three reasons. First, during my sample period all

Bean prices include these charges and the Bean prices can be used to establish essentially all

of the claims made below. Second, the Orvis and EEl prices also apply for goods bought

through their retail stores and as such, do represent transaction prices for some customers.

Lastly, Bean management reports that numerous customer surveys have indicated that most



                                                6
customers are insensitive to shipping charges. This last claim would be interesting to

document and study for its own sake, but it is beyond the scope of this paper.7

       RE! is a consumer cooperative, so once per year RE! members are given rebates for

purchases made in the preceding year. The last implication of using stated catalog prices in

my calculations is that [ignore any rebates that members may subsequently receive for

buying through RE!. Since non-members do not receive the rebate and the patterns for the

RE! data axe similar to the Bean and Orvis data, I do not think the presence of the rebates

causes any significant biases.

B. Data Descrintion

       The LL. Bean products include two shoes, a shirt, a blanket and a duffel bag.

Together these items cover Bean's traditional product areas: footwear, clothing, hunting and

fishing gear and hand-sewn canvas and leather specialty items. Of the two shoes, one is a

moccasin and the other a hunting boot. The shirt is a cotton "chamois0 shirt. The duffel bag

is made from canvas and the blanket is made of wooL Bean manufactures the duffel bag and

the shoes. The chamois shirts are contracted out and the manufacturer changes from time to

time. The blanket is a Hudson's Bay Blanket that Bean imports from England. All of these

items are studied over the entire 1953-1987 period.' (A more complete description of the

data is given in the appendix of the 1990 working paper version of the paper.)

       The items I track from Orvis reflect the fact that it began as a fishing tackle supplier

and has expanded over the last 25 years to now offer a wider variety of pmducts. The

earliest Orvis items are a bamboo fly rod and a fly. Both are individually made, although the

fly-tying is contracted out and the bamboo rods are made in-house by Orvis craftsmen. The


                                               7
popularity of the bamboo rod declined with the invention of graphite, and the rod was

discontinued in 1985. The fly is available over the entire 1953-1987 period? I also analyze

the prices of a poplin fishing hat that Orvis has sold since 1963.

    The non-fishing items have a shorter lifetime. The hunting item that I follow is a pair of

binoculars which Orvis sold from 1966 until 1986. After 1986 the case for these binoculars

was changed, so I dropped the item. The binoculars are made for Orvis in West Germany.

The last two Orvis items were selected because of their comparability with Bean goods. I

track the Orvis chamois shirt, which the company introduced in 1974 and the Hudson's Bay

Blanket during the twelve years that Orvis carried it (1972 through 1984). The On'is and

Bean chamois shirts are close substitutes for each other and the Hudson's Bay Blankets that

the two companies offered were identical.

    The data from REI were restricted by the availability of past catalogs. Complete catalogs

prior to 1969 were not available. Given that less than 20 years of data were available, I

chose to use only one RE! item: the REI chamois shirt. 'This shirt is manufactured for RE!

and is very similar to the Bean and Orvis shirts.

       The products studied are generally well-known, standard items. Given therange of

goods studied, there are bound to be some differences in demand variation and cost

fluctuations, but in many cases these differences can be used to study the implications of

different theories. More importantly, there do not appear to be any strong reasons to believe

that goods' prices should move in unrepresentative ways.




                                               8
                       IV. NOMINAL PRICE CUARACTERISTICS

A. Frequency of Price Changes

       Table I introduces the mnemonics used throughout the remainder of the paper and

presents the first main finding: that nominal prices typically stay fixed for periods of longer

than one year — the actual price data are tabulated in the data appendix. As mentioned in the

last section, it is the nature of the catalog business that prices listed in a catalog do not expire

immediately. But there is no a priori reason why price schedules could not be included in the

catalogs. In principle, the schedule could depend on time or more exotic factors such as the

consumer price index. Similarly, the companies could issue catalogs with prices that expired

more frequently (say every three months). However, given conventions followed by these

finns, this fact should be interpreted as saying that over half the time when the firms consider

adjusting their price they choose to leave it alone.

       When studying the durations shown in Table lit is important to remember that the

Orvis Fishing Hat and Light Cahill Fly axe often only advertised once per year. More

generally, all the durations depend (slightly) on the way that the truncation associated with

the end of the sample is handled. The statistics on the time between price changes that I

report were calculated using the conservative assumption that all prices prevailing in Fall

1987 would change in the Spring 1988.10 Even so, the average thue between price changes

is about 15 months.

        The last four columns in Table I provide further information on the duration of long

spells. These columns reveal that none of the items had their longest spell during the mid- to

late-1970's. This is the first of many indicators that will show that during times of higher


                                                 9
 inflation long spells of constant prices are less common. The table shows that long spells

 have not disappeared. Periods of more than two years of constant prices still occur.

 B. The Size of Price Changes

        The two panels in Figure 1 give a variety of statistics concerning the size of price

 changes. For each item, the top panel shows the average (absolute) size of the price changes.

 The lower panel provides information on the distribution of the size of the changes. For

 example, for the Orvis binoculars roughly five percent of the changes were less than one

 percent in magnitude, while roughly 14 percent were between one and two percent and

 another 14 percent were between two and three percent.. Thus, about one third of all of the

 changes were less than three percent in magnitude. Conversely, about one fifth of the

 changes for the Orvis binoculars were more than 15 percent in magnitude.

        Overall the heterogeneity in the size of the changes, both across dine and items, is

striking. As the top portion of the Figure shows, the mean change for the different items

varies between 4 and 18 percent, while the average over all items is about 8 percent.

However, as the bottom panel shows there are both large and small changes for the same item

at different times. The last bar in the lower half of thefigure shows that across all items, 2.7

percent of the changes are less than one percent in magnitude. Another 7.2 percent are

between one and two percent, while 11.1 percent axe between two and three percent, so that a

total of 21 percent of the changes are less than three percent in absolute value. Yet, more

than 13 percent of the total changes were more than 15 percent in magnitude.

       The size of the individual price changes is not vely closely tied to the overall

(observed) level of inflation: changes are mere frequent during the 1970s but not



                                              10
systematically larger when compared to the 1950s, 1960s or late 1980s. One way to

demonstrate this point is to compare the average price change during the 1968 to 1982 period,

when inflation in consumer prices averaged about 7.5 percent per year, with the average size

of the changes over the pre-1968 and post-1982 period, when average inflation was about 2.5

percent. These statistics are shown iii the fifth and sixth columns in Table LI. The numbers

in parentheses below each of the entries in the table represent the number of changes included

in the averages.

       For the items that entered the study in the late sixties and early seventies, there is

clearly limited information available concerning pricing patterns in a low-inflation

environment Nevertheless, the table demonstrates that the average magnitude of the price

changes between the two periods is approximately equal. A formal Wilcoxon ranks test for

equality of the median change between the two periods confirms this claim. (I use a non-

parametric test since the distribution of price changes appears to be vety non-normal.) The

last column of Table II shows the probability that the median change in the two periods is

equal. For none of the items is it possible to reject the assumption of.equality at any of the

usual significance levels. For the joint test that the median change across all goods is equal

in the two periods. I fail to reject at the 75 percent significance level.

       A different way to see the importance of the variation in the size of the price changes

is to directiy compare the price movements to changes in aggregate inflation. The top half of

Figure II shows a scatter plot of changes in the catalog prices and changes in the Consumer

Price Index.   For reference, a regression line is also shown. The slope coefficient in the

regression is estimated to be 0.82 (with a standard error of 0.14), although this coefficient



                                                 11
 estimate is strongly influenced by the four large price changes. Absent these four changes of

 more than thirty five percent, the slope is estimated to be .68 (with a standard error of .11),

 so that one would reject the hypothesis that the coefficient relating the two measures of price

 movements is equal to one. In either case, however, the R2 from the regression is around .05,

 so that the actual correspondence is very loose.

        The lower half of the figure makes a related point by comparing catalog price changes

 to movements in the monetary base. Since the money aggregates are not available prior to

 1959, this plot excludes the earliest part of the sample, but even so, the fitted regression line
shows that them is significant positive association between movements in catalog prices and a

narrow measure of money -- the slope of the regression line is estimated to be 0.71 (with a

standard error of 0.24). Again, however, the R2 for the equation is very low (.015), so that

the growth in money has relatively little explanatory power for the catalog prices. Put

differently, the purchasing power of money would vary significantly over time because prices

do not closely covaiy with the amount of money."

        Finally, as is evident from these figures, about eight percent of the price changes (21
of the 261) are negative. Perhaps surprisingly, none of the basic facts about the price changes

appear to be driven by the presence of the price cuts. In particular, the prevalence of the
small changes is not due to price cuts -- more than 20 percent of the price increases are less

than three percent. More generally, the avenge size of the price cuts and price increases are

not noticeably different: the avenge size of the increases is 8.2 percent, while the avenge
price cut is 7.4 percent.




                                               12
C. 'The Synchronization of Price Changes

       Since some theoretical models make predictions regarding the comovements in prices,

I next study the extent to which changes across items are synchronized. Figure III shows the

timing of price changes. Each symbol in the figure marks the periods when a price changed.

The figure highlights the fact that price changes were much more frequent from the late

sixties to early eighties; during periods of higher average inflation, price changes were more

common.

       The shading in the graph shows periods designated as recessions by the National

Bureau of Economic Research. A first indication of the lack of synchronization of the price

changes is that the frequency of price changes does not appear to depend on the stage of the

business cycle.   Price changes occur about 30 percent of the lime during business cycle

expansions and about 34 percent of the time during business cycle contractions.

       It is difficult to more precisely characterize the synchronization of the changes

because, given the discrete nawit of changes, standard correlation statistics are uninformative.

Accordingly. I use a measure of association that accounts for this discontinuity (see Fleiss

[1973] pp. 42-43). Intuitively, this association measureis derived by checking whether

changes and non-changes for one series are sufficiently aligned with changes and non-changes

for the second series so as to reject the hypothesis that the two sequences of changes are

independent. Therefore, in addition to providing a measure    of association that is scaled
between -1 and 1, the statistic also facilitates testing whether price changes for any pair of

series are independent. I view   lack of independence as a very weak benchmark since with

semi-annual data I would expect business cycle factors to induce some common movements



                                                13
across most items.

        Surprisingly, using the changes of the raw, semi-annual data it is not possible to reject

the hypothesis of independence among most of the series--only 12 of the 66 pairwise

comparisons were sufficiently correlated so that the hypothesis of independence could be

rejected. (To save space these results are omitted). One possible explanation for this may be

that changes axe indeed synchronized but not contemporaneously timed; for instance, changes

for similar items may regularly occur within a year but not coincide exactly. Moreover, for

some of the more seasonal goods, comparisons using semi-annual data may be slightly

misleading.

       To investigate these possibilities, I annualized the data so that changes that occur

within the same year will be treated as identical çi.e., if any price change occurred within a

given year. the observation for the year is coded as a one, otherwise it is coded as zero.)

Since there are two ways to group adjacent Fall and Spring seasons, I used two different

definitions of a year one corresponding to the standard calendaryear, the other corresponding

to the fashion cycle that fins from Fall of one year through Spring of the nextyear. Using

the calendar year convention there are nine significant associations between the 66 pairwise

comparisons, while there are only six significant associations using the fashion year dating.

       In some cases, the short length of the sample and the associated lack ofprecision may

be responsible for the insignificance of the correlations. However, the lack of

synchronization is also evident for many of the items where synchronization might have been

most expected. For example, one cannot reject the hypothesis that the price changes for the

identical blankets being sold by Orvis and Bean are independent. The same conclusion


                                              14
follows for the associations among the three chamois shirts and for the connections between

the fishing gear. Collectively, these results suggest that there is very little synchronization

between the price changes across items.'2

       At this point I have established the three main facts mentioned in the introduction:

prices are adjusted infrequently, by differing amounts, and, although prices are more likely to

change during periods of high overall inflation, the synchronization of changes across goods

is generally low. These findings should not be surprising since they are implicit in the only

other empirical work using U. S. data, Cecchetti [1985, 19861--although Cecchetti did not

emphasize the presence of many small changes.'3 His results are for magazine newsstand

prices, which some skeptics have argued may be atypical because subscriptions and

advertising, not newsstand sales, produce the majority of magazine revenue and magazines on

the whole are a small ticket item. My data are immune to these criticisms and reaffirm

Cecchetti's findings)4



             V. INTERPRETING THE FACTS USING EXISTING MODflS

       One difficulty in trying to explain these facts is that there is no consensus, baseline

model from which to start. Instead the literature has bifurcated so that most papers focus

either on time-dependent price-setting rules or state-dependent price- setting rules.

       Unfortunately, neither of these lines of the literature convincingly explains the failure

of firms to index their prices.LS The standard reply to concerns over why sophisticated rules

are not used is that the cost to a monopoListically competitive firm of a slightly miss-set price

is second-order (see Mankiw [1985] and Akerlof and Yellen (1985].) So, if there are small


                                                15
 relabelling or "menu" costs involved in revising prices they may be enough to inhibit

 continuous adjustment of prices. While this explanation is appealing, the difficulty of

 identifying these menu costs (or in Akerlof and Yellen's terms, explaining why nominal rules

of thumb dominate simple indexing schemes) is still disturbing. Both time dependent and

state dependent models are therefore incomplete, but both approaches can explain why other

types of pricing decisions are not made continuously.

A. Assessing Time-Dependent Pricing Models

        One class of explanations for why prices are not continuously reset presumes that

either the necessary information is not available or that the costs of high frequency changes

are prohibitive (see Blanchard il93]-)    These   models posit instead that price setters will

intervene to change prices only occasionally when the relevant information has become

available. This argument is somewhat appealing because these companies are now issuing so

many catalogs per year (Bean was sending out over 20 per year by the end of the sample)

that it would be unrealistic to assume that prices could be intelligently readjusted with each

catalog. Aside from the confusion it would create for customers, it is. probably difficult to

process sales data quickly enough to justify continually fme-tuning prices. Although this

model explains why prices are posted for non-trivial periods of time, it does not explain why

the actual period of time between changes for the same good is so variable. The large

standard deviations for the number of months between price changes cannot be explained by

simple timing models.

       A more sophisticated timing-based model would relax the assumption that all prices

for every item are revised in tandem, Instead, an extended model would focus on the extent


                                              16
to which price changes could be related to the (potentially lumpy) arrival of information. In

particular, a robust implication of the timing model is that if two items have similar cost or

demand characteristics, so that information arrival for the goods is highly correlated, then

price changes for the two items should be correlated. In my sample there are four natural

groupings of items where these conditions are likely to hold: the two identical blankets, the

three nearly identical shirts, the two types of leather shoes, and the three fishing items. As

mentioned in the last section, it does not appear that changes among these goods are tightly

synchronized even at the annual frequency. Only for the two types of shoes is it possible to

reject the hypothesis that the price changes am independent.

         The asynchronization of the changes is even more surprising given that the price levels

for comparable items tend to be aligned. For instance, the Orvis price-setters told me that

they were matching Bean's price moves for the Hudson Bay blankets. While it is true that

the price levels are fairly close, a comparison of the sequence of price changes turns up some

unexpected patterns. For instance, between the Spring of 1980 and the Fall of 1982, the

prices for the blankets were:


                         1980                1981                1982
                  Spring    Fall    Spring Fall         Spring     Fall

         Bean $110          $111     $112 $131 $132 $145
         Orvis $110         $110     $131 $136 $136 $136


After   the   Fall of 1982, die Bean price remained at $145 for another 18 months, while Orvis


held its price at $136     for another two   years.   Clearly this sequence of changes will be


difficult   to explain using a standard timing model. More generally, aside from the fact that


                                                      17
prices sometimes do not change. I find little support for the dining models.

B. Assessing State-Dependent PricinE Models

        The leading alternative explanation for why firms do not continuously adjust prices

posits that, because price adjustment is costly, a firm trades off the costs of letting inflation

erode its optimal price with the cost of changing prices. With a fixed cost of changing prices

and a predictable ambunt of inflation, the finn will not adjust its nominal prices until the

accumulated inflation drives the ma! price below a (pie-specified) lower limiL Once the limit

is crossed, the nominal price will be reset to a higher level. Allowing for cost and demand

shocks implies that nominal prices should be set to be keep the real price within a band that

varies over time.

        The usual motivation for these type of models is that they are plausible and sometimes

even optimal (depending on the exact specification of the model). Not surprisingly, as with

the simple timing models, the versions of this model that rely on a constant fixed cost of

changing prices fail to describe many key features of the data. For instance, not only do

nominal prices both rise and fall, but the presence of many small price increases suggests that

the band widths are highly variable. Similarly, as Tsiddon [1991] shows, when expected

inflation increases, the avenge size of price changes should increase because a finn would

want to trade off the frequency of costly price changes with the deviation of the actualprice

from the target price. As shown in Table 11, there is no evidence that the size of prices is

closely related to the level of inflation.

       There are several ways to extend the state-dependent models that would help address

these problems, One possibility is to assumt that demand conditions shift to make the


                                               18
desired band width narrower, so that an immediate small price change has a large benefit

Alternatively, the variations in the sizes of the price changes could be handled by introducing

a time-varying cost to changing prices.

       These approaches are just beginning to be pursued. For instance, Benabou [19921,

expanding on his 1988 model, shows how consumers' seazvh behavior can interact with the

level of inflation to generate endogenous fluctuations in the degree of competitiveness. In his

model, shocks that increase competition decrease price dispersion and thus can generate a

motive for small price adjustments, even at high levels of inflation. Unfortunately, the

Benabou model is sufficiently complex that it can only be analyzed using simulations;

"testing" the model does not seem possible at this point

       Caballero and Engel [1994] propose a related set of models, including one where the

cost of changing prices is explicitly modelled as a random variable. In this case, a Sheshinski

and Weiss style policy, in which firms take no action until a threshold is crossed and then act

for sure once the bather is passed, is no longer optimal. Instead, firms will have a

continuous probability of adjusting their prices and the probability of adjusting will rise as the

distance between the optimal price and the actual price increases. Intuitively, this type of

policy will generate both large and small changes because if the costs of changing prices axe

sometimes low, then firms will occasionally make a small price adjustment.

       The principal implication of this class of models is that large divergences between the

actual price and the desired price axe much less likely to be optimal than small divergences.

Accordingly, shocks that engender large divergences will generally be offset by price

changes, so that large price changes should be more common than small adjustments -- the


                                               19
 distribution of price changes should be fat-tailed.

        The (excess) kurtosis of the price changes in this sample is 31.02. Interestingly, the

kurtosis of the price increases is 31.23, while the kurtosis of the price cuts is 4.58. These

differences are also predicted by the theory since the general drift in inflation should make

large price cuts less necessary than large price increases. Thus, simple calculations suggest
that this new class of models is very promising.

C. Assessing a New Customer-Based Model of Pricing

        The last explanation I consider was proposed by the price-setters at Orvis and REI.

They suggested that them are certain nominal thresholds, price points", which firms are

reluctant to exceed because doing so would lead to a considerable loss in sales. More

formally, a price point is a price where a firm believes its marginal revenue curve is

discontinuous because its customers care about nominal magnitudes. This explanation is

different from the standard kinked demand explanation of price stickiness. The firm may be

reluctant to exceed a threshold even if there is no strong competition. For instance, for a

monopolist, a price increase from 19.95 to 20.30 might have a very different effect than an

increase from 20.50 to 20.85. The presence of a competitor is likely only to reinforce a

firm's reluctance to change a price.

    Them is no tight theoretical justification for this story, although it is essentially similar to

the explanation for rigidities posited by McCallum [1986]. McCallum suggested that the use

of non-indexed prices is done for convenience. He argues that inflation uncertainty in the

United States has generally been low, so that the gains from indexation would be low enough

that the mere cost of continually calculating real prices is sufficient to deter firms from



                                                20
indexing. The analogy is that buyers may use rules of thumb when searching for items and

comparing prices. McCallum's convenience argument can be used to explain why the rules

would likely be formulated using nominal prices, If firms are aware of this tendency by

consumers they may set prices so as to exploit the use of the rules; if a finn knows some

customers do not even consider buying a shirt that costs more than $20, then the firm will

prefer to charge $19.95 instead of $20.05.

          The RET and Orvis price setters do not appear to be the only retail finns that believe

that price points are important. For instance, in his recent survey of finns pricing behavior

Alan Blinder asked firms to assess the importance of this phenomena. Among the seventeen

retail finns he sampled, the price point theory received considerable support. For instance,

fifteen of the seventeen firms report that they believe their customers are affected by price

points.

          Thus, the natural question is whether standard statistical tests can be used to

determine their relevance for price rigidity. In a previous version of the paper, Kashyap

[1990), I provided a number of calculations to assess this question. The results were mixed

and for brevity's sake, I merely summarize the main findings. First, the static distribution of

prices is not uniform. Prices ending between 41 to 50 cents or 75 to 00 cents are much morn

common than prices ending between 01 to 40 or 51 to 74. ('This is a widely documented

finding, see Friedman [1967].) The bunching of price endings is more pronounced during

low inflation periods than high inflation periods. These facts about the static distribution,

however, are irrelevant for niacroeconomists unless they have dynamic implications.

          To investigate the dynamic consequences of the price points, one needs to be more


                                                 21
specific about how to define, a price point. This' is difficult since there is clear danger of

circularityinusingthedatatolearnaboutthepricepointsandthentestingthemodelwiththe
same data. Ideally, one would use different data sets to identify the price points and to study

their consequences. With only one data set and a presumption that the high and low inflation

periods may differ, the options here are limited. My approach was to use very simple rules to

identify the price points, with the hope that these rules were sufficiently straightforward that it

would be clear that the results have not been rigged.

        The niles I adopted create thresholds every fifty cents for the low price items (the hat

and the shoe) and every dollar for the more expensive items." Operationally, this meant

that prices in certain ranges were considered to be at price points. The dollar price point

encompasses only those prices that end between 75 and 100 cents. The fifty cent price range

was defined to include this range as well as prices which end between 40 and 50 cents. For

instance, prices of $12.45 and $7.95 would both considered to be at a fifty cent threshold.

Given these admittedly ad hoc cutoffs several tests were carried out (See Kashyap 119901 for

a more extended discussion of what follows).

        First, if pricing points inhibit price changes, then they might also be expected to affect

the sizes of price increases. Specifically, if prices that are at price points are fixed longer

than other prices, then any subsequent price adjustments might be expected to be larger than

avenge. There was weak evidence in this direction. On an item by item basis there was a

slight tendency for the changes after price points to be larger (but not significantly so) than

usual. Collectively, across all items this pattern was statistically significant.

       A more direct test I considered was to check whether after controlling for competitors'



                                                22
price movements and cost shocks, price changes were less likely to occur when prices were

near price points. To do this, I estimated the probability of a price change given proxies for

cost changes and movements in competitors' prices, as well as an indicator of whether the

firm was near a price poinL

       The models successfully predict the decision to change or not roughly 70 percent of

the time. The coefficients on   the   cost proxies tended to be positive and marginally

significant. indicating that an increase in costs increases the likelihood of a price change.

Conversely, for seven of the eight items, the price points indicators have negative coefficients

-- although only one of the eight coefficients had a t-statistic greater than 1.67 in absolute

value (the ten pement significance level). The cumulative increases in the price of substitute

goods, over the period when a firm has its own price fixed, seemed to have a mixed effect on

the likelihood of a price change--with the only significant results coming for the shirts. Thus,

although the price points seemed to work in the expected direction most of the coefficient

estimates were insignificanL

       This conclusion was partially reversed when I allowed the importance of the price

point effects to shift with the level of inflation. Specifically, I split up the price threshold

proxy so that there were separate regressors for the high and low inflation regimes." The

period 1968-1982 was chosen as the high inflation period (and the results were not sensitive

to use of these specific dates). The results were then somewhat more impressive: for all of

the goods, being near a price point in the low inflation period reduced the probability of a

price change, while in most cases price points were of no importance during the high inflation

period. Furthermore, the importance of th. price points was much more pronounced for the


                                                 23
 shirts, cap and fly -- the coefficients on the price point indicators during low inflation periods

 for four of these five items had I-statistics above 1.5. It appears thai the designation of price

 points that I used for the three $40÷ items was too loose. The data suggest that adjacent one

 dollar bathers are not nearly as important for these more expensive items.

        The overall evidence on price points suggests that they may influence price

adjustment, but this data set is not very well suited to establishing their importance. A study

focusing on morn goods even over a much shorter period would have much more power to

determine the significance of the price points.



                                     VI. CONCLUSIONS

        The results in section IV show that nominal prices sometimes stay fixed for several

years and at other times change regularly every six months. When prices do change, the size

of the price changes are quite different and in particulaç small price changes are quite

common. The combination of many periods of no change and many small changes suggests

that when small price changes do occur, the costs of changing prices must be small (or the

benefits of the change must be large). At other times these costs must belarger or benefits

must be smailer. Models that generate price rigidity by assuming a constant cost of changing

prices in an otherwise stationary environment cannot explain these data.

       Models that assume that the costs of changing prices axe lime varying may be able to

explain these data. While these models axe becoming easier to work with, they do not

explain why these costs exist in the first place. Is this an important question? Ball and
Mankiw [1994] have recently argued that macroeconomists should not be too worried about



                                               24
using "menu cost models without having a literal account of menu costs" 1 disagree. For

instance, a leading explanation for the true costs of adjustment is the cost of managers' time

(e.g. Ball and Mankiw). If this is correct, automated pricing decisions should become much

more common with increased computerization. It is quite possible that automatic indexing

provisions will gain popularity. It is important to determine whether such changes will have

a large impact on the extent to which prices are sticky. More generally, them was one

episode in my sample -- the late l9lOs -- when catalog companies significantly increased the
frequency of their prices changes. Without knowing what led to this shift, the robustness of

the shortcuts that must be taken to keep models tractable seems questionable.




                                               25
                                       REFERENCES

 Akerlof, (3. A., and J. Yelien, "Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make Significant
       Differences to Economic Equilibria," American Economic Review. LXXV (1985).
       708-720.

Ball, L, and N. G. Mankiw, "A Sticky Price Manifesto," National Bureau of Economic
         Research Working Paper Number 4677, 1994.

Ball, L. and D. Romer [1990], "Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of Money",
        Review of Economic Studies. LVII (1990), 183-203.

Barsky. R. B.. and E. J. Warner, "The Timing and Magnitude of Retail Store Markdowns with
      Reference to Weekends. Holidays and Business Cycle Fluctuations," mimeo, 1994.

Benabou, R. [1988). "Search Price Setting and Inflation," Review of Economic Studies. LV
      (1988), 353-376.

______ "Inflation and Efficiency in Search Markets", Review of Economic Studies. LIX,
       (1992), 299-329.

Blanchard, O.J., "Wages, Prices and Inflation Stabilization," in Inflation, Debt and
      Indexation, R. Dornbusch and M. H. Simonsen, eds. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       1983).

Blinder, A. S. "Why are Prices Sticky? Preliminary Results from an Interview Study,"
        American Economic Review Paners and Proceedin2s. LXXXI, (1991) 89-96.

Caballero, R. and E. Engel, "Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing: A
       Generalized (S.s) Approach", mimeo, 1994.

Canton, D. W., "The Rigidity of Prices," American Economic Review. LXXVI (1986),
      637-658.

Cecchettj, S. C. (1985], "Staggered Contracts and the Frequency of Price Adjustment,"
      Quarterly Journal of Economics. C (1985), 935-959.

______ "The Frequency of Price Adjusnent A Study of the Newsstand Prices of
      Magazines," Journal of Econometrics. XXXI (1986), 255-274.




                                            26
Danziger. L "Inflation, Fixed Cost of Price Adjustment and the Measurement of Relative
      Price Variabih . Theory and Evidence? American Economic Review. LXXVII
      (1987), 704-713.

Friedman, L., "Psychological Pricing in the Food Industry," in Prices: Issues in Theory.
      Practice and Public Policy. A. Phillips and O.E. Williamson, eds. (Thiladelphia
      University of Pennsylvania Press, 1967).

Fleiss, J. L, Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions. (New York: John Wiley and
        Sons. 1973).

Gordon, It I., "What is New Keynesian Economics," Journal of Economic Literature_,
      XXVIII, (1990), 1115-1171.

Kashyap, A. K. "Sticky Prices: New Evidence Fmm Retail Catalogs", Federal Reserve
      Board FEDS Working Paper 112, 1990.

Lach. S. and D. Tsiddon "The Behavior of Prices and Inflation: An Empirical Analysis
       of Disaggitgated Price Data," Journal of Political Economy. C. (1992), 349-389.

Mankiw, N.G. "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model,"
     Ouarterly Journal of Economics. C (1985), 529-538.

McCal.lum, B. T., "On 'Real' and 'Sticky-Price' Theories of the Business Cycle", Journal of
       Money, Credit and Banking. XVIII. (1986), 397-414.

Patterson, Gregory A. "U.S. Catalogers Test International Waters", Wall Street Journal.
       April 19, 1994. 81.

Rees, A., "Alternative Retail Price Indexes for Selected Non-Durable Goods, 1947-59," in
       The Price Statistics of the Federal Government Review. Appraisal and
       Recommendations. 0. Stigler, ed.. (New York: National Bureau of Economic
       Researeh, 1961).

Sheshinski     and Y. Weiss, "Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment," Review of Economic
       Studies. XLIV. (1977) 287-303.

Sheshinski, E., A. Tishler, and Y. Weiss, "Inflation, Costs of Adjustment, and Amplitude of
      Real Price Changes: An Empirical Analysis," in Development in an Inflationary
      World. New York: Academic Press (1981).

Tommasi, M., "Inflation and Relative Prices: Evidence from Argentina" in Optimal Pricing.
     Inflation, and The Cost of Price Adjustment, E. Sheshinski and Y. Weiss, eds.
       (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993).

                                              27
Tsiddon, D., "The (Mis)Bebavior of the Aggzegate Price Level," Hebiew University
      Working Paper no. 182 (1992).

Weiss. Y., "Inflation and Price Adjustment A Survey of Findings from Micro-Data" in
       Optimal PricinE. Inflation, and The Cost of Price Adjustment, E. Sheshinski and
      Y. Weiss, eds. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993).




                                           28
1.     One interesting question that I do not swdy is why the companies choose this particular
interval over which to quote fixed nominal prices.

2.     Specifically, he shows that a consumer price index based on a collection of catalog items
closely tracks the Bureau of Labor Statistics' official consumer price index, as long as the goods
are not undergoing big changes in quality.


3.     See Barsky and Warner [1994] for a study of high frequency pricing patterns.
4.      Of course not changing quality may be an endogenous decision. Implicitly I assume that
for these goods, quality changes are driven by exogenous forces.


5.      if a customer uses an old catalog to place an order, all three companies fill the order and
bill the customer for the current price.


6.     The equivalence between the store and catalog prices is reassuring since Orvis and REI
are expanding the number of outlets they operate and thus the percentage of total sales accruing
from catalogs is falling. At the end of my sample, mail order sales accounted for over 80 percent
of Bean's and Orvis's total sales and roughly 20 percent of REI's total sales.


7.     In the early 1990s Bean changed its policy and began adding a shipping charge.
8.     The price of each of these items except the duffle bag changed in the first half of 1953 -
- the duffle bag price had been at $7.85 since the first half of 1951. I limit my analysis to the
post-Korean war period because of the price controls and rationing that prevailed during the
Korean War and World War IL In many cases, goods completely disappeared from the market.
In other cases, quantities were limited and often only available if the buyer had a ration coupon.


9.     Unlike the bamboo rod, the fly's price did not change in the first half of 1953. So in
Table 1, I account for the fact that the price of the fly was 42 cents from 1949 through the
Spring of 1954.

10.   Dropping the last spell for each item gives very similar answers -- except for the Orvis
chamois shirt which had not had a price change since the second half of 1983.

 11.    The link between money and prices is even looser if one uses M2 as the measure of
money. In this case, the regression line has a slope of .01 (with a standard error of .18) and R2
for the regression is only .00001.



                                                29
12.    Lach and Tsiddon [1992] report that price changes across a set of grocery goods in Israel
between 1978 and 1984 are not very closely synchronized. Tominasi [1993] also reaches this
conclusion after studying weekly supermarket prices of 15 goods in Argentina in 1990. So even
across very different inflation regimes there seems to be little synchronization of price changes.
13.     Danziger [1987) analyzes Israeli data for Kosher salami. However, his data are not
continuously sampled through time or across sellers. Sheshinski, Tishler and Weiss [1981) study
the price of noodles and instant coffee in Israel but these prices are regulated. Lach and Tsiddon
[1992] and Tommasi [1993] examine prices from economies with much higher rates of inflation
than the United States. Barsky and Warner [1994] have recently collected daily transactions
prices for a number of retail goods sold at several stores, but their sample covers only a few
months.


14.    See Weiss [1993] for a comprehensive survey of how these findings compare to results
from studies using data from other countries.
15.     As Ball and Romer [1990] and McCallum [1986] emphasize, many of the commonly cited
reasons for price rigidity are in fact reasons formal rather than nominal price rigidity. Moreover,
Bail and Romer show that only a small amount of nominal rigidity can have large effects if real
prices are rigid.
16.     Some of the items were excluded because cost proxies could not be found. For instance,
no reliable producer price indices are available for bamboo and it is known that bamboo
shortages have been a key factor in shifting the price of the fly rod.. Similarly cost information
is difficult to obtain for the binoculars. Since the binoculars have always been produced by a
single West German finn, I suspect that approximating costs for this item may be particularly
difficult. Finally, for the blankets (British) labor cost data were not readily available. In thecase
of the blankets, we have already see that competitive factors are very important and that the price
point story may not be relevant.

17.     Making this type of distinction can be justified for several reasons. First, consumer search
activity, which undoubtedly influences these thresholds, is unlikely to be constant. Pursuing the
analogy with the McCallum explanation, if rules of thumb are responsible for thresholds then
rules of thumb may be abandoned during periods of high inflation. Similarly, changes in the
sizes of cost shocks could undermine the importance ofprice points. If costs grow more rapidly
during periods of high inflation, then retailers may choose to jump from price point to price
point Finally, because prices are adjusted more frequently during periods of high inflation, a
firm might expect its competitors to be more inclined to follow a price move. Hence, strategic
considerations that reinforce being at a particular price point may be less relevant during high
inflation periods.




                                                30
                                                        Table I
                                               Frequency of Price   Changes

                                    Ave. months                                 Longest   spell
                                    between price                      Overall:              since 1960:
                                     changes
                                        &           Nuiter    of   Dates &     duration       Dates   I.   duration
Mnemonic     Item       Dates       (Std. 0ev.)      changes                   (months)                    (months)



             Bean
1.1.5_Shoe   Hunting    53:1—87:2    11.8                36        59:2—63:2      51          85:2—86:2       18
             shoe                   (10.9)

             Bean
ut.a..socc   camp       53:1—87:2    11.5                37        59:2—65:1      76          81:1—82:1       18
             Moccasin               (12.8)

             Bean
LLB..Blnk    Hudson     53:1-87:2    17.8                24        58:1—62:2      60          84:2—87:1       36
             Bay                    (15.0)
             Blanket
             orvis
0KV—sink     Hudson     72:1—84:2    14.2                11        81:2—84:2      42          81:2—84:2       42
             Bay                    (10.8)
             Blanket
             Bean
LL8_Dbag     Zipper     53:1—87:2    12.9                33        61:2—65:1      48          80:2—81:2       18
             Duffle                  (9.6)
             Bag
             Bean
LLB_Shrt     Chamois    53:1—87:2    12.5                34        59:1—65:2      84          85:1—87:1       30
             Shirt                  (14.2)

             Orvis
oRV_Shrt     chamois    74:2—87:2    14.7                11        83:2—87:2      54          83:2—87:2       54
             Shirt                  (14.3)

             RET
ReI_shrt     Chamois    72:1—87:2    14.8                13        81:1—97:1      78          81:1—87:1       78
             Shirt                  (19.7)

             orvis
0KV_Hat      Fishing    63:1-87:2    18.8                16        63:1—68:2      72          81:1—82:2       24
             Hat                    (15.0)

             orvis
ORV.Brod     Bamboo     53:1—85:1    18.0                22        69:2—73:2      54          81:1—82:1       18
             Fly Rod                (14.9)
             Orvis
0KV_Fly      Fishing    53:1—87:2    30.4                14        54:1—64:2 132              92:1—84:2       36
             Fly                    (31.6)

             Orvis
0KV_Binc     7 inch     66:1—86:1    11.2                22        68:1—71:1      42          80:1—81:2      24
             Binocs.                 (9.1)


All Items               53:1—87:2    14.7            273
                                    (15.0)




                                                    3'
                                                           Table II

                                        Average    Size of Price change by Period


                                             Average absolute poreentage price       change
                                                        High          LOW                   Wilcoxon
                                                     inflation    inflation                Ranks Test:
                                      Complete         period       period              Probability of
                                      sample         (1968-1982) pre—68, po.t-82         equal medians
Hnejuonic    Item       Dates       (0 Changes)      (I Changes)      (I Changes)


             Bean
LLB_Shoe     Hunting    53:1—87:2     5.5               4.9            6.4                    0.18
             Shoe                     (35)             (21)           (14)

             Bean
LLB_$oCc     Camp       53:1—87:2     5.7                 5.4          6.4                    0.72
             Moccasin                (36)               (23)          (13)
             Bean
LLB_Blnk     Hudson     53:1—87:2     9.0               11.9           5.4                    0.34
             Bay                     (23)               (13)          (10)
             Blanket

             Orvis
oRv_Blnk     Hudson     72:1-84:2    13.7               13.7           n.a.                    n.a.
             Bay                     (10)               (10)
             Blanket
             Bean
LL8_Dbag     ZIpper     53:1—87:2     7.1                 6.6          7.6                    0.7$
             Duffle                  (32)               (17)          (15)
             Bag
             Bean
t.LB_Shrt    chamois    531—87:2      4.8               5.1            4.4                    0.89
             Shirt                   (33)               (22)          (11)

             Orvis
ORV_Shrt     Chamois    74:2—87:2     5.3               5.0            8.0                    n.a.
             ShIrt                   (13)                 (9)          Ci)

             REI                                                                 -
REX_Slut     Chamois    72:1-81:2    10.0              10.0           10.0                    n.e.
             Shirt                   (12)               (11)           (1)
             Orvis
ORV_Hac      Fishing    63:1—81:2    17.1              18.2           14.0                     0.99
             Hat                     (15)               (11)           (4)
            Orvis
o?V_Brod    Bamboo      53,1—85:1    11.1              13.2            9.8                     0.48
            Fly Rod                  (21)               (12)           (9)
            Orvis
CRY_FLy     Fishing     53:1—87:2    10.3               9.9           11.3                     0.82
            Fly                      (13)                 (9)          (4)
            Orvis
ORV_Binc    7 inch      66:1-86:1     8.4               7.6           11.2                     0.15
            Binocs.                  (21)               (16)           (5)
All         *11 Items   53:1-872      8.1               8.4            7.5                     0.75
                                     (261)              (174)          (87)




                                                     32
                                                  Catalog Price         Data
           (See Table   I   for Mnemonics   and footnotes   8   and 9 (or informalion used   in Table   1 calculations.)



Date         OEM_Brad             ORV_BiflC LLB_Blnk ORV_Blnk LLB_$occ LLB_Shoe
53     1        86.50                   .               28.65                     .               5.85               10.85
53     2        86.50                   .               28.65                     .               5.85               10.85
54 1            86.50                   .               28.65                     .               5.85               11.85
54     2        86.50                   .               28.65                     .               5.85               11.85
55 1            86.50                   .               28.65                     .               5.85               11.85
55     2        86.50                   .               28.85                     .               5.85               11.85
56 1            90.00                   .               29.85                     .               6.45               12.85
56     2        90.00                   .               29.85                     .               6.45               12.85
57 1            90.00                   .               29.85                     .               6.45               12.85
57 2            90.00                   .               29.85                     .               6.45               12.85
58 1            90.00                   .               30.85                     .               6.55               12.85
58     2        90.00                   .               30.85                     .               6.55               12.85
59 1            98.50                   .               30.85                     .               6.75               12.85
59 2            98.50                   .               30.85                     .               7.75               13.35
60 1            98.50                   .               30.85                     .               7.75               13.35
60     2        98.50                   .               30.85                     .               7.75               13.35
61 1            98.50                   .               30.85                     .               7.75               13.35
61     2        98.50                   .               30.85                     .               7.75               13.35
62 1            98.50                   .               30.85                     .               7.75               13.35
62     2        98.50                   .               30.85                     .               7.75               13.35
63 1           106.50                   .               32.85                     .               7.75               13.35
63     2       106.50                   .               32.85                     .               7.75               13.35
64   1         106.50                   .               32.85                     .               7.75                13.85
64   2         106.50                   .               33.85                     .               7.75                13.85
65   1         106.50                   .               33.85                     .               7.75                14.85
65   2         106.50                   .               33.85                     .               7.75                14.85
66   1         120.00               92.50               33.85                     .               9.00                14.85
66     2       120.00               92.50               35.00                     .               9.25                15.85
67   1         120.00               92.50               36.00                     .               9.45                18.35
67   2         120.00               92.50               36.00                     .               9.45                18.35
68   1         135.00               97.50               36.00                     .               9.75                19.00
68   2         135.00               97.50               36.00                     .               9.85                19.00
69   1         135.00               97.50               36.00                     .              10.00                19.00
69   2         150.00               97.50               37.00                     .              10.50                19.00
70   1         150.00               97.50               37.00                     .              10.75                19.85
70   2         150.00               97.50               37.00                     .              11.00                20.00
71   1         150.00               97.50               37.00                     .              11.50                20.50
71   2         150.00              107.00               37.00                     .              11.50                22.00
72   1         150.00              107.00               37.00                  39.50             11.90                22.00
72   2         150.00              107.00               37.00                  39.50             13.00                22.00
73   1         150.00              110.00               45.00                  39.50             13.50                22.00
73   2         150.00              110.00               45.00                  55.00             13.50                22.00
74   1         165.00              120.00               45.00                  55.00             13.75                23.50
74   2         245.00              154.50               65.00                  67.50             14.00                25.00
75   1         245.00              159.75               65.00                  67.50             14.50                26.50
75   2         245.00              162.75               65.00                  69.75             15.00                27.00

                                                                 33
Date ORV_Brod ORV_BiflC LLB_Blnk ORV_Blnk LL.3_Mocc LLB_Shoe
76   1   245.00     177.75     65.00      69.75   16.50   27.50
76   2   257.00     172.75     65.00      69.75   16.50   29.00
77   1   257.00     177.75     65.00      69.75   17.50   29.00
77   2   270.00     187.50     72.00      77.00   18.00   30.00
78   1   270.00     191.00     86.00      91.00   18.00   31.00
78   2   288.00     193.00     86.00      92.00   19.50   33.00
79   1   288.00     230.00     88.50      92.00   21.00   36.00
79   2   330.00     230.00     97.00      98.50   25.00   41.00
80   1   380.00     269.50    110.00     110.00   27.75   41.00
80   2   420.00     269.50    111.00     110.00   27.75   42.75
81   1   460.00     269.50    112.00     131.00   29.75   41.75
81   2   505.00     269.50    131.00     136.00   29.75   42.50
82   1   505.00     269.00    132.00     136.00   29.75   45.25
82   2   505.00     269.00    145.00     136.00   31.00   47.75
83   1   550.00     269.00    145.00     136.00   32.75   49.75
83   2   550.00     250.00    145.00     136.00   32.75   49.75
84   1   605.00     260.00    145.00     136.00   33.75   51.25
84   2   695.00     225.00    120.00     136.00   35.75   48.75
85   1   800.00     225.00    120.00        .     35.75   52.75
85   2         .    195.00    120.00        .     37.75   53.00
86   1         .    230.00    120.00        .     37.75   53.00
86   2         .          .   120.00        .     37.75   53.00
87   1         .          .   120.00        .     38.50   55.00
87   2         .          .   109.00        .     38.50   55.00

 Date ORV_Cap      ORV_$hrt REI_Shrt LLB_Shrt LLB_Dbag ORV_Fly
53   1     .          .         .        5.45      7.85    0.42
53   2     .          .         .        5.45      7.85   0.42
54   1     .          .         .        5.45      7.85   0.50
54   2    .           .         .        5.15      7.75   0.50
55   1    .           .         .        5.15      8.65   0.50
55   2    .           .         .        5.15      8.65   0.50
56   1    .           .                  5.35      8.85   0.50
56   2    .           .         .        5.35      8.85   0.50
57   1    .           .         .        5.65     10.90   0.50
57   2    .           .         .        5.65     10.90   0.50
58   1    .           .         .        5.65     10.90   0.50
58   2    .           .         .        5.65     10.90   0.50
59   1    .           .         .        5.85     10.90   0.50
59   2    .           .         .        5.85     11.90   0.50
60   1    .           .         .        5.85     11.90   0.50
60   2    .           .         .        5.85     11.90   0.50
61   1    .          .          .        5.85     11.90   0.50
61   2    .          .          .        5.85     12.85   0.50
62   1    .          .          .        5.85     12.85   0.50
62   2    .          .          .        5.85     12.85   0.50
63   1   2.50        .          .        5.85     12.85   0.50


                                    34
Date       ORV_Cap   ORV_Shrt REI_Shrt LLB_Shrt LLB_Dbag ORV_Fly
63 2         2.50       .        .         5.85   12.85    0.50
64 1         2.50       .        .         5.85   12.85    0.50
64     2     2.50       .        .         5.85   12.85    0.50
Ss   1       2.50       .        .         5.85   12.85    0.55
65   2       2.50       .        .         5.85   11.65    0.55
66   1       2.50       .        .         6.25   11.65    0.55
66   2       2.50       -        .         6.25   11.65    0.55
67   1       2.50       .        .         6.45   14.50    0.60
67   2       2.50       .        .         6.45   14.50    0.60
68   1       2.50       .        .         6.85   14.00    0.65
68   2       2.50       .        .         6.85   14.00    0.65
69     1     2.95       .        .         7.00   14.00    0.65
69   2       2.95       .        .         7.50   14.00    0.65
70   1       2.95       .        .         7.85   14.00    0.75
70   2       2.95       .        .         8.00   14.50    0.75
71   1       5.50       .        .         8.35   14.50    0.75
71   2       5.50       .                  8.50   14.50    0.75
72   1       6.50       .       8.50       8.35   14.50    0.75
72   2       6.50       .       8.50       8.35   15.00    0.75
73   1       7.50       .      11.00       8.35   15.00    0.75
73   2       7.50       .      11.00       8.85   15.50    0.75
74   1       7.50       .      14.25      10.00   16.50    0.80
74   2       7.75     17.00    14.25      12.00   16.50    0.80
75   1       7.75     17.95    14.25      12.50   17.00    0.90
75   2       7.75     17.50    14.25      12.50   17.00    0.90
76   1       7.95     17.50    14.75      12.50   18.50    0.90
76   2       7.95     17.95    14.75      12.50   20.50    0.90
77   1       8.75     17.95    15.95      13.00   22.00    0.90
77   2       8.75     18.50    16.95      13.00   23.00    0.90
78   1       9.95     19.50    17.95      13.50   23.00    1.00
78   2       9.95     19.50    17.95      13.50   23.50    1.00
79   1      10.45     19.50    19.00      14.00   24.00    1.10
79   2      10.45     19.95    19.50      14.25   27.00    1.10
80   1      12.50     20.95    17.95      14.75   32.00    1.20
80   2      12.50     20.95    19.50      15.75   29.75    1.20
81   1      13.50     22.50    19.95      16.50   29.75    1.30
81   2      13.50     24.95    19.95      17.00   29.75    1.30
82   1      13.50     24.95    19.95      17.50   31.50    1.40
82   2      13.50     24.95    19.95      18.25   34.25    1.40
83   1      15.00     24.95    19,95      19.00   35.25    1.40
83   2      15.00     22.95    19,95      t9.75   35.25    1.40
84   1      16.75     22.95    19.95      19.75   36.00    1.40
84   2      16.75     22.95    19.95      19.75   38.00    1.40
85   1      17.50     22.95    19.95      21.00   36.00    1.50
85   2      17.50     22.95    1995       21.00   36.00    1.50
86   1      17.50     22.95    19.95      21.00   38.00    1.50
86   2      17.50     22.95    19.95      21.00   38.00    1.50
87   1      12.50     22.95    19.95      21.00   39.00    1.50
87   2      12.50     22.95    21.95      21.50   39.50    1.50


                                     35
                              Figure IA
                   Sizes of Price Changes
                   Average Abeolute Percent Changes

            1V




        P
        0
        r
        •nC S
        t




                   .Ln     0 •— S—V •Sat c.,V
                                         t* 0d 0••M eU
                                                    0    *A*.

                              Figure IS
                 Distribution of Price Changes




       P
       0
       r
       0
       0
       n
        t




[ Lgoer.p                                                   a—,.   I
                                                    Figure hA
                          Changes in CR1 (Urban. Afi Items) vs. Changes in Catalog Prices
        1                                                       p




      0.6 -

ci,
a,
C,




               ____                                            H
o
                          !_               :!!S1b
                                               -  : ! 5!
                                                •;.
      -0.2


      -04                         I                             I
       -O.oi          0         0.01      0.02       0.03       0.04    0.05   0.06         0.07   0.08
                                                    Changes in CPI
             Note: Solid line shows best fitting regression line


                                                      Figure 115
                               Changes in Monetacy Base vs. Changes in Catalog Prices



      0.8

In
0
o 0.6-




C                                           .                           •


      -0.2

                                   I        I                       I
      -04
                      0          0.01    0.02        0.03      0.04  0.05      0.06         0.07   0.08
                                              Changes in Monetaiy Base
             Note: Solid line shows best fitting regression line
                                                               Figure UI
                                        Timing   of Price Changes
                                                As
                                            Snbd Pw kern Shci AS Ots*vation


                                                                                                                            I
                                                                        N     N*N                   NNN       N        N
                                                OcVb Fishing Hat
                                                                                            I                          N              *
                                                       N      N     N                                     N   N
                                               Otvis Ugh Cahil Fly
              N                            N          N       N                                     NNN            N   NM             N

                                           Orvis Bamboo Fly Rod

                                                                    £          £     £          I *& £4 £4 I                    £   £4 I I
                                          Orvhs   7—Inch Blnoaian

                                               DMa Chamois Shirt
                                                                                                    •   •5 4
                                                                                     4              4 45 5 4.                                4
                                                REI Chamois Shirt

     I   •    •4                                           • S 45                                       S 5 ••                        •      4
                                               Bean Chamois Shirt
                                                                                                        • 4+ 4         *
                                         CM. Hudson Say Shankat

             ,S                            •       •        •t
                                         Bean Hudson Bay BlankS
                                                                                                        • • 4t         4                         S




         00 0     0        0       0                       0 00
                                           Been pper DullS Bag
                                                                                                    WOO 000                         WO 0     00

                                                           00 0 00 0          0 00 0                0 00 0 00                       00 0     0

                                                                                                                       I
     0        a       I   00                                                                    0
                                           Dean Camp        Mousain
     a   I    0            0                      0    0 00 0                I 00               .0 00 0 00 00                       00 00    0
                                               Mains Hunulng Shoe

r 53 54 55 56 57 Sn 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 60 69 70 fl fl 73 74 75 76 77 70 79 60 01 02I 03 04 05 66 07 011
52
                                                                        ri
                          Plait: Shtd.d ragin sSw puriSt dtSrSSd a ruaWail by iS Naland Bitttu ol t0001a fla.eth
