NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN ASSET ALLOCATION PUZZLE

Niko Canner
N. Gregory Mankiw
David N. Well

Working Paper No. 4857

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1994

We are grateful to John Campbell and Tony Lancaster for comments and to the National Science

Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Asset
Pricing and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Niko Canner, N. Gregory Mankiw and David N. Weil. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4857
September 1994

AN ASSET ALLOCATION PUZZLE

ABSTRACT

This paper examines popular advice on portfolio allocation among cash, bonds, and
stocks. It documents that this advice is inconsistent with the mutual-fund separation theorem,
which siates that all investors should hold the same composition of risky assets. In contrast to
the theorem, popular advisors recommend that aggressive investors hold a lower ratio of bonds

to stocks than conservative investors. The paper explores various possible explanations of this

puzzle. It concludes that the portfolio recommendations can be explained if popular advisors
base their advice on the unconditional distribution of nominal returns. It also finds that the cost
of this money illusion is small, as measured by the distance of the recommended portfolios from

the mean-variance efficient frontier.

Niko Canner
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

David N. Weil
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER

N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics
Littauer 223
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

1. Introduction
How should an investor's attitude toward risk influence the composition of his portfolio?

A simple and elegant answer to this question comes from the mutual-fund separation theorem.
This theorem, a building block of the most basic Capital Asset Pricing Model, is taught regularly

to undergraduates and business students. According to the theorem, more risk averse investors

should hold more of their portfolio in the riskiess asset. The composition of risky assets,
however, should be the same for all investors.

Popular financial advisors appear not to follow the mutual-fund separation theorem.

When these advisors are asked to allocate portfolios among stocks, bonds, and cash, they

recommend more complicated strategies than indicated by the theorem. Moreover, these
strategies differ from the theorem in a systematic way. According to these advisors, more risk

averse investors should hold a higher ratio of bonds to stocks. This advice contradicts the
conclusion that all investors should hold risky assets in the same proportion.
The purpose of this paper is to document this popular advice on portfolio allocation and

to attempt to explain it. We begin in Section 2 by reviewing the basic mutual-fund separation
theorem. We consider the conditions under which all investors should hold stocks and bonds in
the same proportion. We also present a numerical example of the optimal mutual fund based on

the historical distribution of stock and bond returns.

In Section 3 we document the nature of popular financial advice regarding portfolio
allocation. We show that this advice contrasts starkly with the predictions of the mutual-fund

separation theorem. Moreover, the deviations from the theorem are systematic. In the rest of

1

the paper we take this popular advice on portfolio allocation as the "data" to be explained.

In Section 4 we consider whether such advice might be optimal. We consider various

deviations from the assumptions that underlie the basic mutual-fund separation theorem. In
particular, we consider the absence of a riskless asset; preferences that depend on more than the

mean and variance of returns; portfolio choice in dynamic settings; and the existence of nontradable assets. Although we cannot rule out that popular advice is consistent with some model
of rational behavior, we have so far been unable to find such a model.

Having failed to explain popular advice within the usual range of economic theory, we
turn to non-rational explanations in Section 5. We show that popular advice resembles optimal

portfolio choice if investors care about the unconditional distribution of nominal returns. That

is, popular financial advice is appropriate for investors who want a time-invariant portfolio
allocation and who suffer from money illusion.
The conclusion that popular advice is based on money illusion suggests that investors (or

investment advisors) are not fully rational.
recommended portfolios?

But how far from full rationality are the

In Section 6 we examine the costs from holding non-optimal

portfolios. We show that these portfolios are not far from the mean-variance efficient frontier.
That is, even though money illusion leads to portfolios quite different from optimal portfolios,

the costs of such deviations are small. For the purposes of portfolio allocation, money illusion
is "near rational."
Section 7 summarizes our findings and offers concluding comments.

2

2. Theoretical Background
The textbook Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) is based on the work of Sharpe
(1964), Lintner (1965), and Mossin (1966). This model shows how rational investors should

combine risky assets with a given distribution of returns. It rests on the following important
assumptions:

1. All assets can be freely traded.
2. Investors operate over a one-period planning horizon.
3. Investors arc indifferent between any two portfolios with identical means and variances.

The third assumption can be replaced with the somewhat more primitive assumption that
investors' objective functions are quadratic. Alternatively, it can be replaced with the assumption

that asset returns are normal, so that the mean and variance fully characterize the distribution of
returns.

These three assumptions yield a powerful conclusion: regardless of the number of assets
in the economy, two mutual funds span the set of efficient portfolios. This result becomes even

stronger if we add another assumption:

4. A riskiess asset exists.
In this case, the riskiess asset and a single mutual fund of risky assets are sufficient to generate

all efficient portfolios. Under these conditions, all investors hold risky assets in the same
proportions. In particular, every investor holds the same ratio of bonds to stocks. To achieve
the desired balance of risk and return, investors simply vaxy the fraction of their portfolios made

up of the riskiess asset.
To illustrate this principle, consider a world with three assets: an index fund of stocks,

3

an index fund of bonds, and riskless cash. Suppose the means and variance-covariance matrix

of annual real returns for bonds and stocks from 1926 to 1992 represent distribution of future
returns. In addition, suppose that cash offers a riskless real return equal to the mean real return

on Treasury bills over the same period. Straightforward calculations show that, under these
assumptions, all mean-variance efficient portfolios hold bonds and stocks with a ratio of .33 to
one. For example, the portfolio composed of 60 percent stocks, 20 percent bonds, and 20 percent
cash is mean-variance efficient; there is some quadratic objective function for which this portfolio
is optimal. Other investors will hold other portfolios, depending on their preferences toward risk.

But all investors will hold portfolios with a 0.33:1 ratio of bonds to stocks.

3. Popular Advice on Portfolio Allocation
It is easy to find advice on portfolio allocation being offered to the general public. Table
1 shows the recommendations of four financial advisors. The recommendations in part A come

from a newsletter sent by Fidelity Investments, a large mutual-fund company. Those in part B

come from a book promoted by Merrill Lynch, a large brokerage firm. Those in part C come

from a book by Jane Bryant Quinn, a prominent journalist who writes on personal financial
planning. Those in part D come from an article in the "Your Money" section of The New York
Times.

Each of the advisors presents a recommended allocation among stocks, bonds, and cash

for three investors with different preferences toward risk. (Here "cash" is interpreted as shortterm money-market instruments, not currency.) In the last column we present the ratio of bonds

to stocks, which we use to measure the composition of risky assets. The consistency of the

4

advice is striking. For all of the advisors, the recommended ratio of bonds to stocks falls as the
investor becomes more willing to take on risk.

Figure 1 illustrates the recommended portfolios in a type of diagram that we use
throughout this paper. The horizontal axis shows the fraction of the portfolio made up of stocks.

In all the settings we examine, this fraction is a good proxy for tolerance toward risk. The
vertical axis shows the ratio of bonds to stocks. The set of optimal portfolios according to the

mutual-fund separation theorem is simply a horizontal line. By contrast, the set of points
representing the portfolios recommended by the popular advisors slopes downwanl.

The

inconsistency of these "data' with the celebrated mutual-fund separation theorem has not, to our

knowledge, been previously noted. This figure suggests that tcxthook theory does not well
describe the behavior of actual investors (or at least investment advisors).
One might argue that this failure of the mutual-fund separation theorem is not surprising,

because various studies have shown that the CAPM does not fit the data on asset returns. It is

important to note, however, that the validity of the mutual-fund separation theorem does not
depend on the CAPM being the right model of asset returns. Empirical tests of the CAPM--such

as examinations of whether beta is related to mean returns--are premised upon the assumption

that all investors act according to the model. Even if this condition is false, a particular set of
investors could still choose portfolios on the mean-variance efficient frontier. Thus, the fact that
the CAPM has often been rejected as a model of asset returns should not preclude an investment

advisor from recommending portfolios that satisfy the mutual-fund separation theorem.
One might also argue the mutual-fund separation theorem is obviously false because, in

the world, we observe thousands of mutual funds rather than one single mutual fund. The

5

existence of many mutual funds, however, can be explained by differences in expectations. If
different people have different subjective distributions over future returns, then they will combine

risky assets in different proportions. One virtue of studying the advice of popular advisors is that

each advisor gives three portfolio allocations for investors with different risk tolerance.
Presumably, the advisor's subjective distribution of returns is being held constant across the three

recommended portfolios. Thus, although different expectations can explain the diversity of
mutual funds in the world, it cannot explain the popular advice we document in Table 1.

4. Is the Advice Optimal?
As the tide of this paper suggests, we view popular advice on asset allocation as a puzzle.

In some circumstances, economists should not expect people to act exactly according to theory,

because theory often predicts complicated behavior. But the mutual-fund separation theorem
indicates that optimal behavior is exceedingly simple. What is surprising about popular advice

on portfolio allocation is that it is both systematic and more complicated than indicated by
textbook theory.

It is possible, of course, that popular financial advice on portfolio allocation is simply

wrong. Such a conclusion would be troubling, however. Economists routinely assume that
people act optimally. When confronted with the observation that people do not have the tools
to perform formal optimization, economists often argue that people follow rules of thumb that
allow them to act "as if" they were optimizing. Popular advice, such as that documented in Table

1, would seems to be an ideal device for allowing people to act optimally in an environment
where formal optimization is difficult. The fact that such advice is widely disseminated suggests

6

that it affects behavior. If this popular advice is wrong, then it would constitute prima fade
evidence that people do not optimize.

An alternative to concluding that people do not optimize is to argue that popular advice

is not wrong but that the economic model it contradicts is lacking. Indeed, this seems like a
natural presumption. Since the popular advice is so systematic, perhaps there is good reason for

it. If so, academic financial economists may be able to learn from popular advisors.

Like all conclusions from theory, the mutual-fund separation theorem rests on
assumptions. In this section, we discuss the four key assumptions listed above, in reverse order.
Our goal is to see if relaxing these assumptions can explain the disparity between the portfolios

dictated by theory and those recommended by popular advisors.
The approach we take is necessarily numerical rather than analytic. Most deviations from

the mutual-fund separation theorem will yield predictions conditional on the distribution of

returns. Therefore, as we relax assumptions, we calculate optimal portfolios based on the

historical distribution of returns from 1926 to 1992. Table 2 shows the means, standard
deviations, and correlations of annual real returns for this period. (The underlying data are from

Ibbotson Associates, 1993). Below we also consider the possibility that the advisors' subjective
distribution might differ from this historical distribution.

4. 1 Absence of a Riskless Asset
The most obvious assumption to relax is the existence of a riskless asset. Although U.S.
Treasury bills are riskiess in nominal terms, inflation makes their return uncertain in real terms.

If we retain the other assumptions of the CAPM but allow for the absence of a riskless asset,

7

two-fund separation continues to apply, but now both funds include risky assets. Without a
riskiess asset, optimal portfolios need not contain the same relative proportions of risky assets.

Figure 2 shows the set of mean-variance efficient portfolios given the historical
distribution of returns. This figure is generated using a hill-climbing algorithm to identify the
portfolio that achieves the lowest variance for each given mean return. By repeating this process

for a range of mean returns, we derive the set of asset allocations that correspond to points on
the mean-variance efficient frontier.

The result of relaxing the riskiess-asset assumption is to raise the disparity between

optimal and recommended portfolios. Financial advisors tell their clients to create riskier
portfolios by decreasing the ratio of bonds to stocks. Yet calculations of mean-variance efficient

portfolios suggests very different advice. According to these calculations, as an investor creates

a riskier portfolio, he should allocate more assets to both stocks and bonds but should increase

the ratio of bonds to stocks. Thus, allowing cash to be risky only deepens the asset allocation
puzzle.
The intuition for this result comes from noting that the real returns on cash and bonds are

highly correlated. For a low-risk investor, bonds are quite unattractive as a risky investment,
since this investor holds a high proportion of his portfolio in cash. Thus, the ratio of bonds to

stocks will be low. Indeed, the investor may even take a short position in bonds in order to
hedge the risk inherent in his large cash holdings. As the investor takes on more risk, the cash
proportion of his portfolio falls, and so the high correlation between cash and bond returns is not

as problematic. Thus, the ratio of bonds to stocks rises.

8

4.2 Beyond the Mean-Variance Objective Function

Rational investors care about only the mean and variance of portfolio returns if returns

are normal or if utility is quadratic. In practice, neither of these conditions is likely to hold.
Various studies have documented that stock returns are skewed and kurtotic. (See Campbell,

1992, for example.) Moreover, quadratic utility is generally considered an unappealing
assumption, as it implies decreasing absolute risk aversion. That is, under quadratic utility, a

person's willingness to accept a risk of fixed size declines as wealth increases. This behavior
is intuitively implausible.
A natural alternative to quadratic utility is the Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA)

utility function: U(W)=W/(l-A). With this utility function, investors will care about more than

the mean and variance of returns. That is, holding constant the mean and variance of returns,

changing the skewness or kurtosis will affect investors' expected utility. We now consider
optimal portfolios given the historical distribution of returns and CRRA utility.
To generate a set of optimal portfolios for investors with objective functions of this form,

we use a hill-climbing algorithm to choose the portfolio that maximizes expected utility for

various values of the risk aversion parameter. Expected utility is computed based on the
historical distribution of returns. In particular, each realization of annual returns from 1926 to
1992 is taken to be equally likely. This aproach assumes that all the moments of the subjective

distribution of future returns exactly match th moments of the historical distribution.
Figure 3 depicts the set of optimal portfolios for investors with CRRA objective functions.

We allow coefficient of relative risk aversion A to range from one to twelve. Notice that the set

of optimal portfolios looks qualitatively similar for CRRA utility and for quadratic utility. In

9

both cases, the ratio of bonds to stocks declines as the proportion of stock rises. It seems that
CRR.A objective functions cannot resolve our asset allocation puzzle.

4.3 A Digression: Subjective versus Historical Distributions
The optimal portfolios shown in Figures 2 and 3 depend on the particular distribution of

returns used in the calculations. We used the historical distribution of real returns from 1926 to

1992. In doing this, we assumed that the historical distribution is a good proxy for the popular

advisors' subjective distributions. To the extent that the historical and subjective distributions
differ, optimal portfolios as we calculate them can differ from those recommended by popular
advisors. There are two plausible ways in which this might occur.

First, it is possible that the distribution of returns has changed. In particular, the data

from the volatile 1930s could in principle be having an excessive effect on the results. One
might argue that the Great Depression is given too much weight when using the entire sample
because the Depression was an unusual event that popular advisors believe will not be repeated.

Similarly, one might argue that more recent data are more relevant for future returns simply
because they are more recent. To investigate this issue, we recalculated the optimal portfolios
using returns since 1946. We found that the optimal quantity of bonds is lower using data only
from this recent period. Nonetheless, across efficient portfolios, the ratio of bonds to stocks rises

as the proportion in stocks increases. Thus, the inconsistency of recommended and efficient
portfolios shown in Figures 2 and 3 cannot be resolved simply by excluding data from the Great
Depression.

Second, even if the subjective distribution of returns is the same as the distribution that

10

generated the data, the subjective and historical distributions could differ because of sampling

error. To investigate this possibility, we followed a bootstrap procedure. We generated 2000

artificial samples of the same size as our actual sample by drawing from the historical
distribution with replacement. For each of the 2000 replications, we calculated how the optimal
ratio of bonds to stocks varies with risk aversion. In over 95 percent of the replications, the ratio

of bonds to stocks rose as the investor became more willing to take on risk. This was true
whether or not we used data from the Great Depression. Thus, the key result illustrated in
Figures 2 and 3 cannot be explained by sampling error.

4.4 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
Although the CAPM assumes that investors face a one-period planning problem, actual
investors make decisions over many periods. If the set of investment opportunities were the same

each period--that is, if asset returns were independently distributed over time--then the dynamic

problem would be essentially the same as the one-period problem. Yet this condition does not

hold. The real interest rate (the return on cash) is serially correlated. Moreover, stock returns
are serially heteroskedasuc: high volatility in one period predicts high volatility in future periods.

Hence, the set of investment opportunities is not constant over time.
In a world in which the distribution of asset returns changes, investors should attempt to
hedge their portfolios against adverse shifts in the asset-return distribution. For instance, Merton

(1973) considers the case in which the risidess rate is the single state variable determining the

distribution of asset returns. In this case, rational investors should hedge movements in the
nskiess rate. Covariance with the riskiess rate enters into the equilibrium prices of assets in a

11

manner parallel to that of covariance with the market.
Can intertemporal hedging reconcile popular investment advice and fmancial theory? At

this point we cannot offer a definitive answer. Yet intertemporal hedging of the sort discussed
by Merton would seem to point in the right direction. More risk-averse investors should hedge
their portfolios against adverse movements in mean asset returns to a greater extent than do their

more aggressive counterparts. Because downward shifts in real interest rates both worsen the

investment opportunity set and lead to positive returns for bondholders, intertemporal
considerations provide a reason for more risk-averse investors to hold a greater proportion of
their portfolio in bonds. The magnitude of this effect is not evident a priori.

Unfortunately, the empirical literature on intertemporal hedging lags far behind the
theoretical literature. There are substantial obstacles to developing a simple model to test this
potential explanation for our puzzle. Second moments as well as first moments of asset returns
appear to change over time, and these changes are not simply functions of the riskiess rate. To

develop an empirically realistic model of intertemporal hedging, one would need to identify a
small number of state variables that determine the distribution of asset returns. Yet Campbell's

(1987) results suggest that identifying such a set of variables is difficult. We therefore offer
intertemporal hedging as a theoretical consideration and a direction for further research.

We do, however, try to take a small step in the direction of incorporating the dynamics

of asset returns. Following Fischer (1983), we suppose that the investor faces a one-period

problem but that the investor's time horizon exceeds one year. If asset returns were
independently distributed over time, the time horizon would not affect the composition of the
optimal portfolio. In fact, however, varying the time horizon changes the variance-covariance

12

matrix of returns and, therefore, the optimal portfolio implied by the CAPM. In particular, since

bill returns are positively serially correlated, cash looks relatively more risky over longer time
horizons.

To see how the time horizon matters, we calculated the mean-variance efficient portfolios

based on the distribution of returns for one, five, and ten year returns. These are shown in Figure
4.

Varying the time horizon does indeed affect the composition of optimal portfolios.

Nonetheless, over each horizon the ratio of bonds to stocks increases with the overall riskiness

of the portfolio. Thus, given the historical distribution of returns, it is impossible to reconcile
the advice of financial advisors with the textbook CAPM for any time horizon.

4.5 Non-Traded Assets: Human Capital
The mutual-fund separation theorem is based on the assumption that all assets are traded.

Yet much wealth is not traded as readily as stocks and bonds. Human capital--the present value
of future labor earnings--is probably the most important non-traded asset. If investors hold nontraded assets and care about their total return, the optimal quantities of traded assets will reflect
their covariances with non-traded assets.

The existence of human capital can potentially explain popular advice on portfolio
allocation. The key condition is that human capital be more similar to stocks than to bonds. To

see why, consider a simple example. Imagine that every investor holds a certain amount of
human capital. Also imagine that human capital has exactly the same return as stocks. In this
case, human capital is just another name for stock. For all investors to hold risky assets in the
same proportion, as the mutual-fund separation theorem dictates, the following ratio must be

13

constant:

BONDS
HUMAN CAPITAL + STOCKS

Investors who are more willing to take on risk would reduce their cash position and increase the
numerator and denominator of this expression by the same proportion. But, since the amount of

human capital is fixed, the amount of stock must rise proportionately more than the amount of
bonds. The ratio BONDS/STOCKS would, therefore, be lower for these investors.

To evaluate whether human capital can in fact explain popular advice on portfolio
allocation, one would need to measure the return on human capital and compute the covariance

with other assets. Moreover, if preferences are not quadratic, one would need to take into
account that each person's human capital generates a large amount of idiosyncratic risk that
cannot be diversified through markets. Such an exercise is beyond the scope of this paper.
Yet we are skeptical that the existence of human capital can explain popular advice on

portfolio allocation, for two reasons. First, it is not obvious that human capital is similar to
stock. Labor earnings--the aggregate dividends on human capital--are almost perfectly correlated

with measures of the business cycle, such as real GDP and unemployment. Both interest rates
and stock prices have some predictive value for the business cycle. Therefore, the implicit return

on human capital is probably correlated with both stock and bond returns.
Second, if human capital were an important consideration behind popular advice, a natural

conclusion would be that individuals who hold more human capital--the young—should hold a

smaller fraction of their traded portfolio in the form of stocks. Yet this is exactly the opposite
of conventional wisdom among popular financial advisors. Young people, because of their long

investment horizons, are counselled to hold a higher fraction of stocks than are the elderly.
14

4.6 Non-Traded Assets: Nominal Debts

Mother important non-traded asset for many investors is debt, such as mortgages and
student loans. These debts are often long-term and nominal. Therefore, they represent a short

position in bonds. If these debts are taken into account, then the investor should hold the
following ratio constant to satisfy the mutual-fund separation theorem:
BONDS - DEBT
STOCKS

Investors more willing to accept risk would proportionately increase both the numerator and
denominator of this expression. If DEBT is held constant, then BONDS/STOCKS would be
lower. Thus, the existence of nominal debts can potentially explain popular advice.

Yet we are skeptical that this explanation is the right one. First, it cannot explain the

advice that the young hold more equity than the old. Since the young have more debts, the
opposite should be true. Second, if the existence of nominal debts were important for popular

advice, the advice should be different for homeowners and renters, as well as for those with
fixed-rate mortgages and adjustable-rate mortgages. (Adjustable-rate mortgages are more like
a short position in cash.) Yet popular advice does not seem to take account of these differences
among investors.

5. Money Illusion
Consider the problem faced by an author of a book on fmancial planning. In the chapter
on portfolio allocation, the author wants to give advice on portfolio allocations to stocks, bonds,

and cash. The author believes that the CAPM is the right model, but she also believes that
readers care about nominal rather than real returns.
15

In this case, the mutual-fund separation theorem should hold. There is certainly a riskiess

asset in nominal terms: Treasury bills. Thus, the proportion of risky assets--stocks and bonds-should not depend on the risk preferences of the investor.
Yet the author faces another difficulty: when writing the book, she does not know what

interest rates will be when the advice is taken. That is, even though interest rates arc known at

the time of the investment, they are not known to the author giving the advice. Moreover, the

author might view advice contingent on the interest rate as too complicated for her intended
audience.

Thus, the author faces a problem with three risky assets: stocks, bonds, and cash. When

determining the allocation among these three assets, she views the return on each of them as
unknown. In her book, she wants to present several mean-variance efficient portfolios given the

unconditional distribution of nominal returns. Table 3 presents summary statistics on nominal
returns for the period 1926 to 1992.
Figure 5 shows the set of optimal portfolios given quadratic utility and CRRA utility. The

figure shows that using nominal returns does seem to do a good job in fitting advice actually

given. In all cases, the ratio of stocks to bonds falls monotonically as the fraction of the
portfolio devoted to stock increases. The magnitude of the decline is greater for CRRA utility
than for quadratic utility.
The greatest discrepancy between the optimal and recommended portfolios occurs when

the proportion of stock is high. In particular, when the proportion of stock is above 70 percent,

the popular advisors recommend much lower ratios of bonds to stocks than is optimal for this
problem. This discrepancy can perhaps be explained by constraints on borrowing. The optimal

16

portfolios in this range include a short position in cash. Since actual investors cannot borrow at
the Treasury bill rate, one might want to impose a higher rate on borrowing than lending. In this

case, the optimal portfolios would more closely resemble the recommended portfolios.

The overall conclusion from this figure, therefore, is that if one is willing to accept the

assumption of money illusion, popular advice on portfolio allocation is easier to explain. The
reason is that the variance-covariance matrix is different for nominal and real returns. Comparing

Figures 2 and 5, one can see that the greatest differences come in the low-risk portfolios.
Optimal low-risk portfolios computed with real returns have low holdings of bonds relative to

stocks. By contrast, optimal low-risk portfolios computed with nominal returns have high
holdings of bonds relative to stocks.
To gain some intuition about why real and nominal returns imply such different behavior,

consider the portfolio of a highly risk averse investor. Such an investor will hold a high
proportion of his portfolio in cash, which is the least risky asset. Comparing Tables 2 and 3, one
can see that cash and bonds are much more highly correlated in real teims than in nominal terms.

This difference affects the usefuiness of bonds to the highly risk-averse investor. If he cares
about the real return on his portfolio, he will take a short position in bonds in order to hedge his

holdings of cash. Yet if he cares about the nominal return on his portfolio, he will take a long
position in bonds in order to diversify out of cash.
To illustrate this, we computed the extreme case of the minimum-variance portfolio. For

real returns, this portfolio includes 3.2 percent stocks, -15.3 percent bonds, and 112.1 percent
cash; for nominal returns, it includes 2.6 percent stocks, 4.4 percent bonds, and 93.0 percent cash.

Thus, for the infinitely risk-averse investor, the ratio of bonds to stocks should be negative if he

17

thinks in real terms, but it should be positive and large if he thinks in nominal terms. Since
popular advisors recommend a high ratio of bonds to stocks for conservative investors, explaining

their advice is easier using nominal returns.
Because

-

the distinction between nominal and real returns matters so much, one might

suspect that measurement error in inflation could be potentially important. It is certainly true that

changes in the level of prices are measured less accurately than (nominal) asset returns. Yet we

doubt that such measurement error is important in this context. The most natural assumption is

that measurement error is uncorrelated with asset returns. If this is the case, then measurement
error will not change the set of mean-variance efficient portfolios measured in real terms, for it

will merely add the same irreducible noise to the returns on all assets. Thus, unless one has
some reason to believe that measurement error in inflation is correlated with asset returns, it
cannot help explain the apparent success of the money-illusion hypothesis.

At this point, we should admit that some readers may view the assumption of money

illusion as ad hoc. In its defense, one might point out that this assumption has been used to
explain various other phenomena that otherwise would be puzzling. For example, Modigliani and

Cohn (1979) have argued that a confusion between real and nominal interest rates explains why

the stock market was so depressed during high inflation of the 1970s. Shafir, Diamond, and
Tversky (1993) discuss a variety of experimental evidence that people suffer from money illusion.

Thus, the assumption of money illusion may be unpalatable, but it is not ad hoc in the true
meaning of the term.
Moreover, there is reason to believe that money illusion plays a role in investors' thinking
about portfolio choice. The public can now make investment decisions with the help of portfolio-

18

allocation software. Two well-known examples are Retirement Planner developed by The
Vanguard Group (the large mutual fund company) and Wealth Builder developed by Money

Magazine. These software programs aim to help the user determine the optimal allocations

among cash, bonds, and stocks by presenting the historical risk and return of alternative
portfolios. It is noteworthy that both of these programs show risk-return tradeoffs using nominal

returns. The existence of these programs provides some circumstantial evidence that money
illusion plays a role in portfolio allocation.

6. The Costs of Non-Optimization
An assumption that underlies almost all models in economics, including the CAPM, is that

people optimize perfectly. That is, people are assumed to choose the exact values of the
variables under their control that maximize their objective function. Yet, as Akerlof and Yellen

(1985) emphasize, small deviations from optimal settings result in only second-order losses.
Therefore, one should not be surprised to see behavior that is only "near rational." In this section,
we ask whether near rationality can help explain the observed discrepancy between the prediction

of the mutual-fund separation theorem and popular advice on portfolio allocation.

Near rationality on the part of investors can take two forms: selection of a portfolio that
is off the mean-variance efficient frontier and selection of a portfolio that is at the wrong point
on the frontier. An observer who does not know the investor's preferences toward risk can only

detect the first type of error. Here we assume that the CAPM applied to real returns is the right
model and ask how far the recommended portfolios are from the efficient frontier.

In Figure 6, we compare the me.ns and variances of the recommended portfolios to the

19

mean-variance efficient frontier. Although some of the recommended portfolios look quite
different from efficient portfolios, the cost of non-optimization seems small. For example, the

most inefficient recommended portfolio is conservative portfolio of Fidelity and Jane Bryant
Quinn. Yet even this portfolio is only 22 basis points, or 0.22 percent, off the efficient frontier.

Thus, even if the portfolio recommendations of popular advisors are not fully rational, they
appear nearly rational.

To gauge the magnitude of this deviation from the efficient frontier, one can compare it

to investors' other costs. One such cost is the annual expenses associated with mutual funds.
As Bogle (1994) reports, the average stock mutual fund has annual expenses of 150 basis points.

Moreover, the difference in expenses between high-cost and low-cost mutual funds is over 150
basis points. Thus, relative to the other Costs facing investors, the cost of being away from the
efficient frontier is small.

One might be tempted to conclude that since the recommended portfolios are close to
optimal, there was never any puzzle to be explained. Yet, for several reasons, this conclusion
is not satisfying. First, although near rationality might explain why an investor would not bother

to rebalance a portfolio that is off the efficient frontier, it cannot explain the recommendations

of popular advisors who assume that investors begin with a clean slate. Second, if popular
advisors recommended some rule of thumb that was almost optimal, one might conclude that they

were optimizing subject to the constraint that their advice be simple. But popular advice is in
fact less simple the advice given by the mutual-fund separation theorem. Third, popular advice

differs from theory in a consistent way. Appealing to near rationality does not explain why the
deviation from full optimality is so systematic.

20

Near rationality combined with money illusion, however, does seem to provide a
parsimonious resolution to our puzzle. It is often pointed out that money is the yardstick with
which people measure economic transactions. In other words, it is simpler for people to think

in terms of the unit of account rather than in inflation-adjusted terms. Thus, although living
standards depend on real returns, popular investment advisors offer menus of portfolios that are

efficient in nominal returns. The cost of this form of irrationality is very small, so the advisors
never have a strong incentive to alter their behavior.

7. Conclusion
In this paper we have treated the recommended portfolios of financial advisors as data that

any theory of portfolio allocation must confront. These data exhibit a pronounced regularity:

those portfolios with a high proportion of stocks have a small ratio of bonds to stocks. This

regularity is noteworthy, because it contradicts the predictions of the texthook mutual-fund
separation theorem.
The purpose of this paper has been both to document this regularity of popular advice on

portfolio allocation and to explain it. Our attempts to explain it have led us to three conclusions.

First, it appears difficult to explain popular advice using models of fully rational investors.
Second, the advice can be explained if one assumes that investors care about nominal rather than

real returns. Third, the loss from the apparent failure of optimization is not very great. In
particular, although popular advice on portfolio allocation is below the efficient frontier measured

in real terms, investors who follow the advice lose at most 22 basis points of return.
Although we have not been able to explain popular advice within a rational model, it is

21

possible that others will succeed where we have failed. Our results here indicaxe that the absence
of a risklcss asset and deviations from mean-variance preferences are unlikely to help resolve the

puzzle. By contrast, it harder to evaluate the roles of intertemporal hedging and non-traded
assets. Developing portfolio models that include these features and that ale simple enough to
implement empirically remains a challenge for future research.

22

Table I
Asset Allocations Recommended By Financial Advisors
Advisor and
Investor Type

Cash

Percent of Portfolio
Bonds

Stocks

Ratio of
Bonds to Stocks

A. Fidelity
Conservative
Moderate
Aggressive

50
20
5

30
40

20
40

1.50
1.00

30

65

0.46

35

45
55
75

0.78
0.73

1.50
0.80
0.00

B. Merrill Lynch
Conservative
Moderate
Aggressive

20
5
5

40
20

0.27

C. Jane Bryant Quinn
Conservative
Moderate
Aggressive

50

30

10

40

20
50

0

0

100

40
30
20

40
60

D. The New York Times
Conservative
Moderate
Aggressive

20
10

0

80

1.00
0.50
0.25

Sources:

A. Lariy Mait, "Asset Allocation: Finding the Right Mix," Fidelity Focus: The Magazine for Fidelity
Investors, Winter 1993. page 11.

B. Don Underwood and Paul B. Brown, Grow Rich Slowly: The Merrili Lynch Guide to Retirement
Planning, New York: Viking, 1993, page 257.
C. Jane Bryant Quinn, Making the Most of Your Money, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1991, page 489.

D. Mary Rowland, "Seven Steps to Handling an Inheritance," The New York Times, Saturday, February
5, 1994, page 34.

23

Table 2

The Distribution of Annual Real Returns: 1926-1992

Asset

Standard
Arithmetic
Mean Return Deviation

Treasury Bills

0.6 %

Long-term
Government Bonds

2.1

Common Stock

9.0

Correlation with
Bonds
Stocks

.63

.09

10.1

1.00

.23

20.8

.23

1.00

4.3 %

24

Table 3

The Distribution of Annual Nominal Returns: 1926-1992

Asset

Arithmetic
Standard
Mean Return Deviation

Correlation with
Bonds
Stocks

Treasury Bills

3.8 %

3.3 %

.25

-.05

Long-term
Government Bonds

5.2

8.6

1.00

.14

Common Stock

12.4

20.6

.14

1.00

25

References

Akerlof, George, and Janet Yellen, 1985, "Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make
Significant Differenccs in Economic Equilibria?" American Economic Review, 75
(Scptcmber): 708-721.

Bogle, John C., 1994, Bogle on Mutual Funds: New Perspectives for the Intelligent Investor,
New York: Irwin.
Campbell. John, 1987, "Stock Returns and the Term Structure," Journal of Financial Economics
18, 373-399.

Campbell, John, and Ludger Hentschel, 1992, "No News is Good News: An Asymmetric Model

of Changing Volatility in Stock Returns," Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281-318.
Fischer, Stanley, 1983, "Investing for the Short Term and the Long Term," in Financial Aspects

of the U.S. Pension Sys:en, edited by Zvi Bodie and John B. Shovcn, University of
Chicago Press, 153-176.
Ibbotson Associates, 1993, Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation: 1993 Yearbook.
Lintner, J., 1965, "The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments in Stock
Portfolios and Capital Budgets," Review of Economics and Statistics, 47 (February): 1337.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model," Economeirica 41
(September), 867-887.

Modigliani, Franco, and Raymond Cohn, 1979, "Inflation, Rational Valuation, and the Market,"

Financial Analysts Journal 35, 24-44.
Mossin, J., 1966, "Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market," Econometrica, 35 (October): 768-83.

26

Shafir, Eldar, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky, 1993, "On Money illusion," MiT working
paper.

Sharpe, W.F., 1964, "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under Conditions

of Risk," Journal of Finance, 19 (September): 425-42.

27

</ref_section>

0

0.5

1.5

2

0

I

0.4

I

0.2

1M

Bond-to-Stock Ratio

CAPM Assumptions

0.6

0.8

1

Proportion of Assets in Stock

U

Recommended Portfolios

Optimal and Recommended Portfolios

Figure 1.

I

1.2

1.4

SI

Optimal Portfolios

-0.5

1

1.5

2

0

Recommended Portfolios

0.2

0.4

0.8

1

Proportion of Assets in Stock

0.6

1.2

1.4

/tIPorffoIios

/

Bond-to-Stock Ratio

No Riskiess Asset

Optimal and Recommended Portfolios

Figure 2.

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

0

0.2

U

Bond-to-Stock Ratio

0.4

I

0.6

0.8

U.
1

Proportion of Assets in Stock

U.

Recommended Portfoflos

CRRA and Quadratic Objective Functions

Figure 3.
Optimal and Recommended Porifolios

1.2

1.4

Quadratic Utility

CRRA Utility

-1.5

—1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

0

0.2

a

Bond-to-Stock Ratio

0.4

a

0.6

0.8

1

Proportion of Assets in Stock

Urn

Recommended Portfolios

One, Five, and Ten-Year Horizons

Figure 4.
Optimal and Recommended Portfolios

1.2

1.4

10-Year Horizon

1-Year
Horizon

0

0.5

I

1.5

2

0

U.

0.2

0.4

0.8

U.
1

Proportion of Assets in Stock

0.6

Recommended Portfolios

U

Bond-to-Stock Ratio

Nominal Returns

Figure 5.
Optimal and Recommended Porifolios

1.2

1.4

Quadratic Utility

CRRA Utility

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0

Mean

0.01

Efficient Frontier

Mean-Variance

0.02

Mean-Variance Efficient Frontier

Figure 6.

Variance

0.03

0.04

0.05

Recommended Portfolios

0.06

-J

