                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   MARX-Up PRICrNG IN
                                MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS




                                       G. William Schwej-t




                                    Working Paper No. 4863




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachuse Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 1994



The Bradley Policy Research Center, William E. Simon Graduate
                                                                         School of Business
Administration, University of Rochester, provided support for this research. Comments
Stephen Kaplan, Lisa Meulbroek Richard                                                 from
                                          Ruback, and the participants at the 1994 American
Finance Association meetings and the Harvard    Finance and Control Conference are greatly
appreciated. I have also benefitted from
                                         discussions about this topic with Brad Cornell, Dan
Fischel, Gregg Jarrell and Mark Wolfson.
                                          This paper is part of NBER's research
Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of program in
Bureau of Economjc Research.                                                    the National

© 1994 by 0. William Schwert.
                                All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without
notice, is given to the source.    explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4863
                                                                              September 1994


                                   MARX-Up PRICING IN
                                MERGERS AND ACQUISmONS


                                           ABSTRACT

        This paper studies the premiums paid in successful tender offers and
                                                                                mergers involving
 NYSE and Amex-listed target firms from 1975-91 in relation to pre-announcement stock
                                                                                      price
 runups. It has been conventional to measure
                                                 corporate control premiums including the price
 runups that occur before the initial formal bid. There has been little evidence on the relation

 between the pre-bid runup and the
                                    post-announcement premium (the premium paid to target
stocltholders measured from the date of the first bid). Under what circumstances are
                                                                                           runups
associated with larger total premiums? The evidence in this paper shows that in most
                                                                                        cases, the
pre-bid runup and the post-announcement
                                         premium are uncorrelatetj (i.e. little or no substitution
between the runup and the post-announcement premium), so the
                                                             runup is an added cost to the
bidder. This has important implications
                                          for assessing the costs of illegal insider trading based
on private information about a potential bid.




G. William Schwert
William E. Simon Graduate School
  of Business Administration
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
                                      Sche,r Mark-up Pricing in M&A


  1.   Introduction


          Many studies have documented the large premiums paid by bidder firms to acquire control

  of exchange-listed target fin-us. The size and variability of these control premiums raise several

  interesting questions. For example, it is conventional to include a period ofpre-bid runup in the

  targets stock price as part of the control premium paid by winning bidders. As shown below, the

 average runup is about half of the total premium paid in successful takeovers (the other part of the

 premium is the markup over the stock price the day before the first bid is announced). What causes

 pre-bid runups, and how do they affect the total control premium? Thesequestions provide the focus

 for this empirical study of 1,398 successful takeovers of New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and

 American Stock Exchange (Amex) -listed target firms for the 1975-91 period.

        The spate of insider trading cases associated with mergers and acquisitions (M&A) during

 the 1980s drew significant attention to the consequences of such activities. Meulbroek (1992) shows

that daily stock returns are correlated with the illegal trading activities of insiders for firms where

the Securities and Exchange Commission (S.E.C.) successfully prosecuted insider trading. She

estimates that almost half of the runup in the month before initial merger or tender offer

announcement occurs on the days when insiders traded illegally, although insiders traded on a small

subset of the days in the runup period on average.

        Jarrell and Poulsen (1989) study 172 successful cash tender offers in the 198 1-85 period.

They conclude that there are several sources of legitimate information available to market

participants that allow investors to anticipate takeover announcements, including announcements

of 1 3D filings when investors acquire more than 5% of the target firm's stock. They find weak

evidence that pre-bid runups substitute for post-bid markups in their sample, so that premiums are
                                              Schi.'ert: MarA-up Pricing in M&A


      higher ceferis paribus when runups are large.

               The question of whether illegai insider
                                                           trading damages bidders by raising the price paid to
     acquire a target ni-rn has been highly contentious.
                                                             There are many lawsuits against investment banks
    and others who might have leaked private information that led to
                                                                                       illegal insider t.rading. For
    example, Anheuser-Busch sued Paul Thayer and A. G. Edwards because it felt
                                                                                                 that leaks of inside
    information b' Thayer (a director of AnheuserBusch) caused it to
                                                                                       pay too much in acquiring
    Campbell Taggart in 1982.' Litton sued Lehman
                                                  Brothers because insider               trading by Dennis Levine
   allegedly caused Litton to pay too much
                                                      when it acquired Itek in 1983.2 Maxus sued Kidder
   Peabody, Ivan Boesky and Martin
                                           Siegel because the price it paid to acquire Natoinas in 1983 was

   allegedly inflated by Boesky's illegal insider
                                                         trading.3 FMC Corporation sued Goldman Saclis,
   Boesky and others because the
                                         price it paid stocitholders in its 1986
                                                                                        recapitaiization plan was
  allegedly inflated by the insider trading activities of Boesky.4

            This paper examines the
                                        theoretical and empirical relations between pre-bid runups and post-
  bid markups conditional on various types of information that
                                                                         were available in the market prior to
 merger or tender offer bids from 1975-91. Section
                                                            2 reviews the literature on auctions and develops
 the hypotheses to be tested. Section 3 describes the
                                                            sample of mergers and acquisitions that are used
in the tests. Section 4
                                analyzes several regression tests that relate pre-bid runups to post-bid
markups. Section 5 analyzes alternate
                                                specifications for some of the statistical tests. Section 6
contains bnef concluding remarks.



           AeepBusch Cs. Paul                elaL. No, CA3-S57R (N. Tex.
for an analysis of this case.                                                     1988). See Cornell and Si   (1992)
           Litton Industries . Lhma, arathers Ku eb
                                                          734 F. Supp. lOll (S.D.Y. 1990).
           Maxus
                   v. Kidder Peabody, eta!., No. Sl-15583M (298 D. Tex. 1987).
           FMC
                 Corporagon . Boesky. eta!. 852 F.2d 981, 994(7th Cir.
                                                                     1988).
                                         Sc/iwer,. Murk-up Pricirg ii, M&A
                                                                                                               3


   2.   Auctions, private information and insider trading

          To understzmd the effects of pre-bid
                                                  runups on M&A negotiations, it is useful to think of the
  following time line of events:



        TimliflofMA Events (Measuring the Total Premium)
                                             First Bid
                                          Annouucement                                            Final
                                                                                                 Outcome
  I                                              I
            Pre-bid Runup Period
                                                                                                      I
                                                                  Post-bid Markup Period




 In the Pre-bid Runup Period, the bidder knows that it is considering making a bid for
                                                                                                a particular
 target firm, but no one else should have this private information.
                                                                         Of course, it is possible that more
 than one bidder is considering the
                                      acquisition of this target simultaneously, but the intentions of each
 bidder are not generally known by others.
                                              Any abnormal movement of the target's stock price in this
 period is called the Pre-bid Runup. Once the First Bid
                                                                Announcement occurs, public investors
 become aware of that bidder's intentions (at least to the extent that they are revealed by their
                                                                                                      bid).
After that time, the target is "in play" and it is possible that other bidders may compete to acquire

the target firm. Such a multiple bid auction
                                               usually leads to higher control premiums than when the
initial bid is successful. The Final Outcome
                                                     occurs when one bidder succeeds in taking over the
target, or when all bidders quit tiying. If the target is acquired by a bidder, the Post-bid Markup

Period represents the period between the First Bid Announcement and the Final Outcome, so that

the change in the target firm's stock price in this period (perhaps adjusted for market movements)

reflects the Post-bid Markup.
    4
                                           Schwer:: Mark-up Pricing in M&A


   2. 1 Conpetirive bidding strategies



           There arc at least two competing hypotheses
                                                                  about the effects of early revelation of
   information in a merger or tender offer situation. If the bidder and target
                                                                               (managers and
   stockholders) are in a two-person bargaining
                                                    situation, negotiation will lead to a consummated deal
   if the reservation price of the target is below the
                                                         valuation placed on the target by the bidder. These
  valuations by the bidder and the target depend
                                                       on the information each party has at the time of the
  negotiation. To the extent that both parties have more information than is reflected in the
                                                                                                        open
  market price for the target firm's stock (and they think there are no other traders with valuable
                                                                                                      private
  information), both the bidder and the target would
                                                          ignore stock price movements that occur prior to
  and during the negotiation in setting the final deal price. As a result, the post-bid
                                                                                          markup (measured
  from the announcement date through the time
                                                     when all uncertainty about the consummation of the
 deal has been resolved) will be lower by the amount of the pre-bid runup. This is the
                                                                                               substitution
 hypothesis --   each dollar of pre-bid runup offsets the
                                                          post-bid markup one-for-one.
         On the other hand, if the bidder or the target is uncertain about whether
                                                                                          movements in the
 market price of the target's shares
                                       might reflect valuable private information of other traders, runups
during the negotiations could well cause both parties to the negotiation to revise their valuations of

the target's stock. For example, if the negotiating parties suspect that another bidder
                                                                                                 might be
acquiring target shares in the open market, both the bidder and the target (management and

stockholders) would probably revise their valuations
                                                          of the target stock upwards. Bradley, Desai and
Kim (1988) and Comment and Schwert
                                              (1994) show that the premiums paid in contested M&A
transactions (auctions) are significantly higher than in cases where multiple bidders do not
                                                                                                  appear.
In this case, the final deal price will increase by the amount of the pre-bid
                                                                                    runup. The post-bid
                                                Sch'.'ert. Mark-up Pricing in MA                                            5



   markup will be unaffected by the amount of the                   pre-bid runup. This is the markup pricing
   hypothesis --       each dollar of pre-bid runup gets added into the final deal
                                                                                   price one-for-one.
             As described above, the markup pricing hypothesis reflectsrational behavior of bidders and

   targets in a situation where they have incomplete information. An additional
                                                                                                explanation for a lack
   of Substitution between the runup and the markup is based on irrational behavior by bidders. Roll

   (1986) calls this the "hubris hypothesis," where bidders are interested in winning a takeover contest

  irrespective of the cost. One way to distinguish between the
                                                                            markup pricing and hubris hypotheses
  is to study the stock returns to the bidder firm, if the bidder firm offers too much for the target firm,

  given the information available to the stock market at the time of the bid, one would expect a drop

  in the bidder's stock price.


 2.2 Relation to the literature on auctions


           An analogy to conventional open outcry English auctions is apt.3 If the item
                                                                                                       being auctioned
 is marketable, as is clearly the case with the common stock of a publicly traded target finn, part of

 the value any bidder would place on the item is basedon its potential resale value (this is called a

 common value auction). Of course, every bidder might also have unique reasons for wanting to own

a particular item, and this valuation might be larger than the resale value (this is called a private

value auction). In general, most auctions reflect a mixture of common and private values (this is

called a correlated values auction). The typical situation wherecompeting bidders can observe the

bids of others causes complicated interactions among bidders' strategies. To the extent thatanother



           See section X of McAfee and McMillan
                                                (1987) for a discussion of the correlated values auction model where
bidders' valuations are affiliated. Milgrogn (1989)
                                                provides an excellent survey of the economics literature on auctions, and
Ashenfelcer (1989) provides many interesting insights into the workings of auction markets for high quality wine and art.
                                       Schwert; MarA-ap Pricing in M&A



  bidder rmght have better information about the resale value of the target firm, his bid should alter

  the perceptions of competing bidders about resale value. Ineffect, each bidder learns by observing

  the current market price. This is the spirit of the self-fulfilling rational expectations models of asset

  prices developed by Grossman (1976, 1977).

         The presence of people who trade on the information of either the bidder or the target without

 the knowledge of the negotiating parties is like having a shill in the audience at an open outcry

 auction. Based on unusual price arid volume behavior in the secondary market for the target's stock,

 the bidder and arget might falsely conclude that a legitimate competing bidder exists, and hence

 revise their valuations upward. By stealing information from the bidder or the target, insider trading

 can cause the final price in the auction (or negotiation) to be higher than it would otherwise be.


 2.3 Relation to the efficient markets literature


        The semi-strong form of the efficient markets hypothesis posits that the market
                                                                                        price of
common stock reflects all publicly available information [Fama (1970)]. Private information, such

as the intention to bid for control of a target firm, would not generally be reflected in the market

price of the target stock until an event occurs that causes many traders to infer that private

information. An example would be pre-bid purchases of the target's stock by the bidder to establish

a 'toe-hold' position, which would lead to the filing ofa 13D statement with the Securities and

Exchange Comjnissjon (S.E.C.) after the bidder buys more than 5% of the target's stock. Unusual

patterns of price and trading volume often attract attention from securities traders (as well as the

stock exchanges and the S.E.C.), and of course public statements such as press releases and S.E.C.

filings provide direct information about potential bids.

       One implication of the efficient markets hypothesis is that future price changes are
                                              Schwerr.' Mark-up Pricing in M&A                                             7



  unpredictable based on publicly available information. It should not be possible to earn systematic

 abnormal profits by buying stock in companies that are potential targets (without access to private

 or inside information). There is much evidence to support the efficient markets hypothesis in the

 context of mergers and tender offers. For example, measured from the date of the first announced

 bid, there is no evidence that public investors can earn average abnormal returns from purchasing

 the stock of target firms. Not surprisingly, the stock prices oftargets that are successfully taken over

 rise above the market price on the day after the first bid, on average, and prices fall if the targets are

 not successfully taken over, on average. But it is not possible to know which bids will succeed or

 fail at the time of the first bid, so it is not possible to profit.6

             If future price changes are unpredictable, there should be no correlation betweenpast price

 movements (such as pre-bid runups) and subsequent returns to target shareholders. If this were not

 true, it would be profitable to buy shares of stocks whose prices have risen recently (perhaps with

unusual volume behavior). Pound and Zeckhauser (1990) find there are no abnormal profits

available from buying the shares of companies that are written about in the Wall Street Journal

"Heard on the Street" column as potential takeover targets (where most of the stories identi1' unusual

price and volume behavior as one source of the rumor). Thus, from the perspective of target

shareholders, it would not be surprising to find that pre-bid runups and post-bid markups are

unrelated. The only exception to this rule would occur if the bidder and/or the target effectivelypre-

announce the bid. In that case, everyone (including bidder and target stockholders and management)

knows the information in the actual offer before it is formally filed. The formal announcement of

the offer would have little effect on the market price of the stock, since all of the relevant parties


         6
             Dodd and Ruback (1977). Dodd (1980). and Bradley. Desai and Kim (3983) are early papers that document these
facts. Also see the survey paper by Jensen and Ruback (1983).
   8                                   Schwert.' Mark-up Pricing in M&A



   already know this information.


   2.4 Inferring information about illegal insider trading


          How likely is it that the market can infer the existence of illegal insider trading? In the

  United States, which has severe punishments associated with
                                                                     illegal insider trading, people who
  acquire inside information and trade on it have strong incentives
                                                                          to disguise their behavior. There
  are many mechanisms used by regulators to detect illegal insider trading. For example, the New

  York Stock Exchange monitors trading of all of its listed stocks and uses statistical screens to

  identify unusual patterns of price or volume. These
                                                           events trigger investigations by calling the
 affected company to ask whether there is material information that could be causing the unusual

 trading pattern. In extreme cases, the S.E.C. is notified and it begins its own investigation. Faced

 with knowledge of these enforcement mechanisms, sophisticated traders who have inside

 information try to avoid trading patterns that would lead to easy detection by spreading their trading

 over many accounts and brokerage firms, and by spreading their trading over time [Stewart (1991)].

        Even if there were no legal costs associated with
                                                                 insider trading, insiders have strong
 incentives to disguise their behavior so that other traders cannot easily infer the information they

possess from their trading behavior. For example, many buy orders submitted by an insider in a

short period are likely to attract attention from "tape watchers" who trade based on current market

movements. To maximize the value of the private information he possesses, an insider must delay

the revelation of that information to other
                                              traders as long as possible (until he has bought as many
target shares as he wants). Barclay and Warner (1993) study trading patterns in the shares of 105

tender offer targets from 1981-84 during the 30 trading days before formal offers. They find that

most of the price appreciation before formal bids occurs in intermediate-sized trades (500 to 9,900
                                            Schwert; Mark-up Pricing in M&A                                              9


  shares), rather than larger or smaller trades. They refer to this behavior as "stealth trading.' Of

  course, once the insider accumulates his desired position, he benefits from speedy revelation of his

  private information (which is one reason insiders might share information with others whom they

  know will trade on inside information).

           Another cost that can result if insider trading is readily apparent is that planned bids can be

 canceled. A bidder who sees the target price runup unexpectedly might decide to postpone or cancel

 a planned bid while trying to learn why the runup had occurred. Diamond Shamrock canceled its

 planned bid for Natomas after Ivan Boesky's insider trading caused a
                                                                     more than twenty percent runup
 in Natomas' stock price during Februaiy 1983. Shortly after the decision to cancel the offer,

 Natornas' stock price plummeted, in large part due to selling pressure from Boesky (who had been

 tipped by Martin Siegel, Diamond's investment banker).7 if insidertrading results in a canceled

 offer, the profitability of the inside information is negated by the insider's trading behavior.

          While the highly publicized cases involving Dennis Levine,Boesky and Siegel have focused

attention on insider trading associated with M&A transactions in recent years, these cases were

discovered several years after the insider trading took place. Moreover, they were discovered

through a very indirect sequence of circumstances [Stewart (1991)]. Table I shows the number of

stories on Dow Jones News Retrieval (DJNR) containing the words "insidertrading" for the years

1979-92. This is a noisy measure of the public's awareness of insidertrading associated with M&A

transactions, since many of these stories do not involve mergers or tender offers. The explosion of

stories about insider trading began in 1986 with the Boesky revelations,so it is unreasonable to think

that investors or bidder or target firm managers should have known about insider trading several


        'Maxus v. Kidder Peabody, Boesky, Siegel, eta).. Second Amended Original Petition by Plaintiff. No. 87-15583.M
(298 D. Tex. 1987)..
  io                                   Schwerr: Mart-up Pricing in M&A



  years   before the U. S. government discovered it.

            Thus, the question of whether pre-bid runups caused by insider trading affect the price

  negotiated between a bidder and a target in a merger or tender offer revolves around whether all

 parties to the transaction (bidder and target management and stockholders) understand that the

 insider trading merely reflects the private information of the negotiating parties. In general, since

 insider trading is illegal, and because the profits of the insider will generally be higher if he can delay

 the process by which other traders infer his information, we should expect that targets and bidders

 will no know with certainty that pre-bid runups merely reflect their own information. In terms of

 the hypotheses stated earlier, it is unlikely that the substitution hypothesis (pre-bid runups substitute

 for post-bid markups) is a good description of the world. The tests below show how runups and

 markups are related in a large sample of actual merger and tender offer transactions in the 1975-91

 period.


3. Mergers and tender offers, 1975-91

           To study the relation between pre-bid runups and post-bid markups, I use Robert Comment's

proprietary database containing information about all mergers and tender offers for NYSE and

Amex-listed target firms from 1975-91. These announcements were obtained through various

keyword searches of the Dow Jones News/Retrieval database, by inspection of the Wall Street

Journal index, and from Commerce Clearing House's Capital Changes Reporter (the original source

for CRSP delisting codes). Security return and volume data and market indexes are from the Center

for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).

          There are 1.398 successful takeovers from 1975-91 with enough return data available to be

included in this study. For each of these firms, I calculated the market model regression equation
                                      Schwerz; Mw-k-up Pricing in M&A



 (I) for the 253 trading days ending 127 trading days before the first public announcement of a tender

 offer or merger.


                              = a + 3 R,, + e,,,               t = -379, - - ., -127                 (1)


 where R is the continuously compounded return to the stock of target firm i and R is the

 continuously compounded return to the CRSP value-weighted portfolio of NYSE and Amex-listed

 stocks for day t. Firms are included if they have at least 100 daily returns available to estimate the

 parameters of (1). The runup is the cumulative abnormal return to the target stock over the 42-day

runup period before the first bid,


                                         Runup, =                Cu,                                (2)
                                                       = -42


and the markup is the cumulative abnormal return from the date of the first bid announcement

through delisting or 126 trading days after the first bid, whichever comes first,


                                                     delisting

                                        Markup1 =                c.                                 (3)



The total premium paid by the successful bidder (Premium1), adjusted for market movements, is the

sum of Runup1 and Markup.

        Because there are some deals that take a long time to consummate, I focus on the sample of

cases where the length of time between the first bid and delisting is no more than a year. Some deals

take a long ume to complete because regulatory hurdles have to be jumped. The noise added to the

siock returns of these target firms due to the delay is the primary reason for ignoring these cases. In
                                    Sch,.'ert: 4ark.up Pricing in M&.A



addition, there are some cases where the size of the target firm is so small (less than $10 million

market value of equity) or the price of the target stock is so low (less than $2 per share) that the

measured stock returns could be unreliable. Low-priced stocks are likely to be more affected by

market microstructure effects, such as large proportional bid-ask spreads [Ball, Kothari and Shanken

(1994)]. After excluding these exceptional cases, there are 1,173 target finns remaining. This is

called the main sample" hereafter.

       The choice of a 42 trading day (about two calendar months) runup period is suggested by the

empirical evidence trom prior studies on mergers and tender offers. Figure 1 shows the plot of the

cumulative average abnormal returns (CAR) from 126 trading days before the first bid

announcement (day 0) through 253 trading days after the first bid for the 1,398 successful mergers

and tender offers in this sample, where the market model parameters were estimated using returns

for days -379 to -127 relative to the announcement day. The CAR starts to rise around day -42, but

the largest pre-bid rise occurs from days -21 to -1.


3.1 Average runups and markups


       Table 2 shows the average runups and markups for the total sample and for several subsets.

It also shows the proportion of the various samples that have pre-bid news implying that a bid might

be forthcoming (News), or that involve multiple bidders (Auctions), or that are tender offers (Tender

Offers), or that are management buyouts (MBOs), or where cash is the only form of payment to

target shareholders (Cash), or where equity is the only form of payment to target shareholders

(Equity), or where the S.E.C. later accused someone of engaging in insider trading prior to the
                                            Schwert: Mark-up Pricing i,i M&A                                          13



takeover (Insiders).8 Results are shown for each of these samples, along with samples of deals that

began in each year from 1975-91. Finally, table 2 shows the standard deviations for the sample of

all 1,398 deals and the main sample of 1,173 transactions in the rows immediately following the

averages for these samples.

          Runups are large for all these samples. The average for the main sample is 14.2%, and it is

a little higher for cases where there was foreshadowing news (16.0%), in tender offers (15.9%), and

in cases where the S.E.C. later accused insiders of trading illegally (18.5%). Average runups are

slightly lower in cases that later become auctions (12.2%), when there is an MBO (11.4%), and in

cases where equity is the only form of payment made to target shareholders (11.4%). The average

runups and markups shown in bold italics in table 2 are reliably different from the main sample

averages at the 5% significance level.

          Average runups were larger in 1977-80 than at other times during the 1975-91 period.

Average runups were slightly lower after the prosecutions of Levine, Boesky and Siegel that began

in 1986, although the average runups remain substantial (from 7.1% to 13.5% from 1986-91). The

following regression provides a simple test of the effects of the Insider Trading Sanctions Act of

1984 (1TSA84) and the Insider Trading and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act of 1988 (ITSFE88),


                    Runup, = 0.1779 - 0.0644 1TSA841 + 0.0033 ITSFE881 + u,                                         (4)
                                (0.0084)      (0.0120)                (0.0155)


where White's (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. The insider

trading law variables are equal to zero before 1984 and 1988, respectively, and equal to one



         $
             Information on insider trading prosecutions came from the Dow Jones News Retrieval, the Wall Street Journal
index, and the Lexis S.E.C. Release file.
 14                                   Schwert: Mark-up Pricing in M&A



afterwards. This regression suggests that the 1984 Act is associated with significantly lower pre-bid

runups (-6.4% lower), but the 1988 Act had no significant additional effect. This simple regression

does not take account of other changes in the legal and takeover environments that occurred in this

period, so these conclusions are tentative at best.

        Average post-bid markups are similar to average runups for most of the samples. The

average markup for the main sample is 15.9%. The most obvious exception is for auctions, where

the average markup is 28.0% and the average runup is 12.2%. This is easy to understand if the

competition among multiple bidders is generally not anticipated at the ume of the first bid. The

average premium (the sum of runup plus the markup) is between 24.0% (in 1978) and 40.9% (in

1988). A regression similar to (4) to estimate the effects of the changes in insider trading legislation

on post-bid markups suggests that markups increased reliably (by 8.3%) following the 1988 Act, but

not following the 1984 Act,


               Markup = 0.1376 +          0.0078    ITSA84 +    0.0832 ITSFE881 + Ui.               (5)
                           (0.0103)      (0.0154)              (0.0228)


However, it is likely that other changes in the merger and acquisition environment could also explain

the higher premiums after 1988. For example, Comment and Schwert (1994) argue that increases

in antitakeover protection that occurred from 1983-91 increased the premiums paid to target firms

that were taken over.


3.2 Composition of the sample


       There are prior news events suggesting that the target may be in play in 47.3% of the cases

in the main sample. News equals one when any of the following events have occurred within the
                                      Schwerr: Mark-up Pricing in M&A                               I   5



 past   calendar year:


          (a)   there was a news story, confirmed by either the target or the bidder firm, saying
                that a merger or acquisition was being actively discussed, or
          (b)   there was a newsstoiy saying that a 13D form had been filed with the S.E.C.
                showing that a new buyer had bought at least 5% of the target's stock, or
          (c)   there was a news story saying that the firm is a potential target, or
          (d)   the target firm adopts a new poison pill security as an anti-takeover device
                (based on information from Dow Jones News Retrieval and Corporate Control
                Alert).


Mikkelson and Ruback (1985) find that the market interprets at least some 13D announcements as

showing that the likelihood of a takeover has increased. Comment and Schwert (1994) show that

poison pill security adoptions frequently foreshadow takeover bids. These pre-bid news events

happen more frequently in auctions (59.2%) and when there is an insider trading prosecution

(62.7%). The frequency of prior news events is lower before 1980, because coverage by Dow Jones

News Retrieval begins in mid-1979, and other sources of this information have less coverage.

         Auctions occur in 19.0% of the cases in the main sample. They are more frequent when there

is a tender offer (30.4%). The frequency of multiple bidder auctions increased in the late 1980s,

rising to 35.3% of the takeovers in 1988. As the number of takeovers fell in 1990-91, the frequency

of auctions also fell.

         Tender offers represent 44.8% of the main sample. They are more frequent when there is a

subsequent insider trading prosecution (58.2%). They are less frequent when the winning bidder

involves the incumbent management of the target firm (an MBO), only 30.7%. The years 1984-89

had a higher rate of tender offers than the other parts of the period (from 44.6% to 63.9%).

Management buyouts (MBOs) represent 11.9% of the main sample. Cash deals represent 63.5% and
    to                                     Sche,i;   itlarA-.up Pici,jg in MSA


   equity deals represent 17.3% of the main sample.

              There were insider trading prosecutions in 11.4% of the cases. The rate of insider trading

   prosecutions is highest for the deals that began from 1981-85 (from
                                                                                 13.1% to 27.7%). Of course,
   the increased rate of prosecutions could reflect
                                                          a higher frequency of illegal insider trading, or a
   higher rate of discovering and prosecuting illegal trading,
                                                                    or both. One explanation for this drop in
  prosecution rates is the increased penalties associated with the Insider
                                                                          Trading Sanctions Act of 1984
  and the Insider Trading and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act of 1988.

            Arshadi and Eyssell (1991) find that insiders who must register their trades with the S.E.C.

  changed     their trading patterns before tender offers after the 1984 Act. Before 1984, registered

  insiders were strong net buyers of their own firms stock, but afterwards they became weak
                                                                                                         net
 sellers. They also find that pre-bid
                                          runups are positively correlated with the trading of registered
 insiders. Of course, the sample of insiders used by Arshadi and Eyssell is a small subset of the
                                                                                                      types
 of people who have been prosecuted by the S.E.C. for insider trading before
                                                                                    mergers or tender offers
 -- the
          officers, directors and beneficial owners of the target firm. Their trades are easiest to monitor,

 since they have to be reported to the S.E.C. on a timely basis (which is the source of data used
                                                                                                         by
 Arshadi and Eyssell). In unnegotiated offers, these
                                                          people might not even be aware of the intentions
of the bidding firm. The most
                                   prominent insider trading cases prosecuted by the S.E.C., and theones
where the cause of the pre-bid
                                    runup would be ambiguous to the target and bidding firms, involve
third party insider trading -- people who obtain and misuse information from
                                                                                       agents of the bidder
or the target.

          The evidence in table 2 provides
                                             a useful summary of the characteristics of the sample, both
in terms of the types of deals covered and the times when they occurred. The
                                                                                       tests below provide
a more structured basis for judging the effects
                                                     of runups on the price paid by bidders in successful
                                       Schw err; Mark-up Pricing in M&A                               17


  mergers and tender oilers.



 4. Regression tests for substitution between runups and premiums

 4.1 Simple regression lests


          The easiest way to test whether there is substitution between pre-bid
                                                                                  runups and post-bid
 markups is to consider the relation between the total premium paid by the bidder and the pre-bid

 runup,


                                   Premium1 = a + b Runup1 +          Ui.                           (6)


 As described in section 2. 1, the substitution hypothesis implies that the totalpremium is not affected

by pre-bid runup, so the slope coefficient b in (6) should equal zero. On the other hand, the markup

pricing hypothesis implies that the total premium increases one-for-one with the pre-bid runup, so

the slope coefficient b in (6) should equal one. An estimate of b between zero and one implies

partial substitution; that is, the pre-bid runup increases the total premium paid by the bidder, but

only as a fraction of the size of the runup (where the coefficient b represents that fraction).

          Since the total premium is the sum of the runup plus the markup, the regression equation (6)

is equivalent to the regression of markup on runup,


                                 Markup1 = a + (b-I) Runup1 +             Ui.                       (7)


If the substitution hypothesis is true, the regression of Markup, on Runup1 should have a coefficient

of -l (i.e., when runup is higher, markup is lower by the same amount). If the markup pricing

hypothesis is true, the regression of Markup1 on Runup1 should have a coefficient of zero (i.e.,
   s                                   Schwer:; Murk-up Pricing in M&A



  markup is unrelated to runup).

          Table 3 cornains estimates of the regression model (6) for the all 1,398
                                                                                   merger and
  acquisitions, for the main sample of deals consummated within a year, and forsamples with prior

 foreshadowing news (News=l), for samples without prior foreshadowing news (News=0), for

 auctions (Auctions= 1;, for single-bidder deals (Auctions=0), for tender offers (Tender Offers= 1),

 for mergers (Tender Offers=0), for management buyouts (MBOs=1), for all-cashdeals (Cash=1), for

 all-equity deals (Equitv= I), for deals that subsequently had insider trading prosecutions (Jnsiders=1),

 and for deals that did not have insider trading prosecutions (Insiders=0). The second column shows

 the proportion of the main sample represented by each sample and the third colunm shows the

 number of target firms used in each regression. The fourth through sixth columns contain estimates

 of the intercept, a, its standard error, S(a), and the t-statisuc for whether a equals zero, t(a=0). The

 seventh and eighth columns contain estimates of the slope, b, its standarderror, S(b), while the ninth

colunu) shows a t-test, t(b=1), for whether there is substitution between runup and markup in

determining the total premium paid by successful bidders (i.e., is the coefficient b significantly

different from one?). Finally, columns ten and eleven contain thestandard error of the regression

S(u) and the adjusted coefficient of determination, k2.

        In the main sample, the estimate of the coefficient for
                                                          Runup, b, is 1.017, which is close to

the value implied by the markup pricing hypothesis, and the t-statistic forwhether b equals one is

0.42. Across the samples based on deal characteristics, the lowestestimate of b is 0.649 (in deals

where there was subsequent prosecution for insider trading) and the t-statistic for whether this

estimate is different from one is -3.20. The other sample where the estimate of b is reliably lower

than one is for tender offers, where the coefficient estimate is 0.881 with a t-statistic of -2.04. Thus,

even the smallest estimates of the substitution coefficient imply that at least 65% of the pre-bid
                                          Schwert: Mark-up Pricing in M&A                                 I9




 runup is added to the total price paid by the bidder in acquiring a target stock.

         The intercept in equation (6) estimates the average post-bid markup paid in mergers and

 acquisitions when there is no pre-bid runup. Note that in cases where the slope coefficient b is less

 than one, the intercept a is larger than the average markup in table 2 (for example, in insider trading

 cases, a = 0.278 and the average markup in table 2 is 0.2 13). This difference measures the effect of

 pre-bid runup on lowering the average post-bid markup -- another way of seeing that the effect of

 substitution is not large.

        Table 3 also shows estimates of the regression model (6) for samples based on the year when

the first bid occurs. Most of the estimates of the coefficient for
                                                                   Runup1, b, are close to one (the   range
of these estimates is from 0.76 to 1.34). Only one of the i-statistics for substitution is below -2

(1986), and three are larger than 2 (1980, 1983 and 1988), which implies that
                                                                              premiums are higher
than average in cases with large runups. Overall, there is little reason to think that there is variation

in the amount of substitution over the 1975-91 period.


4.2 Multiple regression models for substitution


        Table 4 combines the effects of these different samples into a multiple regression. Since

several characteristics of successful deals are correlated (e.g., cash deals and tender offers), it is not

possible to disentangle separate effects of these characteristics from the simple regressions in table

3. Instead, the multiple regression.


                                                      7              7
           Prernium =         a0   + b0   Runup1   +E     ak   D11 + E bk Db Runup1 + c,,              (8)
                                                    kI              k=I

where the dummy variables            equal one if the kth characteristic (News, Auctions, Tender Offers,
 20                                   Sch.'.erz: Mark-up Pricin8 in M&A



 MBOs, Cash, Equity, or Insiders) applies to case i, and equal zero otherwise, allow the intercept a

 and the slope b to vary' with the characteristics of the deal. Consistent with the evidence in table 3,

 the estimates of the markup paid if the runup equals zero (i.e., the intercepts) are reliably higher

 when there is a multiple bidder auction (coefficient = 11.8%, t-statistic = 4.36), when there is a

 tender offer (coefficient = 8.3%, t-statistic = 3.76), when cash is used to pay target shareholders

(coefficient = 9.9%, t-statistic = 3.03), and when there is illegal insider trading that is later

prosecuted (coefficient = 12.3%, t-statistic = 4.02). The large sample joint test for whether all seven

intercept-change coefficients equal zero equals 99.1, which has a p—value less than 0.01% compared

with a x2 distribution with 7 degrees of freedom.

        The runup coefficient estimate is 1.146, with a standard en-or of 0.132, when all of the seven

deal characteristics equal zero. Most of the slope change coefficients (bk) for the deal characteristics

are small, and only the insider trading coefficient (-0.372) is reliably less than zero (t-statistic of

-3.22). The large sample joint test for whether all seven slope change coefficients equal zero equals

15.0, which has a p-value of 3.6% compared with ax2 distribution with 7 degrees of freedom. To

estimate the sensitivity of the total price paid to the pre-bid runup for a deal with some of these seven

characteristics the base case slope coefficient, b= 1.1456, is added to the appropriate slope change

estimates. For example, for a cash tender offer that is not an auction or an MBO, and where there

is no subsequent insider trading prosecution, the estimated slope coefficient is 1.1456 - .1417 - .0539

= .9500.

        The estimates in table 4 confirm the results from table 3. There is some substitution between

pre-bid runups and post-bid markups for cases where the S.E.C. subsequently prosecutes illegal

insider trading, and possibly for tender offers. Overall, however, the extent of substitution is small.

The effects of different types of deal characteristics on the size of the average markup, given the size
                                     Schwer: Mark-up Pricing in M&A                                  21


 of the runup, is much larger and more reliable.



4.3 Differential substitution during the runup period


        To this point, the runup period has been held fixed at 42 trading days. I have also estimated

some of the results in this paper using shorter and longer runup and markup periods, with no

substantial change in the results.       To explore this more systematically, 1 consider nine

nonoverlapping runup periods: [(-1,-I), (-2,-5), (-6,-b), (-1 l,-21), (-22,-42), (-43,-63), (-64,-84),

(-85,-l05), and (-106,-126)1, and fourteen markup periods: [(0,126), (0,delisting), (0,0), (1,1), (2.5),

(6.10), (11,21), (22,42), (43,63), (64,84), (85.105), (106,126), (127,253) and (254,delisting)). Table

5 contains estimates of multiple regressions of the returns for the main sample for each of the

fourteen markup periods on the nine runup returns,


                                                   9
                             Markup = a       + E bk Runupk ÷ c,                                  (10)
                                                k= I

where the coefficients bk should equal zero if the markup pricing hypothesis is true and they should

equal -1 if the substitution hypothesis is true. The coefficient estimates that are more than two

standard errors from zero are shown in bold italics.

       There is evidence of partial substitution using the markup return on days 0 and + 1, since the

coefficient estimates are negative for many of the runup periods. The largest of these estimates are

for the announcement day markup return (day 0)and the runup periods covering the week before the

first bid. Day -l has a coefficient of -0.252 and days -2 through -5 have a coefficient of -0.234,

implying that the markup return on the announcement day is lower by about -0.25 times the runup

that occurred in the prior week. When looking at longer markup periods, such as the (0,126) period
                                      Schwert: Mark-up Pricing in M&A



used elsewhere in this paper, the evidence for partial substitution for the day -1. runup remains

reliably different from zero (coefficient of -0.335 with a t-statistic of -4.06). However, the estimates

of the runup coefficients for earlier periods are generally positive, and some are reliably different

from zero. The small negative coefficients for the announcement day 0 are offset by small positive

coefficients at longer lags. Most of the coefficients that are more than two standard errors from zero

after day +1 are positive [for example, in the ranges (11,21) through (106,126)]. Thus, the strongest

evidence in favor of the substitution hypothesis finds the markup is reduced by only about a quarter

to a third of the runup in the week before the first bid. There is no reliable evidence of substitution

in other runup periods.


4.4 Effects of runup in the bidder's stock price


        In addition to the runup in the target's stock price, market participants can also observe the

runup in the bidders stock price before the date of the first bid. To the extent that information about

a pending bid leaks to the market, it should be reflected in the bidder's stock price as well as the

target's (if there are significant value implications for the bidder). To check whether the bidder's

runup affects the premium paid for the target firm, I include the 42-day runup in the bidder's stock

return along with the target runup,


                        Premium1 =      a   + b Runup1 +     c Runup1, +    t,.                    (11)


Estimates of (11) are shown in table 6 in a format similar to table 3 for the 761 cases where the

bidding firm is an exchange-listed firm. For the main sample of 657 matched targets and bidders,

the estimate of the bidder runup coefficient c is 0. 121 (t-statistic of 1.20), showing a weak positive

relation between the runup of the bidder's stock price and the premium paid for the target. The
                                    Schwert: Mark-up Pricing in M&A                                  23


 estimates of the bidder firm runup coefficient are positive for most of the samples. The largest

positive bidder runup coefficient estimates are for auctions (0.576, with a t-statistic of 2.64) and for

tender offers (0.254, with at-statistic of 2.51). Only the estimate for the small sample of 16 MBOs

(where a publicly traded firm participates along with the target firm's management to make a bid)

has a large negative estimate of -0.435 (t-statistic of -1.15), and the average bidderrunup for this

sample is -2.4%, implying that the target's premium is higher as a result of the negative bidder runup

in these cases.

        Table 6 also shows the average bidder runup and markup (measured from the date of the first

bid through 126 trading days after the first bid) for each of the samples. Compared with the target

runups, the bidder runups are small, but most are positive. The largest positive bidder runups are

when there is foreshadowing news (1.7%) and when the S.E.C. subsequently prosecutes illegal

insider trading (2.4%). Unlike the pattern with target finns, where the average runup and markup

are similar, the markups for bidder firms are generally negative. The average for the main sample

is -2.4%. The most negative bidder markups are for auctions (-8.2%), MBOs (-7.7%) and for all-

equity deals (-6.3%). To the extent that auctions are unanticipated at the time of the first bid, the

negative bidder markups reflect the costs of increased competition for the target firm. On the other

hand, since the average runups and markups have different signs for most of the samples, it seems

that the act of bidding conveys negative information that was not known during the runup period.


4.5 Effects of abnormal trading volume


       Besides price runups, it is also common to see unusually high levels of share trading volume

before announcements of merger and acquisition activity. For example, Pound and Zeckhauser

(1990, TableS) show that takeover rumors published in the "Heard on the Street" column of the Wall
  24                                             Schwert.- MarL-up Pricing in M&A



  Street Journal often mention unusual price and volume                          behavior for the stock in question.

  Meulbroek (1992, Table XIII) shows that trading volume is unusually high on days when insiders

  trade before takeovers. She also shows that trading volume is unusually high during the 20 trading

 days before takeover bids, even after netting out the trades of insiders who were prosecuted for

 insider trading.

                 Information about trading volume, as well as price, prior to a formal merger or tender offer

 bid might help bidders judge whether their information had been leaked to the market. To check this

 possibility, I use data from CRSP to estimate a model for daily share trading volume for the 1,169

 target firms for which adequate share trading volume are available. The volume model is:


          Cn(q/q1) = p +        p   Qn(q1/q2) +    'r n(q/q,.1) + y, Qn(q,.1/a2) + o0 R + R + v,1,(12)   a1



 where n is the natural logarithm, q1 is share trading volume for firm i on day t, q is share trading

volume for the exchange where this firm is traded (either NYSE or Amex) on dayt, and Rd is the

stock return for firm i on day t. This model expresses the growth rate in share trading volume,

                   as a function of the previous growth rate, the current and lagged growth rate of market

trading volume, tn(q.jq,,,1), and the current and lagged return on the stock Modeling share trading

volume in terms of its growth rate, with lagged values of the explanatory variables is in the form of

an "error-correction model.'1° This allows share trading volume to be non-stationary, but it also

allows for transitory movements in volume that affect future volume growth. The average estimates

of the parameters of this model are in table 7, along with the average t-statistics.



             Donaldson and Hatheway (1993) also study intraday price and volume behavior before a small number of tender
offers.
            '°
                 Engle and Granger (1987) discuss the ermr correction model and its application to economic time series.
                                    Sch,erz; Mark-up Pricing in M&A                                 25


        The average estimate of the coefficient of lagged share volume, p, implies a tendency for

unusual movements in share volume to be partially reversed. If this coefficient was zero, changes

in log share volume would be entirely permanent (e.g., log share volume would follow a random

walk, ignoring the other parameters in the model). When this coefficient is negative, changes in log

share volume are partly transitory. The average coefficient estimate of -0.417, with an average t-

statistic of -7.25, is consistent with log share volume having both permanent and transitory

components.

       The average estimates of the market share volume growth coefficients, Yo and y1, imply

comovement of trading volume across stocks. The long-run effect of a one percent increase in

market trading volume is (y0 + y1)/ (1 - p), which averages 0.790 across these 1,169 finns.

       There is a weak positive association between share trading volume growth and stock returns.

The average estimate of the contemporaneous coefficient, t3,., is 3.878, with an average t-statistic of

1.56. The long-run effect of a one percent increase in the stock return is (o + 6 ) / (1 - p), which

averages 2.488.

       Using the regression models summarized in table 7, 1 predict the growth in trading volume

from 42 days before through 126 days after announcement of the first bid. Figure 2 shows the

proportion of abnormal returns and volumes that are positive for the event days from -40 to +40

around the date of the first bid (day 0). The pattern is similar for returns and volume in the pre-bid

period, with mostly positive abnormal returns and volume in the three days before the bid. After the

bid, the abnormal returns are positive about half the time, but for the first week after the bid volume

is lower than predicted for many firms (about 80% of the abnormal volumes are non-positive on day

-2). After day +10, the abnormal volumes return to more normal behavior, being positive about half

the time.
26                                  Schwerf; Mark-up Pricing in M&A



       Table 8 summarizes the volume runup, which is the cumulative abnormal share volume from

days -42 to-I relative to the first bid,


                                     Volume runup =                v,                              (13)
                                                         t = -42




where v is the prediction error for share volume growth from (12). Across the main sample of

1,169 firms, where delisting occurred within one year of the first bid, the average volume runup is

about 92%. The average is somewhat lower for deals that subsequently turned into auctions, and

much higher for deals where the S.E.C. subsequently prosecuted illegal insider trading.

        Panel B of table 8 contains estimates of a regression model that includes dummy variables

for all of the deal characteristics examined previously. It also includes the pre-bid stock price runup,

to see whether the relation between volume and stock prices estimated outside the deal periodis

altered in the runup period before a deal is announced. Based on this regression, the average pre-bid

volume runup is significant even when none of the other deal characteristics is positive, including

the stock price runup. The estimate of the intercept is 66%, with a t-statistic of 3.00. The abnormal

stock price runup has a coefficient of 1.163 (t-statistic of 2.27). implying that stock returns and

volume growth move together more in the runup period than in the prior estimation period. The

auction coefficient is -41.4% (t-statistic of -2.11), implying that volume growth is abnormally low

in cases that later turn into auctions. Finally, in cases where the S.E.C. later prosecuted illegal

insider trading, abnormal volume of is higher by 63% with a t-statistic of 2.33. This raises the

possibility that extremely large pre-bid trading volumes trigger S.E.C. investigations.

        A remaining question about the behavior of volume runup is whether it influences the post-

bid markup. When the volume runup is added to the regression model estimated in table 4 to explain
                                      Schert; Mark-up Pricing in M&A                                     27



the total premium paid by successful bidders, the t-statistic for the volume runup coefficient is 1.26,

implying no reliable effect on the total premium. None of the other regression coefficients is

materially affected. Thus, although there is abnormal volume runup before bids, it does not seem

to affect the price paid by bidders, given the other characteristics of the deal, including the price

runup.


5. Specification analysis

5.] Runup as an artifact of deal size


         One interpretation of the pre-bid runup is that it is the probability of a takeover times the total

premium chat will be paid if a takeover occurs:


                                       Runup1 = Prob3 Premium3.                                       (14)


Suppose that the total premium for target flims is determined exogenously, and known to the market

in advance, so that the only uncertainty concerns whether a successful takeover will occur. In this

scenario, the size of the premium determines the size of the runup, so the regressions in tables 3 and

4 would reflect reverse causality.

         Suppose that a combination of legitimate and illegitimate sources of information caused

every deal to be anticipated with Prob3 = 0.5 before the first bid. Then, every runup would be half

as large as the total premium. The coefficient of runup in (6) would be (1/Prob), or two, however,

and the post-bid markup would be perfectly correlated with the pre-bid runup. Remember that the

markup pricing hypothesis implies a regression coefficient on runup equal to one, and that the runup

and the post-bid markup are uncorrelated. Appendix A shows that with weaker assumptions about
28                                   Schuert: Mark-up Pricing in M&A



the probability of a takeover before the first bid (e.g., it is random, but uncorrelated with the size of

the total premium). the coefficient of runup in (6) will have a probability limit that is lower than

[IIE(Prob)], but greater than one (i.e., runups and markups would be positively correlated).

Therefore, even if one were to suppose that the total premium paid in successful deals was known

in advance, and unaffected by early disclosure of information that causes the runup, the one-to-one

relation between runups and total price paid cannot be explained.


5.2 The runuj, index


        If the size of the premium was known a priori, the probability of a successful takeover, Prob1,

could be estimated for any given deal as the runup divided by the total premium, Probe = Runup1        '
Premium. This is called the "runup index" by Jarrell and Poulsen (1989) and an equivalent measure

is used by Meulbroek (1992).

       What can we learn from the runup index? There are several practical problems that must be

addressed. First, how do you treat situations where the runup is negative? Typically, one of two

choices is made: set the runup index to zero, or omit this observation. Second, how do you deal

with cases where the post-bid markup is negative? Again, the usual solution is to set the runup index

to one, or omit this observation. Unfortunately, while these solutions leave a sample of runup

indexes that have the appealing property that they are between zero and one (as a probability

measure should be), this truncation can induce a significant bias into the relation between runup and

total premium.

       As an example, table 9 contains estimates of the means and standard deviations of the runup

index and the average runup and premium for the main sample of 1,173 takeovers that were

consummated within a year. It shows the results for the unadjusted data (previously summarized in
                                    ScIi'er:: Mark-up Pricing in M&A                               29


table   2), and for both methods of correcting runups and markups so that runup indexes are all

between zero and one. It also shows estimates of the substitution coefficient b from the regression

of total premium on runup (6) for the five sets of data.

         The average runup index is 0.589 for the main sample, but it has a standard deviation of

16.73, reflecting many observations outside the (0,1) interval. When some of the outliers are

eliminated by ignoring observations with negative pre-bid runups, there are 912 estimates of the

runup index (77.7% of the main sample). The average runup index from this sample is 0.525, with

a standard deviation of 4.093. When observations with negative post-bid markups are also ignored,

there are only 712 estimates of the runup index (60.7% of the main sample). The average runup

index from this sample is 0.480, with a standard deviation of 0.262. As expected, the average runup

and the average premium are higher, both by about 7%, compared with the original sample. The

estimate of the regression coefficient of total price paid on runup. b, is 0.896 for this sample, with

a standard error of 0.051, so the markup and the runup are reliably negatively correlated. This is an

artifact of truncating the sample to eliminate negative runups and markups. When the negative

runups and markups are set equal to zero, so that the runup index equals zero when runup equals

zero, and it equals one when markup equals zero, the average runup index is 0.462, with a standard

deviation of 0.372. The average runup and markup are higher than for the original sample, but not

by as much as when the negative observations are simply omitted from the calculation. The

regression coefficient estimate is 0.95 1, with a standard error of 0.038, which does not show reliable

evidence of substitution.


5.3 Regressions of premiums on the runup index


          Jarrell and Poulsen (1989) suggest using a regression of the premium on the runup index
30                                    SchwerL Mark-up Pricing in M&A



to test whether deals where a larger proportion of the premium occurs as runup are also deals with

larger premiums. Compared with the regression in (6), the regression of the premium on the runup

index,


                           Premium1    = a' + c (Runup1 / Premium) + u1,                         (15)


has several statistical problems. First, the regressor in (6), Runup1, is divided by the dependent

variable, Premium,, to create the runup index, which could induce negative correlation between the

premium and the runup index. Second, to the extent that the sample or the data must be truncated

to make the runup index lie in the (0,1) interval, this could induce a correlation between the errors,

u,, and   the runup index because the dependent variable Premium is in the denominator of the runup

index.

          To show these problems, I use a bootstrap simulation where the i-unups from the main sample

of 1,173 takeovers discussed above are added to markups that are randomly selected from the same

set of transactions. This experiment is repeated 1,000 times to show the effects of the statistical

problems with the runup index regression. By construction, the markup pricing hypothesis is true

in this experiment, because the runups and markups are uncorrelated.

          Table 10 shows estimates of the runup index regression (15) for the real data and several

summary statistics from the simulated samples. Using the real data, it seems that there is a reliable

negative relation between the runup index and the premium when the cases involving negative

markups and negative runups are omitted (the fourth column of table 10), since the coefficient

estimate is -0.115 and its standard error is 0.031. In the other columns, the coefficient of the runup

index is not more than two standard errors from zero. This would seem to imply that takeovers

where the runup was large (relative to the total premium) were not cases with large premiums.
                                      Schwert: Mark-up Pricing in M&A                              3I



 However, the simulation evidence in the remaining rows of table 10 shows that these regression

results are not meaningful evidence against the markup pricing hypothesis. In the simulations,

premiums are created by combining runups with randomly chosen markups, so there is no way that

either the bidder or the target could react to a higher than average runup by reducing the subsequent

markup as the substitution hypothesis predicts. The average coefficient of the runup index is close

to zero for the full sample and for cases where the runup is truncated by omitting negative runups

or setting them equal to zero (columns 2. 3 and 5 in table 10). In cases where the markup is

truncated by omitting negative markups or setting them equal to zero (columns 4 and 6 in table 10),

however, there is a strong negative bias; the average runup coefficient is -0.1334 when negative

markups are omitted and -0.0988 when they are set to zero. Thus, although the data are constructed

so that the markup pricing hypothesis is true, the runup index regressions seem to show a lack of

relation, or even a negative relation between runup indexes and premiums. These results are artifacts

of underlying statistical problems.

        The last two rows of table 10 show the averages and standard deviations of the t-tests for

whether the runup index coefficient equals zero. Under the null hypothesis that the runup index and

the premium are unrelated, the t-test should have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.

The average t-tests show a pattern similar to the average coefficients, with strong negative bias when

negative markups are omitted or transformed (average t-tests of -4.10 and -5.47 in columns 4 and

6). When the negative markups are not omitted or transformed, however, the effect of dividing the

runup by a premium the is close to zero or negative in some cases is to create many outliers, which

explains the very large standard deviations for the t-tests in columns 2, 3 and 5. Thus, the runup

index regression is plagued by two problems: either the runup is divided by the dependent variable

(which includes some values that are close to zero or negative, so outliers occur), or if data are
32                                  Schwert: Mark-up Pricing in M&A



omitted or transformed to solve the outlier problem, this process creates a correlation between the

errors and the regressors, inducing substantial bias.


5.4 Can the market predict premiums?


        Besides   the statistical problems caused by negative runups or markups, the runup index has

an important conceptual problem that makes it useless to bidders or targets during the process of a

transaction. While the price and volume runups can be seen by both the bidder and the target at the

time of the first bid, and could affect the subsequent behavior of either party to the transaction, the

runup index can only be calculated after the consummation of the deal (or at least at the end of the

bidding). The hypothetical assumption that the total premium is somehow known in advance is

inconsistent with all of the evidence in this paper.

       From table 2, most of the reliable variation of premiums is relaxed to the variation of markups

as the type of deal is learned by the market (e.g., all-cash deals, tender offers, and especially

auctions). There is much less variation in runups across different types of deals. Comment and

Schwert (1994) use several accounting and stock market performance measures to predict takeovers

of exchange-listed firms from 1975-91 and to predict premiums (including a 20 trading day runup

period) conditional on a takeover. They fmd only weak evidence that accounting and stock market

performance variables predict either takeovers or premiums. The most reliable variables explaining

premiums aie auctions, all-cash deals and tender offers, along with yearly dummy variables. Even

including the explanatory variables that are not known at the time of the first bid, the adjusted

coefficient of determination for predicting premiums is only 19.2%. In short, it seems that the type

of competition that the bidder fears is the best systematic explanation for variation in takeover

premiums, and this is not generally known before the first bid occurs.
                                    Sch,..'e,t; Mark.tq Pricing in M&A                              33


6. Conclusions


        The preponderance of evidence in this paper supports the markup pricing hypothesis; that

is, the premiums paid to target shareholders in successful mergers and tender offers (measured from

the date of the first bid announcement through delisting) are essentially unrelated to the size of the

price or volume runups that occur before the announcement of the first bid. Even selecting the

results that are most favorable to the notion of substitution between runups and post-bid markups.

which involve cases where the S.E.C. subsequently prosecuted someone for insider trading, the

regression tests show that the post-bid markup is only reduced by one third of the pre-bid runup. In

other words, at least two-thirds of the runup is added to the total premium by successful bidders (the

sum of runups and post-bid markups).

        This markup pricing behavior is consistent with rationality since, in general, neither bidders

nor targets (management or shareholders) are certain about the causes of pre-bid runups. To the

extent that an increase in the market price of the target's stock reveals information held by other

potential bidders, perhaps foreshadowing an auction, it is to be expected that the successful deal

price will adjust to reflect this information. From this perspective, the kinds of third party insider

trading prosecuted by the S.E.C. in the l980s (e.g., Dennis Levine, Ivan Boesky and Martin Siegel)

impose large costs on financial markets. By stealing a bidder or target firm's proprietary information,

these third party insider traders act like shills in an auction -- they fraudulently fool legitimate

bidders into thinking that there are competing bidders with potentially different private information

who are interested in buying the target. Even the strongest critics of insider trading regulations in

the United States [e.g.. Canton and Fischel (1983) orManne (1966)] do not argue that third party

insider trading based on misappropriated information has societal benefits.
34                                  Scnwerr; Mark-up Pricing in M&A



        Some of the results raise interesting questions about the enforcement of insider trading laws.

There is some evidence that the cases where the S.E.C. subsequently prosecuted people for insider

trading are different from the overall sample. For example, this subset of about 10% of the sample

has partial substitution between the pre-bid runup and the post-bid markup, and the pre-bid price and

volume runups are unusually large for these cases. Since the prosecutions are generally announced

long after the deal is consummated, it seems that the market can partially infer the existence of this

insider trading before the S.E.C. does. This is consistent with the results of Meulbroek (1992), who

finds that much of the price movements during runup periods occur on days when insiders are

trading. One interpretation is that insider trading occurs in a much larger fraction of the cases, but

the S.E.C. only prosecutes the cases where the effects on price and volume are largest.

       In summary, one way to think about the results in this paper is in terms of the random walk

model for stock prices -- the market price on the day before the first bid in a merger or tender offer

sets the level on which subsequent control premiums are determined. It generally does not matter

how that market price was achieved (i.e., how big was the runup during the last month).
                                        Scherr: Mark-up Pr!ci#!g ui M1&A                                       35



Appendix A. The relation between runup and premium when premium is
                     predetermined
        Define runup for firm i, R,, as the product of the total premium paid if a successful takeover
were to occur, P. Limes the probability of a takeover perceived before the date of the first bid, it.
Both R and P are measured as market-adjusted stock returns, so they represent a percentage
deviation from the siock market price measured at the beginning of the runup period. Suppose that
the total premium paid is known in advance to all participants. Further, suppose that the probability
of takeover is uncorrelated with P.
        The expected runup would be


                                          E(R) = E(P1) . E(it1).                                          (Al)

The variance of the runup would be

              Var(R) = Var(P) Var(E1) +              E(ir1)2
                                                               • Var(P) + E(P)2 • Var(1t1),               (A2)

and the covariance of runup with the total price would be


                                      Cov(R,, P1) =    E(it) Var(P).                                      (A3)

Thus, the probability limit of the coefficient from the regression of total premium on runup in (13)

is


       plirn b   =   Cov(R1,   P) / Var(R)
                 =   E()• Var(P1) / [Var(P1) . Var(it1)        + E(ir1)2. Var(P)       +   E(P)2 • Var(it1)]

                 =   1   / { E(it1) • [1 + (VarOt1) / E(ir)2) •   [I   +   (E(P1)2   I Var(P)) 11).       (A4)

If the probability of a takeover is constant across all deals. Var(,t1) = 0, and pli,nb = 1/ E(ic). In

general, plim b> 1, since the denominator of(A4) will be less than 1. Table Al shows the values

of plim b implied if the takeover probability has a uniform distribution over the range [l,u] for
36                                  Schwert Mark-up Pricing in M&A



different values of the upper and lower limits 1 and u. It assumes the values of the mean and variance

of the total price from the 1,173 finns in the main sample of exchange-listed takeover targets, E(P)

= 0.302,   and Var(P,)= 0.1 02. The probability limits for b range from 2.00 to 1.23, being inversely

related to the variance of




                                           Table Al

      Coefficients for runup, R. in a regression of total premium paid, P. on R, where the
 probability of a successful takeover, ,t, is drawn from a uniform distribution over the interval
 [I,u]. EOt) and Var(7t) are the mean and variance of the takeover probability, respectively.
 plirn b is the probability limit of the coefficient of R implied by this model for runup from
 (A4), with E(P1) = 0.302. and Var(P) = 0.102 (the values from the main sample of 1,173
 takeovers of exchange-listed target firms. 1975-91).

     Lower                Upper
     limit, 1            limit, u             E(it)              Var(t)              plim b

       0.00                  1.00              0.50                  0.083              1.23
       0.05                  0.95              0.50                  0.067              1.32
       0.10                  0.90              0.50                  0.054              1.42
       0.15                  0.85              0.50                  0.041              1.53
       0.20                  0.80              0.50                  0.030              1.63
       0.25                  0.75              0.50                  0.021              1.73

       0.30                  0.70              0.50                  0.013              1.82

       0.35                  0.65              0.50                  0.007              1.89
       0.40                  0.60              0.50                  0.003              1.95

       0.45                  0.55              0.50                  0.001              1.99
       0.50                  0.50              0.50                  0.000              2.00
                                    chneri. Mir&-up Pricing in M&A                                 37


References

Arshadi, N., and T. H. Eyssell, 1991, Regulatory deterrence and registered insider trading: The case
        of tender offers, Financial Management 20, 30-39.
Ashenfelter, Orley, 1989, How auctions work for wine and art, Journal of Economic Perspectives
        3. 23-36.
Ball, Ray, S. P. Kothari, and Jay Shanken, 1994, Problems in measuring portfolio performance: An
        application to contrarian investment strategies, Journal of Financial Economics
         forthcoming).
Barclay, Michael J. and Jerold B. Warner, 1993, Stealth trading and volatility: Which trades move
        prices? Journal of Financial Economics 34, 28 1-305.
Bradley, Michael, Anand Desai, and E. Han Kim, 1983, The rationale behind interfirni tender offers:
        Information or synergy?, Journal of Financial Economics 11, 183-206.
Bradley, Michael, Anand Desai, and E. Han Kim, 1988, Synergistic gains from corporate
        acquisitions and their division between the stockholders of target and acquiring firms.
       Journal of Financial Economics 21, 3-40.
Carlton, Dennis and Daniel Fischel, 1983, The regulation of insider trading. Stanford Law Review
       35, 857-895.
Comment, Robert and G. William Schwert, 1994, Poison or placebo? Evidence on the deterrent
       and wealth effects of modern antitakeover measures, Journal of Financial Economics
       (forthcoming).
Corneil, Bradford, and E. R. Sim, 1992, The reaction of investors and stock prices to insider trading.
       Journal of Finance 47, 1031-1060.
Dodd, Peter, 1980, Merger proposals, management discretion, and stockholder wealth, Journal of
       Financial Economics 8, 105-137.
Dodd, Peter and Richard S. Ruback, 1977, Tender offers and stockholder returns: An empirical
       analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 5,351-374.
Donaldson, R. Glen and Frank Hatheway, 1993, An expanded event study approach to the empirical
       analysis of illegal insider trading, working paper, University of British Columbia.
Engle, Robert F. and C. W. J. Granger, 1987, Co-integration and error correction: Representation,
       estimation and testing, Econometrica 55, 25 1-276.
                                  Scherr: ,i4ark-u1, Pricing in M&A



Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient capital   markets: A review of theory and empirical work, Journal
       of Finance 25, 383-417.
Grossman, Sanford J., 1976, On the efficiency of competitive stock markets where trades have
       diverse information, Journal of Finance 31, 573-586.
Grossman, Sanford J., 1977, The existence of futures markets, noisy rational expectations and
       information externalities, Review of Economic Studies 44, 431-449.
Jarrell, Gregg A. and Anneete B. Poulsen. 1989, Stock trading before the announcement of tender
       offers: Insider trading or market anticipation?, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
       5, 225-248.
Jensen, Michael C. and Richard S. Ruback, 1983, The market for corporate control: The scientific
       evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 11,5-50.
Manne, Henry, 1966, Insider trading and the stock market (New York: Free Press).
McAfee, R. Preston and John McMillan, 1987, Auctions and bidding, Journal of Economic
       Literature 25. 699-738.
Meulbroek, Lisa K., 1992, An empirical analysis of illegal insider trading, Journal of Finance 47,
       1661-1699.
Mikkelson, Wayne H. and Richard S. Ruback, 1985, An empirical analysis of the interfirm equity
       investment process, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 523-553.
Milgrom, Paul. 1989, Auctions and bidding: A primer, Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, 3-22.
Pound, John and Richard Zeckhauser, 1990, Clearly heard on the street: The effect of takeover
       rumors on stock prices, Journal of Business 63, 291-308.
Roll, Richard, 1986, The hubris hypothesis of corporaie takeovers, Journal of Business 59, 197-216.
Stewart, James B., 1991, Den of thieves (New York: Simon & Schuster).
White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasucity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test
       for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 8 17-838.
                         Table 1
        Number of Stories in Dow Jones News Retrieval
         Containing "Insider Trading" from 1979-92

                                                   Percent
Year                            Stories            of Total
1979                                  6                 0.3%
1980                                25                  1.4%
1981                                54                  3.1%
1982                                83                  4.8%
1983                                74                  4.3%
1984                                99                  5.7%
1985                                52                  3.0%
1986                               212                  12.2%
1987                               269                  15.5%
1988                               204                  11.7%
1989                               193                  11.1%
1990                               187                  10.7%
1991                               149                   8.6%
1992                               134                   7.7%

Total                             1,741                 100%
                                                                 Table 2
 Average pre-bid runups (Runup) and post-announcement markups (Markup) for different samples of successful mergers
 or tender offers ot exchange-listed target firms. 1975-91. Runup is the cumulative abnormal return to the target's stock
 from day -42 to day - I relative to the first bid. Markup is the cumulative abnormal return to the target's stock from the
 day of the first bid through dehsting or 126 trading days after the first bid, whichever comes first. Also, the proportions
 of each sample that have pre-bid news implying that a bid might be forthcoming (News), or that involve multiple bidder
 auctions (Auctions), or that are tender offers (Tender Offer), or that arc management buyouts (MBO), or that involve the
 payment of cash to target shareholders (Cash), or that involve the payment of equity to target shareholders (Equity), or
 where the S.E.C. later accused someone of engaging in insider trading prior to the takeover (Insiders).

                      Sample                                                        Tender
        Sample         Size, N Runup Markup News Auctions Offers MBO Cash                                               Equity      Insiders

 All Deals           1,398          0.1415 0.1486 0.3970 0.1595 0.3763 0.1001 0,5329 0.1452                                         0.0959
     Standard Deviation             0.1980 0.2700 0.4895 0.3663 0.4846 0.3003 0.4991 0.3524                                         0.2945
Main Sample        1.173            0.1432 0.1591 0.4731 0.1901 0.4484 0.1194 0.6351 0.1731                                         0.1142
   Standard Deviation               0.1907 0.2528 0.4995 0.3926 0.4975 0.3243 0.4816 0.3785                                         0.3182
No News                    618      0.1284 0.1723 0.0000 0.1472 0.3754 0.1100 0.6278 0.2152                                         0.0809
News                       555      0.1598 0.1444 1.0000 0.2378 0.5297 0.1297 0.6432 0.1261                                         0.1514
Auctions                   223      0.1222 0.2796 0.5919 1.0000 0.7175 0.1121 0.7354 0.0583                                         0.1390
NoAuction                  950      0.1482 0.1309 0.4453 0.0000 0.3853 0.1211 0.6116 0.2000                                         0.1084
Tender Offers              526      0.1590 0.2160 0.5589 0.3042 1.0000 0.0817 0.8213 0.0114                                         0.1483
Mergers                    647      0.1304 0.1129 0.4034 0.0974 0.0000 0.1499 0.4838 0.3045                                         0.0866
MBOs                       140      0.1138 0.1258 0.5143 0.1786 0.3071 1.0000 0.7786 0.0000                                         0.1357
Cash                       745      0.1451 0.1945 0.4792 0.2201 0.5799 0.1463 1.0000 0.0000                                         0.1221
Equity                     203      0.1136 0.1084 0.3448 0.0640 0.0296 0.0000 0.0000 1.0000                                         0.0591
Insiders                   134      0.1850 0.2126 0.6269 0.2313 0.5821 0.1418 0.6791 0.0896                                         1.0000
Nolnsiders              1.039       0.1379 0.1522 0.4533 0.1848 0.4312 0.1165 0.6295 0.1838                                         0.0000
 1975                       19     0.1208 0.2020 0.0526 0.4211 0.0526 0.5789 0.2632 0.0000 0.0000
 1976                       35     0.1659 0.1536 0.2571   0.1143 0.3143 0.0000 0.5429 0.2857 0.0286
1977                        59     0.2281 0.1365 0.2034 0.1695 0.3390 0.0339 0.5763 0.2373 0.0169
1978                        65     0.1 941 0.0456 0.2462 0.1385 0.4154 0.0462 0.6000 0.1385 0.0462
1979                        68     0.2516 0.1079 0.294! 0.1765 0.397! 0.0000 0.5735 0.1324   0.0294
1980                        72     0.1959 0.1035 0.36ll 0.1806 0.2917 0.0833 0.6111 0.2222 0.0556
1981                        65     0.1386 0.2329 0.3846 0.2000 0.4000 0.0615 0.5692 0.2000 0.2769
1982                        72     0.1461 0.1825 0.5278 0.1528 0.3194 0.1944 0.6111 0.1667 0.1944
1983                        75     0.1247 0.1285 0.5733 0.1600 0.2533 0.2133 0.6267 0.1867 0.1467
1984                        84     0.1396 0.1109 0.4524 0.1905 0.4762 0.2024 0.7381 0.1071   0.1310
1985                       101     0.1278 0.1135 0.4851 0.1485 0.4455 0.1287 0.6337 0.1386 0.2772
1986                       116     0.0939 0.1657 0.5345 0.1810 0.5862 0.1552 0.7069 0.112! 0.0862
1987                        99     0.0995 0.1837 0.5859 0.2727 0.5455 0.1818 0.6162 0.1919 .0.0808
1988                      119      0.1345 0.2745 0.6807 0.3529 0.6387 0.1597 0.7311 0.1176 0.0588
1989                        68     0.1124 0.1777 0.6912 0.2206 0.6029 0.0882 0.6765 0.1471 0.0882
1990                        35     0.0714 0.1864 0.5429 0.0571 0.4000 0.0571 0.5714 0.3429 0.257l
199!                       21      0.1064 0.2044 0.4762 0.0000 0.2857 0.0476 0.4286 0.4762 0.0476
No4e Average nrnups nd markups thai isa saliably dffeient from the main sample mean *5 the 5% significwsce level we sbown us boW italic:.
                                                        Table 3
Regressions of the total premium paid to target stockholders (Premium) on the pie-bid runup (Runup,) for vanous
samples of successful mergers and tender offers for exchange-listed target firms. 1975-91

                                              Premium = a + b Runup, + u,,

where Premium, = Runup, + Markup, Runup, is the cumulative abnormal return to the target's stock from day -42 to
day -l relative to the first bid. Markup is the cumulative abnormal return to the target's stock from the day of the first
bid through delisting or 126 trading days after the first bid, whichever comes first. The substitution hypothesis implies
b < 1, while the markup pricing hypothesis implies b = I. S(u) is the standard error of the regression and           is the
adjusted coefficient ot determination. White's (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are used.


                Proportion     Sample Constant Std Error T-statistic Slope Std Error T-statistic
   Sample       of Sample      Size, N   a       S(a)      t(a=0)      b     S(b)      t(b1)              S(u)
All Deals                         1,398     0.1382     0.0105    13.11    1,0733    0,0427      1.72     0.2697     0.383
Main Sample                       1,173     0.1567 0.0104 15.14           1.0169 0.0403         0.42     0.2529     0.370
No News              52.7%          618     0.1683  0.0145 11.63          1.0318 0.0589         0.54     0.2538     0.349
News                 -17.3%         555     0.1420     0.0148    9.62     1.0151    0.0552      0.27     0.2515     0.395
Auctions             19.0%          223  0.2783 0.0244 11.40              1.0103    0.1169      0.09     0.2745     0.268
NoAuction            81.0%          950 0.1254 0.0111 11.28               1.0371    0.0421      0.88     0.2391     0.419
TenderOffers         44.8%          526 0,2349 0.0144 16.28               0.8812 0.0584        -2.04     0.2410     0.311
Mergers              55.2%          647     0.1024     0.0136    7.52     1.0808 0.0525         1.54     0.2521     0.411
MBOs                 11.9%          140 0.1348         0.0243    5.55     0.9211    0.1087     -0.73     0.2063     0.336
Cash                 63.5%          745     0.1984     0.0118 16.88       0.9732 0.0475        -0.56     0.2383     0.376
Equity               17.3%          203     0.0952     0.0232    4.10     1.1161    0.0990      1.17     0.2638     0.400
Insiders             11.4%          134 0.2776         0.0291    9.55     0.6486 0.1098        -3.20      0.2181    0.178
No Insiders          88.6%        1.039 0.1467         0.0108 13.53       1.0402 0.0423        0.95       0.2555    0.384

1975                  1.6%            19 0.2108 0.0535            3.94    0.9270 0.2690 -0.27             0.2363    0.310
1976                  3.0%            35 0.1645 0.0664            2.48    0.9341 0.2182 -0.30             0.2698     0.302
1977                  5.0%            59 0.1913 0.0528            3.63    0.7597 0.1472 -1.63             0.2174     0.255
1978                  5.5%            65 0.0203 0.0521            0.39    1.1305 0.1511   0.86            0.2382     0.428
1979                  5.8%            68 0.1553 0.0497            3.12    0.8115  0.1340 -1.41            0.2067     0.343
1980                  6.1%            72 0.0592 0.0395            1.50    1.2260 0.1129 2.00              0.2354     0.518
1981                  5.5%            65 0.2454 0.0483            5.07    0.9101    0.1981     -0.45      0.2676     0.223
1982                  61%             72    0.1885     0.0358     5.26    0.9594    0.1349 -0.30          0.2120     0.481
1983                  6.4%            75 0.0902 0.0318            2.84    1.3065    0.1320      2.32      0.2138     0.606
1984                  7.2%            84 0.1093 0.0266            4.11    1.0116 0.1341         0.09      0.1966 0.434
1985                  8.6%           101    0.1047 0.0284         3.69    1.0683 0.1499         0.46      0.1950 0.351
1986                  9.9%           116    0.1882 0.0237         7.93    0.7597 0.1007        -2.39      0.2253     0.236
1987                  8.4%            99 0.1979 0.0346            5.73    0.8571    0.1287     -1.11      0.2814     0.269
1988                 10.1%           119    0.2293     0.04.44    5.17    1.3363 0.1618         2.08      0.3256     0.400
1989                  5.8%            68 0.1478 0.0385            3.84    1.2655 0.1453         1.83      0.2765     0.496
1990                  3.0%            35 0.1746 0.0483            3.61    1.1658 0.2430         0.68      0.2631     0.387
1991                   1.8%           21    0.1940 0.0564         3.44    1.0973 0.3926         0.25      0.3071     0.273

Joint test for equality of the yearly intercepts or slopes.      35.49                         30.36
    1975 to 1991. distributed 2(16)
                                                        Table 4
 A multiple regression of the toLal premium paid to target stockholders (Prcmium) on the pre-bid runup (Runup,) and
 dun-uny variables for various characteristics of successful mergers and tender offers for exchange-listed target firms.
 1975-91:


                       Premium = a1 + b, Runup, +               a, D,, +        b, D Runup1 + U,,

 where Premium, Runup, + Markup,. The dummy variables appear separately to represent changes in the intercept
a,, and they interact with Runup, to represent differences in the effect of pre-bid runups on the total premium paid,
b,. Runup, is the cumulative abnormal return to the target's stock from day -42 to day -l relative to the first bid.
Markup, is the cumulative abnormal return to the target's stock from the day of the first bid through delisting or 126
trading days after the first bid, whichever comes first. The characteristics of deals that arc used in the regression
include: pre-bid news implying that a bid might be forthcoming (News), multiple bidder auctions (Auctions), tender
offers (Tender Offer), management buyouts (MBO), the payment of cash to target shareholders (Cash), the payment
of equity to target shareholders (Equity), and whether the S.E.C. later accused someone of engaging in insider trading
before the takeover insiders). The substitution hypothesis implies b < I. while the markup pricing hypothesis implies
b = I.      is the adjusted coefficient of determination. White's(1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
are used. The c-statistic for the runup coefficient tests whether it is equal to one; the other 1-statistics test whether the
coefficients equal zero. The tests for whether all of the coefficients representing intercept (a,) and slope changes (b,)
equal zero, which have a large sample X2 (7) distributions, and their p-values are also shown.


                                            Intercept. a,                                       Slope, bk
       Variable           Coefficient       Std Error       T-Statistic     Coefficient        Std Error       T-Statistic
Constant                        0.0404        0.0366           1.10
Runup                                                                            1.1456          0.1324           1.10
News                           -0.0468        0.0204          -2.29             -0.0056          0.0807          -0.07
Auctions                       0.1 ISO        0.0270           4.36              0.0693          0.1254           0.55
Tender Offers                  0.0827         0.0220           3.76             -0.1417          0.0811          -1.75
MBOs                           -0.0211        0.0249          -0.85             -0.0892          0.1093          -0.82
Cash                           0.0988         0.0327           3.03             -0.0539          0.1136          -0.47
Equity                         0.0519         0.0411           1.26              0.0080          0.1527           0.05
Insiders                       0.1229         0.0306           4.02             -0.3717          0.1155          -3.22

Degrees of Freedom                             1,157
                                              0.4379
Standard Error                               0.2389
Test for joint significance,   f (7)            99.1                                                15.0
p-value                                       0.00%                                               3.58%
                                                                                           Table 5
Multiple regressions of markups (cumulativeabnormal returns for the target firm) measured over various spans of trading dav alter the first bid (day 0) on a constant and the
                                                                                                                                                                                   runups
(cumulative abnormal returns) measuredover nine periods before the first bid. Perfect substitution between the
                                                                                                               pre.hid runup and (he post-hid markup would show as a coefficient of -
White's(l98O)he(croskedastjcjty.consjs(entstjdard errors are in parenthesesbelowthe coefficient estimates      Iis the adjusted coefficientof determination and S(u) is the standard error
of the regression. Thesample includes 1.173 NYSE and Amex-listed target firms that were taken over in the 1975.91
                                                                                                                        period.


 Runup Period                                                                 Markup Meaturement Perlod (Depen dent Variable)
 (Independent
   Variable)        (0,126)    (0.Delist)      0           I         (2.5)        (6.10)      (11,21)      (22,42)    (43.63)    (6.4.84)    (85,105)   (106.126)   (I 27.253)     >253
Constant            0.1 717     0.1717       0.1350     0.0126      0.0048      -0.0002       0.0075      -0.0082     0.0056     0.0024      0.0066      0.0056     -0.0003       0.0004
                   (0.0104)    (0.0113)     (0.0057)   (0.0023)    (0.0021)     (0.0020)     (0.0030)     (0.0036)   (0.0031)   (0.0028)    (0.0029)    (0.002!)    (0.0035)     (0.0006)
       -l          -0.3347     -0.2749      -0.2523    -0.0388     -0.0203       0.0335      -0.0010       0.0101    -0.0536    -0.0121     -0.0206      0.0203      0.0810      -0.0212
                   (0.0824)    (0.0942)     (0.0420)   (0.0150)    (0.0177)     (0.0208)     (0.0225)     (0.0318)   (0.0255)   (0.0206)    (0.0242)    (0.0170)    (0.0384)     (0.0216)
   (-2.-5)         -0.0991     -0.0932      -0.2344    -0.0134      0.0300       0.0285       0.0037       0.0750     0.0227     0.0242      0.0047     -0.0402      0.0305      -0.0246
                   (0.0810)    (0.0918)     (0.0410)   (0.0161)    (0.0172)     (0.0161)     (0.0220)     (0.0264)   (0.0229)   (0.0205)    (0.0285)    (0.0188)    (0.0336)     (0.0221)
  (-6,-to)          0.0952      0.1457      -0.0642    -0.0002     -0.0170       0.0362       0.0121       0.0785     0.0185     0.0116      0.0229     -0.0034      0.0606      -0.0101
                  (0.1403)     (0.1458)     (0.0632)   (0.0242)    (0.0230)     (0.0211)     (0.0309)     (0.0558)   (0.0363)   (0.0380)    (0.0347)    (0.0192)    (0.0395)     (0.0081)
(-ll.-21)          0.1603       0.1791      -0.1034     0.0124     -0.0025       0.0213      -0.0099       0.1184     0.0624     0.0397      0.0058      0.0160      0.0157       0.0031
                  (0.1026)     (0.1078)     (0.0448)   (0.0193)    (0.0192)     (0.0172)     (0.0246)     (0.0389)   (0.0268)   (0.0321)    (0.0264)    (0.0162)    (0.0301)     (0.0046)
(-22.-42)          0.0304       0.0445      -0.1138    -0.0214      0.0078       0.0087       0.0068      0.0332      0.0675     0.0162     -0.0013      0.0268      0.0)80      -0.0039
                  (0.0602)     (0.0680)     (0.0313)   (0.0)00)    (0.0129)     (0.0113)     (0.0150)     (0.0239)   (0.0182)   (0.0160)    (0.0133)    (0.0105)    (0.0255)     (0.0029)
(-43.-63)          0.0295       0.0699      -0.1089    -0.0062     -0.0064       0.0070       0.0149       0.0706     0.0479     0.0222     -0.0041     -0.0076      0.0290       0.0114
                  (0.0711)     (0.0764)     (0.0334)   (0.0133)    (0.0124)     (0.0153)     (0.0163)     (0.0229)   (0.0182)   (0.0166)    (0.0182)    (0.0139)    (0.0325)     (0.0087)
(-64,-84)          0.0987       0.1452      -0.0223    -0.0249      0.0183       0.0053      0.0065        0.0474    -0.0074     0.0451      0.0208      0.0099     0.0457        0.0009
                  (0.0723)     (0.0792)     (0.0337)   (0.0116)    (0.0144)     (0.0122)     (0.0221)   (0.0282)     (0.0251)   (0.0172)    (0.0179)    (0.0135)    (0.0257)     (0.0026)
(.85.-lOS)         0.2670       0.2641      -0.0575    -0.0014      0.0)98       0.0139       0.0469     0.0689       0.0443    0.1103       0.0085      0.0)33      0.0040      -0.0069
                  (0.0904)     (0.0996)     (0.0389)   (0.0)27)    (0.0144)     (0.0)28)     (0.0228)   (0.0310)     (0.0243)   (0.0241)    (0.0285)    (0.0)62)    (0.0384)     (0.0054)
(-106,-126)        0.2005       0.2196       00304     -0.0026     -0.00)3       0.0)66       0.0220      0.0495      0.0766    -0.0429     0.0278       0.0245      0.0080      0.0111
                  (0.0758)     (0.0994)     (0.0387)   (0.0187)    (0.0141)     (0.0)47)     (0.0220)   (0.0287)     (0.0251)   (0.0300)    (0.0)67)    (0.0125)    (0.0391)     (0.0133)
                   0.034        0.03!        0.063     0.001        0.000        0.005        0.000      0.048       0.037       0.046      -0.003      0.007        0.006       -0002
     S(u)          0.2484      0.2729       0.2280     0.0540       0.05)4      0.0483       0.0699       0.0864     0.0779     0.0648      0.067)      0.0505      00863        0.0452

Note: Coefficient estimates that are more than two standard errors from zero are shown in bold italics.
                                                                            Table 6
Regressionsof the total premium paid to target stockholders(Premium,) on the pre-bid runup   for the target firm (Runup)and for the   bidder firm (Runupib) for various
samplesof successful mergers and tender offers for exchange-listedtarget firms, 1975-9!:

                                                            Premium1   = a + b Runup1 + c Runup + u.

where Premium, = Runup1 + Markup1. Runup1 (Runupa) is the cumulative abnormal return to the targets (bidder's) stock from day -42 to day - I relative to the first
bid. Markup is the cumulative abnormal return to the target's stock from the day of the first bid through delisting or 126 trading days after the first bid, whichever
comes first. The substitution hypothesisimplies b < I, while the markup pricing hypothesis implies b = I. The average 42-day runup for the bidder is in the fourth
column fromthe right and the average 127-day markup for the bidder is in the third column from the right. S(u) is the standard error of the regression and    T  is the
adjusted coefficientof determination.  White's (1980)  heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors  are used to compute the t-statistics.


                  Proportion      Sample       Constant 1-statistic     Slope     1-statistic    Slope     1-statistic Avg Bidder Avg Bidder
                                  Sizc.N                  t(a=0)           b       t(b=l)          C         t(c=0)     Runup1     Markup,h            S(u)
     Sample       of Sample                        i
All Deals                              761       0.1329      9.94       1.0141        0.29       0.1561        1.70        0.0063        -0.0264    0.2708     0.344

Main Sample                            657       0.1522     11.12       0.9794       -0.41       0.1214        1.20        0.0085        -0.0241    0.2541     0.350

NoNews               55.0%             361       0.1587       8.96      0.9977       -0.03       0.1066       0.72         00013         -0.0201    0.2556     0.324

News                 45.1%             296       0.1417      6.68       0.9740       -0.35       0.1529        1.18        0.0173        -0.0289    0.2530     0.374

Auctions             19.3%             127       0.2782       8.07      1.0676        0.43       0.5761       2.64        -0.0056        -0.0824    0.2676     0.360

NoAuction            80.7%             530       0.1229       8.64      0.9690       -0.63      -0.0120      -0.14         0.0119        -0.0101    0.2375     0.387

TenderOffers         444%              292       0.2329     11.31       0.8368       -2.20       0.2541       2.51         00070         -0.0036    0.2397     0.306

                     55.6%             365       0.1013       5.71      1.0253        0.37       0.0504       0.33         0.0097        -0.0404    0.2555     0.37!
Mergers
MBOs                  2.4%              16       0.0225       0.54      1.0431        0.21       -0.4350     -1.15        -0.0241        -0.0771    0.1584     0.614

Cash                 50.1%             329       0.1997     11.24       0.9258       -1.10       0.1590        1.60        0.0029        -0.0002    0.2468     0.344

                     26.5%             174       0.1081       3.94      1.0624        0.57       0.0204       0.08         0.0125        -0.0633    0.2687     0.349
Equity
Insiders             12.8%              84       0.2710       6.62      0.5895       -2.76       0.2209        1.05        0.0239         0.0007    0.2157     0.134

No Insiders          87.2%             573       0.1430       9.95      09996        -0.01       0.1088       0.98         0.0062        -0.0277    0.2582     0.363
                                                   Table 7
Average estimates of the coefficients of the daily share trading volume prediction model for 1.169 NYSE
and Amex-listed target In-ms that were taken over from 1975-91 (omitting target firms with stock prices
below $2 per share, with equity capitalization less than $10 million, and where it takes more than one year
from the first bid to consummate the transaction). For each fir-rn, a year of daily share trading volume data
is used to estimate the regression,

     en(q,/q1,.1)=i+ p Qn(q1/q1 2)+y1fn(q,Iq1)+y1 fn(                     1/q,.,2)+ö0R ÷6 R +v,
where c, is share trading volume for target firm i on day t, cj,.,, is share trading volume for all shares on the
exchange where target firm i is listed on day t. and R is the continuously compounded return to the stock
of target firm i on day t for trading days -379 to -127 relative to the first bid date. The results in this table
show the average values of these coefficients and the average t-statistics from these 1,169 regressions. The
implied long-run effects of a one percent change in either market trading volume growth, or of the target
firm's stock return are also shown (adjusting for the effects of including lagged values of the variables).
S(v) is the average standard deviation of the residuals from these regression estimates.


                                                                  Average                   Average
Variable                                                         Coefficient                t-statistjc

Intercept, p                                                         -0.0076                   -0.12
Lagged share volume growth, p                                        -0.4171                   -7.25
Market share volume growth, y                                         0.7785                    2.63
Lagged market share volume growth, -y                                 0.3430                     1.12
Stock return, â,,                                                     3.8776                     1.56
Lagged stock return, a1                                              -0.3443                   -0.08
Standard error of regression, S(v)                                   0.9818

Long-run effects of a one pereent change in:
Market share volume, (To + y)/ (1 p)                                 0.7902
Stock Return, ( + 6) / (1 - p)                                       2.4883
                                                  Table 8
Cumulative average abnormal share trading volume growth for days -42 to-I relative to the announcement
of the first bid for 1,398 NYSE and Amex-listed target firms that were taken over from 1975-9!. For each
firm, a year of daily share trading volume data is used to estimate a regression model (see table 7) to predict
daily share volume, ending 126 trading days before the date of the first bid.


                                                                               Average
Sample                             Sample Size, N                           Volume Runup

Full Sample                            1,398                                     0.8973
Main Sample                            1.169                                     0.9160
News                                     555                                     0.9522
Auctions                                 223                                     0.6343
Tender Offers                            525                                      1.0375
MBOs                                     140                                      1.0630
Cash                                     742                                     0.9179
Equity                                   203                                     0.8259
Insiders                                 134                                      1.5407



Cross sectional regression model explaining pie-bid volume runups during days -42 to-I relative to the
announcement of the first bid for 1,169 exchange-listed target firms taken over from 1975-9 1 as a function
of the stock price runup, whether there is news that might foreshadow the bid, whether the bid is a tender
offer, whether the bid is an MBO, whether cash is the sole compensation for target stockholders, whether
equity is the sole compensation for target stockholders, whether multiple bidders eventually compete to
acquire this firm, and whether the S.E.C. eventually prosecuted people for insider trading in this transaction.
    is the adjusted coefficient of determination and S(v) is the standard deviation of the regression residuals.
The standard errors use White's (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent method.


Variable                                       Coefficient            Standard Error              T-statistic

Constant                                         0.6597                      0.2195                   3.00

Stock price runup                                 1.1627                     0.5132                   2.27
News                                             -0.0205                     0.1752                   -0.12
Tender Offers                                    0.293 7                     0.2025                    1.45

M130s                                            0.2533                      0.2883                   0.88
Cash                                             -0.0945                     0.2044                   -0.46

Equity                                           0.0218                      0.2705                   0.08
Auctions                                         -0.4139                     0.1960                   -2.11

Insiders                                          0.6298                     0.2709                    2.33

Degrees of freedom                                                             1,160
1                                                                            0.0098
Standard error of regression. S(v)                                           2.9213
                                                                        Table 9
Average runup index (Runup3/Premium3), pre-bid runup (Runup,), and post-bid markup (Markup) for the mainsample of 1,173 exchange-listed arget firms, 1975-
91. Standard deviationsare shown in parentheses under the averages. Premium3 = Runup1 + Markup. The coefficient from the regression of
                                                                                                                                           Premium3 on Runup,
and its standard error are shown in the last row. Five samples arc used. Column 2 contains estimates from the original untransformed data
                                                                                                                                          (previously shown in
tables 2 and 3). Column 3 shows what happens when the cases whereRunup1 <0 are omitted. Column4 shows the effects of omitting caseswhere either
                                                                                                                                                        Runup
<0 orMarkup3 <0. Column 5 shows what happens when negative values of Runup3 are set equal toO. Column 6 shows the effects of setting negative values        of
either Runup3 or Markup1 equal to 0.


                                                   Negative Runups           Negative Runups and           Negative Runups          Negative Runups and
Statistic                         Main                Omitted                 Markups Omitted                  Set to 0              Markups Set to 0
                                 Sample           (Sample truncation)        (Sample truncation)           (Datatruncation)          (Data truncation)

Sample Size                       1,173                    912                         712                       1,173                       1,173
Average Runup Index             0.5888                  0.5249                      0.4804                      0.6243                      0.4621
(Standard Deviation)           (16.7254)               (4.0928)                    (0.2617)                    (3.0339)                    (0.3724)
Average 42-day Runup            0.1432                  0.2121                     0.2138                       0.1649                      0.1649
(Standard Deviation)           (0.1907)                (0.1507)                    (0.1518)                    (0.1595)                    (0.1595)
Average 126-day Markup          0.1591                  0. 1663                    0.2476                       0.1591                      0.1936
(Standard Deviation)           (0.3564)                (0.2323)                    (0.1880)                    (0.1999)                    (0.1999)
Coefficient of Runup3           1.0169                  0.9444                      0.8958                      I .0076                     0.9513
(Standard Error)               (0.0403)                (0.0518)                    (0.0510)                    (0.0460)                    (0.0378)
                                                                        Table 10
Coefficientsof the runup index (Runup1 / Premium1 ). and t-testsfor whether the runup index coefficient equals zero in a regression of Prcinium (Runup + Markup)
on the runup index. The first rows show coefficient estimates and White's(1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standarderrors using real data for the main sample
of 1,173 exchange-listed target firms, 1975-91. The remaining rows show the averages and standard deviations for the coefficient estimates and the (-tests from
 1.000 simulations where the pre-bid runups are added to randomly selected post-bid markups from the Set of 1.173 takeovers to create premiums such that the
markups and the premiums are uncorrelated (i.e., the markup pricing hypothesis is true by construction). Five samplesare used. Column 2 contains estimates using
the full set of 1,173 observations, Column 3 shows what happenswhen the cases where Runup, <0 arc omitted. Column 4 shows the effects of omitting cases where
either Runup1 <0 or Markup1<0. Column 5 shows what happenswhen negative values of Runup1 are set equal to 0. Column 6 shows the effects of setting negative
values of either Runup, or Markup1 equal to 0.


                                                    Negative Runups          Negative Runups and           Negative Runups            Negative Runups and
Statistic                             Main              Omitted                Markups Omitted                 Set to 0                 Markups Set to 0
                                     Sample       (Sample truncation)         (Sample truncation)          (Data truncation)           (Datatruncation)

                                                                         Real Data
Coefficient of Runupindex            -OMOO1                 0.0008                 -0.1149                      -0.0049                      -0.0055
(Standard Error)                     (0.0005)              (0.0034)                (0.0306)                     (0.0015)                     (0.0185)

                          BootstrapSimulations (runups added to randomly chosen markups to create premiums)
Average Coefficient of
Runup Index                         0.0002                 0.0006                  -0.1334                      0.0017                       -0.0988


Standard Deviation   of
Coefficientof Runup Index           0.0013                 0.0025                   0.0280                      0.003 2                       0.0150


Average t-test for Whether the
CoefficientofRunup Index
EqualsZero.t(c0)                      -0.01               -0.09                      -4.10                        0.45                        -5.47

Standard Deviation of (-test for
Whether the Coefficientof
RunuplndexEqualsZero,t(c=0)            5.73               6.10                       0.86                         5.70                        0.81
            40%
      z
      I..




      I.
      0
            20%
                     r

            10%

    'I



            -10%
                     -126 -105 -84 -63 -42      -21      0         21 42 63 84 105 126               147 168 189 210 231 252
                                                       Event Date Relative to First Bid
 Figure I. Cumulative average abnormal returns io target firms stocks from trading day -126 to +253 relative to the first bid. All NYSE
 and Amex-listed targets that were successfully taken over in the period 1975-91. Market model parameters used to define abnormal
 returns are estimated using the CRSP value-weighted portfolio for days -379 to -127.




   V                                                                 RtWIVOW.M




  30%                                       -
  0
  0.20%                                                                      —   ——                              ———

       10%
               -40       .35   .30   .33   20    .15         -tO    .5   0       5      50      15    20    25     30      35    40
                                                        Event Date Relative to       Fuit Bid
Figure 2. Proportion of abnormal returns and volume growth rates that are poSitive for each of the irading days from -40 to ÷40 relative to
the first bid. Based on all NYSE and Amex-listed targets that were nicceufully taken over in the period 1975-91. Regression models
used to define abnormal returns or volume arc estimated using data for days -379 to -127 relative to the day of the first bid.
