NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A SURVEY OF EMPIRICAL RESEARCH
ON NOMINAL EXCHANGE RATES

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Andrew K. Rose

Working Paper No. 4865

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1994

This paper is to be a chapter in The Handbook of International Economics, edited by Gene
Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, North Holland. For comments, we thank: Michael Dooley,
Charles Engel, Robert Flood, Peter Garber, Charles Goodhart, Karen Lewis, Richard Lyons,
Maurice Obstfeld, Ken Rogoff, and participants at the Handbook of International Economics
Conference at Princeton. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Finance

and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Andrew K. Rose. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4865
September 1994

A SURVEY OF EMPIRICAL RESEARCH
ON NOMINAL EXCHANGE RATES

ABSTRACT
We survey the empirical literature on floating nominal exchange rates over the past

decade. Exchange rates are difficult to forecast at short- to medium-term horizons. There is a
bit of explanatory power to monetary models such as the Dornbusch "overshooting" theory, in

the form of reaction to "news" and in forecasts at long-mn horizons. Nevertheless, at short
horizons, a driftless random walk characterizes exchange rates better than standard models based

on observable macroeconomic fundamentals. Unexplained large shocks to floating rates must
then, logically, be due either to innovations in unobservable fundamentals, or to non-fundamental

factors such as speculative bubbles.

The observed difference in exchange rate and

macroeconomic volatility under different nominal exchange rate regimes makes us skeptical of
the first view. The theory and evidence on speculative bubbles, however, is not conclusive. We
conclude with the hope that promising new studies of the microstructure of the foreign exchange

market might eventually rise to insights into these phenomena.

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Institute for International Economics
11 Dupont Circle, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER

Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business
350 Barrows Hall
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER

A Survey of Empirical Research on Nominal Exchange Rates
Jeffrey A. Frankel and Andrew K. Rose

CONTENTS
0.

Introduction

I. Empirical Studies of Exchange Rate Movements
LA. Overview

LB. Models with Fundamentals
LB.1. Empirical Equations of Exchange Rate Determination
LB.1.a. flexible Prices
LB.1.b. Sticky Prices and Overshooting
LB.1.c. Portfolio Balance and Sterilized Intervention
1.B.2. Anticipated vs Unanticipated Effects: The News
I.B.2.a. Statistical Innovations
I.B.2b. Announcement Effects

I.C. Forecasting
I.C.1. With Fundamentals
I.C.2. Without Fundamentals

ID. Summary
II. Evidence from across Fixed and Floating Regimes
III. Speculative Bubbles

IV. The Micro Evidence on the Foreign Exchange Market
IV.A. The Formation of Expectations
IV.A.1. Are Expectations Stabilizing or Destabilizing: Survey Data
IV.A.2. Heterogeneous Expectations
IV.A.3. Technical Analysis
IV.A.4. Models of Chartists and Fundamentalists
IV.B. Trading
IV.B.1. The Nature of Trading
IV.B.1.a. Time-Vaiying Volatility, Trading Volume, and Location
IV.B.1.b. The Bid-Ask Spread, Volatility and Volume
lV.B.2. The Behavior of Market-makers

IV.C. An Early Assessment of the Market Micro-Structure Literature

\'. Conclusion: Endogenous Speculative Bubbles?

0. Introduction

This paper is intended to be a selective critical survey and interpretation of
recent exchange rate research. We focus on empirical results for exchange rates
among major industrialized countries.

In the decade since the publication of the first two volumes of The Handbook of
International Economics, there have been three main strands of empirical research in

international finance. The first and largest has been concerned with the determination
of floating exchange rates; the second has addressed the issue of the efficiency of
foreign exchange market efficiency and uncovered interest parity; the most recent has

dealt with the characteristics of explicitly managed exchanged rates. In this chapter, we

review the first topic. (The second and third chapters are covered in this Handbook in
the chapters by Lewis, and Garber and Svensson, respectively.) We begin by surveying

the work on exchange rate determination in floating rate regimes, and then consider
evidence across exchange rate regimes. After a brief examination of the issue of
speculative bubbles, our chapter finishes with a discussion of some relatively new

directions in exchange rate research that focus on the micro-structure of foreign
exchange markets.

I, Floating Exchange Rates

l.A. OveMew

Most of the large industrialized economies floated their exchange rate in early

1973, after the demise of the post-war Bretton Woods system of fled exchange rates.
While there had been extensive academic disputes on the relative merits of fixed and
floating exchange rates, this discussion had been carried on at a largely hypothetical

2

level (and is analyzed in the chapter by Garber and Svensson). The generalized
floating regime provided economists with the empirical data set required to resolve
such academic disputes, as well as raising more immediate policy issues. Much of the

international finance literature produced in the decade after the move to generalized
floating focused on the development and estimation of empirical models of floating
exchange rates.

By the early 1980s however, some early apparent empirical successes in the

literature had been overturned and key empirical findings began to turn negative, a

state of affairs that continues through the present day. The most profound negative
result was produced by Meese and Rogoff (1983a, b), who compared the predictive

abilities of a variety of exchange rate models. Their key result was that no existing
structural exchange rate model could reliably out-predict the naive alternative of a
random walk at short- and medium-run horizons, even when aided by actual future
values of the regressors. This extremely negative finding has never been entirely
convincingly over-turned despite many attempts. The simple random walk model of

the exchange rate has become the standard benchmark for empirical exchange rate
performance, no matter how uninteresting it is per Se. (Indeed a number of researchers
have professed to view the random walk "model" as being intrinsically interesting.)

Many of the most important empirical regularities remain what they were 15

years ago. Mussa (1979) made the following points, among others: 1) the log of the
spot rate is approximately a random walk; 2) most changes in exchange rates are
unexpected; 3) countries with high inflation rates tend to depreciate, and at
approximately the inflation differential in the long run; and (4) actual exchange rate
movements appear to overshoot movements in smoothly adjusting equilibrium exchange

rates. The recent literature on floating rates is quite consistent with these propositions.

3

Nevertheless, some progress has been made. Above and beyond the issue of the
determination and prediction of floating exchange rates, there have been a number of
smaller streams of research in the area. One looks across exchange rate regimes;
another focuses on survey evidence of exchange rate expectations; a third promising

new area is the microeconomic modelling of foreign exchange markets. One of our

objectives in this chapter is to provide a road map to these areas; we survey each in
turn.

There are already a number of existing surveys. MacDonald (1990) and
MacDonald and Taylor (1989, 1992, l993b) offer particularly comprehensive reviews of

the literature, focussing primarily on exchange rate determination and prediction.
More selective perspectives are offered by Dornbusch (1987), Boughton (1988), Kenen
(1988), Mussa (1989), Meese (1990), and Krugman (1993).

l,B. Models with Fundamentals

I.B.1, Empirical Equations of Exchange Rate Determination

The standard workhorse of international finance is the monetary model of the

exchange rate. The model starts with the reasonable statement that, as the exchange
rate is the relative price of foreign and domestic money, it should be determined by the
relative supply and demand for these moneys. The typical model stems from three
equations. The first is money-market equilibrium:

p1 = y1 - ai1 +

(1)

where: m1 denotes the stock of money at time t; p denotes the price level; y denotes

real income (all three in natural logarithm form); i denotes the nominal interest rate; €

4

denotes a shock to money demand; and a and

are positive structural parameters. It

is traditional to assume that there is a comparable equation for the foreign country,
and that domestic and foreign elasticities are equal.1/ Subtracting the foreign
analog (where an asterisk denotes a foreign value) yields:

(p-p) (m-m)1 - p(yy*)

+

a(i-i) - (€-€).

(2)

LB,1.a. The Monetary Model with flexible Prices

The other two conditions enter as different substitutions for two of the terms in

this equation. One can model (and replace) the relative price term by assuming that
prices are either flexible or sticky. Similarly, one can model the interest rate
differential as either simply satis'ing uncovered interest parity, or as incorporating
some adjustment for risk. The simplest monetary model assumes flexible prices: thus,

in the absence of transportation costs and other distortions, purchasing power parity

(PPP) holds, at least up to a disturbance:

(p.p*)1 =

e

+

(3)

where e denotes the (log) spot domestic price of a unit of foreign exchange, and v is a

stationary disturbance. The solution for the exchange rate is then immediate:

e1 = (mm*)t - (y_y*)1 + a(i-i)1 -

v.

1/ Though Haynes and Stone (1981) object to this practice.

(4)

5
Finally, it is typically assumed that domestic and foreign assets are perfect substitutes.
except possibly for an exogenously-varying time premium, so that the interest rate
differential equals the expected depreciation rate plus a possible risk premium, .
Thus a modified form of uncovered interest parity [UIP] holds:

(i-i') - Pt = E1(dej/dt

(5)

where E1 denotes the expectations operator conditional on information available at

time t. The simple flexible-price monetary 'fundamental" can be defined as:

(rn-rn')! - 3(y-y')1 - (€-E')1 - v +

(6)

p1.

Substituting in the modified UIP condition, the exchange rate equation then becomes:

e=

+ aE1(dej/dt.

(7)

This expression was first drived by Mussa (1976). A very similar equation can be
derived from the currency substitution model (e.g., Calvo and Rodriguez, 1979).

Stocknian (1980) and Lucas (1982) gave the simple monetary model more
respectability by replacing the ad hoc money demand equations with money-in-theutility-function and cash-in-advance assumptions, respectively. Early and influential
empirical studies included Frenkel (1976, 1978), Bilson (1978), and Hodrick (1978) and

other papers gathered in Frenkel and Johnson (1978).
After initial claims of success, the empirical failures of the simple monetary

model became swiftly apparent. The coefficient estimates (of a and )

and empirical

fit of such models were never particularly good, except perhaps under hyperinflation

6

conditions. Also, high volatility of real exchange rates, and the highly positive

correlation of nominal and real exchange rates, became obvious enough to warrant
explicit treatment. Finally, the models turned out to forecast poorly out-of-sample.

Some of these problems can be easily illustrated using actual data. Figure 1
contains time-series plots of bilateral Japanese/American data from 1960 though 1992;

Figure 2 has the analogs for the UK vis-a-vis Germany. Each figure portrays three
variables: the nominal exchange rate (graphed with a thin solid line); the real exchange
rate (graphed with plus marks); and "monetary fundamentals" (graphed with small

circles). The real exchange rate is the nominal exchange rate adjusted using Consumer
Price Indices; monetary fundamentals are a (scaled) standard measure of flexible-price
monetary fundamentals, namely the ratios of domestic and foreign money supplies over

the ratio of domestic and foreign levels of real output (that is, [(MUjMo)/(YuyJYG)]
for the British-German case, and analogously for the Japanese-U.S. case, where capital

letters denote the levels of the variables).
The graphs show a number of features which are pervasive in bilateral data.

First, both the nominal exchange rate and fundamentals appear to be non-stationary,

though the real exchange rate does not (except perhaps for a trend in the real
yen/dollar rate). Second is the important comparison across regimes. Nominal
exchange rates were fixed explicitly at the beginning of the sample under the Bretton
Woods regime, and the pound-mark rate was also stabilized during the period 1990-92,
when Britain was in the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System.
In each case (1960-72 for the yen/dollar rate in Figure 1, and 1960-69 and 1990-92 for

the pound/mark rate in Figure 2), nominal exchange rate stabilization is reflected in a
corresponding stabilization of the real exchange rate, but surprisingly did not require a
corresponding stabilization in macroeconomic fundamentals.

7
Nominal (.) and Real (+) Exchange Rates; Monetary Fundamentals (0)

are Jaanese/4mer]can Patios of Money to Peal 0utut
500 -

00
300 -

200

-

100

-

65

70

BE

75

os

Yen/Dollar
Figure 1

Nciunal (.) and Peal (+)

Echarige Pates; Monetar, undamertals
Out0u

are Britisn,Gernian Patios of Money to Peal

2

65

Bra tish

Figure 2

70

7aDS

eb

Pounds/Deutschemar'k

8
A third stylized fact is that the relationship between the monetary fundamentals

and the nominal exchange rate does not appear to be close in the short-run, though

they may share longer-run trends. Given that both sets of data are typical for
industrialized countries, the finding of poor coefficient estimates and goodness-of-fit in

flexible-price monetary models is unsurprising. Finally, the correlation between

nominal and real exchange rates is considerable at high frequencies, though it appears

to fall at lower frequencies. This apparent contradiction to the assumption of flexible
prices leads naturally to the subject of price stickiness.

I..1.b. Price Stickiness and Overshooting
An alternative to making the PPP assumption is explicitly to model goods-market

prices as being sticky, at least in the short run. The classic theoretical paper was
Dornbuschs (1976b) contribution which demonstrated that in the short run, nominal
exchange rates may "overshoot" their long-run levels.1/ This was followed by

Frankel (1979), Mussa (1979), and Buiter and Miller (1982).2/ Price-stickiness can
be easily, incorporated into the empirical structural models of exchange rates.

A simple, yet strong, statement that captures the essence of the Dornbusch model
is a statement of proportionality between the real exchange rate and the
contemporaneous real interest differential. Start by subtracting expectations of the
inflation differential from the statement of uncovered interest parity:

1/ Forerunners included Mundell (1964), Niehans (1975) and Dornbusch (1976a).
2/ Extensions, such as full system estimation with an allowance for cross-equation
constraints, included Driskill (1981), Driskill, Mark and Sheffrin (1992) and Papell
(1988, 1989, 1993).

9

(i-1)1 - E(dp-dp1) = E1(de3/dt - E1(dp1-dp1) + p1
or

r1 - r =

where: r1 and r1 are the

E1(dq1)/dt +

p,

(8)

cx ante expected real interest rates, defined by r1

i1-E1(p,,1-

ps), and q1 is the real exchange rate, defined as e1 - p1 + p' Equation (8) states that

for both countries' assets to be willingly held, a difference in real interest rates across
countries must be matched by an expectation of real depreciation.
A second assumption used is that the real exchange rate is expected to revert

toward a long run equilibrium value, .

E1(dq,)/dt = -e(q1 - ).

(9)

Combining equations and solving, we obtain a proportionality between the level of the

real exchange rate and the real interest differential:1/

q - , = -(1/8)[(i-i)1 - E1(dp1-dp'j] + p1 = -(1/s )[r1 - r'J + Pt

(10)

Recent tests have focused on this equation per se.

.1/ Initially, attention focused on short-term real interest rates (e.g., Frankel, 1979).
Short-term rates are implicit in equation (10) here, as is appropriate if the expected
regression of the real exchange rate in equation (9) is assumed to follow a first-order
autoregressive process, which in turn is the rational expectation if price adjustment follows
a first-order autoregressive process. An alternative approach using long-term differentials
was inaugurated by Isard (1983). Assume a version of equation (9) in which some long
span of time, say 1/ years, is considered sufficiently long for q to return to equilibrium
(with no position tal&n on the specific time path). If such an equation is combméd with
a version of equation (8) expressed with correspondingly long-term interest rates, the result
is a version of equation (10) suitable for use with real interest rates of term 1/
6

10

Early tests of the overshooting model tended to focus on models more like
Dornbusch (1976), that is, fleshed out in a form more complete than the simple

proportionality between the real exchange rate and the real interest differential. The
more complete model allows for price stickiness in a standard way. Substitute a
Phillips-curve equation where the flexible-price model assumed continuous purchasing
power:

j(yyLR)1 +

y - LR.

=

+

g + E(1+1-1)

6'(q) + 4'r1

=> P1+iP1 = O(q) + 4r1 + g1 + E(,1-1)

(11)

where: y is the long-run level of output; g is a well-behaved shock to goods market
equilibrium; and

is defined as the price level that would prevail at time 1 if prices

were flexible and goods markets cleared:1/

+ 4ir1 + g1 = 0.

Equation (11) gives the system its long-run equilibrium (i), and its dynamics
(which are correctly incorporated in 0, if investors are rational). Substituting equation
(10) and conventional money demand functions like equation (1) yields a complete

equation of exchange rate determination. This is essentially the flexible-price monetary

model with the addition of extra terms representing the real interest differential, the
risk premium p1 [if any] and variation in the long-run equilibrium exchange rate

/

[if

Obstfeld an Rogoff (1984) and Engel and Frankel (1984b) provide a detailed
discussion of the p term.

11

any). These extra terms can be measured in a variety of ways, allowing for estimation
of the exchange rate equation.
At first, empirical tests of exchange rate models with price stickiness met with

success, particularly for the mark/dollar rate.1/ Subsequently, however, results
began to fall apart, even in-sample: e.g., Frankel (1983a, b) and Backus (1984). More
importantly, the models caved in to the same Meese and Rogoff onslaught that
effectively did in the flexible-price models (i.e., unsuccessful tests of out-of-sample

predictive performance).

Recent research has focused on equation (10) -- the simple testable implication

of the model relating the real exchange rate to the contemporaneous real interest
differential -- using increasingly sophisticated time-series econometrics. The third in

the series of papers by Meese and Rogoff (1988) used the Engle-Granger test for cointegration, and failed to find evidence of such a relationship. Similarly, Campbell and

Clarida (1987) found that very little of the variation in the real exchange rate could be

explained by variation in the real interest differential. Many authors have noted that a
possible reason for such results is the existence of a missing variable, which would

enter as a determinant of either a time-varying long-run real exchange rate or a risk
premium. Another possibility is weak power in the tests, since failure to find
statistically significant evidence of co-integration never entitles one to claim that such a
relationship does not exist.
A number of subsequent studies have used increasingly powerful econometric

firepower (e.g., the Johansen procedure), and have also included other variables.
Blundell-Wignall and Browne (1991) find evidence of co-integration between the real

exchange rate and real interest differential when a measure of the cumulated current

1/

E.g.,

Frankel (1979).

12

account is included; Edison and Pauls (1992) find less evidence. Throop (1992) claims
strong results, including out-of-sample predictive ability, when allowing for several

other variables: a lagged effect of the real interest differential, the budget deficit, the

real price of oil, and a measure of the relative price of non-traded goods. Baxter
(1994) finds evidence of a relationship between real exchange rates and real interest
rates by looking at lower-frequency data than earlier studies.

I.B.1.c. Portfolio Balance Models and Sterilized Intervention

The portfolio-balance model is a third approach to modelling exchange rates,
beyond the flexible-price and sticky-price monetary models. Tobins portfolio-balance
model was internationalized by Kouri (1976), Branson (1977), Girion and Henderson

(1977) and Allen and Kenen (1980), among others. The literature was ably surveyed
by Branson and Henderson (1985).

Relative to the monetary models of exchange rate determination, the key
modification made by the portfolio-balance theorists is the assumption that domestic

and foreign securities are not perfect substitutes. The result is that a risk premium
intrudes on the uncovered interest parity condition, and supplies of bonds and other

non-monetary assets intrude on the equation of exchange rate determination. The
exchange rate is determined by the supply and demand for all foreign and domestic

assets, not just the supply and demand for money as in the monetary approach. The
resulting models are of particular use when one wants to consider the possible effects
of sterilized intervention by the monetary authorities or of current account imbalances.

Intervention represents a change in the supplies of assets, and thus in the protfolio
balance model works to change the exchange rate accordingly: a purchase of foreign
assets drives up the price of foreign exchange. In the "small-country portfolio-balance

model where international capital flows are assumed to be denominated solely in

13

foreign currency, current account balances represent a change in asset supplies. A
surplus raises the supply of foreign assets and thus reduces their price, which is an

appreciation of the domestic currency. In more realistic models where the portfolio
behavior of both domestic and foreign residents is relevant for market equilibrium,
current account balances represent a change in asset demands, if the foreigners have a
preference for their own assets. A surplus raises the net wealth-weighted worldwide
demand for domestic assets, and thus again leads to an appreciation of the domestic
currency.

Early empirical tests of the portfolio-balance model, such as Branson, Halttunen
and Masson (1977, 1979), were not particularly successful, even in-sample. The

outlook did not much improve when researchers did a more careful job of measuring
asset supplies (e.g., Frankel (1983b), Backus (1984), and Golub (1989) ).
This line of research took a new direction in the l980s. Early work had modelled

international asset demands as arbitrary functions of expected returns. Subsequently,
portfolio-balance modelers made the assumption that investors diversified their
portfolios optimally, in the manner dictated by expected utility maximization. A typical
implication in these models was that the degree of substitutability between domestic
and foreign assets depended inversely on the degree of risk-aversion and the exchange

rate variance (or variance-covariance matrix, when there are more than two currencies

in the portfolio). The relevant empirical tests are surveyed in the chapter by Lewis in
this volume.!!
Ai noted, one of the major motivations for considering the portfolio-balance

approach is that it enables one to consider the possible effects of sterilized
intervention, that is, intervention that is not allowed to affect money supplies, and thus

1/ E.g.: Frankel (1982), Black and Salemi (1988), Lewis (1988), and Engel and
Rodriguez (1989).

14

has no effect on the fundamentals dictated by monetary exchange rate models. Several
studies published in the aftermath of the 1983 Jurgensen Report by research
departments of G-7 central banks on intervention surveyed the empirical literature that
existed at that time (Tryon (1983), Henderson (1984), Henderson and Simpson (1983),
and Henderson, Danker, Haas, Symansky, Tryon (1987).) The early studies mostly
consisted of various tests of the portfolio-balance model, using quarterly data on asset
supplies. Estimated effects were generally small and statistically insignificant, if even of
the correct sign. This was especially true when the quantity of intervention was
calculated in the theoretically correct fashion (i.e., cumulative, combined with

government deficits and any other components of the net supplies of assets

denominated in the currencies in question).1/
Several developments reinvigorated this subject of research toward the end of the
1980s: the advent of the "signaling" hypothesis, the increased availability of daily data,

and the widely perceived success of concerted intervention by the G-7 in the period
beginning with the 1985 Plaza Agreement to bring down the value of the dollar.
Studies such as Dominguez (1990, 1992) seemed to show an effect when actual daily

intervention data were used. The more recent literature has been comprehensively and
ably surveyed by Edison (1993).

The current conventional wisdom (e.g., Obstfeld 1990) is that -- precisely because

international financial markets are well-developed, highly integrated, and subject to
diversification -. central bank purchases or sales of foreign exchange are un]ikely to be

large enough to have much of an effect on the exchange rate. The possible exception
is non-sterilized intervention that affects money supplies. If the effect is

1/ E.g., Dooley and Isard (1982a, 1983), Frankel (1982) or Rogoff (1984).

15

contemporaneous, it is simply a variety of monetary policy. However, the effects on
future money also matter. Some years ago Mussa (1981), among others, suggested the
"signaling" hypothesis: sterilized intervention may be effective if it signals future
changes in monetary policy.

This channel requires, first, that intervention is

reported to market participants, and second that they interpret it as conveying
information on future monetary policy that is actually validated on average by the

monetary authorities. Klein (1993) offers evidence relevant to the first proposition;
Kaminsky and Lewis (1993), Klein and Rosengren (1991) and Lewis (1990, 1993) offer

much more ambiguous evidence relevant to the second. Dominguez and Frankel

(1993a, b) have found evidence of intervention effects through both the signaling

channel and the traditional portfolio channeLl/ Catte, Galli, and Rebecchini (1994)
and Eijffinger and Gruijters (1991) claim even stronger evidence of effects of daily
intervention.

A persuasive, but less-noticed, train of thought within the portfolio-balance model
has been pursued by Dooley and Isard (1982b, 1987, 1991), as well as Krugnian (1985)

and Bovenberg (1989), who view the cumulated current account deficit as an important

determinant of the exchange rate because political risk puts a limit on the extent to
which international investors wish to lend to a particular country, rather than because
exchange risk puts a limit on the extent to which investors wish to hold assets

denominated in a particular currency. Dootey, Isard and Taylor (1993) claim some
supporting empirical findings.

LB.2. Anticipated vs Unanticipated Effects; The "News"

1/ Domiriguez and Frarikel (1993a, b) use survey data to measure investors'
expectations, as discussed in Part V below, and newspaper accounts to distinguish between
public reports of intervention and true intervention.

16

Volatility of foreign exchange rates is considered to be sufficiently high to be

worthy of study by applied researchers. Standard asset-pricing models rationalize
volatility in terms of revisions regarding expectations of future developments arising Out

of new information, that is, in terms of news. In this sub-section, we review recent
developments in this literature.

From the time when expectations were first introduced into the asset-market

approach to exchange rate determination,1/ it has been recognized that unexpected
events have a qualitatively different effect on the exchange rate from anticipated
developments. Specifically, the exchange rate should change discontinuously in

response to new pieces of unanticipated relevant information, and not otherwise.
Anticipated discrete changes are ruled out, since they would represent an unexploited

profit opportunity. Only gradual changes are possible in the absence of news. Such
gradual changes can occur, for example, in step with the price level or the stock of
foreign assets, which typically move gradually over tirne.2/ (For the time being, we
are ruling Out speculative bubbles and the bursting thereof, which would constitute a

sudden change without an exogenous cause. They are considered in further below.)
I.B.2.a. Statistical Innovations

Dornbusch (1978; 1980, pp.157-163) and Frenkel (1981, pp.686-693) suggested the

term "news to call attention to the sort of unanticipated developments that should
affect the exchange rate discretely. Their empirical work used statistical innovations
(from ARIMA processes) in interest differentials and other macroeconomic variables

/

j/ Black (1973) was an early introduction of rational expectations.
Obstfeld and Stockman (1985) provide a survey. For the efficient markets hypothesis
to hold, gradual appreciation or depreciation must be offset by sufficient differences in
interest rates, so that domestic and foreign assets are equally attractive at the margrn.

17

to model expectations and thereby derive measures of news.j/ This approach tends
to produce more significant effects on the exchange rate than using similar
macroeconomic variables that have not been converted to statistical innovations.

Dornbusch found that unexpected current account improvements result in dollar
appreciations, as did Branson (1983) in a VAR study motivated by the portfolio-

balance model. Dornbusch found that business cycle effects were also of the right sign,

but insignificant. The money supply effects were mixed. Edwards (982, 1983) found
positive effects of innovations in the domestic/foreign money supply ratio on the price

of foreign exchange, as would be predicted by most monetary models. MacDonald
(1983), however, found that an unanticipated increase in the German money supply led
to an appreciation of the Deutschemark, suggesting anticipations of future tightening.
To distinguish between the flexible-price and sticky-price versions of monetary

models, one can look at interest rate innovations. On the one hand, Frenkel found
positive effects of innovations in interest rates on the price of foreign exchange,
suggesting that they capture inflation expectations, as called for in his flexible-price

monetarist model. Copeland (1989, p.225), on the other hand, found that an

unanticipated increase in the German interest rate led to an appreciation of the
Deutschemark.

More recently, Eichenbaum and Evans (1993) have sought to isolate changes in
the U.S. money policy that can be specifically identified as unanticipated, exogenous, or

deliberate, using three alternative methods: statistical innovations in a measure of nonborrowed reserves; innovations in the federal funds rate; and deliberate policy shifts

recorded from history using the minutes of the Federal Reserves Open Market
Comj-nittee, They find similar results with all three measures: monetary contractions

1/ For current account balances and business cycle developments, Dornbusch used
deviations from OECD forecasts.

18

lead to dollar appreciations. At the same time, there are also positive effects on
interest rates, suggesting to Eichenbaum and Evans a rejection of the popular real
business cycle model (the modern successor to the flexible-price monetary model), and

support for a "liquidity effect as in the overshooting model. The surprising aspect of
their findings is that, in violation of rational expectations, there is a two-year lag before

the peak effect is felt in the market. Grilli and Roubini (1993) have recently extended
the Eichenbaum-Evans approach to include monetary policy in other major

industrialized countries. Clarida and Galli (1994) undertake a VAR decomposition of
exchange rate variation into nominal shocks and real shocks. They interpret the results
as consistent with the Eichenbaum-Evans finding, and therefore with the sticky-price

textbook model [albeit with lags]. However, it should be stressed that the EichenbaumEvans results have not yet been subjected to a thorough sensitivity analysis (e.g., out-ofsample forecasting tests).

Even though the Dornbusch-Frenkel approach of using fundamentals that have
been converted to statistical innovations tends to produce more satisfactory results than

the earlier studies, the improvement is distinctly limited. In the first place, market

anticipations are not measured accurately. To use an ARIMA or VAR process as a
measure of what agents expect, is to ascribe to them simultaneously not enough

information, and too much. It does not ascribe to them enough information, because it
leaves out all the thousands of bits of information that market investors use, beyond a
few simple macroeconomic times series. It ascribes to them too much information

(even under the assumption that agents are rational and thus use all available
information), because it assumes that they know the parameters of the statistical
process from the beginning of the sample period. A second problem with early
implementations of the methodology is that they typically measure the news with final
money supply numbers after revisions by government agencies, ignoring that these are not

19

generally the same as numbers first announced, and that even first announcements
generally take place days, weeks, or months after the period to which they pertain.
LB.2.b. Announcement Effects

Both of the measurement problems inherent in the statistical approach can be
solved, albeit not without work. By compiling actual announcements of official statistics
from press releases, wire service stories, or newspapers, one can measure information

as it actually becomes available to the market.jJ One major advantage of such
announcement data is that one can pinpoint the day, and often the time ofday, when
the announcement was made. One can then observe the exchange rate immediately
before and after the announcement, to see the effect. The advantage of such precise
timing is that one can hope to isolate the impact of one particular bit of information.
Empirical results show that effects typically diffuse rapidly in a stream of other

information that the researcher is not able to observe, so that statistical significance
disappears when exchange rate changes are measured a day or two late, let alone over
months (as in standard tests of exchange rate determination). By seeking to isolate the
impact of the announcement, one might hope to explain a large fraction of the
variation in the exchange rate over short intervals. However, in practice, even when
the effects are highly significant statistically, the goodness-of-fit statistics are usually
disappointing.

The use of data from surveys on the forecasts of market participants is a way of
addressing the problem that agents form their expectations based on a far wider set of
data than anything the econometrician can ever hope to measure. The survey data
have become a standard basis from which to measure the unanticipated component of
announcements; Money Market Services, International ("MMS) provides the most

1/

The analogous stock-market tests are called event studies.

20

popular survey. The timing of the MMS surveys is almost perfect for research
purposes, since MMS and other financial services collect their surveys in order to see

what market participants expect the datum in question to be, typically a couple of days
before the scheduled announcement date. The use of survey data is discussed at

greater length in Part IV below.
Engel and Frankel (1984a) examined the reaction of the mark/dollar rate to
announcements regarding the preceding week's MI in the early 1980s. Positive U.S.
money surprises were associated with appreciations of the dollar at the same time that
they were associated with increases in interest rates, leading the authors to conclude

that: 1) during this period the Federal Reserve was expected to correct any deviations
of the money supply from its target path; and 2) expectations of monetary contraction

tend to raise real interest rates and cause the currency to appreciate, as in the
Dornbusch overshooting model. Cornell (1982), Frankel and Hardouveljs (1985), and

Tandon and Urich (1987) found the same patterns in other exchange rates: U.S. money
surprises are followed by significant changes in the U.S. interest rate that are negative]v
correlated with the price of foreign exchange.

Ito and Roley (1987) looked at the reactions in the yen/dollar rate both to
macroeconomic announcements in the United States and to those in Japan. They
found that U.S. money announcements had the greatest effect.
The money announcements lost much of their impact later in the 1980s, after the

Fed began to put less emphasis on its Ml targets. A number of authors have found
strong announcement effects for other variables, however. Hardouvelis (1988) finds

significant dollar appreciations associated with news of increases in the trade balance,

decreases in inflation, and improvements in the business cycle.1/ A general pattern

1/ Hogan, Melvin, and Roberts (1991) find the same trade balance effect.

21

throughout is that the reaction in the price of foreign exchange is in the opposite

direction as the reaction in interest rates, which tends to support the view that these
are changes in real interest rates, and that they work on the exchange rate in the
manner of the Dornbusch overshooting model. Beck (1993) finds that government
announcements of unexpectedly large budget deficits cause the dollar to appreciate
against foreign currencies, and argues that this is evidence against debt neutrality, and
in favor of the Dornbusch overshooting model.

LC, Forecast Ana1ysis

Fitting exchange rates to contemporary observable variables, in-sample, is one

thing. Forecasting out of sample is quite another, as many applied researchers have
found.

I.C.1. Forecasting with Fundamentals

In a now-classic study, Meese and Rogoff (1983a) compared the out-of-sample

forecast precision of a variety of different exchange rate models. Using monthly data
for three bilateral dollar exchange rates (as well as an effective dollar exchange rate),
Meese and Rogoff compared forecasting performance by both structural and nonstructural exchange rate models, as well as by contemporaneous spot and forward rates.
The non-structural models included both univariate models and vector-autoregressions.
The structural models included variants of both flexible- and sticky-price monetary

models. It had been widely recognized (e.g., Meese and Singleton (1982)) that
exchange rates could in some sense be modelled well by an autoregression with one

unit root. But Meese and Rogoff (1983a,b) showed the important result that a simple
martingale process forecasts as well as more complex structural models -- up to a year

22

in advance -.

even

providing to the structural models ex post information on future

fundamentals such as money and output. Meese and Rogoff (1983a) found these results

using a variety of different estimation techniques. They corroborated their results in
Meese and Rogoff (1983b) using grid-search techniques in place of actual estimation, a

procedure that is immune to the usual endemic estimation problems such as
simultaneity bias. Their work permanently shifted the focus of empirical exchange rate
work from in-sample fitting to prediction analysis.

Some authors have pursued more sophisticated econometric estimation

techniques in attempts to overturn such results. For instance, Meese and Rose (1991)
used a variety of non-linear and non-parametric techniques in the context of structural

exchange rate models. They found little evidence of either 'time-deformation" or
significant non-linearities in the functional forms linking exchange rates to

fundamentals which could explain the poor performance of linear exchange rate
models.

Not all performance tests on structural exchange rate models have come Out
completely negative. Woo (1985) estimated a flexible-price version of the monetary

model for the dollar-deutschemark and found that the model worked well in the sense
that maximum likelihood estimation lead to plausible and stable parameter estimates
which did not reject tests of cross-equation restrictions and which out-forecast a

random walk model a year ahead. The use of a lagged endogenous variable was
crucial; Woo justifies it by appealing to slow adjustment of money demand. Similarly,
Somanath (1986) also found that a monetary model with a lagged endogenous variable

forecasts better than either a monetary model by itself or the lagged endogenous
variable by itself (i.e., better than the random walk). Finn (1986), and MacDonald and
Taylor (1993a, 1994) also claimed some predictive power for the monetary model.
Schinasi and Swamy (1989) found that the sticky-price monetary model outperforms the

23

random walk when allowance is made for both a lagged endogenous variable and timevarying coefficients. (Related results are reported in Wolff, 1987.)

A number of authors have found that structural models appear to dominate the
random walk's forecasting ability at relatively long prediction horizons, a result
consistent with the visual impression of common trends in exchange rates and

fundamentals given by figures 1 and 2. They include Meese and Rogoff (1983b); Mark
(1992); Chinn (1992); and Chinn and Meese (1992). However, the Meese and Rogoff
analysis at short horizons has never been convincingly overturned or explained. It
continues to exert a pessimistic effect on the field of empirical exchange rate modelling

in particular and international finance in general.

I.C.2. Forecasting without Fundamentals

The triumph at short and medium horizons of the naive random-walk "model" of
exchange rates (if only by default) over fundamental-based models, first discovered by

Meese and Rogoff, lead to a burst of research on the univariate characteristics of
nominal exchange rates, It still remains distressing that a model as simplistic as a
martingale appears to perform empirically as well as extremely sophisticated
alternatives, which sometimes involve complicated estimation strategies.

Engel and Hamilton (1990) use a two-state Markov switching univariate model,

and find that the movements of three bilateral American dollar rates are characterized
by long swings (although the exchange markets seem not to realize this in the sense

that the model does not help to explain deviations from uncovered interest parity).
They also find that the forecasts of this model are somewhat better than those of the
pure random walk. However, Engel (1992) analyzes eighteen exchange rates, including
eleven non-dollar rates, and finds that the Markov-switching models does not have

superior forecast precision to that of a simple random walk, even though it performs

24

better inside the sample. This has become a standard finding; a number of authors
have found models which perform well in-sample (e.g., compared with a simple

martingale) but which break down in out-of-sample prediction analysis. For instance,

Diebold and Nason (1990) use a general non-parametric estimator on a number of

different exchange rates. They find that univariate models fit the data much better insample with their estimator than, e.g., a simple random walk, but that the non-

parametric estimator does not produce forecasts superior to those of a random
walk.1/

Baillie and Bollerslev (1989) find co-integration in a set of American dollar
exchange rates; that is, the dollar-yen exchange appears to be co-integrated with e.g.,

the dollar-DM rate. This finding is quite plausible (and not especially striking) in the
context of standard structural exchange rate models, since all bilateral dollar exchange
rates can be expected to react similarly to American-specific shocks, for example.

However, Diebold, Gardeazabal and Yilmaz (1994) point out that co-integration of

bilateral rates implies that, univariate dollar-yen exchange rate forecasts, for example,
should be out-performed by incorporating information from the dollar-pound rate
(since co-integration implies predictability from the co-integrating relationship). It is

therefore all the more striking that Diebold et. a!. find no evidence of predictability

and co-integration, using the data set of Baillie and Bollerslev. They claim that there
is little evidence of common shocks to the movements in dollar exchange rates.

1/ Small-sample problems -- learning and the "peso problem" -- are relevant here; e.g.,
one might explain Engel and Hamilton in this vein. Other references include Lewis
(1989).

25

I.D. Sumniarv

Studies such as Baclcus (1984), Meese arid Rogoff (1983a, 1983b, 1988) and

Campbell and Clarida (1987) are typical of the empirical literature that seeks to
explain or forecast the monthly or quarterly exchange rate with traditional observable
macroeconomic fundamentals, whether based on the monetary or portfolio-balance
models. The dispiriting conclusion is that relatively little explanatory power is found,
and the models contain little forecasting ability compared to very simple alternatives.
Existing structural models have little in their favor beyond theoretical coherence.
Positive results, when they are found, are often either fragile, or unconvincing in that

they rely on implausible theoretical or empirical models. For these reasons, we, like
much of the profession, are doubtful of the value of further time-series modelling of
exchange rates at high or medium frequencies using macroeconomic models.

II. Evidence from across Fixed and Floating Regimes

It is widely known that real and nominal exchange rates are highly correlated,

and that the shocks common to both are highly persistent (e.g., Mark (1990)). These

correlations are visible in Figures 1 and 2. To many, the fact that real exchange rate
variability went up when nominal variability did after 1973 (also visible in the Figures).

suggests that nominal prices are sticky and that monetary disturbances therefore cause

both nominal and real exchange rate changes, as in the Dornbusch model. Others,
such as Stockman (1987,1988), argue that real exchange rate variability is caused by

shifts to tastes and technology, and would have gone up after 1973 regardless of the
exchange rate regime, which is endogenously chosen in any case. (Real exchange rate
variability is surveyed in the chapter of this volume by From and Rogoff; regime choice

26

is surveyed by Garber and Svensson.) A small recent literature has considered
evidence across exchange rate regimes. We now survey this work.
The evidence discussed in Section 1 above shows that it is difficult to model

exchange rate movements in many respects. Nevertheless, exchange rates have one
striking empirical feature with which any plausible theory must be consistent:

systematically differing volatility. In particular, exchange rates that are officially
stabilized show not only low nominal variability, which one would expect virtually by

definition, but low real variability as well, compared to those that are allowed to float

more or less freely. In the past decade, a number of empirical papers have
characterized or exploited these and other regime-specific differences in volatility.
Mussa (1986, 1990) convincingly demonstrated that nominal and real exchange
rate volatility moved closely together, both being substantially lower during regimes of

fixed rates. Persuasive examples include the Canadian experiment with floating in the
l950s, and changes in Ireland's exchange rate regime from a pound to a Deutschemark
peg. Eichengreen (1988) provides similar evidence from the interwar period. Mussa
reasoned that nominal exchange rate regime-specific differences in real exchange rate
volatility could be caused for a variety of reasons, including bubbles, sticky prices,
systematically varying macroeconomic shocks, or regime-specific differences in policy
behavior.

The subsequent literature has corroborated Mussa's findings regarding real
exchange rate volatility, and examined differences in macroeconomic behavior to

discover the source of the finding. For instance, Baxter and Stockman (1989) looked at
the behavior of a variety of macroeconomic variables across different types of exchange

rate regimes, arguing, as had Mussa, that most theories of the open economy imply
economic behavior which varies systematically with the nominal exchange rate regime.

Baxter and Stockman examined a number of real macroeconomic variables (including

27

consumption, output, and trade flows, de-trended in two ways) over forty industrialized

and developing countries. While non-theoretical in nature, their results are striking
and intuitive. The only systematic regime-specific pattern in the data is higher
volatility of the real exchange rate in regimes of floating rates. By way of contrast, the
volatility of, for example, output and consumption does not appear to vary
systematically with the exchange rate regime.

A similar tactic has been used by Flood and Rose (1993) to study monetary
models of exchange rate determination (with both flexible and sticky prices). They
rewrite the structural form of the simple monetary model with flexible prices as

e1 -

a(i-i)1 =(m-m)1 -

(y-y) - (e-c),

(4)

and note that both the left- and the right-hand side variables can be measured or

estimated. Their analysis hinges on the fact that the volatility of the left-hand side
variable during a regime of floating is between three and nine times as volatile as
during a fixed exchange rate regime. However, the right-hand side has approximately
comparable volatility in fixed and flexible exchange rate regimes. (Both facts are

consistent with Figures 1 through 2.) The more general point is that the volatility of
macroeconomic variables such as money, output, and prices (appropriately
parameterized) does not vary much across exchange rate regimes, certainly not enough
to rationalize the large cross-regime differences in exchange rate volatility. Since few
macroeconomic variables have regime-specific volatility, they interpret this to mean

that macroeconomic variables cannot be very important determinants of exchange rate
volatility. This point transcends the narrow confines of the flexible-price monetary.
model, since different macroeconomic theories of exchange rate determination (e.g.,
models with sticky prices) merely change the right-hand side of equation (4') from one

28

set of macroeconomic components to another. There appears to be a growing genera]
consensus for this conclusion, since it is the rule rather than the exception that large
movements in exchange rates occur in the absence of plausible or detectable

macroeconomic events. In the two minutes that the average reader has taken to read
this page, the dollar/yen exchange rate may well have fluctuated 5 basis points!
The strength of this work is that it characterizes a wide range of currencies and
exchange arrangements, and does not rely on sensitive statistical techniques. The
evidence convincingly shows that the nominal exchange rate regime is systematically

and substantially associated with differences in real exchange rate volatility. This
evidence is inconsistent with a large class of models which predict nominal exchange

rate neutrality. This insight is deceptively simple, yet empirically potent. It is quite
general, since many theories of the open economy imply that the behavior of such
variables as, e.g., money, inflation, and output vary with the exchange rate regime.
Differences in economic behavior are especially plausible since the exchange rate
regime is chosen by the monetary authorities deliberately.
Instead of looking across regimes of fixed and floating exchange rate regimes, one

can also look across regimes of tranquility and turbulence. Hyperinflations represent
one of the most interesting types of economic turbulence from the viewpoint of an
exchange rate analyst. Monetary theories of exchange rates work substantially better in
hyperinflatioris than in periods of low inflation inflation, in that they can explain the

trend in the nominal exchange rate. The classic work is by Frenkel (1976, 1980). The
impression that variation in the real exchange rate is lower in hyperinflations than in
normal times is not correct, however.1/

1/

See,

e.g., Davutyan and Pippenger (1985) and Krugman (1978).

29

To sum up, there are substantial differences in nominal and real exchange rate
behavior across exchange rate regimes which do not appear in observable

macroeconomic variables. There are two possible reasons for this. The first is that
unobservable macroeconomic shocks affect the exchange rate. The second is that

bubbles, defined as exchange rate movements that are unrelated to fundamentals, are
the cause of regime-varying exchange rate volatility.

III. Speculative Bubbles

Sections 1 and 11 suggest that the case for macroeconomic determinants of

exchange rates is in a sorry state. With the exception of some significance in tests of
statistical innovations and announcements at very short horizons, and some hazy

predictive power at long horizons, there is little support for the standard
macroeconomic models. Negative findings such as Meese and Rogoff (1983a, 1983b),

Campbell and Clarida (1987), and Flood and Rose (1993) suggest more than a failure
of specific models of exchange rate determination or typical econometric difficulties.

Instead, such results indicate that no model based on such standard fundamentals like
money supplies, real income, interest rates, inflation rates and current account balances
will ever succeed in explaining or predicting a high percentage of the variation in the

exchange rate, at least at short- or medium-term frequencies.
As noted, two broad possibilities remain. The "equilibrium theory" of exchange

rates asserts that real exchange rate movements have their roots in real fundamental
determinants such as productivity shocks and changes in tastes, even if these factors are

unobservable to the econometrician. The alternative theory is that speculative bubbles
exist which affect nominal and real exchange rates. A number of pieces of evidence
point us away from the equilibrium theory.

30
First, the observed pattern of co-movement of exchange rates and interest rates,
documented in Section 1, contradicts the equilibrium view.1/ Second, direct
evidence on goods prices such as Engel (1993), covered in the chapter by From and
Rogoff, suggests price stickiness. Third, and most convincingly, the cross-regime

evidence reviewed in Section II shows little support for the conclusion that exchange

rate variability is caused by shocks to tastes and technology. No macroeconomic
variable other than the exchange rate demonstrates regime-varying volatility; there is
little indirect confirmation of regime-varying unobservable shocks from other parts of
the economy.

The alternative is the possibility of speculative bubbles, i.e., exchange rate

movements that are not based in fundamentals, but rather are based in self-confirming
expectations. We now turn to this possibility.
In the theoretical literature, a rational speculative bubble is simply the additional

indeterminate term that appears in the solution to a differential or difference equation
representing a rational-expectations equilibrium to equation (7). These bubbles arise
both in monetary models (e.g., Mussa (1976) or Dornbusch (1976b)) and portfoliobalance models (e.g., Rodriguez (1980)), although Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983) have

sought to rule out bubbles on a priori grounds.
If we could be confident of the fundamentals part of the equation, we could test

for the presence of the additional bubble term in (7). Flood and Garber (1980)
introduced a test for a deterministic speculative bubble, that is, one that never bursts
once it gets started. Rational speculative bubbles were made stochastic by Blanchard

(1979) and Dornbusch (1982). Several researchers have sought to introduce tests for
stochastic bubbles in the foreign exchange market, to see if variability is higher than

1/ E.g., Engel and Frankel (1984a), Hardouvelis (1988), and Eichenbaum and Evans
(1993), Baxter (1984), and Clarida and Galli (1994).

31

can be explained by macroeconomic fundamentals. These tests are closely related to
so-called volatility tests, and are surveyed in Frankel and Meese (1987). They have in
common that their usefulness is sharply limited by the prerequisite that one already
knows how to model fundamentals.

Meese (1986) uses a conventional monetary approach to define fundamentals and
a Hausrnan-style specification test to test for bubbles; he finds some evidence of
exchange rate bubbles.1/ Evans (1986) has produced evidence of bubbles in the

pound/dollar exchange rate in the early 1980s, based upon a non-parametric test for
systematic deviations from uncovered interest parity. Evans' work is distinguished by

its careful treatment of the issue of potential data mining, which is accounted for by

simulation analysis of different aspects of his test procedure. However, Flood and
Hodrick (1990) argue that there is an observational equivalence between expectations

of process-switching and bubbles. This problem, in addition to the fact that any test for
bubbles is based upon a posited model of fundamentals (an especially important
problem in the exchange rate context, given the serious specification difficulties which

plague structural exchange rate models) lead Flood and Hodrick to contend that there
is little convincing evidence of bubbles in exchange rates.

It is unfortunate but true that these tests cannot help us choose between the
bubble hypothesis and the hypothesis of unknown or unobservable fundamentals as

maintained by the equilibrium theorists. Nevertheless, the fact that exchange rate
variation cannot be explained with any existing model of fundamentals is certainly
intuitively consistent with the existence of bubbles, especially when coupled with the
cross-regime evidence.

1/ A related test, in the context of the German hyperinflation, is Casella (1989).

32

However, if one is to conclude that speculative bubbles are important in
exchange rate determination, this still leaves us with a rather unsatisfying conclusion.

Rational speculative bubbles are completely indeterminate. It would be nice if
economists could say something more specific about what gets bubbles started or what

causes them to burst, and perhaps also why large bubbles appear to exist in floating

rather than fixed exchange rate regimes. This leads us to the subject of the
microstructure of the foreign exchange market, and the possibility of endogenous
speculative bubbles.

IV. The Micro Evidence on the Foreign Exchange Market

To repeat a central fact of life, there is remarkably little evidence that
macroeconomic variables have consistent strong effects on floating exchange rates,
except during extraordinary circumstances such as hyperinflations. Such negative
findings have lead the profession to a certain degree of pessimism vis-a-vis exchange

rate research.
We are somewhat more optimistic about the course of future research in
international finance, in part because of the prospect of new developments that analyze
the market for foreign exchange primarily from a microeconomic perspective. This

market microstructure" approach represents a radical departure from the traditional
modelling strategy of treating foreign exchange rates as a macroeconomic relative

price. The microeconornic approach to the foreign exchanges is at least potentially
consistent with well-known regularities in the data. For example, the volume of
transactions in foreign exchange markets is very large. The April 1992 surveys

conducted by the Federal Reserve, Bank of England and Bank of Japan found that
daily trading totaled $623 billion in New York, London and Tokyo combined, up from

33

$430 billion a day in April 1989. (The global total, including other locations as well, is
considerably higher.) It is difficult to rationalize the well-known high gross (but low
net) volume of trading on foreign exchange markets without some microeconomic

modelling, particularly attention to heterogeneity in the forecasts of market

participants. It is far too early to say whether this research agenda will be successful;
but the beginnings look promising.

IV.A. The Formation of Expectations

Expectations of future exchange rate changes are a key determinant of asset

demands, and therefore of the current exchange rate. The expectations variable is
relatively straightforward in the conventional monetary models: in theoretical terms it
is determined by the rational expectations assumption, while in empirical terms it is

typically measured by the forward discount or interest differential. The standard
empirical implementation of rational expectations methodology infers ex ante

expectations of investors from ex post changes in the exchange rate. (This is a
particularly attractive way to measure investors' forecasts in the portfolio-balance

model, where expectations cannot be measured from the forward market because of a
possible exchange risk premium.) However, we may wish to consider a possible failure
of the rational expectations methodology, for example due to learning, or peso

problems arising from infrequent sudden changes in the exchange rate, as are likely in
models like those with speculative bubbles. In this case, we need direct measures of
expectations.

IV.A.1. Are Expectations Stabilizing or Destabilizing? Survey Data

34

One of the things we would like to know about expectations is whether they are
stabilizing or destabilizing. Expectations can be described as stabilizing when the effect

of an appreciation today -- relative to some long-run path or mean -- is to induce

market participants to forecast depreciation in the future. If investors act on such
expectations, they will seek to sell the currency, thereby dampening the original

appreciation. This is the stabilizing speculation that Friedman (1953) argued would

thrive under floating rates. Expectations can be described as destabilizing, on the other
hand, when the effect of an appreciation is to induce market participants to forecast

more appreciation in the future. If investors act on such expectations, they will seek to
buy the currency, thereby exaggerating the original appreciation. This 'bandwagon

behavior" can create speculative bubbles. The question then becomes whether
expectations are in fact formed in a stabilizing or destabilizing manner. (This question
is independent of the perennial question of whether expectations are rational, covered
in Lewis's chapter.)

The forward rate cannot be used to measure expectations if one does not feel

able a priori to rule out the importance of risk. A new data source has been used to
shed light on such questions: the results of surveys of market participants conducted by

financial services firms.1/ Much of the new literature on survey data has been
surveyed by Takagi (1991).

1/ These data have also been used for other purposes. One purpose is testing rational
and
expectations: Dorninguez (1986); McDonald (1990); Liu and Maddala (1992); Chinn
Frankel (1994). Another purpose is studying the behavior of the risk premium: Froot
and Frankel (1989); MacDonald and Torrance (1988b, 1990); Cavaglia, Nieuwland,
Verschoor, and Wolff (1993); Cavaglia, Verschoor, and Wolff (1993a); Frankel and Chinn
(1993). The earlier part of this literature has been surveyed by Front and Thaler (1990)
and Hodrick (1988). The survey data have also been used in studies of announcement
effects and foreign exchange intervention, discussed in Sections I.B.2.b and l.B.1.c of this
paper, respectively.

35

Frankel and Froot (1987a) found that investors tended to react to current
appreciations by expecting future depreciations, consistent with either regressive
expectations, adaptive expectations, or distributed-lag expectations, at horizons of one

year, si.x months, or three months. In other words, expectations appeared to be
stabilizing..1/ Subsequent studies, however, indicated that investors at shorter

horizons of one week to one month tend to extrapolate recent trends: Frankel and
Froot (198Th, 1990a), Froot and Ito (1989) and Ito (1994). Expectations at these short
Iorizons appear destabilizing. Since most trading in the foreign exchange market is
known to consist of taking and unwinding positions at horizons measured in hours
rather than months or years, these findings have potentially serious implications.

Most of the survey services that furnish data for these tests are conducted at

either the short horizons or the long horizons, but not both. This raises the possibility
that different types of market participants form expectations in different ways, and that

some are more heavily represented at the short horizons (call them speculators) and
others at the long horizons (call them investors). The distinction between speculators
and investors is one of several motivations for departing from the assumption that all
participants share the same expectations, which until recently was universally made in

the field, and to focus on heterogeneity.

EV.A.2. Heterogeneous Expectations

Some of these articles acknowledge that survey respondents exhibit diverse

opinions, even though a measure of central tendency (usually the median) is typically

used to measure "the" expectation. More recent papers have explicitly pursued the
heterogeneity of expectations, in two ways. One approach is to look for different

1/ Also Cavaglia, Verschoor and Wolff (1993b).

36

patterns of expectation formation among different classes of actors. The other

approach looks for a relationship between the dispersion of opinion and other
microstructure variables of interest, such as the volume of trade in the market.
Ito (1990) and MacDonald (1992) have access to dis-aggregated data on survey

responses. Ito examines systematic differences in the behavior of Japanese
respondents, distinguished by function such as banker, trader, corporate economist, etc..

He finds evidence of wishful thinking: Japanese exporters forecast a depreciation of
the yen, and importers an appreciation. MacDonald looks at differences in the
behavior of corporate respondents residing in seven major countries. He finds more
evidence of extrapolative behavior among German respondents than in other countries.

The brute fact of expectations heterogeneity, regardless of the cause, has
implications for the foreign exchange market. A high dispersion of expectations should

lead to a high volume of trade. Indeed, in the absence of some sort of heterogeneity,

it is hard to see why investors trade at all. Frankel and Froot (1990b) look at
dispersion in the survey data, and find that it is related to a measure of the volume of
trade as well as to market volatility.

IV.A.3. Technical Analysis

Frankel and Froot (1986, 1990a,b) reported that "technical analysis' became
increasingly prevalent in the exchange rate forecasting business during the first half of
the 1980s. Similarly, Taylor and Allen (1992) conducted a questionnaire survey on the
use of technical analysis in the London foreign exchange in 1988. At least 90 per cent

of respondents reported placing some weight on technical analysis, with the proportion

rising steadily with the shortness of the horizon. These short-horizon technical analysts
bear a striking resemblance to the infamous destabilizing speculators of classical
financial mythology.

37

Schulmeister (1987) offered a description of the various rules of technical analysis

that are in widest use, and calculated that all of the rules would have made money over
the period 1973-86. Goodman (1979) also found that the forecasts of technical analysis
performed relatively well as did Levich and Thomas (1993), although Blake, Beenstock,

and Brasse (1986) found the reverse.

Most of the rules of technical analysis seem to fit into the category of
destabilizing behavior, such as the "momentum" models that call for buying when the

current price exceeds the price that held, for example, five days ago. The rules are
clearly more complicated than simple extrapolation, however, and in some cases may

not be destabilizing at all.1/ Garber and Spencer (1994) argue that the use of
dynamic hedging programs by portfolio managers have been destabilizing in recent

episodes. Of related interest is the paper by De Grauwe and Decupere (1992), which
finds significant evidence of psychological barriers at round numbers in the yen/dollar
market: exchange rates tend to resist movements towards numbers such as 130 or 140

yen to the dollar, but to accelerate away from them once the barriers have been
crossed. Krugman and Miller (1993) have considered the implications of stop-loss

orders for exchange rate determination. Work like this may allow for much more
progress in the future.

IV.A.4, Models of Chartists. Fundamentalists and Noise Traders

A number of researchers have deviated from the rational expectations paradigm
to sketch what might be called theories of endogenous speculative bubbles. They
typically start from the proposition that market participants' forecasts are drawn from
competing views, including for example both technical analysis and economic

1/ Allen and Taylor (1989).

38

fundamentals. From there they attempt to build models of exchange rate
determination.

Relevant studies include Goodhart (1988), Frankel and Froot (1986, 1990a),
Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1990), De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann

(1990) nd Goldberg and Frydman (1993a, b).1/ In such models, changes in the
weights assigned by the market to the competing models can themselves alter asset

demands and give rise to changes in the exchange rate. DeGrauwe and Dewachier
(1990) show that the interaction of chartists and fundamentalists can give rise to an
exchange rate process characterized by chaos: a process that is essentially
unpredictable, despite the fact that the underlying model is deterministic.

This area of research is quite small. However, it is potentially important, since it
is the part of the market microstructure work that is concerned with some of the most
central issues of international finance, such as excess volatility and exchange rate

determination. We hope for further developments.

IV,B. Trading

The tremendous level and growth in the volume of trading, particularly in the
New York, London, and Tokyo foreign exchange markets, has been documented in

statistics collected by central banks every three years. An important question is: Who

does all this trading? Typically, a very high fraction of these transactions are reported
to take place among banks; less than five per cent involve importers, exporters or other
non-financial compan.ies.2/ Traders at most banks take large positions for a few

1/ The implications of a mixture of noise traders and regressive expectations for the
question of systematic differences in rates of return on currencies are considered in Evans
and Lewis (1992).
E.g., Frankel and Froot (1990b).

/

39

hours, but limit their overnight positions sharply, or close them out altogether.1/
new players such as hedge funds and other institutional investors have
Recently,

become more important.V Much of the work on market microstructure has
analyzed the process and characteristics of trading on foreign exchange markets; we

now survey that literature.

IV.B.1. The Nature of Trading and Volatility

The market micro-structure literature has been successful in uncovering a number

of trading regularities in the data. For instance there is evidence of "time
deformation."

IV.B,1,a. Time-Varying Volatility. Trading Volume. and Location

Goodhart and Giugale (1993) and Wasserfallen and Zimmerman (1985) have
observed systematic patterns to intra-day volatility. They find that volatility is smaller
during intervals when trading volume is known to be smaller, such as over the weekend

and over the lunch hour, and is especially large during the first hour of Monday trading
for each currency in its own market (i.e., in the domestic countly), even when markets

in other time zones have opened earlier. Such findings suggest either that residents
have a comparative advantage at processing news regarding their own currencies, or

else that trading is in some sense largely unrelated to news, perhaps even that trading
activity per se generates volatility. Of related interest is Batten and Bhar (1993), who
explore the observed statistical relationship between trading volume and price changes,

/

1/ Fieleke (1981).

Hedge funds manage portfolios for a small number of relatively large individual
investors. They deal heavily in derivatives, but the implication of the name is the reverse
of the truth: they speculate rather than hedge. On the topic of the new institutional
investors, see International Monetary Fund (1993).

40

in yen futures markets in three locations. They find, contrary to their expectations, that

the relationship does not depend on the size of the market, and they suspect an
asymmetry in the role of information flows emanating from the U.S. and Japan.
Many econometricians have observed that exchange rate volatilities change over

time. The ARCH model (AutoRegressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity) has become
a very popular way of addressing time-varying variances. Bollerslev, Chou and Kroner

(1992) offer a general survey. The pattern of time-varying variances matters for the
statistical properties of econometric tests of all sorts of propositions, such as those

covered in this survey. The pattern matters particularly when investor behavior is

thought to depend on perceived uncertainty, as in the literature on time-varying risk
premiums surveyed by Frankel (1988) and the chapter by Lewis. Here we consider
only the evidence relevant to microstructure.
Engle, Ito and Lin (1990, 1992) examine intra-day yen/dollar volatility in four
markets: Europe, New York, Pacific, and Tokyo. They find that upswings in volatility

in one market are passed on as higher volatility to the next market, an ARCH pattern
that they describe by analogy with a global meteor shower and interpret as evidence of
information processing. Baillie and Bollerslev (1991) also find evidence of the meteor

shower in hourly data on four exchange rates. In each case they also find evidence of
increased volatility occurring around the opening and closing of each of the three

major world markets, London, New York, and Tokyo. There also appears to be a
correlation of intra-day patterns in volatility and volume (e.g., high at the opening and
closings of markets). The question becomes whether high volume and volatility reflect
the efficient processing of information regarding fundamentals, or something else (such
as noise trading).

Jorion (1994) seeks to test one important microstructure theory. The theory says
that the correlation between trading volume and volatility should be positive when the

41

source of trading volume is disagreement (heterogeneity of beliefs), but the correlation

should be negative when volume is determined by the number of traders, due to
averaging over larger numbers (liquidity) should reduce variability. He finds support

for the theory, in that the variance is observed to depend negatively on a time trend
intended to reflect the growing number of traders, and otherwise to depend positively

on volume. He uses options prices to obtain an implicit measure of the anticipated
component of the variance, rather than the usual ARCH approach.
IV.B.1.b. The Bid-Ask Spread. Volatility and Volume

Jorion also looks at the bid-ask spread, the standard measure of transactions
costs. He confirms earlier findings (Glassman, 1987, and Bessembinder, 1993) that the
spread widens before weekends and holidays, supporting the liquidity effect. He also
confirms earlier findings that the bid-ask spread depends positively on the variance, but
negatively on volume. He and Wei (1994) use the option-implied volatility for this
purpose. Glassman, (1987), Boothe (1988), Bollerslev and Domowitz (1993), Bollerslev

and Melvin (1994), and Lee (1994), use GARCH models of the variance in their tests
of the effect on the bid-ask spread.

The presumption here is that information is processed efficiently. At a time
when beliefs are particularly heterogenous and therefore trading volume is particularly

high, the presumption is that the market is responding to a rapid generation of
information.

Hsieh and Kleidon (1994) cast some doubt on the proposition that information is

processed efficiently. Their point of departure is a model by Admati and Pileiderer. It
features a crucial distinction between well-informed traders and liquidity traders. Some

of the iquidity traders have some discretion as to when they trade, and so seek to trade
at a time when high volume drives down the cost of transaction. (This is the liquidity

effect on the bid-ask spread.) Hsieh and Kleidon confirm the correlation of volume

42

and volatility that the Admati-Pfleiderer model is designed to explain: there is a
bunching of volume and volatility at both the open and the close in the foreign
exchange market.

A deeper look uncovers serious problems, however. First, the bid-ask spread is
observed to go

not down, at the open and close, contradicting the notion that

liquidity traders are deliberately bunching at these times to save on transactions costs.
Second, at the close in London, when volume and volatility are high in that market,
there is no detectible simultaneous effect in the open New York market. This seems to

contradict existing models of asymmetric information, which presuppose a common

knowledge of economic structure despite the existence of idiosyncratic information. If

volatility is high in London because information relevant to the pound/dollar rate is
coming out, then why shouldn't the same effect show up in the pound/dollar rate in the
New York market?
Hsieh and Kieldon think that the answer lies in models where information is

aggregated imperfectly and inventories are important. They take at their word traders

who explain that at morning open, they need to get a feel" for the market by trading,
thus explaining the combination of high trading volume, high volatility and high spreads

in the morning. Towards evening close, traders are anxious to unload excess
inventories, explaining the reappearance of the heightened volume, volatility and
spreads.

IV.B.2. The Behavior of Market-Makers

In equity markets, research into microstructure has explored such questions as
whether the existence and behavior of "market-makers" responsible for market clearing

43

makes a difference. Several researchers have begun to extend this exploration of
microstructure to the foreign exchange market.

The foreign exchange market is a decentralized, quote-driven dealership market"
(Lyons, 1993). In other words, it is a phone-and-computer network over which dealers

(both traders at banks, who can take open positions, and brokers who do not) quote
bid and offer prices, and then consummate transactions. These communications are

purely bilateral, so that the prices and quantities traded are not transparent as they are
in other financial markets.
Lyons (1991) is a first cut at a microstructural perspective. It models customer
order flow as the source of information asymmetry among dealers. The configuration

of the market can lead to an externality in the processing of information. To the
extent that dealers have market power and are risk averse, their trading behavior will

not result in prices that reveal all information fully. The main result is that the greater
the market power and risk-aversion of dealers, the less revealing are prices.
Lyons (1993) investigates these issues using a data set on five days in the life of a
single market-maker, containing the time-stamped transaction prices and quantities in

the New York mark-dollar market.I/ Earlier high-frequency data, e.g., Goodhart's 13
weeks of "indicative quotes" obtained from the Reuters screen, did not include actual

1/ More specifically, the data set consists of time-stamped inter-dealer quotes and
trades, the market-maker's indirect (brokered) trades, and the time-stamped prices and
quantities for transactions mediated by a broker.

44

order flow or transaction prices.1/ Lyons finds evidence of two different channels
whereby trading volume generates movements in the bid and offer rates quoted by
individual dealers: the inventory-control channel; and the information channel.
Inventory costs create incentives for market-makers to change prices so as to control

their positions. However, if some traders have better information than others, it is also
rational for market-makers to adjust their own beliefs, and price quotes, in response to
order flow.

Lyons (1994) uses the same data set to test an additional effect on the

transactions price: the effect of the quantity traded. He seeks to shed light on two
competing theories of why trading volume is sometimes very high. What he calls the
"event uncertainty" view is that high trading volume indicates that information is being
processed rapidly. What he calls the "Hot Potato" theory is that high trading volume

indicates that little information is being processed. Rather, "liquidity-trader" customers

are placing orders with their traders, who then unload their over-extended positions on
other traders, who continue to pass the exposure like a hot potato (consistent with the
Admati-Pfleiderer model of discretionary liquidity traders tested by Hsieh and

Kleidon). The evidence supports the Hot-Potato view: the quantity traded has a

1/ Goodhart and Figliuoli (1991). Goodhart, Ito and Payne (1994) suggest that a good
deal of skepticism is warranted regarding such "indicative quotes," i.e., the bid and ask
quotes that are posted to all potential customers. Traders usually set better prices when
they transact with each other. Goodhart, Ito and Payne use data from a new trading
system, the Reuters 2000-2, to compare actual transactions prices [via this new electronic
broker] with the indicative quotes ("FXFX"). They find that movements in the two are
very close, so that for some purposes either series can be used. But the behavior of the
margin between the highest bid price and the lowest ask price, known in the UK as the
"touch," in the Reuters 2000-2 data is quite different from the behavior of the spread
between the FXFX bid and ask quotes. In the first case the two prices are both firm and
they are normally input by different banks; in the second the quotes are both indicative
and they are always from the same bank. In other words, one should not mistake the
publicly posted bid and ask prices for the prices at which foreign exchange traders trade
observation
with each other. Fortunately, Lyons' (1993, 1994) data set constitutes direct
smaller
still, as
of trader behavior. It shows that actual median interdealer spreads are
compared to Goodhart's sort of spreads.

45

significant effect only when the time between transactions is long. When the time
between transactions is short, the quantity traded has no significant effect on the
trader's prices, suggesting that the trader views these orders as coming from liquidity

traders rather than informed traders.

IV.C, An Early Assessment of the Market Micro-Structure Literature

The foreign exchange research on market microstructure is newborn. It has a
long way to go before it can claim to produce a model of exchange rate determination.

After realistic models of dealer behavior are constructed, the desirable next step is to

let such dealers interact in the market place, in order to derive a central tendency to
the torrent of bid and offer quotes and transaction prices in which each individual
deals. That central tendency would be what in macroeconomic models we call "the"

market-clearing exchange rate. Then the interaction among dealers needs to be
imbedded in the larger universe of borrowers, lenders, importers and exporters, who
play a role in the foreign exchange market, so that economic fundamentals can

ultimately be brought back in. Such a strategy might lead to models of endogenous
speculative bubbles that could account for some of the problematic empirical findings
reviewed in this survey, especially if such bubbles could be more easily formed in
regimes of flexible exchange rates.

This said, the market microstructure literature is a long way from achieving these

goals. Much has been learned about volatility, volume, and bid-ask spreads, from the
studies described in section IV.B; little as yet about central issues like the sources and
persistence of heterogeneous beliefs, excess volatility, and exchange rate determination.

The macroeconomic literature on exchange rates has not provided the right answers.

46

But we believe it does have the right questions. Research like that described in section
IV.A might turn out to point the right direction.

V. Conclusion: Endogenous Speculative Bubbles?

Although the evidence of Meese and Rogoff and others on the failure of the
standard models based on monetary fundamentals to predict at short horizons still

holds, there is more reason at longer horizons to pay attention to some of the models,
such as the Dornbusch overshooting theory. Three independent strands of research are
consistent with the hypothesis that the exchange rate may move in the direction
suggested by the Dornbusch model, but in an inertia-laden manner that is inconsistent

with the standard rational expectations approach. The hypothesis can be described as
"overshooting the overshooting equilibrium."

The three strands are as follows. (1) Tests of bias in the forward market show a
persistent pattern whereby the exchange rate not only (on average) fails to move in line
with the predictions of the forward discount or interest differential, but actually moves

in the opposite direction. Neither those who interpret the forward discount bias as a
risk premium nor those who interpret it as a systematic prediction error have been able
to explain convincingly why the correlation with the forward discount should be
negative.

(2) Some researchers claim an ability for fundamentals models to pick the
direction of movement, relative to the current spot rate, especially at longer horizons.
As noted in section LC.1 above, Woo (1986), Somanath (1986), Mark (1992) and a

number of others claim, essentially, that a convex combination of the monetary model

and the lagged spot rate can outperform the lagged spot rate. The robustness of such
results can never be taken for granted. Long data sets are needed for a definitive

47

evaluation. Nevertheless, there is some reason to think that, notwithstanding puzzling
short-run dynamics that are observed in the foreign exchange markets, the models win

out in the end.1/
(3) As explained in section I.B.2, unexpected changes in monetary policy do in

fact frequently cause movements in the exchange rate in the direction hypothesized by
the sticky-price monetary model. For example, news of contractionary American

monetary policy that raises interest rates is associated with dollar appreciation. There
is some reason, however, to believe that the instantaneous reaction is less than the
medium-term reaction, i.e., that the exchange rate tends subsequently to continue to
move in the same direction, notwithstanding that this finding is inconsistent with

rational expectations. For instance, Eichenbaum and Evans (1993) find that it takes an
estimated two years for the exchange rate to undergo the full reaction to an unexpected
change in monetary policy. Clarida and Gali, 1994, also find a lag before the peak
effect.

The Eichenbaum-Evans pattern, if it is confirmed in subsequent research, would
explain the longstanding puzzle regarding the forward discount bias, the first item listed

above: the dollar appreciates gradually in the aftermath of an increase in the interest
differential, rather than contemporaneously as the rational-expectations form of the
overshooting model (or of any other model) says it should. An interval during which
the interest differential is high is thus an interval during which the currency is likely to

be appreciating, rather than depreciating. This would explain why the interest

1/ There is an analogy with the tests of the proposition whether the real exchange rate
follows a random walk, against the alternative of a slow return toward a long-run
equilibrium. It is by now widely accepted that the slow return to equilibrium is there, but
the power of unit root tests in twenty years of data is very low and so one needs a century
of data to find it (or a cross-section).

48

differential or forward discount on average points in the wrong direction. The question
then becomes: Why does the currency appreciate gradually, rather than suddenly?

The rudiments of a theory of endogenous speculative bubbles, and therefore an
answer to the question, may lie in the microstructure of the foreign exchange markets.

Such a theory must contain three elements: (i) a role for fundamentals that puts an
eventual limit on the extent to which a speculative bubble can carry the market away
from equilibrium, so that fundamentals win out in the long run, (ii) something like a
combination of risk-aversion and model uncertainty (as suggested by the existing

heterogeneity of forecasting techniques) that in the short-run is capable of breaking the
usual rational-expectations arbitrage linking the exchange rate to its long-run

equilibrium, and (iii) some short-run dynamics that arise from the trading process itself
(e.g., noise trading that generates volatility which swamps macro fundamentals on a

short-term basis). These three elements could be described, respectively, as (i) the
eventual bursting of speculative bubbles, (ii) the potential for speculative bubbles, (iii)

the endogenous genesis and prolongation of speculative bubbles. We are hopeful that
more will be accomplished on these research frontiers soon.

49

References

Allen, Helen and Mark Taylor (1989) "Chartists, Noise and Fundamentals: A Study of
the London Foreign Exchange Market" CEPR Paper no. 341.
Allen, Polly and Peter Kenen. 1980. Asset Markets, Exchange Razes, and Economic
Integration. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Backus, David (1984) "Empirical Models of the Exchange Rate: Separating the Wheat
from the Chaff" Canadian Journal of Economics XVII-4, 824-846.
Baillie, Richard, and Tim Bollerslev (1989) "Common Stochastic Trends in a System of
Exchange Rates," Journal of Finance 44, 167-18 1.

Baillie, Richard, and Tim Bollerslev (1991) 'Intra-day and Inter-market Volatility in
Foreign Exchange Rates," Review of Economic Studies, 58, 565-585.

Batten, Jonathan, and Ram Bhar (1993) 'Volume and Price Volatility in Yen Futures
Markets: Within and Across Three Different Exchanges" Working Paper No. 93-15,
Centre for Japanese Economic Studies, Macquarie University, Sydney.
Baxter , Marianne, and Alan C. Stockman (1989) "Business Cycles and the Exchange
Rate System" Journal of Monetwy Economics 23, 377-400.

Beck, Stacie (1993) 'The Ricardian Equivalence Proposition: Evidence from Foreign
Exchange Markets," Journal of International Money and Finance 12, no.2, 154-169.
Bessembinder, H. (1993) "Bid-Ask Spreads in the Interbank Foreing Exchange
Markets," Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Bilson, John (1978), 'The Monetaiy Approach to the Exchange Rate -- Some Empirical
Evidence' IMF Staff Papers, 25 (March): 48-75.

50

Black, Stanley (1973) "International money markets and flexible exchange rates" Studies
in International Finance 25, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.

Black, Stanley, and Michael Salemi (1988) 'FIML Estimation of the DollarDeutschemark Risk Premium in a Portfolio Model," Journal of International Economics
25, 205• 224.

Blanco, Herrninio and Peter M. Garber (1986) "Recurrent Devaluations and
Speculative Attacks on the Mexican Peso" Journal of Political Economy 94, 148-166.
Blake, D., M. Beenstock and V. Brasse (1986) 'The Performance of UK Exchange
Rate Forecasters" The Economic Journal, December, 986-999.
Blanchard, Olivier (1979) "Speculative bubbles, crashes and rational expectations,"
Economic Letters: 387-89.
Blundell-Wignall, Adrian, and F. Browne (1991) "Increasing financial market
integration: Real exchange rates and macroeconomic adjustment" OECD working
paper.

Bollerslev, Tim, Ray Chou and Kenneth Kroner (1992), "ARCH Modeling in Finance,"
Journal of Econometrics 52, 5-59.

Bollerslev, Tim, and Ian Domowirz (1993) Trading Patterns and Prices in the
Interbank Foreign Exchange Market," Journal of Finance 48, 1421-1443.
Bollerslev, Tim, and Michael Melvin (1994) "Bid-ask Spreads and Volatility in the
Foreign Exchange Market: An Empirical Analysis," Journal of international Economics.

Boothe, Paul (1988) "Exchange Rate Risk and the Bid-Ask Spread: A Seven-Country
Comparison," Economic Inquiry 26, 485-492.

Boothe, Paul and Debra Glassman (1987) 'The Statistical Distribution of Exchange
Rates" Journal of International Economics 22, 153-67.

51

Boughton, James (1988) 'The Monetaiy Approach to Exchange Rates: What Now
Remains?" Essays in International Finance, no. 171, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.
Bovenberg, A. Laris (1989) 'The Effects of Capital Income Taxation on International
Competitiveness and Trade Flows," American Economic Review 79. no.5, Dec., 1045-64.
Branson, William (1977) "Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange Rate
Determination" Sozialwi:ssenschafthiche Annalen 1, 69-89.

(1983) "Macroeconomic Determinants of Real Exchange Risks," in RJ.Herring,
ed., Managing Foreign Exchange Risk, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
,

and Dale Henderson (1985) "International Asset Markets: Specification and

Influence," in R. Jones and P. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Econonücs.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
,

Hannu Halttunen, and Paul Masson (1977) "Exchange Rates in the Short-Run:

The Dollar-Deutschemark rate" European Economic Review 10, 303-24.
,

, and

(1979) "Exchange Rates in the Short-Run: Some Further Results"

European Economic Review 12, 395-402.

Buiter, Willem, and Marcus Miller (1982), "Real Exchange Rate Overshooting and the
Output Cost of Bringing Down Inflation," European Economic Review 18, May/June,
85- 123.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carlos Rodriguez (1977) "A Model of Exchange Rate
Determination Under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations" Journal of
Political Economy 85, 3 (June): 6 17-26.

Campbell, John and Richard Clarida (1987) "The dollar and real interest rates,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy 27 (August).

52

Casella, Alessandra (1989) "Testing for Rational Bubbles with Exogenous or
Endogenous Fundamentals: The German Hyperinulation Once More," Journal of
Monetary Economics, July.

Catte, P., G. Galli, and S. Rebecchini (1994) "Concerted Interventions and the Dollar:
An Analysis of Daily Data," Ossola Memorial Conference, Banca ditalia, Perugia,
Italy; forthcoming in a volume edited by F. Papadia and F. Saccomani.
Cavaglia, Stefano, Frederick Nieuwland, Willem Verschoor, and Christian Wolff
(1993), "On the Biasedness of Forward Foreign Exchange Rates: Irrationality or Risk
Premia?," Limburg Institute of Financial Economics, The Netherlands, Sept. 1993,
forthcoming Journal of Business.
Cavaglia, Stefano, Willem Verschoor, and Christian Wolff (1993a), 'Asian Exchange
Rate Expectations," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 7, 57-77.
Cavaglia, Stefano, Willem Verschoor, and Christian Wolff (1993b), "Further Evidence
on Exchange Rate Expectations" Journal of International Money and Finance 12, 78-98.

Chen, Zhaohui (1992) "Cointegration and Exchange Rate Forecasting: A State Space
Model," LSE, United Kingdom.
Chinn, Menzie, and Jeffrey Frankel (1994), "Patterns in Exchange Rate Forecasts for
25 Currencies,' Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 26, no.5, November.
Chinn, Menzie and Richard A. Meese (1992) "Banking on Currency Forecasts" U.C.
Santa Cruz working paper.

Clarida, Richard and Jordi Galli (1994) "Sources of Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations:
How Important Are Nominal Shocks?" NBER working paper No. 4658, Feb. In
Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy, forthcoming.

53

Copeland, Laurence (1989) "Exchange Rates and News: A Vector Autoregression
Approach," in R. MacDonald and M. Taylor, eds., Exchange Rates and Open Economy
Macroeconomics, Oxford, UK, and Cambridge, MA, Basil Blackwell, 218-238.
Cornell, Bradford (1982) "Money Supply Announcements, Interest Rates, and Foreign
Exchange" Journal of International Money and Finance, 1, no.2 (August), 201-08.

Davutyan. N. and J. Pippenger (1985) "Purchasing Power Parity did not Collapse during
the 1970s," American Economic Review, 75, 5, December, 115 1-1158.

De Grauwe, Paul and Danny Decupere (1992) "Psychological Barriers in the Foreign
Exchange Market," Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 621,
January.

DeGrauwe, Paul, and Hans Dewachter (1990), "A Chaotic Monetary Model of The
Exchange Rate," Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 466, Oct.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers and Robert Waldmann
(1990) "Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets" Journal of Political Economy 98-4, 70338.

Diebold, Francis X., and James Nason (1990) "Nonlinear Exchange Rate Prediction?"
Journal of International Economics 28, 3 15-332.

Husted, and Mark Rush (1991) "Real Exchange Rates Under the Gold
Standard" Journal of Political Economy 99, 1252-1271.
,

Steven

,

Javier Gardeazabal and Kamil Yilmaz (1994) "On Co.integration and Exchange

Rate Dynamics", Journal of Finance 49: 727-735.

Dominguez, Kathryn (1986), "Are Foreign Exchange Forecasts Rational? New
Evidence From Survey Data," Economics Letters 21: 277-82.

54

(1990) "Market Responses to Coordinated Central Bank Intervention,' CarnegieRochester Series on Public Policy, vol. 32.

(1992) 'The Informational Role of Official Foreign Exchange Intervention
Operations: The Signalling Hypothesis," Chapter 2 in Exchange Role Efficiency and the
Behavior of International Asset Markets, Garland Publishing Company, N.Y.
Dominguez, Kathryn M. and Jeffrey A. Frankel (1993a) "Does Foreign Exchange
Intervention Matter? Disentangling the Portfolio and Expectation Effects," NBER
Working Paper No. 3299, abridged versions in American &onomk Review 83,
December 1993, and in J.Frankel, On Exchange Rates (Cambridge: MIT Press).
and

(1993b) Does Foreign Exchange Inten'ention Work? (Washington, Institute
for International Economics).

Dooley, Michael and Peter Isard (1982a) "A portfolio-balance rational-expectations
model of the dollar-mark rate." Journal of International Economics 12 (May): 257-76.

(1982b) 'The Role of the Current Account in Exchange Rate
and
Determination: A Comment on Rodriguez," Journal of Political Economy 90, 6,
December, 1291-1294.
and
(1983) 'The portfolio-balance model of exchange rates and some
structural estimates of the risk premium." IMF Staff Papers 30 (December): 683-702.
and

(1987), "Country Preferences, Currency Values and Policy Issues," Journal
of Policy Modeling, Spring.

and
(1991) "A Note on Fiscal Policy, Investment Location Decisions, and
Exchange Rates," Journal of international Money and Finance 10 no.1, March, 161-168.
Mark Taylor (1992) "Exchange Rates, Country Preferences, and Gold,"
NBER Working Paper No. 4183, October.
,

and

55

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976a) "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics" Journal of
Political Economy 84, 1161-1176.

(1976b) 'The Theory of Flexible Exchange Rate Regimes and Macroeconomic
Policy," Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78, 255-275.
(1978) "Monetary Policy under Exchange Rate flexibility" in Managed Exchange
Rate Flaibilily, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series.
(1980) "Exchange Rate Economics: Where do We Stand?" Brooidngs Papers on
Economic Activity 1, 143-94.

(1982) "Equilibrium and disequilibrium exchange rates," Zeitschrifi fur WIrlschaftsund Sozialwissenshaften 102, 6: 573-99. [Reprinted in Dornbusch, R. Dollars, Debts, and
Deficits. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.]

(1987) "flexible exchange rates 1986' Economic Journal 1: 1-18.

Driskill, Robert (1981) 'Exchange Rate Dynamics: An Empirical Investigation." Journal
of Political Economy 89, 2 (April): 357-71.
,

Nelson Mark, and Steven Sheffrin (1992) 'Some Evidence in Favor of A

Monetary Rational Expectations Model with Imperfect Capital Substitutability,"
International Economic Review 33, 223-238.
Edison, Hali (1993) '"The Effectiveness of Central Bank Intervention: A Survey of the
Post-1982 Uterature," Essays in International Finance, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University.

Edison, Hali, and B. Diaxme Pauls (1993) "A Re-assessment of the Relationship
Between Real Exchange Rates and Real Interest Rates: 1974-1990" Journal of Monetary
Economics 31, 165-187.

56

Edwards, Sebastian (1982) "Exchange Rates and News: A Multi-Currency Approach,'
Journal of International Money and Finance 1, 211-224.

(1983) "Floating Exchange Rates, Expectations and New Information" Journal of
Monetary Economics 11, 321-336.

Eichenbaum, Martin, and Charles Evans (1993) "Some Empirical Evidence on the
Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks on Exchange Rates," NBER Working Paper No.
4271.

Eichengreen, Barry (1988) "Real Exchange Rate Behavior Under Alternative
International Monetary Regimes: Interwar Evidence," European Economic Review 32,
363-371.

Eijffinger, Sylvester C.W. and Noud P.D. Gruijters (1991) "On the Effectiveness of
Daily Interventions by the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Federal Reserve System in
the US. Dollar/ Deutsche Mark Exchange Market," Tilburg University, Research
Memorandum FEW394, Tilburg 1989. Forthcoming in E. Baltensperger and H.W. Sinn
(eds.) Exchange Rate Regimes and Currency Union, Londom

Engel, Charles M. (1992) "Can the Markov Switching Model Forecast Exchange
Rates?" NBER Working Paper No. 4210.

and Jeffrey Frankel (1984a) "Why Interest Rates React to Money Announcements:
An Answer from the Foreign Exchange Market" Journal of Monetary Economics 13, 319.

and Jeffrey Frankel (1984b)'The Secular Inflation Term in Open-Economy Phillips
Curves: A Comment on Flood," European Economic Review 24.
and James D. Hamilton (1990) "Long Swings in the Dollar" American Economic
Review 80, 689-713.

57

and Anthony Rodriguez (1989) 'Tests of International CAPM with Time-Varying
Covariances" Journal of Applied Econometrics, 119-38.

Engle, Robert, Takatoshi Ito, and Wen-Ung Un (1990) "Meteor Showers or Heat
Waves? Heteroskedastic Intra Daily Volatility in the Foreign Exchange Market,"
Economerrica 58, 525-542.
(1992) "Where Does the Meteor Shower Come From? The Role of
Stochastic Policy Coordination," Journal of International Economics 32, 221-240.
, and

,

Evans, George W. (1986) "A Test for Speculative Bubbles in the Sterling-Dollar
Exchange Rate" American Economic Review 76, 621-636.

Evans, Martin and Karen Lewis (1992) "Peso Problems and Heterogeneous Trading:
Evidence from Excess Returns in Foreign Exchange and Euromarkets" NBER Working
Paper no. 4003, Feb., p.16-19.
Fieleke, Norman (1981) "Foreign-Currency Positioning by U.S. Firms: Some New
Evidence," Review of Economics and Statistics LXIII, no.1, Feb. 35-42.
Finn, Mary G. (1986) "Forecasting the Exchange Rate" Journal of International Money
and Finance 5, 181-193.

Flood, Robert A. and Peter Garber (1980) "Market fundamentals versus price-level
bubbles: The first tests." Journal of Political Economy 88 (August): 745.70.
and

(1983) "A Model of Stochastic Process Switching" Econometrica 51, 537-

552.

(1991) "The Linkage Between Speculative Attack and Target Zone
and
Models of Exchange Rates" Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1367-1372.
and Robert J. Hodrick (1990) "On Testing for Speculative Bubbles" The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 4-2, 85-101.

58

, and Andrew K. Rose (1993) "Fixing Exchange Rates" NBER Working Paper 4503.
,

, and Donald J. Mathieson (1991) "An Empirical Exploration of Exchange

Rate Target Zones" Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 35, 7-65.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1979) "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based
on Real Interest Differentials,' American Economic Review 69, no. 4 (Sept.), 601-622.
(1982) 'In Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A Six-Currency Test Assuming
Mean-Variance Optimization.," Journal of International Money and Finance 1,
(December): 255-74.

(1988) "Recent Estimates of Time-Variation in the Conditional Variance and in
the Exchange Risk Premium," Journal of International Money and Finance, 7 (March),
115-125.

(1993) 'Monetary and Portfolio-balance Models of the Determination of Exchange
Rates" in J.Frankel, On Exchange Rates (Cambridge: MIT Press). [Revised version of
"Monetary and Portfo!io-Balance Models of Exchange Rate Determination" in J.
Bhandari, ed., Economic Interdependence and Flexible Exchange Rates. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1983.]
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Menzie Chinn (1993), "Exchange Rate Expectations and the Risk
Premium: Tests for a Cross-Section of 17 Currencies" Review of International
Economics 1, no.2 (June), 136-144.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Kenneth A. Froot (1986) "Understanding the U.S. Dollar in the
Eighties: The Expectations of Chartists and Fundamentalists" Economic Record, 24-38.
Reprinted in On Exchange Rates (Cambridge: MIT Press), 1993.
and
(1987a) "Short-Term and Long-Term Expectations of the Yen/Dollar
Exchange Rate: Evidence from Survey Data" Jownal of the Japanese and International
Economies 1, 249-74.

59

and ----- (198Th) "Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions Regarding
Exchange Rate Expectations" American Economic Review, 77, no. 1 (March), 133-153.
[Reprinted in Exchange Rate Economics, vol. II, edited by R.MacDonald and

M.Taylor, International Library of Critical Writings in Economics, Edward Elgar
Publishing, U.K., 1992.]

and
(1990a) "Chartists, Fundamentalists, and the Demand for Dollars" in
Anthony Courakis and Mark Taylor, eds., Private Behavior and Governmen.t Policy in
Interdependent Economies. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
and
(1990b) "Exchange Rate Forecasting Techniques, Survey Data, and
Implications for the Foreign Exchange Market." NBER Working Paper no. 3470.
Abridged versions in American Economic Review 80, 2, 181-5, and On Exchange Razes,
1993.

and Gikas Hardouvelis (1985) "Commodity Prices, Money Surprises, and Fed
Credibility" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 17-4 I, 427-38.
and Richard A. Meese (1987) "Are Exchange Rates Excessively Variable?" NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2, 117-153.

Frenkel, Jacob A. (1976) "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal
Aspects and Empirical Evidence" Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78 (May), 200224. Reprinted in J. Frerikél and H. G. Johnson, eds., The Economics of Exchange
Rates. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1978, 97-116.
(1980) Exchange rates, prices and money: Lessons from the 1920s. American
Economic Review 70, 2 (May): 235-42.

(1981) "flexible Exchange Rates, Prices and the Role of 'News'" Journal of
Political Economy 89-4,, 665-705. Reprinted in J. Bhandari, and B. Putnam, eds.
Economic Interdependence and Flexible Exchange Rates, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press,
1983.

60

and H. G. Johnson (1978), eds., The Economics of Exchange Raies. Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Friedman, Milton (1953) 'The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates" in Esscrys in Positive
Economics (University of Chicago, Chicago).

Froot, Kenneth and Jeffrey Frankel (1989), "Forward Discount Bias: Is It an Exchange
Risk Premium?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 416 (February): 139-61; reprinted
in Advances in Behavioral Finance, R.Thaler, ed., Russell Sage Foundation, New York,
1993.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Takatoshi Ito (1989) 'On the Consistency of Short-Run and
Long-Run Exchange Rate Expectations" Journal of International Money and Finance 8,
no. 4, 487-510.
and Richard Thaler (1990) "Anomalies: Foreign Exchange," Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4, June, 179-192.

and Maurice Obstfeld (1991) "Exchange-Rate Dynamics Under Stochastic Regime
Shifts" Journal of International Economics 31, 203-229.

Girton, Lance and Dale Henderson (1977) "Central Bank Operations in Foreign and
Domestic Assets under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates" in P. Clark, D. Logue, and
R. Sweeney, eds, The Effects of Exchange Raze Adjustment (Department of the
Treasury, Washington, D.C.) 15 1-79.

Glassman, Debra (1987) "Exchange Rate Risk and Transactions Costs: Evidence from
Bid-Ask Spreads" Journal of International Money and Finance 6, 479-490.
Goldberg, Michael, and Roman Frydman (1993) "Theories Consistent Expectations and
Exchange Rate Dynamics," forthcoming in H.Frisch and A. Worgoter, eds., OpenEconomy Macroeconomics (London: MacMillan Publishing).

61

Goldberg, Michael, and Roman Frydman (1993b) "Qualitative Rationality and
Behavior in the Foreign Exchange market," NYU Economics Department mimeo.
Golub, Stephen (1989) "Foreign-Currency Government Debt, Asset Markets, and the
Balance of Payments" Journal of International Money and Finance 8, no. 2, 285-94.

Goodhart, Charles (1988) 'The Foreign Exchange Market: A Random Walk with a
Dragging Anchor" Economica 55, 437-60.
and L. Figliuoli (1991) "Every Minute Counts in Financial Markets,' Journal of
International Money and Finance 10, 23-52.

and M. Giugale (1993) "From Hour to Hour in the Foreign Exchange Market,
LSE FMG Discussion Paper No. 33. In The Manchester School, 61, no. 1 (March): 134.

, Takatoshi Ito, and R. Payne (1994), "One Day in June, 1993: A Study of the
Working of Reuters 2000-2 Electronic Foreign Exchange Trading System," Bank of
haly, Perugia, Italy, July. In The Microstrucrure of Foreign Exchange Markets, J.
Frankel, G. Galli and A. Giovarmini, eds., University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
forthcoming.
Goodman, S. (1979) "Foreign Exchange Forecasting Techniques: Implications for
Business and Policy" Journal of Finance 34, 4 15-27.

Grilli, Vittorio, and Nouriel Roubini (1993) "Liquidity and Exchange Rates: Puzzling
Evidence from the G-7 Countries," mimeo.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Robert J. Hodrick (1980) "Forward Exchange Rates as
Optimal Predictors of Future Spot Rates" Journal of Political Economy 88-5, 829-853.
Hardouvelis, Gikas (1988) "Economic News, Exchange Rates, and Interest Rates
Journal of International Money and Finance 7, 23-5.

62

Haynes, Steven, and Joe Stone (1981) "On the Mark: Comment," American Economic
Review 71 (December): 1060-67.

Henderson, Dale, and Stephanie Sampson (1983) 'Intervention in Foreign Exchange
Markets: A Summary of Ten Staff Studies," Federal Reserve Bulletin 69, 830-36.
Henderson, Dale (1984) "Exchange Market Intervention Operations: Their Role in
Financial Policy and Their Effects," in Exchange Raze Theory and Practice, J.Bilson and
R.Marston, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Henderson, Dale, Deborah Danker, Richard Haas, Steve Symansky, and Ralph Tryon,
(1987), "Small Empirical Models of Exchange Market Intervention: Applications to
Germany, Japan and Canada," Journal of Policy Modeling, Spring, 143-173
Hodrick, Robert (1978) "An empirical analysis of the monetary approach to the
determination of the exchange rate" in J. Frenkel and H. 0. Johnson, eds., The
Economics of Exchange Rates. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 97-116.

Hodrick, Robert (1988) The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and
Futures Foreign Exchange Markets. In Fundamentals of Pure and Applied Economics.
Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Hogan, Ked, Michael Melvin, and Dan Roberts (1991) "Trade Balance News and
Exchange Rates: Is There a Policy Signal?" Journal of International Moncy and Finance
10, S90-S99.

Hsieh, David (1989) "Testing for Nonlinear Dependence in Daily Foreign Exchange
Rates" Journal of Business 62, 339-368.
Hsieh, David, and Allan Kleidon (1994) "Bid-ask Spreads in Foreign Exchange
Markets: Implications for Models of Asymmetric Information," Bank of Italy, Perugia,
Italy, July. In The Microst,'ucture of Foreign Exchange Markets, J. Frankel, 0. Galli and
A. Giovannini, eds., University of Chicago Press, Chicago, forthcoming.

63

Isard, Peter (1983) "An accounting framework and some issues for modeling how
exchange rates respond to the news," in Jacob Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates and
International Macroeconomics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ito, Takatoshi (1990) "Foreign Exchange Rate Expectations: Micro Survey Data"
American Economic Review 80, 3, June, 434-49.

(1994) "Short-Run and Long-Run Expectations of the Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate,"
Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 8, no. 2, June: 119-143.
and V. Vance Roley (1987) "News from the U.S. and Japan: Which Moves the
Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate" Journal of Monetary Economics 19, 255-277.
(1990) "Intraday Yen/dollar Exchange Rate Movements: News or Noise?'
and
Jour-na! of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 1, no.1.
Jones, Ronald and Peter B. Kenen (1985) Handbook of International Economics
(Amsterdam, North-Holland).

Jorion, Philippe, (1994) "Risk and Turnover in the Foreign Exchange Market," Bank of
Italy, Perugia, Italy, July. In The Microsrrucrure of Foreign Exchange Markets, J.
Frankel, G. Galli and A. Giovannini, eds., University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
forthcoming.

Kaminsky, Graciela, and Karen Lewis, (1993) "Does Foreign Exchange Intervention
Signal Future Monetary Policy?" NBER Working Paper No. 4298, March.
Kenen, Peter (1988) Managing Exchange Rates, The Royal Institute of International
Affairs, Council on Foreign Relations Press, New York.
Klein, Michael (1993) "The Accuracy of Reports of Foreign Exchange Intervention,'
Journal of International Money and Finance 12, 6, Dec., 644-653.

64

and E. Rosengren (1991) "What do We Learn From Foreign Exchange
Intervention'?" Tufts University working paper.

Kouri, Pentti (1976) 'The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the Short
Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach" Scandinavian Journal of Economics
78, 280-304.

Krugman, Paul R (1978) "Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange Rates: Another Look
at the Evidence" Journal of International Economicx 8, 3 (August): 397-407.
(1979) "A Model of Balance of Payments Crises" Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 11, 311-325. Reprinted in Currencies and Crises, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press,
1992, 61-76.

(1985) "Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable?" in The U.S. Dollar -- Recent
Developments, Outlook and Policy Options. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 10333.

(1991) 'Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics" Quarterly Journal of
Economics CVI, 669-682.
(1993) "Recent Thinking about Exchange Rate Determination and Policy," in The
Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments, edited by Adrian Blundell-Wignall, Sydney,
Reserve Bank of Australia: 6-22.
and Marcus Miller, eds (1991) Exchange Raze Tai'gets and Currency Bands

(Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).

(1993) "Why Have a Target Zone?" CEPR DP No. 718. Carnegie
Rochctcr Confcrcncc Scric.
and

Lee, Tae-Hwy (1994), "Spread and Volatility in Spot and Forward Exchange Rates,"
Journal of International Money and Finance 13, no.3, 375-383.

65

Levich, Richard, and Lee Thomas (1993) 'The Significance of Technical Trading-Rule
Profits in the Foreign Exchange Market: A Bootstrap Approach," Journal of
International Money and Finance 12, no.6, 563-586.

Lewis, Karen K. (1988) 'Testing the Portfolio Balance Model: A Multi-lateral
Approach" Journal of International Economics 7, 273-288.
(1989) "Changing Beliefs and Systematic Forecast Errors," American Economic
Review 79, 621-636.

(1990) 'Occasional Interventions to Target Rates" NBER Working Paper No. 3398.
(1993), "Are Foreign Exchange Intervention and Monetaxy Policy Related and
Does it Really Matter?," NBER Working Paper No. 4377, June.

Liu, Peter, and G.S. Maddala (1992) "Rationality of Survey Data and Tests for Market
Efficiency in the foreign Exchange Markets," Journal of International Money and
Finance 11, no.4, August, 366-381.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1982) "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country
World" Journal of Monetary Economics, 335-360.

Lyons, Richard (1991) "Information Intermediation in the Microstructure of the
Foreign Exchange Market," October, revised version of NBER Working Paper No.
3889.

(1993) 'Tests of Microstructijral Hypotheses in the Foreign Exchange Market,"
NBER Working Paper No. 4471, September.

(1994) "Foreign Exchange Volume: Sound and Fury Signi'ing Nothing?" Bank of
Italy, Perugia, Italy, July. In The Microstrucrure of Foreign Exchange Markets, 3.
Frankel, 0. Galli and A. Giovannini, eds., University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
forthcoming.

66

MacDonald, Ronald (1983), "Some Tests of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis in
the Foreign Exchange Markets," Scottish Journal of Political Economy 30, 235-50.
(1990), 'Are Exchange Market Forecasters 'Rational': Some Survey-Based Tests,"
The Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies, LVIII, 229-241.

(1990) Exchange Rate Economics: An Empirical Perspective," in Graham Bird,
ed., The International Financial Regime (London and San Diego, Academic Press Ltd.),
9 1-144.

(1992) "Exchange Rate Survey Data: A Disaggregated 0-7 Perspective," University
of Dundee mimeo.
and Mark P. Taylor (1989) "Economic Analysis of Foreign Exchange Markets: An
Expository Survey," in MacDonald and Taylor, eds., Exchange Razes and Open Economy
Macroeconomics, Oxford, UK, and Cambridge, MA, Basil Blackwell, 1-108.
and
(1992) "Exchange Rate Economics" International Monetary Fund Staff
Papers March, 39-1, 1-57.
and

(1993a) 'The Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Rational

Expectations, Long-Run Equilibrium, and Forecasting," IMF Staff Papers, 40, March,
89-107.

(1993b) "Exchange Rate Behavior Under Alternative Exchange Rate
and
Arrangements" rnimeo.

(1994) 'The Monetary Model of the Exchange Rate: Long-Run
and
Relationships, Short Run Dynamics, and How to Beat a Random Walk," Journal of
international Money and Finance 13, no. 3 (June), 276-290.
and T.S. Torrance (1988a) "Exchange Rates and the News: Some Evidence Using
UK Survey Data," The Manchester School, 56, 69-76.

67

(1988b) 'On Risk, Rationality and Excessive Speculation in the
and
Deutschemark-US Dollar Exchange Market: Some Evidence Using Survey Data,"
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 50, no.2, 107-123.

and

(1990) "Expectations Formation and Risk in Four Foreign Exchange
Markets," Oxford Economic Papers 42, no.3, 544-561
Mark, Nelson C. (1990) "Real and Nominal Exchange Rates in the Long Run" Journal
of International Economics 28, 115-136.
(1992) 'Exchange Rates and Fundamentals" Ohio State University working paper.
McKinnon, Ronald (1976), "Floating Exchange Rates 1973-74: The Emperor's New
Clothes," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., Institutional Arrangements arid the
Inflation Problem. Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 3: 79-114.

McKinnon, Ronald (1988) "Monetary and exchange rate policies for international
financial stability: A proposal," Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, 1 (Winter): 83.103.
Meese, Richard A. (1986) 'Testing for Bubbles in Exchange Markets" Journal of
Political Economy 94, 345-373.

(1990) "Currency Fluctuations in the Post-Bretton Woods Era" Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4-1, 117-134.

and Kenneth Rogoff (1983a) "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies"
Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.
and
(1983b) "The Out-of-Sample Failure of Empirical Exchange Rate
Models" in J. Frenkel, ed Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics (Chicago,
University of Chicago Press).

and
(1988) "Was it real? The Exchange Rate - Interest Differential
Relationship Over the Modern Floating-rate Period" Journal of Finance 43-4, 933-948.

68

- and Andrew K. Rose (1991) "An Empirical Assessment of Non-Linearities in
Models of Exchange Rate Determination" Review of Economic Studies 58, 603-619.
and Kenneth Singleton (1982) "On Unit Roots and the Empirical Modeling of
Exchange Rates," Journal of Finance 37, 1029-1035.
Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1991) "Exchange Rates Bands with Price Inertia"
Economic Journal 101, 1380-1399.
Mundell, Robert. 1964. Exchange rate margins and economic policy. In J. Carter
Murphy, ed., Money in the International Order. Dallas.
Mussa, Michael (1976) "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments, and Monetary
and Fiscal Policy Under a Regime of Controlled Floating" Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 78, 229-48.

(1979) "Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and Theories of
the Foreign Exchange Market" in Policies for Employment, Prices, and Exchange Rates
(eds: Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, North-Holland, New York), 9-57.
(1981) The Role of Official Inten'ention Group of Thirty Occasional Papers, No. 6.
New York: Group of Thirty.

(1986) "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of the Real Exchange
Rate" in Real Business Cycles, Real Exchange Rates and Actual Policies (eds: Karl
Brun.ner and Allan H. Meltzer, North-Holland, New York), 117-213.
(1990) "Exchange Rates in Theory and in Reality," Essays in International Finance
No.179, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.

Niehans, Jurg (1975) "Some doubts about the efficacy of monetary policy under flexible
exchange rates," Journal of International Economics 5 (August): 225-8 1.

69

Obstfeld, Maurice (1986) "Balance of Payments Crises and Devaluation" American
Economic Review 76-1, 72-81.

(1990), "The Effectiveness of Foreign-Exchange Intervention: Recent Experience:
1985-1988" in International Policy Coordination and Exchange Rate Fluctuations, edited
by W. Branson, J. Frenkel, and M. Goldstein, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
and Kenneth Rogoff (1983) "Speculative hyperinflations in maximizing models:
Can we rule them out?" Journal of Political Economy 91 (August): 675-87.
(1984) "Exchange Rate Dynamics with Sluggish Prices under Alternative
and
Price-Adjustment Rules" International Economic Review 25-1, 159-174.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan Stockman (1985) 'Exchange rate dynamics" in R. Jones
and P. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Papell, David (1988), "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics After a Decade of
Floating," Journal of International Economics 25, 303-317.
(1989) "Monetary Policy in the United States Under flexible Exchange Rates,"
American Economic Review 79, 1106-1116.
[---- (1993) 'Cointegration and Exchange Rate Dynamics," University of Houston,

March.]

Rodriguez, Carlos (1980) "The Role of Trade Flows in Exchange Rate Determination:
A Rational Expectations Approach," Journal of Political Economy 88-6, more
Rogoff, Kenneth (1984) "On the Effects of Sterilized Intervention: An Analysis of
Weekly Data," Journal of Monetaiy Economics 14, 133-150.
(1985) "Can exchange rate predictability be achieved without monetary
convergence? Evidence from the EMS" European Economic Review 28: 93-115.

70

Schinasi, Gary and P.A.V.B. Swamy (1989) 'The Out-of-Sample Forecasting
Performance of Exchange Rate Models when Coefficients are Allowed to Change"
Journal of International Money and Fiiiance 8, 375-390.
Schulmeister, Stephen (1987) "An Essay on Exchange Rate Dynamics" Research Unit
Labor Market and Employment Discussion Paper 87-8, Wissenschaftzentrum Berlin fur
Sozialforschung, Berlin.
(1988) "Currency Speculation and Dollar fluctuations," Banca Nazionoie del
Lavoro Quarterly Review 167, 343-365.

and Michael Goldberg (1989) "Noise Trading and the Efficiency of Financial
Markets," in G.Luciani, ed., The American Financial System: Between Euphoria and
Crisis Quaderni della Fonda.zione Adriano Olivetti: Rome, 117-153.
Somanath, V.S. (1986) "Efficient Exchange Rate Forecasts" Journal of International
Money and Finance 5, 195-220.

Stocknian, Alan (1980) "A Theory of Exchange Rate Determination," Journal of
Political Economy 88, 673-698.

(1987) "The Equilibrium Approach to Exchange Rates" Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond Economic Review March/April, 12-30.

(1988) "Real Exchange-Rate flexibility under Pegged and floating Exchange-Rate
Systems" Carrzegie•Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 29, 259-294.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (1992) "An Interpretation of Recent Research on Exchange Rate
Target Zone" Journal of Economic Perspectives 6-4, 103-118.
(1993) "Assessing Target Zone Credibility" European Economic Review 37-4, 763793.

71

Takagi, Shinji (1991) "Exchange Rate Expectations: A Survey of Survey Studies," JMF
Staff Papers 38, 156-183.

Tandon, Kishore, and Thomas Urich (1987) "International Market Response to
Announcements of US Macroeconomic Data," Journal of International Money and
Finance, 6, no.1, 71-83.

Taylor, Mark and Helen AlIen (1992) "The Use of Technical Analysis in the Foreign
Exchange Market" Journal of international Money and Finance, 11, no.3, 304-314.
Throop, Adrian (1993) "A Generalized Uncovered Interest Parity Model of Exchange
Rates," FRBSF Economic Review 2, 3-16.
Tryon, Ralph (1983), "Small Empirical Models of Exchange Market Intervention: A
Review of the Literature," Staff Studies no. 134, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System: Washington, D.C., September.
Wei, Shang-Jin (1994), "Anticipations of Foreign Exchange Volatility and Bid-Ask
Spreads," NBER Working Paper No. 4737, May.

Whitt, Joseph (1992), "Nominal exchange rates and unit roots: A Reconsideration"
Journal of international Money and Finance 11, no.6, Dec., 539-511.
Williamson, John (1985) The Exchange Rate System. Policy Analyses in International
Economics No. 5, Institute for International Economics, September 1983. Washington,
D.C. Revised 1985.

Williamson, John (1987) "Exchange Rate Management: The Role of Target Zones,"
American Economic Review 77-2, 200-204.

Williamson, John and Marcus Miller (1987) Targets and indicators: A blueprint for the
international .coordjnatjon of economic policy. Policy Analyses in International
Economics nb. 22 (September). Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.

72

Wolff, Christian (1987) "Time-Varying Parameters and the Out-of-Sample Forecasting
Performance of Structural Exchange Rate Models," Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics Jan. 5, 87-97.

Woo, Wing T. (1985) 'The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rate Determination under
Rational Expectations" Journal of International Economics 8, 1-16.
(1987) "Some Evidenceof Speculative Bubbles in the Foreign Exchange Markets"
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 19, 499-514.

</ref_section>

