                             NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES




                            WHAT DOES THE POLITICAL
                          ECONOMY LiTERATURE ON TRADE
                              POLICY (NOT) TELL US
                            ThAT WE OUGHT TO KNOW?




                                         Dani Rodrik




                                  Working Paper No. 4870




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 September '994



I am indebted to Kym Anderson, Bob Baldwin, Dick Baldwin, Jim Cassing. Rob Feenstra. Arye
HilIman, Steve Magee. Wolfgang Mayer. Doug Nelson, Sharyn O'Hatloran. Edward John Ray,
Ray R.iezman, Ron Rogowski, Guido Tabellinj, Mariano Tonimasi, and especially Gene Grossman
for their help in the preparation of this paper. This paper is part of NEER's research program
in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

C 1994 by Dani Rodrik. AU rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4870
                                                                              September 1994


                             WHAT DOES THE POLITICAL
                           ECONOMY LITERATURE ON TRADE
                               POLICY (NOT) TELL US
                             THAT WE OUGHT TO KNOW?


                                          ABSTRACT


       Three questions lie at the core of the large and distinguished literature on the political

economy of trade policy. First, why is international trade not free? Second, why are trade

policies universally biased against (rather than in favor of) trade?         Third, what are the

determinants of the variation in protection levels across industries, countries, and institutional

contexts? These questions are handled only imperfectly by the existing literature. Current

models treat trade policy as a redistributive tool, but do not explain why it emerges in political

equilibrium in preference over more direct policy instruments. Further, existing modek do not

generate a bias against trade, implying that pro-trade interventions are as likely as trade-

restricting interventions. The greatest contribution of the political economy literature may lie in

developing a better grasp of normative economic analysis--that is, in helping design policies.

rules, and institutions.




Dani Rodrik
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
Room 1312
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
                   WHAT DOES THE POLITICAL ECONOMY LITERATURE ON

                  TRADE POLICY (NOT) TELL US THAT WE OUGHT TO KNOW?



1. Introduction

       Perhaps no other area of economics displays such a gap between what policy makers

practice and what economists preach as does international trade. The superiority of tree trade

is one of the professions most cherished beliefs, yet international trade is rarely tree. Partly

as a consequence, a large and distinguished literature has developed over the years on the

political economy of trade policy. This literature has been well surveyed in a number of

recent contributions, including Nelson (1989), Hillman (1989), Magee, Brock and Young

(1989), Riezman and Wilson (1993a), Mayer (1991), Magee (1994). and Ray (1990).

       This paper overlaps with these existing surveys, but also differs from them in being

more specifically focussed on the questions to which the literature should be providing

answers. In other words, I will review the literature from the perspective of what I take to be

the interesting questions, and evaluate it by how well it measures against this yardstick. This

kind of approach necessarily makes for a more critical perspective on the literature than is

common. In particular, I will suggest that the political economy literature has lost sight cA the

very questions that have motivated it. My purpose in taking this approach is not to belittle the

contributions made by the researchers in the area, who include some of the profession's best

minds- The questions at issue are tough ones, and I hope that the difficulty of providing

satisfactory answers will come across in my discussion. Rather, my primary goal is to refocus

attention on these fundamental questions, and in doing so suggest interesting avenues of

research for the next generation of political economy work.

       To set the stage, I begin by setting out a general framework to assess the distributional

consequences of trade policy (section 2). Using this framework as the background, the next
                                                 2

section provides a guided tour of the leading approaches to formalizing the political economy

of trade policy (section 3). I then turn to the questions of interest: Why is international trade

not free? (section 4). Why are trade policies universally biased against trade? (section 5).

What are the determinants of the variation in protection levels across industries, countries,

and time? (section 6). In the penultimate section, I discuss the economic consequences of

viewing trade policy endogenously (section 7). A final section provides a brief summary and

condudes the paper (section 8).



2. General ConsIderations

        As illustrated in Figure 1 • in principle a political-economy model of trade poiicy must

have four elements. First, it must contain a description of individual preferences over the

domain of policy choices available to policymakers (box A). This is of course the easiest part

of the exercise, insofar as much of trade theory is devoted to analyzing the consequences of

trade policy for individuals wtio derive their incomes from different factors of production or

sectors. Given an underlying economic model of the Heckscher-Ohlin or Ricardo-Viner type,

and the presumption that preferences for policy depend only on self-interest, one can deduce

individuals's policy rankings on the basis of their factor endowments or sector-speciflc scills.

Second, the model must contain a description of how these individual preferences are

aggregated and channeled, through pressure groups, political parties, or grass-roots

movements, into "political demands for a particular policy or another (box B). This step is

considerably harder, as it involves a characterization of the modes of political organization as

well as of the forms that political influence takes (lobbying, campaign contributions, voter

registration, etc.). As we shall see, most models treat this component implicitly rather than

explicitly.
                                                   3



       The next two components have to do with the "supply side" of trade policy. Here, the

model must first characterize policymakers' preferences (box C): do politicians do what they

do because they want to get re-elected? because they want to transfer resources to favored

groups? because they have partisan preferences? or simply because they are interested in

maximizing social welfare? To know how these preferences play out and eventually interact

with the demands for trade policy, the model then has to specify the institutional setting in

which policy takes place (box 0): Is it congress or the executive that sets tariffs? is the

electoral system proportional representation or first-pass-the-post? are there international

treaty obligations that rule out certain forms of trade interventions?

       A satisfactory treatment of all of these issues is naturally a very tall order.1 None of

the existing models claims to provide a complete political-economic model, and appropriately

so, since the end result would likely be intractable. The established practice is to take short

cuts, and to leave implicit some of the elements discussed above. The success of a model

must then be judged not only by the insights it provides, but also by the plausibility of the

implicit stories that fill in the gap between what is explicitly modeled and what is left out.



2.1 A general framework We begin by describing a general model of a small open erc'nomy,

to serve as a backdrop to the specific models that will be discussed below. For simplicity, we

assume all goods (but no factors) are tradable. On the demand side, we take individual

preferences to be identical and homothetic (as most of the models also do). Each individual's

indirect utility function cart be written as V(p) I',   where p is a vector of domestic prices and
 1h is the individual's income. We will allow (some) domestic prices to differ from world prices

p due to trade interventions. Since we will focus on perfectly-competitive settings for the
                                                 4

most part, these interventions can be thought of as price policies (tariffs, export subsidies) as

well as quantitative restrictions (quotas).

       On the supply side, we could use either a specific-factors framework or the Hecicscher-

Ohlin framework. In the former case, let there be m sectors, indexed by .1, with each sector

using one mobile factor (labor) and one sector-specific factor with a constant-returns to scale

technology. The returns to the specific factors can be captured by restricted profit functions of

the form     (p4, w) where w is the wage. An individual's income can now be expressed as

                  —
                            + Eisji(pi,w)        +
                                                     0hz (pj—pj•)mj,                Yb         (1)



where L is the economy's aggregate labor endowment, p1 are the world prices, rn are net

imports, and s,', s and a" are the individual's shares in the labor endowment, industry profits

(or quasi-rents to specific factors) and net government revenue, respectively. The model is

completed by the full-employment condition for labor


                                              i 8Z(PJ,W)
                                                   3w
                                                           =                                   (2)



and by the resource-balance constraints


                      = — dV(p)                  -   ôn1(p11w)                 vi              (3)




Note that we have used Hotelting's lemma and Roy's identity (which are the derivative

properties of the profit and indirect utility functions) to state labor demand and commodity

supplies and demands in terms of these functions.

        In the Heckscpier-Qhlin case, we have two goods and two factors, and the supply side
                                                S

of the economy can be summarized by using a revenue function of the forni R(p1'p3. K. L)

An individual's income can now be expressed as



                             l   —       +   shrK + oar, (p1—p1)m,                          (4)



where s. and 5K are the individual's ownership shares in the economy's aggregate

endowments of labor and capital, respectively. As long as both goods are produced, factor

prices are detennined by equality between unit costs and output prices in each sector. Letting

O(w.r) and 4(w,r) stand for the unit-cost functions for goods one and two, respectively:


                                             O(w, r)p1
                                                                                            (5)




Resource-balance constraints are in turn given by


                      —   8V(p1,p3)   v(pi,p3YEIh —      8R(p1,p2,K,L)                          (6)




 Note that the model can determine only the relative price p1/p2, so that we are free to take

 either price as the numeraire and set it equal to any constant.

        Now consider the decision problem of a social planner who does not care about

 income distribution. His problem is to choose trade policies (or equivalently, domestic prices)

 to maximize the aggregate real income of the economy. This can be achieved by solving the

 following problem:
                                                    6


                                            P1. s
                                                        V(p)EbItJ                              ('7)




Let   good k be the nurneraire and set p = p. Then it is straightforward to show that the

solution to this problem in both the specific-factors and Hecksctier-Ohlin setttings consists of:


                                       ______ = 0,                  V.1                        (8)
                                         PA.




This simply expresses the optimality of free trade in an economy free of distortions and in

which distributional objectives can be cariled out through lump-sum transfers or other policies.

         The specific-factors and Heckscher-Ohlin models both imply that trade policy has stark

distributional consequences. In the specific-factors model, these consequences are

particularly strong for owners of specific factors, and can be deduced from the ownership

pattern of individuals across the specific factors employed in import-competing and exporting

sectors (see eq. (1J). Since a"k(Pk' w) /aPk > 0. an import tariff or export subsidy in sector k

inaeases the return to the specific factor in that sector, while harming returns to other specific

factors through the induced increase in wages. In the Heckscher-Ohlin model, the

distributional implications work along factor (rather than industry) lines and are described by

the Stolper-Samuelson theorem. An import tariff raises the real return to the economy's

scarce factor and reduces the real return to the abundant factor. An individual who is

specialized in the scarce factor (relative to the 0representative" individual) would be better off

(see eq. (1)

         Neither the specific-factors nor the Heckscher-Ohlin models can account for the large

share of world trade that is intra-industry. And since intra-industry trade can have
                                                 7

distributional implications that are considerably less stark than either oF these, we dose this

section by considering briefly a model with differer tiated products and increasing returns to

scale (IRS).

       Consider an economy with two sectors and two factors (labor and capital). Let sector

one produce differentiated goods under IRS. In a symmetric equilibrium, each variety is

produced by a different firm at an identical level and at price p,. and free entry drives excess

profits to zero. The second sector produces a homogeneous good under standard conditions.

We assume consumers have a preference for variety along Spence-Dixit-Stiglitz lines and are

(as before) identical in their preferences. Their indirect utility function can then be expressed

as a variation of the one we have so far used, as y (xi) V(p11p2) I, where n denotes the

number of varieties available for consumption and (n) > 0.2 Each individual's income level is

the same as that expressed in eq. (4).

        In this economy Free trade will have some redistributive consequences along Stolper-

Samuelson lines as long as its relative factor endowments differ from that of the rest of the

wotid. However, the presence of IRS generates a motive for trade distinct from factor-

endowments considerations. Consequently, there will exist trade—intra-industry trade—even if

there are no differences In relative factor endowments across countries. Moreover, what is

pailicularty important from the political-economy standpoint is that this intra-industry traae will

make everyone better off: it will increase the number of varieties available For consumption (n)

without reducing anyone's real income (v( . ) I b). Therefore, as long as intra-industry trade

dominates factor-endowments-based trade, no individual will prefer autarky to free trade (see

Helpman and Krugman, 1985, 190-195). However, this does not mean that trade is

disthbutonalIy neutral. Trade, and trade policy, will continue to have redistributive

consequences as long as the home economy differs in its relative Factor endowments from its
                                                  8


trading partners.



3. A Typology of Models

       Political-economy models generally take the specific-factors or Heclcsctier-Ohlin

settings described above, and modify it in one or both of the following ways: (i) the objective

function maximized by the policymaker is taken to show a preference for certain distributional

outcomes, and hence to differ from that of the social planner (V/); and (ii) individuals or

lobbying groups are assumed to be able to take actions to shape the policymaker's

preferences. We now turn to discuss the leading models in the literature, emphasizing these

two dimensions.



3.1 The tariff-formation function approach. The most direct way in which trade policy can be

endogenized is to link the level of a particular trade policy instrument, say a tariff, to the

amount of lobbying resources deployed by contending organized groups. This approacri was

first used by Findlay and Wellisz (1982). In its simplest version, the model consists of a two-

sector economy where one of the sectors uses only labor under constant returns to scale,

while the other one (which is also the politically-active sector) employs labor and sector-

specific capital (Rodrik, 1986). As long as the first sector is active, the constant marginal

product of labor there fixes the economy-wide wage (say at unity). The tariff-formation

function consists of a relationship of the form t = t(tJ), where L' is the amount of labor used by

the politically active sector in the lobbying process. The endogenous level of lobbying (and

hence of trade protection) is given by the solution to the following problem:


                                !ff n(ps(1+t(L1fl.           1) -                                C)
                                                 9

This story assumes that owners of the specific factor can perfectly coordinate their lobbying

behavior and costlessly prevent free riding.

          The Findlay and Wellisz (1982) model has two industry lobbies in a sector-specific

factors setting, each deciding how much labor to devote to the lobbying activity. The resulting

tariff level is expressed as t = t(L11, L), with L1' and 2' standing for the amount of labor

devoted to lobbying activities by each of the sector-specific factors. The tariff is increasing in

the import-competing Industry's lobbying, and decreasing in the other industry's lobbying.

There is diminishing retums to lobbying. A Nash equilibrium in the two groups' lobbying

strategies determines the tariff. Feenstra and Bhagwati (1982) allow both labor and capital to

be used in lobbying activities, but they focus on a case where only a single industry is

politically active. While popular, the lobbying function approach has been cdticized for treating

the supply side of protection as a black box; the preferences of the politicians are not explicitly

stated.



3.2 The political support function approach. In this approach, the policy maker is assumed to

be partial to political influence from an organized interest group representing a particular

industry (as before), but is also assumed to care about the efficiency consequences of

restricting trade. The policymaker maximizes a function which trades off the gains from

protection to this industry against the losses to the general population. Letting p stand for the

relative price of the organized industry, Hillman (1989) wyites the political-support (unction as

follows:


                                   W'.M(z(p)-n(p•),          p..ps)                            (10)


 The first argument captures the political-support motive in favor of the industry whose profit

 function is included in the maximand, while the second represents the efficiency loss (hence
                                                10

M1' 0 and M2O). Note that both industry profits and overall welfare enter the political-support

function not in levels but in deviations from the free—trade benchmark. The first-order

condition for maximizing W3 is given by:


                                          M1ii+M=O                                           (11)

Since M1>0 and       > 0, an inteuior solution to this problem always requires that a positive

level of protection be provided to the industry concerned (p>p). This framework has been

applied to numerous issues, including declining-industry protectitn (1-lillman 1982) and bilateral

exchange of trade concessions (Hiliman and Moser, 1995).

        Van Long and Vousden (1991) provide a generalization in which political support

depends explicitly on the income levels of different groups in a sector-specific factors

economy. These authors distinguish between three groups in a two-good economy: owners of

the specific factor in sector one, owners of the specific factor in sector two, and owners of the

mobile factor (labor). Letting h = 1, 2, 3 denote representative individuals from each one of

these groups, respectively,

                                 I'    it1(p,w) +
                                 12 a x2(1,w) + a3(p-ps)m1                                  (12)
                                      13wL+a3(p-ps).rn1




where good 2 is taken to be the numeraire (so that p is the relative price of good 1). The

political-support function used by Van Long and Vousden (1991) then becomes:


                                      Eaav(s1b V(p)EaaI"                                    (13)
                                                11

where a, are exogenous weights reflecting the politician's preferences over the three groups.

Van Long and Vousden recognize explicitly that the shares of the three groups in tariff

revenue (a") need not be constant, and will depend in general on the equilibrium prices. This

approach can be viewed as the mirror image of the lobbying (unction approach: it makes

explicit the objective function of the policymakers while leaving obscure the actions taken by

influential groups to extract the desired behavior from them.



3.,s Median-voter approach. This approach was pioneered by Mayer (1984), who considered

a direct-democracy model where the tariff level is determined by voting among the population.

Using a HeckscherOhlin model, Mayer showed that each factor owner has an optimal tariff

rate (possibly negative) whose value is uniquely determined by the individuals factor

ownership. Let the exportable (good 2) be the numeraire with p2 = p, = 1 and p, p =

p,(1+t) = p(1+t). Assuming that tariff revenue is distributed in proportion to each person's

share in factor income, individual h's optimal tariff rate is found by maximizing V(p)l' with

respect to p. This yields:


                                    th    —      i
                                              , aia,
                                                        a$h/ap                                  (14)
                                                           $h




where I is aggregate income,      is individual h's share in aggregate income, and än/3p<U,

In the Heckscher-Ohlin model i34/3p>O if individual h is relatively well endowed in the factor

that is used intensively in the importable, and the strength of the effect is larger the more

"specialized" the individual is in that factor. Consequently, such an individual's most preferred

tariff will be strictly positive. Note also that the more open the economy to imports, and the

more price sensitive is import demand, the lower the individually desirable tariff (or export
                                                 12

subsidy).

       As long as voters differ only along a single dimension (say, in their relative capital-

labor endowment), the median-voter theorem can be applied to determine the tariff rate that

would emerge from voting. If there are no costs to voting, the median eligible voter's decision

is the outcome of majority voting. Therefore, under majority voting the endogenous level of

trade policy is determined .jf a policy maker maximized the utility of the median voter

                                          W1t'. V(p)I                                            (15)


where m denotes the median individual. Mayer (1984) also considers the speafic factors

case, to show that if there exists voting costs, a small industry is likely to gain protection

because other interests may find voting against the proposed tariff increase is not worthwhile.1

       This model is exemplary in that it is a fully-specified political-economic model, with no

black boxes. The assumption of direct democracy greatly simplifies the institutional sethng,

obviating much of the detail normally needed. The downside, of course, is the lack of realism:

in practice, trade policy is rarely determined by majority voting.



3.4 The campaign contributions approach (Magee-Brocic-Voung) . In the models mentioned

so far, the transfer of resources from special-interest groups to politicians does not pla' any

direct role. Models by Magee, Brock, and Young (MBY, 1989, chaps. 3 and 9) and Grossman

and Helpman (1992) have explicitly addressed the role of political contributions. In MBY,

lobbies make campaign contributions to increase the probability that their favored political

party wins at the polls. In Grossman and Helpman, campaign contributions are made to

influence the policy stance of the incumbent government.

       The MBY model adds two lobbies and two political parties (or candidates) to the
                                                 13
standard 2x2 Heckscher-Ohlin model. One of the parties is assumed to be pro-trade, while

the other is pro-protection. Each lobby represents one factor of production (capital or labor),

and makes contributions to one of the two parties. (In equilibrium, it does not pay to split

contributions.) Each party's election probability is increasing in the campaign contributions it

receives but decreasing in the level of the policy intervention it commits itself to.

        Formally, assume good 115 capital-intensive and let q be the probability that the pro-

capital party is elected. Denote by CK and CL the campaign contributions made respectively

by the capitalist lobby to the pro-capital party and by the labor lobby to the pro-labor party.

Magee         express q as q(C, CL, p1-p1t p2-p2), where q(.) is increasing in own

contributions and in the pro-labor distortion (p2-p2) and decreasing in the contributions

received by the other party and in the pro-capital distortion (p-p1). The pro-capital party

selects p1 to maximize q(.), while the pro-labor party selects p2 to maximize 1-q(.). As for

lobbies, they maximize the expected incomes of the factors they represent, net of campaign

contributions. Letting {rK, WK} represent the factor returns when the pro-capital party is in

power and {rL, wJ the factor returns when the pro-labor party is in power, the relevant

maximands are

                                 max
                                  CK              (1-q)rjK- C
                                                                                                (16)
                                 max
                                    I,
                                         Iqwk+ (1-q)wjL-C




The assumed strategic interactions are as follows: the two parties play Nash against each

other, as do the two lobbies. Out the parties are assumed to be Stackelberg leaders over the

lobbies which contribute to them. This is equivalent to having parties move (that is, select
                                                  14

their policies) in the first stage of a two-stage sub-game perfect equilibrium, with the lobbies

moving in the second stage. The implication is that lobbies' contributions are intended to

affect election outcomes but not party platforms. The model generates equilibrium levels of p1

and p2. i.e., an import tariff and an export subsidy. however, the framework is too complex to

yield reduced-form solutions, short of making specific parametric assumptions.

        The MOY model has been vigorously criticized by Austen-Smith (1991), both for its

artificial restriction on the parties' platforms (either pro-export or pro-protection) and for its use

of probabilistic voting without a rational-choice foundation. Mayer and U (1994) have

reworked the MBY framework tackling both criticisms. They provide better microfoundations

for the MBY assumption that campaign contributions enhance electoral strength by modeling

uncertainty explicitly. The full justification for the MBY model requires two-sided uncertainty:

voters must not know exactly the policy prelerences of the two parties, and parties in tum

must be uncertain about some aspect of the voters' preferences. Mayer and Li also allow the

parties to choose any policy they want. The result of these refinements is to weaken some of

the MOY findings: it is no longer certain that the two lobbies will never contribute to the same

party, for example.



3.5 The political contributions approach (Grossman-Hetpman). The Grossman and Helpman

(1992) model does not allow explicit competition among politicians. Instead, there exists a

single incumbent who maximizes a weighted sum of total political contributions and aggregate

welfare:


                                 wwf=    a,v(p,ih) +                                             (17)



where a (> 0) is the relative weight placed on aggregate welfare, and X"(p) represents the
                                                  15

contributions. (t" refers to individual incomes before political contributions.) The underlying

economic model is that of a small open economy, where the wage is fixed to unity due to the

presence of a numeraire sector Which uses labor alone. Them exist n additional sectors

wtiich use labor plus a specific factor. Some of these specific factors are represented by

lobby groups. Each lobby presents the incumbent with a contribution schedule, mapping the

policy vector (restricted to trade taxes and subsidies) into a contribution level. Letting H,

stand for the set of individuals who own some of the specific factor used in sector i, the lobby

representing sector i makes contributions amounting to A1(p), where


                                     A1(p)    —
                                                  Eh€KIAb(p)
                                                               .                                (18)




Grossman and Helprnan restrict individual preferences to the form V(p. Ib) = lh - &(p). Each

lobby wants to maximize its membership's itility (net of contributions). Therefore the lobbies'

problem consists of selecting A1(p) to maximize


                                              (I&.6(p)) — A1(p) .                               (19)



The incumbent government takes these contribution schedules as given and maximizes W'

(eq. 17) accordingly. Note that lobbies commit to their contributions before policies are

selected. in contrast to MBY, then, political contributions are intended to directly influence

the policies selected by the policy maker.'

        An equilibrium consists of a set of contribution functions {A(p)} such that each of these

 maximizes the joint welfare of the lobby's membership given the schedules of other lobbies

 and the anticipated decision rule of the government, plus a vector of domestic prices which

 maximizes W°". Grossman and Helpman (1992) rely on results from Bemheim and
                                                16

Wbinston's (1986) work on common agency to show that the equilibrium tariffs (or export

subsidies) take the following form (provided the contribution schedules are differentiable

around the equilibrium point):


                                      ____       C1—a                                        (20)
                                       1+t1      a+a     mjEj




where ç is an (exogenous) indicator that equals one if industry fls represented by a lobby

(and zero otherwise), a. is the (exogenous) share of the population that is represented by

lobbies, ; is the domestic output in sector i, and ; is the import demand or export supply

elasticity (defined as a positive number for the former and a negative number for the latter).1

The protection received by a sector is higher when it is organized, when its output is high

relative to competing imports, and when the price responsiveness of the corresponding trade

flows is low.

       This model is applied to a two-country selling in Grossman and Helpman (1993a) and

to analyze the political viability of a free-trade agreement in Grossman and Helpman (1993b).

The great advantage of the Grossman-Helpman framework is that it allows the endogenous

derivation from first principles of the campaign contribution schedules of competing lobbies in

a fairly general framework. Moreover, it does so without sacrificing tractability. On the other

hand, the model is subject to the criticism that only a small part of lobbying activity in real

polities takes the form of financial contributiont'
                                                17

4. Why Is International Trade Not Free?

The n/son d'être for the literature on the political economy of trade policy is the need to

provide an answer to the question posed by this section's title. How well does the literature

fare in this regard? At one level, quite well. Each of the family of models reviewed above

provides a particular story about how organized groups or individual voters can take political

action to reinforce or alleviate the income-distributional consequences of trade flows. While

the manner in which political influence is exercised differs across models, the conclusion in

common is: trade is not free because politically-influential groups can be made better off by

policy interventions in trade.

       At a deeper level, however, this shared bottom-line is problematic, or at least

incomplete. The reason has to do with the well-known argument that trade policy is a highly

inefficient tool for redistributing income (see Dixit, 1985, for a broad treatment). Saying that

trade policy exists because it serves to transfer income to favored groups is a bit like saying

Sir Edmund Hillary ciimbed Mt. Everest because he wanted to get some mountain air. There

was surely an easier way of accomplishing that objective!

       To more concrete, consider the case of garment workers in the United States. Let us

assume that these workers are politically influential (in the relevant sense), and that

transferring income to them is the politically efficient thing to do. Assume, moreover, that the

political equilibrium requires the garment workers' lifetime wealth to be higher than what it

would have been under unfettered market competition by $x. Now consider the following five

ways of achieving this transfer (i) a lump-sum grant of $x to every worker employed in the

garment industry presently; (ii) the same lump-sum grant, but to future as well as present

garment workers; (iii) a permanent employment subsidy to the garment industry which

increases workers' lifetime wealth by $x (iv) a permanent production subsidy to the garment
                                                  18

industry; and (v) a permanent tariff on imported foreign garments. By construction, garment

workers should be indifferent among these possibilities. The rest of society, however,

progressively becomes worse off as we move from option (i) to option (v).

        The puzzle then is why the worst of these optons—trade intervention—should emerge in

political equilibrium. This apparently perverse outcome is not only puzzling, but also goes

against the expectation, most dearly articulated by Becker (1983, 1985), that pressure groups

will favor more efficient means of transferring income to themselves. The models discussed

above are largely silent on this issue, since they explicitly rule out recourse to other policies

besides trade policy. Put differently, the existing literature is largely a literature on the political

economy of redistribution, and not of trade policy proper.9 The links with trade policy arise

only in the special case wherein policymakers are assumed to have access to no other

instruments beside trade interventions.'0

        This is not to say that the existing models cannot be manipulated to generate

examples in which trade policy is used in equilibrium even when a choice of alternative, more

direct instruments is available. I will mention such examples below. The point is that the

leading models are not primarily aimed at addressing this question. Therefore, there

continues to exist a serious gap in our understanding of what makes trade policy so politically

efficient, as it must be judged to be by revealed preference, when considerably more direct

means of redistributing income certainly exist.

        The existing work suggests two broad avenues for reconciling the political efficiency of

trade policy with its economic inefficiency for redistributive purposes. First, it is possible that

tariff-equilibria are preferred because they entail less cost to relevant political actors, in part

because their economic inefficiency may make them harder to use. Second, tariff-equilibria

may emerge as preferred outcomes In models with incomplete information because of
                                                19
informational reasons. I will take up each type of explanation in turn.



4.1 Tariffs as a means of reducing costly redistribution. Return for a moment to the

discussion above about alternative forms of transferring income to garment workers. What

allowed us to rank these policies in terms of payoffs to relevant parties (garment workers and

the rest of society) was that they were each calibrated so as to transfer a fixed amount of

income ($x) to garment workers. But in a political-economy framework, this is an

inappropriate comparison. After all, the amount of income that in equilibrium garment workers

manage to extract From the rest of society is really endogenous. Depending on the policies

that are available, and the rules of the game, the distributive gains to workers will change, as

will the associated costs—lobbying, campaign contributions—incurred both by workers in the

pursuit of these gains and by others in the attempt to avoid the transfers. Consequently, the

preferences of the relevant actors for specific types of redistributive policies cannot be known

ex ante, and will depend in general on the Features of the model at hand. Nor can the social

desirability of one type of policy be easily ranked against that or another, once the

endogeneity of the process generating these policies is recognized (Rodrik, 1987).h1

        The eailiest paper that I am aware of which gives concrete form to this line of

reasoning is Rodrik (1986). The paper undertakes a comparison of two policy regimes, one in

which a politically-powerful industry can lobby only for production subsidies and another in

which it can lobby only for import tariffs. The crucial difference between the two policies is

that production subsidies can be in principle firm-specific, while import tariffs are not. In view

of the free-rider problem associated with lobbying for tariffs, then, the endogenous policy

equilibrium involves a higher level of transfers to firms when production subsidies are the only

instrument available. This added redistribution can be large enough to offset the by-product
                                                20

distortion of tariffs on the consumption side. Hence, citizens acting behind a Raw1sian veil of

ignorance, not knowing their later position in society, may well choose a tariff regime over a

subsidy regime.
       Wilson (1990) has provided a more elegant model, with the same flavor. In his words,

"a move to relatively inefficient forms of income transfers may reduce the total excess burden

in the economy, because the greater inefficiency induces the politicians to lower their use of

transfers" (1990, 242). The model has two candidabs competing to win office, with the

probability of winning increasing in own contributions and decreasing in the rival's. The higher

the level of contributions a candidate receives the higher the transfer he will have to make

when in office. But these transfers are costly to the politician due to their dead-weight loss. If

the two candidates behave in Nash fashion in pursuit of contributions, in equilibrium there is

excess contributions and excess transfers compared to what could have been achieved if they

had colluded. So restricting the efficiency of transfers alleviates this particular problem,

reduces the transfers in equilibrium, and could even make both politicians better off (since

politicians are assumed to also care about deadweight loss). In particular, the political

equilibrium with tariffs is more efficient than the one with production subsidies.

        In a similar vein, Grossman and Helpman (1992, section 6) show in their model that

lobbies would not necessarily prefer the government to use more efficient means of

transfemng income to them. The reason is that when competition between lobbies is intense.

each lobby is making a large contribution, yet at the same time its effect on policy outcomes is

being cancelled by the equally large contributions of other lobbies. So lobbies may support

institutions that constrain governments to transfer income as inefficiently as possible (i.e.,

through trade policy), thus inducing lower contributions by each of the lobbies. As in Wilson

(1990). the counter-intuitive result is the consequence of wasteful competition among lobbies
                                                21
that cannot coordinate their actions. Put differently, more efficient transfers allow the

incumbent to play off lobbies against each other more easily, and to collect more contributions

(1990, P. 33).

       As a final example of this kind of logic, consider the paper by Staiger and Tabellini

(1987). In the Staiger-Tabellini framework, trade policy is the consequence of a benevolent

government's incentive to provide "surprisC protection to workers adversely affected by a fall

in world prices. Since, workers cannot be systematically surprised, however, the time-

consistent equilibrium Involves excessive protection (in the sense that the government may

have preferred to commit itself to providing no protection at all). In this context, a switch from

a more "efficient" policy tool (production subsidy) to a less "efficienr one (import tariff) can

make the government better off: the less efficient policy alleviates the time-inconsistency

problem by making it less beneficial to surprise the workers.

       In each of the above models, the comparison involves equilibria of different "policy

regimes", where each regime is characterized by the use of a specific policy (tariffs or

production subsidies, say). What is often left vague is the political mechanism that governs

the choice of one regime over another. One can think of this choice as being made in the first

stage of a two-stage political economy model. This appears to be the implicit view in the

previous papers, but the decision-making process for this first stage is not well specified in

any one of them. The main contribution of the type of reasoning represented by these papers

is to suggest that tariff equilibria do not necessarily generate more deadweight loss than

equilibria in which more direct redistributive policies are used, once the political determination

of the magnitude of policy Interventions is accounted for.



4.2 Tariffs as Informationally efficient policies. Most of the models discussed so far are
                                                 22
complete-information models where uncertainty or asymmetric information plays no role. In

particular, politicians are assumed to be perfectly informed about the characteristics of

pressure groups and the latter in turn to have full information about the economy-wide

consequences of policy choices. In practice, of course, neither of these assumptions is

tenable. Some effort has gone recently into modelling the consequences of relaxing thern,

with a particular eye towards generating a rationale for the use of inefficient redistributive

polices such as trade policy.

        Magee, Brock, and Young (1969) propose the principle of "optimal obfuscation" as an

explanation for the existence of trade restrictions. They argue that indirect policies present a

political advantage precisely because their effects are less likely to be observed by those who

bear the costs. Their formalization, however, is incomplete and presents more questions than

it answers. In particular, as Austen-Smith (1991, 82) has argued, "rational maximizers without

complete information may nevertheless be able to infer sufficient information frorn the behavior

of others to make the 'correct' decision." A satisfactory model dealing with this issue must

incorporate explicit uncertainty and be built on information-theoretic foundations.

       A recent paper by Coate and Morris (1993). although not concerned directly with trade

policy, represents an important beginning in that direction. They construct a model in which

voters have uncertainty both as to the motive of the politician (well-meaning or redistributive),.

and as to the efficiency of the indirect transfer. With regard to the latter, there exists some

states of the world in which the less direct transfer is also the rnore efficient one. They show

that under these conditions inefficient transfers will sometimes be made. The reason is that

politicians care about their reputations, and redistributive politicians will sometimes rather

maintain their reputation (of not being redistributive) than make the efficient transfer (which will

be recognized directly for what it is). In other words, "the reputational penalty for using the
                                                  23

(inefficient] policy to make transfers is likely to be less than that for making direct transfers"

(Coate and Morris, 1993, 25).

       One important contribution of the Coate-Morris paper is its demonstration that both

types of uncertainty are needed for inefficient transfers to be made in equilibrium: if all

politicians were alike, then their type could be readily discerned from their behavior. So

uncertainty about the efficiency of the indirect transfer is not sufficient. But note also that their

model has only partial applicability to the issues at hand. Trade restrictions are economically

efficient only for a large country and for "optimum tariff" reasons; it is hard to believe that there

would exist much uncertainty in practice about the legitimacy of this motive.'2 (Remember

that the indirect redistributive policy must be efficient in some states of the world, and that the

state of the world is not observed by voters.)

        Feenstra and Lewis (1991a) consider the role of asymmetric information from the

perspective of a benevolent government. Suppose the government wants, following a fall in

the world price of importables, to make sure that noone loses. Suppose further that the

government can observe nothing about the domestic economy, and therefore that it can

neither target lump-sum transfers, nor ensure that the taxes needed to finance a production

subsidy on import-competing producers are designed appropriately to leave no individual

worse off. Under these conditions, an import tariff is an informationally efficient policy

because the tariff necessarily and automatically benefits those that lose out, while leaving

noone worse-off relative to the initial situation. In parlicular, a tariff equivalent to the decline of

import prices will leave everyone in the economy as well off as before, while generating some

government revenue which can be redistributed. The tariff policy does not require the

government to have any information about individual production and consumption levels.

Feenstra and Lewis show that the optimal, incentive-compatible policy in this case is actually
                                                24

a non-linear tariff, with larger producers of the import-competing good being protected by

lower tariffs.



4.3 Other explanations. In a series of papers, Mayer and Riezman (1987, 1989, 1990) have

considered the choice between tariffs and more direct redistributive policies in Mayer (1984)-

type models. In Mayer and Riezman (1987), they show that where voter preferences are

based only on differences in factor ownership, production subsidies are preferred by the

median voter to tariffs (as expected). In Mayer and Riezman (1989), they allow voters to differ

on other dimensions besides factor ownership, namely in consumption preferences and in

their treatment under income taxes. With multidimensional voting of this type, there is of

course no unique equilibrium. We need an agenda setter to determine equilibrium, but with

that included, the more inefficient tariffs can certainly arise as a possible equilibrium. Finally.

Mayer and Riezman (1990) provide additional reasons for why tariffs may be preferred by

certain voters in the same kind of framework: if income taxes are progressive, the cost of

financing subsidies will be focussed on richer individuals, while the cost of the tariff is more

broadly distributed among the population, leading to some individuals preferring tariffs; a tariff

regime may be less risky ex ante, since the range of ex-post optimal tariffs is smaller than in

the case of subsidies, resulting in risk-averse voters prefening the former.



4.4 The Choice Among Alternative Trade Policy Instruments. There also exists a related

literature that analyzes the political choice between tariffs and other trade policy instruments

(mainly VERs). Hillman (1990) discusses how non-tariff bafflers such as VERs and trigger

price mechanisms can be viewed as arrangements that benefit producers in both exporting

and importing countries at the expense of consumers. Hillman and Ursprung (1988) model
                                                25
how VERs can be preferred to import tariffs by both domestic and foreign producers, and

therefore can emerge in a political equilibrium where each industry makes campaign

contributions to their respective domestic politicians. Feenstra and Lewis (1991b) provide a

model in which VERs are an efficient response to the following problem: when domestic

political pressures are not directly observed by trade partners, cacti country may have an

incentive to exaggerate the political pressure at home, so as to jack up its protection;

therefore, "the transfer of quota rents (through VERs) can play a useful role in ensuring that

countries do not exaggerate the political pressure for protection" (1304).



4.5 Summary and evaluation. The collective effect of these papers is to weaken considerably

the presumption that direct redistributive policies should be politically more efficient than trade

interventions. However, the reader would be fully justified if s/he is left uneasy about how well

the literature has tackled the task at hand. The results discussed above tend to be too narrow

and specific to account for what is essentially a universal phenomenon: the preference of

political systems to use trade interventions to generate or sustain distributional outcomes. Of

course, trade policy is not the only, or even the most important, mechanism of redistribution

used by govemments. But practically all governments apparently use it for that purpose. A

sufficiently general and convincing explanation for this phenomenon has yet to be formulated.

        Part of the problem is that the literature has largely relegated the preference for trade

policies to a side show. The papers discussed in this section represent a tiny minority within

the literature on the political economy of trade policy, and even in some of these the question

of policy choice is an afterthought. This is also reflected in the small role attached to the

question in existing surveys. In Hillman (1969), for example, the chapter entitled "Political

Choice of the Means of Protection" focusses its analytical core on the choice between tariffs
                                                 26
and quotas, and not on the choice between these and more efficient distributive policies. In

Magee, Brock, and Young (1989), the preference for trade policies over other policies is not

discussed until the very last chapter. Clearly, the literature needs a shift in focus.



5. Why Are Trade Policies Biased AgaInst Trade?

        Let us assume for a second that the existing literature provides a satisfactory

explanation for the prevalent use of trade policies for distributive purposes. We now confront

a second, equally Important puzzle: why are trade policies almost always biased against trade,

rather than in favor of it? That is, why is trade policy systematically used to transfer resources

to import-competing sectors and factors rather than to export-oriented sectors and factors?

That there exists a systematic bias should be obvious: there is no country that I am aware of

where the net effect of commercial policies is to expand rather than contract trade.t3 This is

also reflected in the fact that multilateral (as well as bilateral) trade negotiations typically

focus on eliminating barriers to trade rather than artificial inducements thereon. The few case

studies that focus on the political activities of export-er'ented interests take it for granted that

the focal point around which such interests coalesce is free trade, not export subsidization

(see Destler and Odell, 1987, and Milner, 1988). It is not dear why this should be so, when

the analogous benchmark for import-competing interests is protection."

        On this puzzle we get very little help from the literature. Consider the leading models.

The tariff-formation function approach a Ia Findlay and Wellisz (1982) essentially assumes the

problem away by stipulating that sectoral interests lobby for tariffs but not export subsidies.

The political-support function approach a Ia Hillman (1982) generates the asymmetry by

assuming that the policymaker desires support from import-competing interests but not from

exporting ones. The other leading approaches do not introduce artiflcial asymmetries, and
                                                 27

therefore generate no presumption that the equilibrium trade policy is a tariff rather than an

export subsidy (although their language often suggests otherwise). In Mayer (1964), for

example, the equilibrium trade policy would consist of an export subsidy when the median

voter is relatively well endowed with the economy's abundant factor.15

       Let us look at this question more closely using the Grossman and Helpman (1992)

framework. As shown in equation (20), the level of support (import tariff or export subsidy)

received by an industry depends in this Framework on a number of (eatures, including whether

the industry is organized or not and the size of its trade elasticity. Leaving aside artificial

asymmetries along these two dimensions, the model predicts that industries with high levels of

output relative to their respective trade volumes receive more protection. To see what this

implies, let us consider the case of a single import-competing and a single exporting industry.

Since trade must be balanced, the question of which industry gets more protection then boils

down to which industry has the higher level of output. And if comparative advantage canies

any force, countries will tend to specialize in their export sectors; that is, they will have larger

export sectors than import-competing sectors. The unfortunate implication is that we should

observe a bias towards export subsidies, and not import tariffs! Indeed, Levy (1993a) has

shown that in a symmetric, two-country Grossman-Helpman world the effect of lobbying is to

encourage net trade promotion.1 Hence, the Grossman-Helpman framework not only does

not help out with the puzzle, it actually makes it worse.

       The starting point for any explanation for the systematic bias in favor of trade

restrictions is likely to be a bit of history: revenue-hungry rulers in countries with poor

administrative capabilities know that trade is an excellent tax handle. Trade taxes therefore

typically contribute a very large share of government revenue in any nation's early history. In

the United States, for example, tariffs provided on average more than 50 percent of
                                                28

government revenue from 1870 to 1914 (Baack and Ray, 1983). Prior to the Civil War, this

ratio actually stood at 90 percentl (Hansen, 1990). Not surprisingly, then, the sharp drop in

the average U.S. tariff rate at the start of World War I coincides with the introduction or the

income tax in 1913.

        Cross-country evidence is also consistent with the hypothesis that poorer countries rely

more heavily on trade taxes. As shown in Table 1, there is a robust negative relationship

between per capita income and the share of trade taxes in total tax revenue: an increase in

per capita income or si,ooo is associated with a reduction in 3.7 percentage points in the

share of taxes that originate from foreign trade.



        Viewed from this perspective, the political-economy puzzle becomes why the bias

against trade remains even when governments develop alternative, more efficient sources of

tax revenue.'7 That is, the puzzle about anti-trade bias turns into a puzzle about persistence.

It is well known that the OECD countries have moved o non-tariff barriers just as they were

reducing their reliance on import tariffs. Of course, one can appeal to the terms-of-trade

benefits of trade restrictions for large countries. But this explanation would be implausible, not

the least because governments have been so quick to transfer rents created by quantitative

restrictions to foreign exporters through VERs. Moreover, there is corroborating historical

evidence that it is difficult to take protection away once it has been given: Gardner and

Kimbrough (1969) show that the average U.S. tariff follows close to a random walk in the pre-

1913 period (that is, any increase in the tariff was essentially permanent).

       There are practically no models in the literature that deal with this issue of persistence,

and very few that can account for it.1' Two exceptions are Fernandez and Rodrik (1991) and

Brainard and Verdier (1993). The first of these papers shows that there is a natural status-
                                                 29
quo bias to policymaking whenever some of the gainers (or losers) from reform cannot be

identified cx ante. Many reforms that are politically sustainable ex post will not be adopted ex

ante. Fernandez and Rodrik (1991) show that the bias exists even when individuals are risk

neutral, rational and forward-looking.

        To see how the argument works, consider a democracy where a majority vote is

needed before trade reform can be adopted. Let the economy have 100 voters and suppose

that the reform in question will increase the incomes of 51 individuals by $5 each and

decrease the incomes of the rest by $1 each, leaving a net gain of (5x51)-(1x49) = $206. In

the absence of uncertainty, the majority of the population would vote in favor and the reform

would be adopted. We assume that all these consequences of reform are common

knowledge. Now suppose that while 49 individuals know for sure that they will gain, the

remaining 51 are in the dark as to which among them will gain and which will lose; however,

since aggregate consequences are common knowledge, individuals in the latter group know

that two of them will eventually benefit while 49 will lose out. (Such uncertainty may arise

from, say, incomplete information at the individual level about the skills needed to succeed in

the post-reform environment.) This renders indMduals in the second group identical ex ante,

with an expected benefit from reform of ((5x2)-(1x49)}151 = -$016 each. Hence the

individuals in the uncertain group will reject reform, blocking its adoption.

       Conversely, uncertainty of this kind can lead to reforms that will prove unpopular ex

post (and hence be reversed) to be adopted cx ante. The bias towards the status quo

derives from the following asymmetry: due to the uncertainty about the consequences of the

reform, some reforms that will be ex post unsustainable are adopted, while some that would

have been sustainable are not. Both of these types of "erro( leave the polity in the status-

quo position (as the former cases are eventually followed by a retum to the status quo).
                                                 30

       Brainard and Verdier (1993) use a dynamic version of the Grossman-f-telpman (1992)

framework to show that industries that have hi9h protection today are more likely to have high

protection tomorrow as well. The reason is that current protection makes these industries

adjust (contract) less, with the result that output will be higher in the future than in the

absence of the protection. The higher future output in turn translates in the Grossman-

Helpman framework into greater future protection.

        To sum up, to date very lithe attention has been paid to explaining why trade policies

are systematically biased against trade. What I have argued here is that a two-part

explanation for this bias holds the greatest promise. First, the initial conditions: since trade is

a convenient tax handle, most governments inherit trade taxes originally put in place for

revenue motives. Second, persistence and status-q'i•n bias: once protection is awarded, it is

difficult to take it away. However, more work is needed on this last point.



6. ProtectIon Across Industries, Counties, and Time

        What are the determinants of protection levels across different industries, among

countries, or over time? These questions, and particularly the first one, have been the subject

of a large body of empirical literature. The typical approach in the empirical work has been to

regress some measure of protection on a number of economic and political variables.1' While

the relevance of the included independent variables is typically motivated by appealing loosely

to the theoretical literature, the links between the empirical and theoretical work have never

been too strong in this area. Regression analysis often takes the kitchen-sink approach, with

a large number of "relevant" variables—some obviously endogenous—thrown in on the right-

hand side. None of the leading approaches discussed earlier has been subjected to direct

empirical test. On the other hand, nor are some of the empirical regularities uncovered by the
                                                  31

econometric work adequately explained by existing theory (see below).

       There exist quite a few surveys of the empirical literature on the political economy of

trade policy (Ray, 1990; Marks and McArthur, 1990; Anderson and Baldwin, 1987). Therefore,

I will only summarize some of the main conclusions coming out of this literature and relate

these to theory.



6.1 Protection across industries. The cross-industry determinants of levels of protection within

a country have been analyzed in a regression framework by a large number of authors. The

studies to date have focussed on advanced industrial countries (mainly the U.S.), and have

used many different indicators of trade protection, including nominal and effective tariffs, non-

tariff coverage ratios, and exemptions from multilateral trade liberalization. To summarize the

key findings of this literature, the protection received by an industry is higher when:

        •      it Is a labor-intensive, low-skill, low-wage industry (Caves, 1976; Saunders,

               1980; Anderson1 1980; Ray 1981; Marvel and Ray, 1983; Baldwin 1985;

               Anderson and Baldwin, 1987; Ray 1991; Finger and Harrison, 1994);

        •      it has high import penetration (Anderson, 1980; Finger and Harrison, 1994), has

               experienced an increase in import penetration (Trefler, 1993), or has been in

               decline (Marvei and Ray, 1983; Ray 1991);

        •      it produces consumer goods rather than intermediate goods (Baack and Ray,

                   1983; Marvel and Ray 1983; Ray 1991);

        •          its production is regionally concentrated (Pincus, 1975; Caves, 1976; Godek,

                   1985), except for in the case of non-tariff bafflers (Ray, 1981);

        •          it engages in little intra-industry trade (Ray. 1991; Marvel and Ray, 1987);

        •          its customers are not highly concentrated (Pincus, 1975; Trefler, 1993).
                                                  32

High levels of concentration in the affected industry itself is apparently not always conducive

to protection: some studies find a negative relationship between seller concentration and

protection Anderson and Baldwin, 1987; Finger, Hall, and Nelson, 1982), while many others

find a positive relationship (Pincus, 1975; Saunders, 1980; Marvel and Ray, 1983; Godek,

1985; Trefier, 1993). Another noteworthy finding is that tariffs and non-tariff barriers are

complements (Ray, 1981; Ray and Marvel, 1984; Godek, 1985). We note that the studies

listed here are not directly comparable for a number of reasons: they use different measures

of protection, cover different countries and time periods, and include different sets of right-

hand side variables.

        One recent paper in this tradition that is particularly noteworthy is Trefler (1993) This

paper is novel in that it considers the joint determination of import penetration levels with non-

tariff protection. The argument is that there is a two-way dependence between these two: an

increase in import penetration stimulates demands for NTBs, while an increase in NIBs

naturally restrict imports. The correct procedure, therefore, is to undertake a simultaneous

estimation of the import-penetration and NIB equations. Once the endogeneity of NTBs is

taken into account, Trefier shows that the restrictive effect of NIBs on U.S. trade is much

greater than what is usually estimated in single-equation trade models. He finds that the 1983

average import penetration in U.S. manufactures would rise from 13.8 to 15.4 percent, which

is equivalent to an increase in actual imports of $49.5 billion under conservative estimates.

With regard to the NTB equation, Trefler finds that the level of NIB coverage is positively and

significantly correlated not with the level of import penetration but with the change in it.

       These empirical regularities overlap only imperfectly with the results of the theoretical

literature. The finding that advanced industrial countries protect mainly their labor-intensive

sectors is essentially a consequence of the fad these are their import-competing sectors. As
                                                 33

discussed above, the theoretical literature does not provide any robust reason as to why

protection should be biased in favor of sectors with comparative Sadvantage.

       The finding with respect to import-penetration levels (or the changes therein) is also

poorly explained. The Grossman-Helpman model in fact yields the opposite presumption,

namely that sectors with high import penetration should get low protection!02' Hillman (1982)

and van Long and Vousden (1991) use the political—support function approach to explain why

declining industries get more protection: when the world price of nn import-competing sector

drops, the policymaker wants the rest of society to share the cost, so she raises the tariff.

Note that the logic in this story is not essentially political, but has to do with risk-sharing. The

same outcome obtains in Staiger and Tabellini (1987) as well, where the govemment does not

have an explicitly political motive, and simply wants to redistribute income from groups with

low marginal utility of income at the margin—those adversely affected by trade—to those with

high marginal utility!2

        Regarding the nature of the industry's output (consumer versus intermediate good) and

its market structure, there is again a dearth of theoretical research. It is of course reasonable

that intermediate-good industries will have a comparatively hard time receiving protection, as

long as consumer interests are less well organized and represented than producer interests.

But almost aN theoretical models of political economy exclude intermediate goods and focus

on consumer goods (see however last section of Grossman and Helpman, 1992). On industry

structure, it is perhaps disappointin9 that the empirical literature is not more clearcut on the

political advantages of high concentration, in view of the strong presumption that free-rider

effects should be important in lobbying. Here too, however, theoretical contributions are

scant. In Rodrik (1987), there is an unambiguous negative relationship between the numbers

of firm in an industry and the amount of tariff protection it receives. Hillman (1991) has
                                                34

undertaken a more complete analysis using a model where owner-managers have to choose

how much to invest in internal monitoring of their production activity and how much to lobby in

favor of a tariff. He funds that the relationship between concentration and the level of

protection is ambiguous in general.'3

       Finally, on intra-industry trade, it stands to reason that pressures for protection are

diluted in industries where two-way trade is significant. Kmgrnan's original work on

international trade with monopolistic competition was motivated at least in part by the

observation that the huge expansion of intra-OECD trade in the postwar period has apparently

taken place without large distributive effects, and hence with few political-economy

repercussions (Krugman, 1981). And one interpretation of the disproportionate bafflers facing

Japanese exports in importing counties is that these are the consequence of Japan's much

lower share of intia-industry trade relative to other developed countries." Interestingly, the

relationship between intra-industry trade and the political economy of trade policy has not

been formally modelled. The only exception seems to be a paper by Levy (1993b), who does

so in the context of the debate between bilateralism and multilateralism. Levy models a world

with both intra-industry trade and Heckscher-Ohlin trade. An expansion of the former benefits

everyone, while an expansion of the latter has redistributive effects along Stolper-Samuelson

lines. He shows that the option of integrating with a similar economy ("bilateralism") may

Foreclose the option of multilateral free trade, when the median voter stands to lose from

Heckscher-Ohlin trade.



6.2 Protection across countries or institutional contexts. There is great variation among

countries in their average levels of protection. Developing countries, in particular, have much

higher levels of protection than the advanced industrial countries—although recently this has
                                                  35
begun to change In the case of Latin American countries. Among the industrial countries, the

small European countries have tended to be more open (at feast when agriculture is excluded)

than the larger economies. The empirical literature on the determinants of cross-country

protection is not large. In fact, I found only few systematic studies on the subject.

       Magee          (1989, chap. 16) find that average tariff rates tend to decrease across

countries as capital-labor ratios increase. This is a reflection of the fact that rich countries

have lower protection than poor countries. As noted above, there is a solid revenue reason

for why this should be so, independent of political ecciomy. In addition, developing countries

have been until recently under the influence of infant-industry reasoning. Once these motives

are controlled for, it is unclear whether political circumstances provide additional explanatory

power for the observed tendency of poor countries to be more protectionist.

       Anderson (1993) has analyzed a related asymmetry concerning rich and poor

countries: poor countries tend to tax agriculture while rich countries subsidize it. Anderson's

main argument is that a tax on agriculture in a developing country results in a relatively small

cost for farmers but a big gain for industrialists, while an agricultural subsidy in a developed

country entails big gains for farmers but small costs to industrialists. This asymmetry is the

consequence of a number of structural differences: in a developing country, agricultural

production is a larger share of GOP, uses less capital and industrial inputs, and is a bigger

pad of domestic consumption. Anderson uses a CGE model with parameters reflecting

arctietypal developing and developed countries to demonstrate the asymmetric distributional

implications of taxing/subsidizing agriculture.

       The cross-national variation in average protection levels among advanced industrial

countries is examined in Mansfield and Busch (1993). Their sample is small—14 countries

pooled over two years, 1983 and 1986—but the results are interesting. They find that non-tariff
                                                  36

bafflers are higher In countries that are larger in size (in terms of either GOP or imports), have

higher unemployment rates, have larger number of parliamentary constituencies, and use

proportional representation (PR) as their electoral system.

       The last two findings deserve special comment, as they are concrete indication that the

institutional context of government matters. Following Rogowski (1987), Mansfield and Busch

argue that the number of constituencies is an inverse measure of the "insulation" of the

executive from narrow interest groups. The reason is that the smaller the average size of the

constituency the more likely that a single group can exercise political power "When

automakers or dairy farmers entirely dominate twenty small constituencies and are a powerful

minority in fifty more, their voice will certainly be heard in the nation's councils" (Rogowski,

1987, 208). This expectation is borne out in the results. The presence of a PR system in turn

is taken to indicate that the executive possesses greater "autonomy" as list-system PR tends

to lead to strong parties: "[p]ressure groups are restrained where campaign resources or the

legal control of nominations are centralized in the hands of party leaders" (Rogowski, 1987,

209). The Mansfield-Busch finding that PR systems are associated with higher NTBs,

however, contradicts this line of reasoning.

        Theoretical and empirical work relating institutional contexts to trade policy outcomes is

in its infancy but should be a promising area of research. Cross-national studies necessarily

confront variability in institutional context. Single-country studies do not necessarily do so,

although different trade policy "tracks" exhibiting different institutional realities rnay well co-

exist within a single political entity. Finger, Hall, and Nelson (1982), in particular, have made

this argument for the United States. They distinguish between a "technical" track and a

"political" track en route to protection. In the case of anti-dumping proceedings, for example,

the determination of whether there has been dumping is a largely technical one, whereas the
                                                 37
determination of injury is more political. The rules for the former determination are more

dearly specified, while the rules for the latter are more subjective and open to interpretation.
Consistent with this hypothesis, Finger        find that in less—than-fair value (LFV) pricing

determinations, political factors such as Industry concentration and size of industry either do

not play a role or enter with the "wrong sign (concentration), while technical factors play an

important role. In the case of injury determinations, size of employment enters positively and

significantly, while technical factors play a much smaller role. Hence just as in the Rogowski-

Mansfie'd-Busch line of analysis, different rules of the game produce different outcomes?5



6.3 Protection over time. Some of the trends in trade policy over time have already been

noted. Notably, countries have tended to reduce their levels of trade restrictions, and, at least

among developed countries, there has been a shift away from tariffs in the direction of non-

tariff barriers. The former is probably best explained by the development of alternative tax

instruments as countries develop, and by the falling out of favor or import-substitution and

infant-industry arguments. As for the shift towards NTOs, this is usually explained by

reference to successive rounds of agreements under the GAiT, which by cutting and binding

tariffs have left governments little discretion over their tariff levels. So governments that want

to protect have little choice but to resort to NIBs. Note that this argument, as stated, is

incomplete. That multilateral agreements under GAIT restrict freedom of action for tariffs but

not for all kinds of NTBs is common knowledge to all parties concerned. Why governments

still have the incentive to negotiate agreements that they know they and others will be rble to

flout by resorting to NIBs is not so easily explained.

       In this sub-section I focus on the following two questions: (i) what do we know about

the determinants of short-term fluctuations in levels of trade protection? (ii) what explains the
                                                38

drastic reversals in trade policy we occasionally observe?

       With regard to the time-series correlates of protection, there exists a number of studies

for the United States. That the average tariff level tends to rise in recessions is a robust

finding in this literature (Ray, 1987; Hansen, 1990; O'Halloran, 1993). In the most careful

empirical study to date of the historical experience of the U.S. with tariffs, Bohara and

Kaempfer (1991) find that U.S. tariffs are Granger-caused by unemployment, real GNP, the

price level, but not the trade balance. Presumably the reason tariffs tend to increase in

recessions is the Keynesian motive of switching demand to home products. Note, however,

that the practice predates Keynes.tm In addition, historically Republicans have tended to raise

tariffs while Democrats have reduced them (O'Halloran, 1993; Magee, Brock, and Young,

1989. chap. 13)?' O'Halloran (1993) emphasizes the importance of political parties taking

distinct positions on the tariff issue and implementing them when elected. She takes this to

indicate that parties are more than pure .iggregators of social pressures, thus reflecting the

importance of political institutions.

        One interesting time-series study outside the U.S. context is Rama's (1993) work on

Uruguay. In this study, Rarna goes through historical govemment records to count the annual

number of statutes relating to foreign trade over the 1925-1953 period. He distinguishes

between regulations imposed to the benefit of a single firm or industry and regulations that

seem more broadly public-spirited, with the first presumably indicating rent-seeking activities.

These series are then scaled by aggregate output or exports. Rama regresses this measure

of rent-seeking on its lagged value and a series of dummies that represent sub-periods with

different political and trade-policy regimes. He finds that sub-periods with policy activism—

either in the direction of Import substitution or export promotion—are also ones in which rent-

seeking activity is largest. This is a notable paper in tat it is one of the few attempts to
                                                 39

seriously quantify rent-seeking in the trade policy arena, and to delineate its relationship to the

government's policy stance.

       Finally, let us turn to cases of sharp reversal in trade policy. Such cases pose

problems of explanation because the distributional consequences of trade—the basis for trade

politics—are unlikely to change very rapidly. Cassing and Hillman (1986) provide a model in

which small changes In external conditions can have drastic effects on trade policy: the

reason is that declines in economic and political standing are related and can amplify each

other's effects. Other explanations are related to changes in the institutional background. A

significant instance is provided by the experience of the United States since the passage of

the. Reciprocal Trade Act of 1934. Following this act, which delegated Congressional authority

over tariff-setting to the President, U.S. tariff levels declined significantly. It has been

suggested that this particular institutional innovation—delegation—was chiefly responsible for

the subsequent move towards free trade, as the President is presumed to be less susceptible

to pressure from nanow pressure groups (Pincus, 1986; Baldwin, 1991).

       O'Halloran (1993) has provided a more nuanced argument about the role of delegation,

in which "Congress meticulously designs procedures to ensure that the actions taken by the

president are in line with legislators' preference? (1993, 5-6). In this view, delegation to the

executive is a willful action aimed at getting desirable outcomes. O'Halloran shows that

Congress delegates less authority to the president of an opposing party, with the

consequence that divided government is associated with higher levels of protection. Once

again, these considerations highlight the role played by the institutional setting in determining

trade policy outcomes.

        More recently, a growing number of developing countries have accomplished a

dramatic turn-around by abandoning their protectionist trade regimes in favor of more open
                                                40
trade policies (Bolivia and Mexico since 1985, Argentina since 1987, Brazil since 1988, Peru

since 1990). What makes this change in course difficult to explain is that it has taken place in

the most unfavorable economic circumstances: these countries were all mired in deep

macroeconomic crises with high inflation and stagnant or falling output at the time that they

decided to open up. A small literature has emerged trying to explain the puzzle. Many of the

explanations center on the political benefits of a deep economic crisis in enabling policy

reform. Drazen and Grilli (1993) focus on a 'war of attrition" between two social groups and

show that a negative shock (a "crisis') leads to an earlier resolution of the conflict. In Rodrik

(1994), I explain the reforms by arguing that a deep economic crisis relegates distributional

considerations to second place behind economy-wide concerns, and therefore allows an

agenda-setting government to sneak In trade policy reforms alongside macroeconomic
                                                                                          -
reforms.



7. Consequences of Viewing Trade Policy from Political-Economy Lenses

       This paper has so far focussed on the contribution that the political-economy

perspective can make to our understanding of the actual conduct of trade policy. But there is

an additional payoff. Political-economy models can actually enhance the sophistication of our

economic analysis as well, by providing a fuller account of the likely consequences of policy.

In addition, they can be an important input to the design of appropriate institutions and

regimes in the trade policy area. Consequently, they can be invaluable for normative analysis

as well as positive analysis (Rodrik, 1993). I conclude this essay by giving some illustrations.

       Trefler's (1993) empirical analysis of non-tariff barriers in the U.S., discussed earlier,

provides an excellent example of how political-econoty analysis enriches our understanding

of the economic consequences of trade policy. Trefler notes that the level of imports and of
                                                 41

NIBs are both endogenous and influence each other, A single-equation framework that

regressed import quantities Ofl NIBs would be subject to simultaneous-equation bias, as

import penetration has consequences in turn for NTB levels thanks to political forces. In fact,

he rinds that the simultaneous-equation estimate of the restrictiveness of NIBs on U.S.

imports is 10 times larger than the single-equation estimate. Hence, viewing NIBs as

endogenous rather than exogenous corrects the previous literature's conclusion that the effect

of trade restrictions on import quantities has been small.2'9

       As an additional example, consider the paper by Brainard and Verdier (1993). As this

paper shows, taking into account the endogeneity of protection gives us a more complete

understanding of the process of inter-sectoral resource flows. The easier it is for industries to

obtain protection in response to a fall in their price, the slower is the rate of adjustment, and

the higher is the long run capacity in the sector experiencing the adverse shock. So, the

"specificity" of factors to an industry becomes endogenous through the political process. Our

economic models would not give a full account short of taking this endogeneity into account.

       One can go one step further. Economic behavior is distorted not only by the actual

imposition of trade restrictions, but by the prospect of their imposition as well—even if the

prospect never becomes reality. So, even Trefler's estimates are biased downwards to the

extent that foreign exporters are reducing their sales in the U.S. market to moderate the

likelihood that they Will bring protection on themselves. Leidy (1993) provides a useful broad

discussion of this issue. As he puts it,

        (tjhe prospect of protection, as it is institutionalized in the policy formation process and
        the rules for administered protection, can induce real changes in economic activity
        independent of whether actual bafflers have been imposed. Import-competing and
        exporting firms may be able to manage the prospect of protection under existing rules
        by modifying decisions pertaining to foreign direct investment, output, employment.
        exports, capital expenditures, and the like.... The mere absence of current barriers to
        trade in some sectors, therefore, is not sufficient to assume, as is typically done in
        pure trade theoiy, that firm conduct and trade is free of policy-induced distortions"
                                                     4;
       (Leidy. 1993, 2).

Bhagwati and Srinivasan's (1976) work on endogenous "market disruption" is the first paper

that formalized this idea in a particular instance: if the exporting industry does not internalize

the risk of protection in the importing country, it is desirable to impose an export tax on it.

Leidy (1993) reviews other papers in this tradition. Winters (1994) provides evidence that the

European Union's practice of "import surveillance" (the collection of detailed statistics on

particular imports either prior to or immediately after their importation) can lead to reduced

imports.

        A consistent theme in the political-economy literature is that trade policies can have

unanticipated effects unless their political consequences are taken into account. Krueger's

(1974) paper on rent-seeking is of course the foremost source on this. A recent application is

Sturzenegger (1993), which shows that the rent-shifting benefits of strategic trade policy can

be undone completely if the policy leads to rent-seeking that competes with R&D activity for

resources. Largely in view of such considerations, Krugman (1993) has argued that free trade

remains a good rule of thumb, even if not the optimal policy in an imperfectly-competitive

world. However, more work remains to be done on this—to demonstrate in particular the

circumstances under which free trade is a politically sustainable policy.

        All these considerations suggest that it is important to have a good idea of political

economy consequences when advocating policies or designing institutions. The literature on

this is not very large. Aside from the papers mentioned above, we can cite Richardson

(1993), Riezman and Wilson (1993b), and Panagariya and Rodnk (1993). Richardson (1993)

focusses on the differing implications of a customs union and a free trade area for trade

diversion in a model where tariff levels are determined endogenously: he shows that an ETA

has the added benefit that tariff levels are likely to decline endogenously. Riezman and
                                                43

Wilson (1 993b) discuss the consequences for tariff le,els of various kinds of political reforms

such as ceilings on political contributions, and argue that these restrictions can be easily offset

by behavioral adjustments on the part of politicians and lobbyists. Panagariya and Rodrik

(1993) consider whether a uniform tariff rule may be desirable as a way of diminishing

sectoral pressure for protection.

       One important advantage of this line of research is to place on a more solid analytical

footing the loose and informal pohtical-economy arguments often deployed in favor of one

policy regime or another. As pointed out in Rodrik (1993), the political arguments in favor of,

say, uniformity in tariff schedules or shock therapy in trade reform do not have to rest on

hand-waving. It is necessary to construct rigorous models to demonstrate the logical

soundness of such propositions, no matter how intuitive they may seem.

       An analogy with macroeconomic policy is useful here. Thanks in part to the research

on time consistency, much of the literature on fiscal and monetary policy has long focussed on

the design of rule-based regimes and institutions which would enhance price stability without

damaging real activity. Think of the work on central-bank independence or optimum currency

zones, for example. In trade policy, we have an analogous set of questions. In particular,

we would like to know what kind of multilateral, bilateral, or unilateral rules ("regimes") are: (a)

politically feasible, and (b) most conducive to the emergence of desirable trade policies.

What is the best way to structure interest-group participation in the policy-making process?

Do constitutional restrictions on certain types of trade policies (export taxes? VERs?) make

sense? When is delegation of trade policy to the exei!ive feasible, and does it always help

in reducing protection? Should trade policy be carried out in a centralized or de-centralized

manner? Are regional arrangements desirable as a complement (or substitute) to multilateral

institutions? What kind of "safeguard" measures should a multilateral regime sanction to
                                                 44

sustain relatively free trade? All these questions are political in nature, and it is natural to turn

to the political economy literature for assistance. So far, there has been little work on such

issues, but my guess is that this is an area very well worth exploring.30



8. Concluding remarks

       Economists have always been aware that the determinants of trade policy are deep

down political. There is a long and distinguished literature that attests to this awareness.

However, I have indicated here a number of areas where more progress ii needed. First, we

do not fully understand the apparent political advantage of trade policy in redistributing income

over more direct policy instruments. Second, we lack a good explanation of the univerSal

preference for trade-restricting policies over trade-promoting ones. Third. the theoretical and

empirical literatures dealing with the determinants of protection levels acmss industries,

countries, and time need to be better integrated. Finally, there is plenty of room for sketching

out the implications of hard-headed political-economy analysis for normative economics.
                                               45
References

Anderson, K. (1980) "The political market for government assistance to Australian
manufacturing industries," The Economic Record 56 (153), June, 132-44.

Anderson, K. (1993) "Lobbying incentives and the pattern of protection in rich and poor
countries," Economic Development and Cultural Change 41.

Anderson, K., and RE. Baldwin (1987) "The political market for protection in industrial
countries," in AM. El-Agraa, ed,, Protection, cooperation, integration and development. New
York: Macmillan.

Austen-Smith, D. (1991) "Rational consumers and irrational voters," Economics & Politics 3(1),
March, 73-92.

Baack, 8.0. and E.J. Ray (1983) "The political economy of tariff policy: A case study of the
United States," Explorations in Economic History 20, 73-93.

Baldwin, RE. (1969) "The case against infant-industry promotion," Journal of Political
Economy 77, 295-305.

Baldwin, R.E. (1976) "The political economy of postwar U.S. trade policy," The Bulletin (New
York University Graduate School of Business Administration), no. 4.

Baldwin, R,E. (1989) "The political economy of free trade," Joumal of Economic Perspectives
3(4), Fall, 119-135.

Baldwin, R.E. (1991) "The political-economy perspective on trade policy," in A. Hillman, ed.,
Markets and politicians: Politicized economic choice. Boston: Kiuwer Academic Publishers.

Becker, G. (1983) "A theory of competition among pressure groups for political influence,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics XCVIII(3), August, 371-400.

Becker, G. (1985) "Public policies, pressure groups and deadweight costs," Journal of Public
Economics 28, 329-347.

Bergsten, C.F. and M. Noland (1993) Reconcilable differences? United-States-Japan
economic conflict. Washington, DC: Institute for lntrenational Economics.

Bernheim, B.D. and M.D. Whinston (1986) "Menu auctions, resource allocation, and economic
influence," Quarterly Journal of Economics 101. February, 1-31.

Bhagwati, J.N. and T.N. Srinivasan (1976) "Optimal trade policy and compensation under
endogenous uncertainty," Journal of International Economics 6, 317-336.

Bohara, A.K. and W.H. Kaernpfer (1991) "A test of tariff endogeneity in the United States,"
American Economic Review 81(4), September, 952-960.
                                                46

Brainard, S.L. and T. Verdier (1993) "The political economy of declining industries: Senescent
industry collapse revisited," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4606,
December.

Bronars, S.G., and J.R. Loft, Jr. (1994) "Do campaign donations alter how politicians vote?"
unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

Cassing, J., and A. Hillman (1956) "Shifting comparative advantage and senescent industry
collapse," American Economic Review 76, 516-523.

Cassing, J., T.J. Mckeown, and J. Oths (1986) 'The political economy of the tariff cyde,"
American Political Science Review 80(3), September, 843-662.

Caves, R.E. (1976) "Economic models of politicai choice: Canaa's tariff structure," Canadian
Journal of Economics 9, 278-300.

Coate 8.1 and S. MorTis (1993) "On the form of transfers to special interests," unpublished
paper, University of Pennsylvania, July.

Corden, W.M. (1974) Trade policy and economic welfare. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Destler, LM., and J. Odell (1987) Anti-protection: Changing forces in United States trade
Dobtics. Washington. D.C.: Institute for International Economics.

Devereux, J. and L.L. Chen (1993) "The external terms of trade, growth and endogenous
trade liberalization," unpublished paper, December.

Dixit, AK. (1985) "Tax policy in open economies," in: A.J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein, eds.,
Handbook of public economics, voil. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Drazen, A. and V. Grilli (1993) "The benefit of crises for economic reforms," American
Economic Review 83(3), June, 598-607.

Feenstra, R.C., and J.N. Bhagwati (1982) "Tariff seeking and the efficient tariff," in: J.N.
Bhagwati, ed., Import competition an response. Chicago and London: The University of
Chicago Press.

Feenstra, R.C. and T.R. Lewis (1991e) "Distributing the gains from trade with incomplete
information," Economics & Politics 3(1 t, March, 21-40.

Feenstra, R.C. and T.R. Lewis (1991b) "Negotiated trade restrictions with political pressure,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics. November, 1287-1307.

Fernandez, R. and 0. Rodrik (1991) "Rnistance to reform: Status-quo bias in the presence of
individual-specific uncertainty," Americait Economic Review 81(5), December, 1146-1155.

Finger, J.M., H.K. Hall, and D. Nelson (.982), "The political economy of administered
protection," American Economic Revie 72(3), June, 452-466.
                                                 47

Finger, M. and A. Hamson (1994) "The MFA paradox: More protection and more trade?"
unpublished paper, The World Bank, February.

Gardner, G.W. and K.P. Kimbrough (1989) "The behavior of U.S. tariff rates," American
Economic Review 79(1), March, 21 1-218.

Godek, P.E. (1985) "Industry structure and redistribution through trade restrictions," The
Journal of Law and Economics XXVIII, October, 687-703.

Grossman, G.M., and E. Helpman (1992) "Protection for sale," Princeton University, August.

Grossman, G.M., and E. Helpman (1993a) "Trade wars and trade talks," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 4280, February.

Grossman, G.M.. and E. Helprnan (1993b) "The politics of free trade agreements," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4597, December.

Hall, H.K., and 0. Nelson (1992) "Institutional structure in the political economy of protection:
Legislated v. administered protection," Economics & Politics 4(1), March, 61-fl.

Hansen, J.M (1990) "Taxation and the political economy of the tariff," International
Organization 44(4), Autumn, 527-552.

Helpman, E., and P. Krugman Market structure and foreign trade. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Pess.

HilIman, A.L. (1989) The political economy of protection. Chur. Harwood Academic
Publishers.

Hillman, A.L. (1990) "Protectionist policy as the regulation of international industry," Public
Choice 67, 101-110.

Hillman, A.L. (1991) "Protection, politics and market structure," in: E. Helpman and A. Razin.
eds., International trade and trade policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hillman A.L., and P. Moser (1995) "Trade liberalization as politically optimal exchange of
market access," in: M. Canzoneri, W. Ethier, and V. Grilli, eds., The new transatlantic
economy. London and New York : Cambridge University Presi.

Hiliman AL., and H.W. Ursprung (1988) "Domestic politics, foreign interests, and international
trade policy," American Economic Review 78(4), September, 729-745.

Irwin, D.A. (1994) "Trade politics and the semiconductor industry," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 4745, May.

Kahneman, 0. and A. Tversky (1979) "Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under flsk,"
Econometrica 47, March, 263-291.
                                                48
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1984) 'Choices, values, and frames," American Psychologist
4, April, 341-350.

Krueger, A.O. (1974) "The political economy of the rent-seeking society," American Economic
Review 64, 291-303.

Krugman, P. (1981) "Intraindustry sepcialization and the gains fom trade," Journal of Political
Economy 89, 959-973.

Krugman, p. (1993) "The narrow and broad arguments for free trade," American Economic
Review 83(2), May, 362-366.

Leidy, M.P. (1993) "Trade policy and indirect rent seeking: A synthesis of recent work,"
University of Michigan, unpublished paper, May.

Levy, P.1. (1993a) "Lobbying and international cooperation in tariff setting," unpublished paper,
Stanford University, November.

Levy, P.1. (1993b) "A political-economic analysis of tree trade agreements," unpublished
paper, Stanford University, January.

Magee, S.P. (1994) "Endogenous protection: A survey," in: D.C. Mueller, ed., Handbook of
public choice. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwefl.

Magee, S.P., WA. Brock, and L. Young (1989) Black hole tariffs and endooenous policy
theory. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

Magleby, D.B., and C.J. Nelson (1990) The money chase: Concressional campaign finance
reform. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Mansfield, E.a and M.L. Busch (1993) "The political economy of non-tariff barriersL A cross-
national analysis," unpublished manuscript, Columbia UnIversity, October.

Marks, S.V., and J. McArthur (1990) "Empirical analyses of the determinants of protection: A
survey and some new results," In: J.S. Odell and T.D. Willett (eds.), International irade
policies: Gains from exchange between economics and political science. Ann Arbor The
University of Michigan Press.

Marvel., H.P. and E.J. Ray (1903) "The Kennedy Round: Evidence on the regulation of trade
in the U.S.." American Economic Review 73(3), March, 190-197.

Marvel, H.P. and E.J. Ray (1987) "lntra-industry trade: Sources and effects on protection,"
Journal of Political Economy 95(6), Oecember, 1278-1291.

Mayer, W. (1984) "Endogenous tariff formation," American Economic Review 74(5).
December, 970-985.

Mayer, W. (1991) "The political economy of trade policy formulation," unpublished paper,
                                                49
June.

Mayer, W, and J. Li (1994) "Interest groups, electoral competition, and probabilistic voting for
trade policies," Economics & Politics 6(1), March, 59-77.

Mayer, W. and Ft Riezman (1987) "Endogenous choice of trade policy instruments," Journal
of International Economics 23, 377-361.

Mayer, W. and R. Riezman (1989) 'Tariff formation in a multidimensional votin9 model,"
Economics & Politics 1(1), Spring. 61-79.

Mayer, W. and ft Riezman (1990) 'Voter preferences For trade policy instruments," Economics
& Politics 2(3), November, 259-273.

Milner, I-IN. (1968) Resisting protectionism: Global industries and the politics of international
trade. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Moore, MO. (1994) "Steel protection in the 1980s: The waning influence of big steel?"
National Bureau or Economic Research Working Paper No. 4760, June.

Nelson, 1). (1988) "Endogenous tariff theory: A critical survey," American Journal of Political
Science 32(3). 796-837.

Nelson, 0. (1994) "The political economy of U.S. automobile protection," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 4746, May.

O'Halloran, S. (1993) Politics, process, and American trade policy, book manuscript
(forthcoming, University of Michigan Press).

Orden, D. (1994) "Agricultural interest groups and the North American Free Trade
Agreement!" National Bureau oF Economic Research Working Paper No. 4790, July.

Panagariya, A. and 0. Rodrik (1993) "Political economy arguments for a uniform tariff,"
International Economic Review, August.

Pincus, J.J. (1975) "Pressure groups and the pattern of tariffs," Journal of Political Economy
83, 757-778.

Pincus, J.J. (1986) "Why have U.S. tariffs fallen since 1930," in: R.H. Snape, ed., Issues in
world trade policy. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Rarna, M. (1993) "Endogenous trade policy: A time-series approach," unpublished paper, The
World Sank.

Ray, E.J. (1981), "The determinants of tariff and non-tariff trade restrictions in the United
States," Journal of Political Economy 89, 105-121.

Ray, EJ, (1987) "Changing patterns of protectionism: The fall in tariffs and the rise in non-
                                                50
tariff barriers,' Northwestern Journal of International Law & Business 8(2), Fall, 285-327.

Ray, E.J. (1990) "Empirical research on the political economy of trade,0 in: C.A. Carter, A.F.
McCaIIa, and J. Sharples, eds., Imperfect competition and political economy. Boulder
Vestview Press.

Ray, E.J., (1991) "Protection of manufactures in the United States," in: C). Greenaway, ed.,
Global protectionism: Is the U.S. playing on a level field? London: Macmillan.

Ray, E.J. and H.P. Marvel (1984) "The pattern of protection in the industrialized world,"
Review of Economics and Statistics LXVI(3), August, 452-58.

RicSiardson, M. (1993) "Endogenous protection and trade diversion," Journal of International
Economics 34(3/4), May, 309-324.

Riezman, ft. and J.D. Wilson (1993a) "Politics and trade policy," unpublished paper, The
University of Iowa, April.

Riezman, R., and J.D. Wilson (1993b) "Political 'eform and trade policy," unpublished paper,
The University of Iowa, March.

Rodrik, D. (1986) "Tariffs, subsidies, and welfare with endogenous policy," JQurnal of
International Economics 21, 285-296.

Rodrik, D. (1987) "Policy targeting with endogenous distortion: Theory of optimum subsidy
revisited," Quarterly Journal of Economics Cll(4), November, 903-910.

Rodrik, D. (1993) 'The positive economics of policy reform," American Economic Review
83(2), May, 356-361.

Rodrik, D. (1994) "The rush to free trade in the developing world: Why so late? why now?
will it last?' in: S. Haggard and S. Webb, eds., Voting for reform: The politics of adiustment in
new democracies, New York: Oxford University Press.

Rogowski, R. (1987) "Trade and the variety of domestic institutions," International Organization
41(2). Spring, 203-223.

Saunders, R.S. (1980) 'The political economy of effective protection in Canada's
manufacturing sector," Canadian Journal of Economics 13, 340-MB.

Staiger, ft and G. Tabellini (1987) "Discretionary trade policy and excessive protection,"
American Economic Review 77, 340-348.

Sturzenegger, F. (1993) "The fallacy of strategic trade policy," unpublished paper, UCLA,
February.

Trefler, D. (1993) "Trade liberalization and the theory of endogenous protection," Journal of
Political Economy 101(1), 138-160.
                                              51

Van Long, N. and N. Vousden (1991) "Protectionist responses and declining industries,"
Journal of International Economics 30(112). February, 87-103.

Wilson, J.D. (1990) "Are efficiency improvements in government transfer polices self-defeating
in equilibrium7' Economics & Politics 2, 241-258.

Winters. LA. (1994) "Import surveillance as a strategic trade policy," in: P. Knigman and A.
Smith, eds., Empirical studies of strateoic trade policy. Chicago and London: The University
of Chicago Press.
                                                52

Notes


lAnd one might add, as did Dick Baldwin in his comments on this paper, that this framework

leaves out some important features that may need to be included: trade policies are often

chosen simultaneously with other policies, so this interdependence may need to be taken into

account; there is as well interdependence with foreign countries' trade policies; we need

dynamic elements to understand how trade policy evolves over time; etc.

2.This formulation assumes either that imported varieties sell at the same price as

domestically-produced varieties (free trade), or that no imported varieties are consumed

(autarky). So, implicitly we are restricting attention to comparisons of autarky to free trade

only.

3.Mayer assumes that only individuals whose real income gain from a tariff or subsidy

exceeds the voting cost will choose to vote. However, this is problematic. The gain from the

policy must be multiplied by the probability that the voter in question will be pivotal, which is

near zero. (I am grateful to Gene Grossman for bringing this point to my attention.) This is

another manifestation of the "voting paradox", a paradox which can be resolved only by

assuming that voting is motivated by other than pure self interest.

4.Riezman and Wilson (1993a) call this an "inverse tariff formation function", except that its

form is determined endogenously. Indeed, the determination of the form that this function will

take represents the analytical core of the Grossman and Helpman paper.

5.Individuals are assumed to own at most one type of factor.

6.Whether political contributions are made to influence candidates' choices (as in Grossman-

Helpman) or to increase the likelihood that a candidate of the desired ideology wins office (as

in MBY) is an unsettled issue in the literature on campaign contributions. Bronars and Lou

(1994) find that retiring congressmen who experience large reductions in donations do not
                                                53

change how they vote in their last term, interpreting this as evidence in favor of the second

hypothesis. See Magleby and Nelson (1990) for a good introduction to the literature on

campaign contributions in the U.S.

7.This is the formula for a small country. In the case of a large country, there is an additional

term capturing the optimum tariff motive.                                        -


8.The following critique of MB'! by Austen-Smith (1991, 84) is equally relevant to the

Grossman-Melpman model: ..lobbying activity is predominantly not financial, but rather to do

with information transmission. Specifically, lobbying activity involves the efforts of individuals

and groups to influence individual legislators' decisions through various forms of persuasion:

for example, direct mail campaigns, face-to-face discussion about the policy consequences of

a bill, providing information on the distribution of constituency support with respect to an issue,

etc., etc. On the other hand, as remarked eailier, campaign contributions cannot be used

legally in this way. While interest groups can give resources to support the electoral

campaigns of favored candidates, they cannot do so in direct exchange for policy decisions or

make donations explicitly conditional on a legislator promising to vote one way or another if

elected."

9.ln the preface to their book, Magee        write: the theory (developed here) describes any

govemment policy motivated by special interests' (1989, xvii). This is of course precisely the

problem.

1O.Moreover many models of political economy contain an inconsistency: They allow tariff

revenue to be distributed in lump-sum fashion back to the population. Unless the distribution

is undertaken in the form of poll subsidies (an equal amount for every individual), this is

inconsistent with the maintained assumption in the same papers that only tariffs can be used

to redistribute Income.
                                                  54

1 1.This complication was recognized by Becker, although in passing. He notes the "tendency

for the political sector to use the most efficient methods available to redistribute to

beneficiaries," but then adds: "a satisfactory anaFysis of the choice of methods must consider

whether the influence function itself depends on the methods used" (1985, 338).

12.Perhaps infant-industry protection fits the Coate-Morils argument best. While trade policy

is rarely first- or even second-best for purposes of infant-industry promotion (Baldwin 1969), it

was widely believed until recently that its use is economically justified under certain conditions.

13.ln his discussion of the Trade Act of 1974, Baldwin (1976, 36) notes that there were few

industries that testified strongly in favor of liberalization, in stark contrast to the many

demands for less liberalization.

14.lt could be argued that one reason for the anti-trade bias is that direct export subsidization,

unlike import tariffs, has long been illegal under the GATT. However, quantitative restrictions

for manufactured goods have also been GAiT-illegal (save for developing countries and

under prosciibed conditions), yet countries have found imaginative ways of using them without

sanction. Govemments have been significantly more prone to flout international obligations on

import restrictions than on export inducements. In addition, one may ask why the prohibition

on export subsidization was agreed to by governments in the first place (when no such

prohibition on import tariffs would have been feasible).

15.Sometimes appeal is made to Corden's "conservative social welfare function" to explain

why there is a bias towards trade restrictions. According to this idea, "any significant absolute

reductions in real incomes of any section of the community should be avoided" (Corden, 1974,

107-108). However, there is no reason to believe that over the long run export interests

receive negative shocks with lower frequency (or lesser force) than do import-competing

interests. And if they do not, why should there be a universal bias towards import
                                                55
restrictions?

16.Levy (1993a, p. 17) provides a good discussion of what would need to hold for anti-trade

bias to exist. Judging that none of these requirements is satisfactory, he gets out of the

conundrum by simply assuming that export subsidies are ruled out.

ll.By the same token, explaining the bias against trade by appealing to revenue

considerations—export subsidies cost money while import tariffs raise revenue—is

unsatisfactory. Most advanced Industrial economies have well-developed tax systems which

render trade taxes unnecessary. As for developing economies, the most popular forms of

protection—quantitative restrictions—do not raise revenue for the treasury. Similarly, many pro-

export policies (such as export targets or export performance requirements, which have been

used widely in East Asia) do not require the expenditure of fiscal resources.

18.One can of course assume that the policymaker is simply loath to have any sector of the

economy incur a real income loss. Corden (1974. 107) has coined the term "conservative

social welfare function" to descilbe the objective function of a policymaker acting in this

fashion.

19.ln addition to econometric work, on which I will focus, there is a large body of case studies.

For some recent U.S. examples, see Nelson (1994) on the auto industry. Moore (1994) on

steel, Orden (1994) on agriculture in the context of NAFTA, and Irwin (1994) on

semiconductors.

20.As Grossman and Helpman (1992) point out in a footnote (In. 16), however, the result can

be reversed If sectors with high Import penetration have very low elasticities of import demand

(so that the efficiency cost of protecting them is low). Since existing empirical work does not

control for sectoral differences in import demand elasticities, and add "extraneous" variables to

the regressions, Grossman and Helpman argue that their theoretical results cannot be directly
                                                56

compared with the empirical findings. This is good illustration of the gulf that currently

separates empirical and theoretical work in the area of political economy of trade policy.

21.Brainard and Verdier (1993) use the Grossman-Helpman framework to address the issue of

senescent industry protection, but they simply assume that the industry starts to lobby only

after it experiences a reduction In its world price. So they cannot address the question of

whether the industry receives more or less protection after it is hit with the shock.

22.ln his discussion on why declining industries get preferential treatment, Baldwin (1989)

refers In passing to the work of psythologists Kahneman and Iwersky (1979, 1984) on how

individuals place greater weight on a loss than a gain of an equivalent amount.

23.An alternative approach is to consider whether an industry is able to maintain cooperative

lobbying activities using trigger strategies in a dynamic setting. See Riezman and Wilson

(1993a) on this.

24.Only 58 percent of Japan's trade was intra-industry in 1990, compared to 83 percent in the

U.S., 73 percent in Germany, and 79 percent in Great Britain (Bergsten and Noland, 1993,

66).

25.See also Hall and Nelson (1992) on how legislative and administered protection routes

may provide different incentives to lobbying industries.

26.Cassing, McKeown and Ochs (1986) provide an alternative explanation that does not

depend on the Keynesian motive. They argue that "old" industries with fixed capaaties benefit

from increases in demand for their product disproportionately at the bottom of the business

cycle.

27.As Ray (1987) points out, the Heclcsther-Ohlin-Samuelson mode! can explain the switch in

the Democrats' and Republicans' favored trade policy stances in the post-World War II period.

Let the Democratic Party represent farmers and labor, and the Republican party represent
                                               57

business (capital). Prior to World War I, the U.S. was relatively poor in capital and rich in

labor and land. This led the Republicans to prefer protection and Democrats to prefer free

trade. As the underlying pattern of comparative advantage changes, so do party stances. By

the 1970s, Democrats—representing labor—are on the anti-trade side and Republicans on the

pro-trade side.

28.Tretler estimates that if U.S. manufacturing NIBs were eliminated, the average import

penetration would rise from 13.8 percent to 15.4 percent, which, is an increase of $49.5 billion

under conservative assumptions.

29.ln a similar vein, Devereux and Chen (1993) argue that the observed correlation between

growth and openness across countries may be an artifact of the endogeneity of trade policy.

As the urban industrial sector experiences growth due to technical progress, a political-support

maximizing government will want to share the wealth by providing the rural sector some of the

gains as well. The government will consequently respond to growth by reducing the

protection of industry.

30.Wbere international institutions are concemed, the research that is needed would integrate

the approaches discussed in this paper with those discussed by Staiger in his chapter in this

volume.
 Table 1: Relationship between Trade Taxes and Per Capita Income

                                                Dependent variable:
                         All trade taxes as a   Import duties as a    Export taxes as a
                         share of total tax     share of total tax    share of total tax
                         revenue,               revenue,              revenue,
                         1964-86 average        1984-86 average       1984-66 average
 Constant                        0.353                 0.279                 Q.065

 Per capita GOP                 -0.03P                -0.030                -0.011
 (1985)
 p                                0.18                  0.12                  0.07
 number of countries               77                    77                    77


Source: Tax data have been supplied by the Fiscal Affairs Department, IMF. Per capita GDP
is from the Heston-Summers data set.

Notes: • significant at the 1% level;
         significant at the 5% level.
 Individual preferences         interest groups         • "demand side"

           (A)                         (2)              of trade policy




                           trade policy outcomes




                              institutional structure
poticyrnaker preferences         of government          "supply side'
                                                        of trade policy
          (C)                          (D)




                           FIgure 1
