                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             CREDIT MARKETS AND THE
                            WELFARE COSTS OF INFLATION




                                      José Dc Gregorio
                                    Federico Sturzenegger




                                   Working Paper No. 4873




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1994



We thank Costas Azariadis, Valerie Bencivenga, Guillermo Calvo, Allan Drazen, Roger Farmer,
Mariano Tommasi, and participants at seminars at the University of Maryland, UCLA and XII
Latin American Econometric Society for many helpful comments. AU remaining errors are our
own responsibility. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Finance and
Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by José De Gregorio and Federico Sturzenegger. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4873
                                                                              October 1994


                               CREDIT MARKETS AND ThE
                              WELFARE COSTS OF INFLATION


                                           ABSTRACF


       We construct a simple model in which high inflation imposes welfare costs because it

affects the ability of the financial sector to screen between high and low cost producers.

Consumers search for a low price and inflation reduces the incentives to search, resulting in an

increase in the demand of high cost producers. We show that beyond a certain level of inflation

there is a switch from a separating equilibrium to a pooling equilibrium, where financial

institutions become unable to distinguish among clients. In this pooling equilibrium a larger

share of credit is allocated to less efficient firms.




José De Oregorio                                           Federico Stunenegger
Research Department                                        Department of Economics
International Monetary Fund                                University of California
700 19th Street, NW                                        405 Hilgard Avenue
Washington, DC 20431                                       Los Angeles. CA 90024-1477
                                                           and NBER
1. Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to provide an analytical framework to examine how
inflation may induce welfare costs through financial markets. The main reason
we study the effects of inflation on the functioning of credit markets is the empir-
ical evidence documenting a negative relationship between inflation and long-run
growth. De Gregorio (1993) and Fischer (1993) have recently shown that inflation
not only hampers growth by reducing investment, but also, and relatively more
important, by affecting the efficiency with which investment is allocated. Indeed,
De Gregorio (1993), analyzing a group of Latin American countries, shows that
inflation affects growth mainly through its effects on the efficiency of investment
(rather than through an effect on its level). Thus, inflation seems to have impor-
tant allocative effects, and a natural candidate to produce such inefficiencies are
financial markets.
    We construct a stylized model in which inflation affects the ability of the finan-
cial sector to distinguish among high and low cost producers. Our model works
as follows. Two types of firms play a signaling game with financial institutions.
One set of firms has high productivity. The second group has lower productivity.
Because firms charge different prices at low inflation, when search activity is very
intense, the difference between the demands for both types of firms differ so much
that low productivitj firms are better off exiting the market. Production requires
mimicking the high productivity type and this implies a cost in terms of over-
 borrowing. When demand is too low the income from sales does not compensate


                                          2
for this cost. Inflation, by affecting search behavior, makes demands more similar
and eventually brings the firms sufficiently close, to the point in which high cost
firms have an incentive to engage in production even though this implies a cost
in terms of over-borrowing. By developing a general equilibrium model we are
able to discuss the welfare effects of such a switch from a separating to a pooling
equilibrium where firm types cannot be distinguished any longer. We find that
it reduces welfare and deteriorates the efficiency of lending. Thus, inflation im-
plies a deterioration in welfart because it reduces the amount of information in
the economy.
   There are other channels through which inflation may affect the functioning
of credit markets. Neumeyer (1992) develops an incomplete markets model where
nominal financial instruments disappear with high (and variable) inflation, result-
ing in negative welfare effects. McKinnon (1991) has argued that distortions in
financial markets stemming from moral hazard and adverse selection problems,
generating credit rationing as that of Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), may be exacer-
bated in an unstable macroeconomic environment. An important mechanism is
that the amount of funds that banks have available to lend may fall as inflation
increases. Azariadis and Smith (1993) develop this point in a general equilibrium
model and show how this may lead to incentive problems which reduce the al-
locative efficiency of the financial sector. Our research attempts to address the
same issues as Azariadis and Smith (1993) but focuses on the allocation of credit
rather than on the amount of resources available to lend. In fact, the experience
of many chronic inflation economies suggests that the amount of resources inter-
mediated by the financial system as measured by M3 or M4 remains rather stable
in spite of high inflation (see Dornbusch et al 1990). Our model can account for

                                         3
a deterioration in credit quality for a given total level of intermediation.
   In De Gregorio and Sturzenegger (1994) we present a partial equilibrium model
in the same spirit of this paper. There, what makes firms more similar are changes
in productivity. Low productivity firms also have a higher default risk. As inflation
rises low productivity firms have a stronger incentive to imitate high productivity
firms in order to obtain financing at a lower interest rate. This, in turn, generates
incentive problems. In this paper we focus on the revelation of information about
firms' type without relying on default risk.
   The paper follows in 5 sections. Section 2 describes the environment of the
economy and the sequencing of transactions. Section 3 describes consumer and
firm behavior with section 4 solving for the equilibrium in labor and goods mar-
kets. Section 5 introduces the financial sector while section 6 discusses welfare
implications.


2. The Environment
The discrete time economy is populated by a large number of three period lived
agents.' We assume each generation is composed by C agents where C is a large
number. Agents are endowed with one unit of labor during their first period of
life. Agents differ in two dimensions. First, in the discount factor /3 which we
assume to be distributed with distribution function cI'(/3). Second, agents differ
 in a technology characteristic: half of the agents will be born with knowledge
 of a technology which allows to produce with production function X = L. For
 the other half the relevant technology is X = L/O with 0 > I. The preference
    'The embedded search and production specification follows closely Tommasi (l994a).


                                              4
parameter /9 is independently distributed respect to the technology so that we
expect the same distribution of /9's among both group of agents.
   During the first period of life agents do two things: they set up a firm to
engage in production and sell their labor endowment in a perfectly competitive
labor market. Production implies several transactions. A firm must first borrow
from financial intermediaries in order to purchase the labor units required for
production. After production there is matching with consumers and sales take
place. At the end of the first period of life agents gather the income obtained
from selling labor and whatever profits they obtained from firm activity. These
resources will be used for purchases in later periods. In fact, during the second
and third periods of life agents become consumers. Under certain circumstances
(to be explained below) agents will have information regarding who charges which
prices. In that case they match with low priced producers. In other equilibria
they do not know which store charges which price, although they will know the
price distribution. In this case consumers need to visit stores in order to consume,
that is they have to search for a low price. In the first period they are matched
with one producer. If the consumer decides not to purchase (s)he is matched with
another producer one period later. Utility is linear and of the form

                                  U=C1+8C2,

where C1 is consumption in the second period of life (first consumption period)
and C3 is consumption during the third period of life (second and last consumption
period).
   Inflation is present in the economy because the government provides a transfer
in amount T to each agent at the beginning of his second period of life. This

                                         5
transfer increases the nominal price level each period and generates persistent
inflation.
   Different markets open sequentially within a given period. Figure 1 gives a
schematic representation of the transactions setup that describes the economy
and is useful for the discussion below. In each period the following sequence of
transactions takes place. The period starts with a set of consumers holding mone-
tary balances which they brought from the previous period (these may be two and
three period aged consumers). The government provides second period consumers
with transfer T. This transfer is chosen to induce a given inflation rate. Next,
new-born agents which hold no cash borrow from financial institutions to hire
labor for production purposes. Under some conditions financial institutions will
be able to distinguish between producer's types. If so, this information becomes
public knowledge. Because production is non stochastic but demand depends on
the search outcome after the financial market closes a set of contingent commodi-
ties markets is opened where securities conditional on the search outcome can be
traded. Firms purchase and sell these securities to maximize expected profits.
We show that firms use these securities to insure against the randomness of the
matching process. Next, firms match with consumers. Consumers and producers
when trading bargain on a price. This determines the price, quantity and profits
involved in each trading. Agents, of course, consume the goods purchased. After
firms sell their production, they repay their loans. Agent-firms hold these profits
and labor income to be spent the following period.




                                         6
3. Consumer and Firm Behavior
An equilibrium is defined as a vector of prices, labor and credit allocations, and
search rules such that (i) firms and financial institutions maximize expected prof-
its, (ii) agents maximize utility and (iii) the markets for labor, credit, goods and
securities all clear. In order to describe the equilibrium and how it depends on
the inflation rate we discuss in turn, the search behavior of agents, the securities
trading by firms and the behavior of financial intermediaries.2

3.1. Search Behavior
Let I be the nominal income that an agent carries into period t (this includes the
transfer provided by the government). We will show below that in equilibrium
the goods market will be characterized by a price distribution in which the high
productivity producers will charge a given price h and in which low productivity
producers charge price p' with p' h• In some cases buyers may know in addition
to the distribution of prices which store charges which prices. In this case they
automatically match with a low cost producer solving a trivial search problem.
In other cases buyers know the distribution of prices but they do not know which
producers charge the low price. Once faced with a seller the consumer has to
decide whether to purchase or not. Additionally, if he decides to purchase, he has
to decide how much he wants to spend. This second decision is simplified by the
fact that the utility function is linear, so that if he decides to purchase he will
spend all of his income.
   2!t is well known that cash in advance economies like the one described above have many
non-stationary equilibria. We concentrate in this paper uniquely on monetary stationary steady
states.


                                              7
   If the seller charges p" then the consumer has found the low price producer,
there is no point in waiting to the second period (there is discounting over time
and no better deal can be attained) and the consumer spends all of his income. If
the searcher finds a seller charging p' he has to decide whether to purchase or not.
If he purchases he obtains utility I/j4. If he rejects he will obtain an expected
utility of
             /3J1E{—} =     4+                        =
                                                           i      {     +
                                                                            }.
The return to search will depend on the expected discounted utility next period.
Because firms exist in identical proportions, the probability of finding a firm of
                                                                                       (3.1)




each type, next period, is 1/2. Notice also that inflation, by depreciating the
value of monetary balances, increases the costs of searching. Finally, that j3, the
discount factor, is in this specification equivalent to a search cost.
    Agents will search as long as the value of searching exceeds the value of current
utility. It is easy to see that there exists a unique j, such that all agents with
discount factors larger than this one will search while all others will purchase from
the first store they visit. This     is defined by making (3.1) equal to the utility of
a high price offer I/p'. Solving for /3 we obtain:
                                         —   2(1   + it)
                                      ,J—


The number of searchers equals 1-I'(). Inflation leads to an increase in j, and
therefore reduces the amount of search. This will be the mechanism through which
inflation will have real effects in our model. This result is similar to that in Casella
and Feinstein (1990) and Tominasi (1994a). The degree of search depends also on
the degree of price dispersion, a result well known in the theory of search.3
   31t may appear puzzling that inflation decreases search when the opposite appears to be the

                                               8
3.2. Insurance Behavior
Firms borrow from financial intermediaries in order to purchase labor for produc-
tion. Thus, firms produce a given number of units of output. Demand, on the
contrary, is highly stochastic depending on the outcome of the matching process.
Because firms may face any number of matches, they have an incentive to insure
themselves against the randomness of the search process. Once way to do this is
to trade securities with payoffs conditional on the realization of the matching pro-
cess. After the matching outcome has been realized firms exercise their contingent
claims, supply their consumers and then pay back the financial intermediaries.
   Search is nothing but a particular realization of matches between consumers
and firms. Any firm can receive any integer number of matches between 0 and C'
the total number of potential buyers, where C' C + 11— (/3)1C. In fact the search
outcome is a particular point s in the space ftC = C x C', which assigns to each firm
i an outcome of the search N1(s) such that                 N1(s)   = C' ('c's), that is the sum
of matches has to equal the number of consumers.4 We can define a probability
function p(s) over AC where p(s):AC —* [0, 1]. s denotes the particular draw of the
distribution and indicates the number of matches each producer achieves in each
draw. Because we assume that matches are independently drawn, with each firm
having a probability 1/C' of matching with each specific consumer, we will have
cmpirical evidence. The proper statement is that agents choose to have less information with
high inflation because the information contained in prices declines. Thus, the result that the de-
mand for both types of firms become closer as inflation rises would hold in a more realistic setup
even with the total amount of search increasing. In our context with a given price distribution
this translates into lower search. See Tornmasi (1994b).
   4The search outcome specifies the number of matches and their type (young or old con-
sumers), both together determine D1(s), the firm's demand in outcome

                                                9
that p(s) = pVs a property which will be useful below.
   Consider the maximization problem faced by firm i. Firms maximize expected
profits which equals

                        Maxp1(s)p(s)X1(.s) — (I + r1)01w.t1                                 (3.2)

subject to
                                 p(s)X1(s) = p(s)gi.                                        (3.3)
and
                                      X1(s) D1(s)Vs.                                        (3.4)

Where p(s) denotes the sale value of the commodity in state s. X'(s) denotes the
amount of state s—contingent securities firm i purchases. Equation (3.2) denotes
profits. The firm hires X units of labor at wage w. Because labor is purchased with
borrowed money, an interest term (1+r) is added to the labor costs.5 The amount
of labor hired allows the firm to sell an equivalent amount of state contingent
securities in those states in which it is productive as denoted in (3.3) and (3.4).
In exchange for these it purchases a menu of state contingent commodities at price
p(s). It should be clear that what the state contingent claims allow firms to do is
to insure amongst themselves for the randomness of the matching process. This
allows the firm to satisfy demand when it is favored in the search outcome even
though its production level is fixed at the beginning of the period. Finally, (3.4)
indicates that the demand is only weakly constrained by the search outcome in
each state s, so that the firm can chose not to satisfy all of its demand.
   5flecause firms will always make positive profits there will be no default. We assume that the
cost of funds to financial institutions is zero (say because it is provided by monetary authorities
at no cost) so that working capital will carry a gross rate of interest of 1. Therefore, in what
follows we omit the interest rate terms.

                                               10
   The first order conditions for this problem are

                           p(s)p1(s) — Ap(s)   —
                                                   si(s)   S0
                               —9'w+AE,p(s) =          0

plus the usual complementary slackness condition for the first equation. Substi-
tuting for A from the second equation and realizing that p(s) = p Vs, we have
that
                            pp1(s) — pO1w — ji(s) 5 0.                          (3.5)
In our specification it will be the case that pf(5) > Ow because final product prices
are determined as a markup over costs. Therefore (3.5) implies that p(s) 0,
or otherwise that X1(s) = fr(s) V.s. Because search outcomes aggregate to the
same amount in each state and firms satisfy all demand, aggregate demand is not
state contingent. Furthermore, because the supply of goods is also state-invariant
(because it is determined by initial labor hiring) the price of both state contingent
commodity and of the final product will be state independent. That is, p1(s) = p1
and p(s) = p Vs. This in turn in (3.3) implies that


                                     = pX(s),                                  (3.6)
that is, firms hire an amount of labor sufficient to produce the expected value of
sales. The firm purchases the corresponding amount of state contingent securities
in order to be able to satisfy its actual demand.

3.3. Relative Demands

Equation (3.6) showed that firms produce the expected value of their sales. We
now determine this expected demand. Not surprisingly it will depend on the

                                        11
informational restrictions under which the economy is operating. If agents can
identify sellers then less productive (expensive) firms will face a zero demand
(X' = 0). High productivity firms will then be matched with all consumers so
that each individual firm expects to sell X" =2I/j4 units of output (because
the mass of consumers is twice that of producers). In this case there will be no
unrealized sales (consumers declining producers' offers) and therefore no monetary
balances will be retained unspent from one period to the next.
   If agents do not know the price each seller charges, deriving demands is slightly
mare complicated. There are now two types of consumers that each firm may face:
consumers of age 2 (young consumers) and consumers of age 3 (old consumers).
These consumers will purchase different amounts because their real purchasing
power is different. For example, high productivity firms charging a price p will
sell an amount equal to Ii/p' to young consumers but only an amount J—i/p =
I/[(l + ir)pfl to old consumers. Similarly for low productivity firms.
   What remains to be determined is the number of consumers that each firms
faces. There are C/2 firms of each type. Therefore, first period consumers are
matched with probability 1/2 with a high productivity producer and with prob-
ability 1/2 with a low productivity firm. They will all purchase from the former
group, but only a fraction Iè) (those non-searchers with sufficiently low discount
factor) will purchase from the latter group. The bad-luck searchers in amount (1-
.I'(fl/2 (searchers which were matched with low productivity firms and decided
not to purchase), search again with identical matching possibilities in the follow-
ing period. Because they will exit the economy after that period, they purchase
independently of the search outcome. In sum the aggregate value of sales will



                                         12
equal
                                                                                37
                                    p 2(1+ir)
for high productivity firms, and

                                 = I:;. ( +                                    (3.8)
                                              2(1+ir))
for low productivity firms. Notice that relative demands differ in two dimensions.
First, low productivity firms will charge a higher price and thus sell a lower amount
for a given income. Secondly, the existence of price dispersion induces search, and
this in turn leads to some rejections of high price offers.


4. Equilibrium
4.1. Labor Market

Labor supply is fixed and equal to one. Labor demand arises from production
needs. As we will see below two potential equilibria exist. In the first, which we
call a separating equilibrium, both firms reveal their type. In the other, firm types
are indistinguishable and we refer to this as a pooling equilibrium.
   In a separating equilibrium only high productivity firms produce. From the
production technology we know that labor demand will equal the corresponding
expected level of output for each firm. Thus, in this equilibrium we require that
  = X"/2. In short, in a separating equilibrium every high productivity firm will
hire two units.
   In a pooling equilibrium, by definition, all firms demand the same amount of
labor. Thus, in a pooling equilibrium necessarily every firm demands one unit of
labor.

                                         13
4.2. Pricing
When a consumer and a producer match they have to bargain about the price at
vhich the transaction will take place. The bargaining problem becomes compli-
cated by the existence of asymmetric information.
    Consider for example the case in which the consumer makes a take-it or leave-
it offer. If he knows the producer's cost, he will offer to pay the marginal cost
thus driving profits to zero. If he does not know this he may choose to offer a low
price ifhe is willing to search and a high price if he is not (if we do not allow for
sequential offers). His offer, though, will never exceed the marginal cost of the
high cost producer who will never obtain profits.
    If firms make a take-it or leave-it offer, then it can be shown that it is impossible
to sustain a price distribution. Low priced firms will always have an incentive to
raise their price until they converge to that of their high cost counterpart.6
    An alternative is to assume a double sided auction where both firms and
consumers submit a bid, then trading if the consumer's purchase price is higher
than the firm's offer price. This approach has appeal in that it leads to higher cost
firms asking for higher prices (see Chaterjee and Samuelson (1983) and Fudenberg
and Tirole (1991)) thus allowing for a price distribution. But the results depend
heavily on the assumption of a continuous distribution in firm and consumer types,
and thus breaks down in our specification. Finally, another unattractive feature
is that there is multiplicity: any price can be supported as the equilibrium.
     We thus simplify the analysis by considering a very simple constant markup
    tThis is a well know problem in search models known as the Diamond paradox. Because we
 require & price distribution to support a search equilibrium we need to make assumptions which
 insure the existence of price dispersion in equilibrium.


                                                14
pricing rule. Under such pridng rules we have that

                                       p'=(l+rri)Ow                                        (4.1)

                                          = (1 + m)w.                                      (4.2)
In general, we could also allow for the markups to vary with inflation, with firm
type, or with the nature of the equilibrium. As long as relative price dispersion
does not increase too strongly with inflation this will not affect the analysis below.7


4.3. Demands
We choose the numeraire to be the wage in every period. Thus, we assume w = 1,
and all nominal variables across periods must be adjusted by the steady state
inflation rate.
    In order to determine the relative demands we need to solve for I. We start
with the case of perfect information (or separating equilibrium) where we have
already shown that X" =         2.   Substituting in the demand function Xh = 2J/p'
we obtain that h =       = (1 + ni) a result we will use below.
    The case in which firm types are not identified is slightly more complicated
because the working capital that firms request from financial institutions does
not coincide with actual production needs. We assume, unconventionally, that
all excess labor is allocated equally to those firms with excess demand. This
   it is unlikely that fully specifying the bargaining setup which renders the pricing equations
(4.1) and (4.2) wifl change the results. For this to be the case inflation should increase price
dispersion. But, if inflation increases the monopoly power of firms, it will also make the goods
market closer to the Diamond world in which all prices converge to the monopoly price. Because
this would concentrate the price distribution it would only reinforce the effects of inflation on
search which are essential for the model. An exception is Bènabou (1988).

                                               15
assumption ensures that all labor is used and that each firm can satisfy its expected
demand for commodities.8 Under this assumption the labor market equilibrium
condition equals

                   1= 1I      I   +     (i—)\ + OltI           + (i—'z)\                     (4.3)
                        2p4           2(1 + ))                    2(1 +
where we have used the fact that low productivity firms request 0 units of labor
to produce each unit of output. We use equation (4.3) to solve for the level of
nominal income. We then substitute back into the demand functions to obtain
the demands as function of the economic fundamentals:
                          I                 —))\'
                    X" =2 (i +              'I'
                                        (1 + 2(1+r)) ) =2(1
                                                            +(ir)),                           (4.4)

and
                             I      (      f1—t)\'                           —1



                  X'=20+(fl))) =29(1+)) ,                                                     (4.5)

where we have introduced the notation (ir) = ('i +                            / (i +           ,   to
simplify the expressions. It is easy to show that i74' > 0 which is an important
result for the ensuing discussion.
    Figure 2 shows that relative demands as a function of inflation. We add a
subscript s to indicate the demands in the separating equilibrium. Notice that
these are independent of inflation and fully concentrated on high productivity pro-
ducers. We denote with a subscript p the alternative pooling equilibrium. Notice
   8We allow for this transfer to take place to concentrate on the allocativeeffects of inflation,
rather than adding a supply constraint to the effects of inflation. While plausible that efficient
firms may become credit constrained at high inflation rates, we want to concentrate here on how
inflation affects the efficiency of lending. This transfer effectively eliminates this supply effect.
Introducing it would only reinforce the welfare results highlighted in the paper.

                                                 16
that in this case there is a shift in demand towards low productivity producers
and that the problem becomes worse as inflation deteriorates: inflation increases
the demand of low productivity firms by reducing the incentives to search.
   The above set of equations fully determine the real and nominal equilibrium
given the information revealed by the financial sector. We discuss this next.


5. The Financial Sector
While during the contingent claims market session firms are properly identified
(they are £rading claims contingent on how many units of production they will
sell) they are not identified by type when borrowing for working capital from
financial institutions.
   Because there is no default, perfectly competitive financial intermediation im-
plies that firm's will be charged the cost of capital which we have assumed to be
zero. The important role played by financial institutions is to distinguish firms
types. We assume that if the financial sector can discriminate between firms, this
information becomes public knowledge. If the financial sector cannot discriminate,
consumers learn the characteristics of the firm after matching occurs.
   The thrust of our model is to show that the financial sector can distinguish
firm types only at low inflation rates. Low productivity firms always want to
borrow a smaller amount because they have lower expected sales but they cannot
afford to be identified as low productivity firms because they would then face no
demand. While inflation is low it is too costly for low productivity firms to try to
appear as high productivity firms. Thus, they stay out of the market. Inflation,
nevertheless, changes relative demands, making both types of firms more similar.


                                        17
This reduces the cost of mimicking the high productivity firm. Beyond some level
of inflation they enter into production. At that point the economy moves to a
pooling equilibrium. The purpose of this section is to characterize the inflation
rates at which this change in the nature of the equilibrium in the credit market
take place.
    The setup is that of a signaling game. A Perfect Bayesian equilibrium (PBE)
is one equilibrium concept which can be used to characterize the solution to such a
game. This requires specifying belief about firm's types for financial institutions.
The argument for such belief functions will be the signals provided by firms, in
our setup, their demands for credit. There are two possible equilibria. In one, a
separating equilibrium, only high productivity firms produce. As we have already
seen, in this equilibrium, firms hire two units of labor each. The PBE requires
that in equilibrium beliefs be correct. Thus, in a separating equilibrium financial
institutions believe that they are facing a high productivity producer. A second
equilibrium is a pooling equilibrium where both type of firms request credit to
purchase one unit of labor. The PBE requires that in this equilibrium financial
institutions believe that with probability 1/2 the firm is of the low productivity
type. We also need to specify beliefs for off-the-equilibrium paths. For simplicity
of presentation we assume that for all other borrowing amounts the financial sector
believes the firm is of low productivity?
    In order to analyze the equilibria we consider a low productivity firm which is
   9While a-priori it may seem reasonable to assume that if a firm demands a larger amount
of credit it must be of higher productivity, this is not the case in our specification. In fact, if
financial institutions were to believe that only high productivity firms would deviate in such a
way, all firms would have the incentive to request this larger amount.



                                                18
evaluating whether to deviate from a pooling• equilibrium. Sales are          and
but borrowing equals one unit. If

                                    ,4X,,—i     0,                                (5.1)

then low productivity firms do not want to deviate from the pooling equilibrium.
The profit has to be equal or greater than zero because that is the reservation value
that the firm can earn if it doesn't produce. When income more than compensates
having to over-borrow in amount 1—.OX, then the low productivity firms have an
incentive to produce. We now discuss how this condition depends on the inflation
rate.


   Proposition 1: There exists an inflation rate t such that for inflation rates
lower than t there is no incentive to pooi.
   Proof: Substitute (4.1) and (4.5) in (5.1) to obtain

                                                                                  (5.2)
                               2(1+m)1+).
Because the left hand side is constant and the right hand side is decreasing in
the inflation rate, if it exists, a unique rate satisfies the equation with equality.
Because for r = 0 the lowest value for       is 1/3, a positive fr will always exist as
long as m c 1. Otherwise, if rn >   1,   * = 0.0


   In other words there is a larger incentive to pool at higher inflation rates. The
intuition for this result is straightforward, at high inflation rates both firms face
similar demands, therefore the excess lending required to mimic high productivity
firms becomes less costly. Notice that no deviation, for either firm, is optimal

                                           19
because the financial sector would believe the firm is of the low productivity type
and the firm would then have no customers. In particular, for inflation rate *
(or any lower rate) low productivity firms do not have an incentive to ask for two
units (rather than one) as this would increase their excess lending costs without
any other compensating gain. The condition to be willing to borrow two units is
that
                                                        1
                                     1+m1+            (it)
which is more stringent than (5.2).Thus, when they engage in production, low
productivity firms will choose to demand one unit, thus forcing high productivity
firms to follow. Therefore, for inflation rates above * the pooling equilibrium is
the unique equilibrium.
    For inflation rates below * low productivity firms do not produce. Then high
productivity firms can safely request two units of labor and the separating equi-
librium prevails. Only once low productivity firms engage in production have high
productivity firms to revert to the pooling equilibrium.'0
  10WhiIe a PUE does not restrict the beliefs off the equilibrium it is true that our specification
tends to make the pooling equilibrium a likely equilibrium. The reader can rework our the
specification under other off the equilibrium beliefs, or imposing additional refinements on the
PBE. In general the conclusion will be that a separating equilibrium can also be supported
even for inflation rates larger than t so that under these alternative configurations none of the
informational problems discussed in the paper arise. Thus, we believe the specification used in
the paper is the interesting one.




                                                20
6. GNP and Welfare
Having fully characterized the equilibria we can now proceed to the discussion
of welfare. Inflation has two effects in this model. First, it affects search and
therefore relative demands. In fact, because it increases the relative demand for
less productive firms there is a presumption that it will decrease welfare. Secondly,
it affects the nature of the financial sector equilibrium thus having additional
welfare effects. In this section we first compute GNP and total credit as functions
of inflation. We then move to a discussion of welfare.

6.1. GNP and Total Credit

Denote GNP per capita by y. In the separating equilibrium y' =     = 1, as all
demand is concentrated in the high productivity firms. The value of GNP also
follows from that fact that total labor supply equals one and all production takes
place in finns with unit labor requirements.
   The situation is certainly different when we consider a pooling equilibrium. In
this case output per-capita equals

                    —
                        X/'   x'         I
                                                +
                                                        I
                                                               <1               (61)
                        2     2      (1+(7r)) °('+)
To show the last inequality multiply both sides by (l+(ir)) to obtain


                    (   +      cI+(ir)= l+(r)<9(1+(ir))
which is true because C > 1. A shift to a pooling equilibrium reduces output
because it shifts production towards low productivity firms. This reduces the
amount of goods which can be produced with a given amount of labor.

                                         21
    Once in a poling equilibrium it is easy to show that higher inflation implies
lower output. Differentiating (6.1) respect to inflation we obtain that

                       dy"              —1                  1
                   sgn[2—] = sgn
                                    (1 +
This result is also intuitive: an increase in inflation shifts the relative demand
towards low productivity firms because agents decide to search less. Thus, once
in the pooling equilibrium additional inflation aggravates the fall in output.
    Figure 3 shows how output depends on inflation in our specification." Initially
inflation has no effect, but eventually inflation reaches * and the financial sector
shifts to a pooling equilibrium. At that point there is a discrete fall in output.
Beyond this initial jump, GNP decreases smoothly in the inflation rate.
    The model also implies that the total amount of credit does not change with the
inflation rate. In the separating equilibrium the total amount of credit requested
equals 1 (half of the firms ask for two units) and in the pooling equilibrium it
remains equal to one (all firms demand one unit). However the model predicts a
deterioration in the efficiency of credit allocation.


6.2. Welfare

Consider the separating equilibrium. In this equilibrium we have shown that
p=   I = (I + in). Agents endowed with technologies X = L/9 will not produce
and will earn only labor income. Every agent receives a transfer of value T. Thus
their utility equals (1+T)/[(I+m)(1 + ir)). Agents with technology X = L will
  We will see in the next section that the level of output is directly related to a measure of
ex-ante welfare.



                                             22
also run firms. Thus, their consumption level equals [1 +T+2m]/[(i + m)(l + it)],
which takes into account the income from labor and from profits.
     In order to compute utility we must solve for the value of the transfer. In order
to do so we use the fact that aggregate spending should equal aggregate income
or
                   if    1-fT              1        1+2rn+T     -—l              62
                     [(1+m)(1+ir)               (1+m)(1+ir)
Equation (6.2) implies that T = (1 + rn)ir. Thus solving for the utility of both
agents we have that the utility of a high cost agent is

                     '—     l+ir(1+m)       —1—
                                                          m
                                                     (1+ m)(l+ it)
and the utility of the low cost agent is

                      —                         —
                                                            m
                           (I+m)(1+r)                 (1+m)(1+ir)
Notice that the er-ante utility equals 1, the level of output. Interestingly, the
model predicts that it is firms that lose from inflation because their profits are
washed out by monetary erosion.
     In a pooling equilibrium the situation is more involved because we now have
to distinguish between searchers and non-searchers. The appendix shows that the
er-ante utility for an agent is again equal to the value of output which has already
been shown to fall in this equilibrium. It can also be shown that the required
transfer in order to generate inflation rate it solves

                           (i+ir)= 2T+l+2mYPE{i}
                                        yP    p
                                                                                 (6.3)

where p denotes the expected price that an individual may expected to pay before
knowing any of his characteristics. Thus, from (6.3) the rate of inflation increases
with the level of the transfer and falls with the level of income.

                                           23
7. Concluding Remarks
We conclude by observing that in our setup there exists a range of low inflations for
which there are no welfare costs. It is usually argued that it is difficult to achieve
the political consensus to eliminate positive but low inflation rates. Our model
provides a potential explanation for this fact: low inflation rates do not matter.
The model indicates that welfare decreases monotonically but not continuously
with inflation rates. There exists a threshold only beyond which inflation becomes
important.
   The model captures the deterioration in the efficiency of credit indicators which
we believe characterizes high inflation economies. If we were to endogenize savings
decisions the deterioration in the quality of credit would decrease the returns to
savings and thus induce a decline in the total amount intermediated. In fact, one
of the most visible effects of a successful stabilization program is the reemergence
of credit to the private sector. In a companion paper, (De Gregorio, Sturzenegger
(1994)) we develop a partial equilibrium model in the spirit of this paper which
allows for additional comparative static exercises. In that model, the deterioration
in the quality of borrowing induces a fall in total credit and an increase in real
lending rates. However, regardless of the specification, we show that high inflation
implies that the economy is operating with less information, less efficiently, and
thus experiencing welfare losses.
   Finally, this paper complements the mechanisms studied by Azariadis and
Smith (1993) who discuss savings decisions and how inflation affects the volume
of resources intermediated. Our approach, in contrast, stresses the quality of
credit allocation.


                                         24
8. Appendix
Ex-ante the individual does not know whether he will be searcher or not, nor
whether he will be high or low productivity. Denote
                                  1       1        1

                                 Pna     2Pr     2Pn
the expected price for non searchers. Denote

                    E(!) = + {2(1 +r)pr + 2(1 +)pn}
the expected price for searchers. Then, with probability 4(Th, the agent will be a
non-searcher and his expected utility will equal

              !1+mXh+TE(1 i1+mX'+TE(1                                        81
              2      (1+ir)                      (i+ir)
Similarly, for searchers in amount (1-4(a)), we have that

                i1+mX't+TE(1\ h1+m+TE'l
                2               (1+ir)
                                                                             82
                      (1+ir)
Both (8.1) and (8.2) indicate total spending for both types. Thus, making spend-
ing equal to income and using the labor market condition which implies that
2y = X" + X' from (6.1) we have that

                                    (i_) + (1 — c(A))E
    yP(1 + ir) = (1 +2my + 2T) {(mE PT"                                      (8.3)
                                                                   (I) }
                                                                    PS

which gives equation (6.3) in the text, where i/p stands for the term in braces.
   Finally substitute (1+2my +2T) from (8.3) in the sum of(8.1) and (8.2) to
obtain that expected utility Eu equals

Eu —
   —
               *I(yPE (;;)
                                         +
                                                       —
                                                           (j))y'E (*)      —
                                                                            —
       'I(ThE (i-) + (1 — ciflE (i'-)         (ThE (1_) + (1 — (f3))E (±)
that is, that once again, expected utility equals income.

                                         25
References
[1] Azariadis, Costas and Bruce Smith (1993) "Private Information, Money and
   Growth," Mimeo UCLA.

[2] Bènabou, Roland (1988) "Search, Price Setting and Inflation" Review of Eco-
   nomic Studies, 55, pp. 353-376.

[3] Casella, Alessandra and Jonathan Feinstein (1990) "Economic Exchange Dur-
   ing Hyperinflation." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, p. 1-27.

[4] Chaterjee, Kalyan and William Samuelson (1983) "Bargaining under Incom-
   plete Information," Operations Research, Vol. 31(5), pp. 835-851.

[5] De Gregorio, José (1993) "Inflation, Taxation, and Long-Run Growth," Jour-
   nal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 31, pp. 271-298.

[6] De Gregorio, Jose and Federico Sturzenegger (1994) "Financial Markets and
   Inflation under Imperfect Information", IMF Working Paper WP/94/63.

[7] Dornbusch, Rudiger, Federico Sturzenegger and Holger Wolf (1990), "Ex-
    treme Inflation: Dynamics and Stabilization, Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity, 2, pp. 1-83.

[8] Fischer, Stanley (1993) "The Role of Macroeconomic Factors," Journal of
   Monetary Economics, Vol. 32, pp. 485-512.

[9] Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole (1991) Game Theory, Cambridge, MIT
   Press.



                                     26
[10] Mckinnon, R. (1991) The order of Economic Liberalization: Financial Con-
    trol in the Transition Economy, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University.

[11] Neumeyer, Andy (1992) "On Monetary Policy in Economies with Incomplete
    Asset Markets", Ph.D. Dissertation, Columbia University.

[12] Stiglitz Joseph and Andy Weiss (1981) Credit Rationing in Markets with
    Imperfect Information, American Economic Review, Vol 71, pp. 393-410.

[13J Tommasi, Mariano (1994), "High-Inflation: Resource Misallocations and
    Growth Effects", Mimeo UCLA.

[14j Tommasi, Mariano (1994), "The Welfare Effects of Inflation: The Conse-
    quences of Price Instability on Search Markets" American Economic Review,
    August.




                                     27
               Figure 1: Timing and Structure of Transactions




Ago-i \\brkn



Ago-2




Age-S




Finns



Financial




Govemmad



                                                            End o(peiiod
               c(peziod




                                 28
        Figure 2: Demands


    x

2
                            x=2




                            x=o
                              It




                   29
        Figure 3: GNP and Inflation


    y



1




                                      It




                   30
