                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT CAPITAL
                         STRUCTURE? SOME EVIDENCE FROM
                              INTERNATIONAL DATA




                                      Raghuram G. Rajan
                                        Luigi Zingales




                                   Working Paper No. 4875


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1994

Rajan thanks the Center for Research on Securities Prices while Zingales thanks the Graduate
School of Business for funding. This project was also made possible with a grant from the
Center for International Business Research at the University of Chicago. We thank Patricia
O'Brien, Douglas Diamond, Eugene Fama, Steve Kaplan, Anil Kashyap, Merton Miller, James
Seward and Rob Vishny for helpful discussions, and participants in workshops at the University
of Chicago (Finance and Junior Faculty Lunch Group), HEC-University of Montr6al, Indiana
University, University of Maryland, NBER Summer Institute, the Stockholm School of
Economics and the 1994 WFA meetings for comments. We are indebted to Eduardo Gonzales
for excellent research assistance, and Andrew Alford for invaluable help in getting us acquainted
with Global Vantage. This paper incorporates part of a C.R.S.P. working paper entitled "Notes
on International Capital Structure". This paper is part of NBER's research program in Corporate
Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Raghurarn G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
         Thirty six years and hundreds of papers aner Modigliani and Miller's seminal work, what do we

 really know about corporate capital structure choice? Theory has clearly made some progress on the

 subject. We now understand the most important departures from the Modigliani and Miller assumptions
 that make capital structure relevant to a firm's value. However, very little is known about the empirical
 relevance of the different theories. Empirical work has unearthed some stylized facts on capital structure

 choice, but this evidence is based on tirms in the United States alone, and it is not at all clear how these
 facts relate to different theoretical models. Without testing the robustness of these fmdings outside the
 environment in which they were uncovered, we cannot determine whether these empirical regularities are

 merely spurious correlations, let alone whether they support one theory or another.
        l'his paper attempts to start tilling this gap in our knowledge. Our primary objective is to
establish whether the choice of capital structure in other countries is based on factors similar to those
influencing capital structure of U.S. firms. In doing so. we do not restrict ourself to attempting to
reproduce the regularities found in the U.S. in other countries, but we try to go deeper in understanding
the theoretical rationale behind them. The use of international data provides an unique opportunity for
this analysis. To the extent other countries are similar to the U.S.. they provide an independent sample
to test the received wisdom. To the extent they have different institutional structures, they increase our
ability to discriminate among alternative theories.
        The cost of using an international sample is that some time has to be spent in analyzing the
differences between the countries, ranging from accounting practices to legal and institutional
environments. Thus, we start by presenting the typical balance sheet in each of the G-7 countries (the US,

Japan, Germany, France. Italy, the U.K., and Canada). This analysis highlights the effects of different
accounting rules, and also points to the corrections that need to be made so that measures of leverage are
comparable across countries. After correcting for differences in reporting and valuation, we find that the
extent to which firms are levered is fairly similar across the G-7 countries, with only the U.K. and

Germany being relatively less levered.
       We then continue by analyzing the major institutional differences across countries and their likely
impact on financing decisions. Although the G-7 countries are fairly homogeneous in their level or
  economic development (in addition to data availability, this is another good reason to focus on them),
  their institutions —    as   exemplified by the tax and bankruptcy code, by the market for corporate
  control, and by the historical role played by banks and securities markets —         are   fairly different. Apart
  from establishing a framework within which to understand between-country differences, the review of

  institutions is important because they may affect the within-country cross-sectional correlation between
 leverage and factors such as firm profitability and firm size. This discussion can help us better identify
 the true economic forces underlying the factors.

            The within-country cross-sectional analysis indicates that factors correlated with leverage in the
 United States are, in general, correlated in the same way in other countries also. But it is much harder
 to link these factors to specific theories of capital structure choice. For example, leverage increases in
 size in all countries except Germany. A possible explanation is that larger firms are better diversified,
 and have a lower probability of being distressed. Lower expected bankruptcy costs enables them to take
 on more leverage. But in Germany, the bankruptcy code ensures that firms entering bankruptcy are
 usually liquidated. Since liquidation values are generally lower than going concern values, bankruptcy
 is potentially more costly in Germany. So there should be a stronger positive correlation between size
 and leverage in Germany. Why then do we observe a significant negative correlation? This suggests that

either our understanding of the economic underpinnings of the factors (e.g., size), or our understanding
of the influence of institutions (e.g.. bankruptcy laws), or both, is flawed. More research is clearly called
 for.

           We are not the first to examjne capital structure across countries. Much of theprevious literature,

though, focuses on aggregate differences in capital structure. Rutherford (1988) is one of the first to
compare leverage across different countries using O.E.C.D. data, and she points out possible biases in
accounting. Mayer (1990) analyzes financing choices in different countries with flow of funds data. The
majority of these studies conclude that the Anglo-American economies (the U.S., the U.K. and Canada)
are less levered than those of Continental Europe and Japan. A number of authors have explained these


    2
        We recognize the enormous differences in accounting and reporting standards across countries. What is
surpnsing is the extent to which countries look similar, after correcting for important differences. This is why we
believe that the aberrations in patterns reflect something real rather than simply differences in accounting.

                                                        2
 aggregate differences as due tO differences in the extent and nature of financial intermediation (see Borio

 (1990)), differences in institutional Structures governing bankruptcy and debt renegotiation (see Frankel
 and Montgomery (1991)), and differences in the market for corporate control (see, for example, Bergiof

 (1990)). Others, such as Mayer (1990), suggest that certain institutions like the tax code cannot explain
 aggregate differences. We argue that while institutional differences may drive whatever aggregate
 differences in capital structure that do, indeed, exist, their influence may be more subtle than previously

 thought.
          Because of the paucity of data, few authors have gone beyond aggregate data. Early attempts to
 explore the cross sectional determinants of capital structure in different countries were undertaken by
 Remmers, et al. (1974) and Stonehill, et a!. (1975). Both studies analyze a sample of large firms from
 four selected industries in five countries (U.S., Japan, France, Norway, and the Netherlands) in the
 period 1966-72. They find that industry and firm size are not important determinants of leverage, while
 profitability and firm growth generally are.' A more recent study is Kester (1986), who compares
 leverage in Japan and the U.S.. He finds that after controlling for a number of determinants, there are
no major differences in the extent to which firms are levered in the two countries. We add to this
literature, not simply by presenting correlations between factors and leverage, but by attempting to
unearth the underlying economic forces.

         The rest of the paper procedes as follows. Section I describes the aggregate leverage in each
country after implementing the necessary accounting adjustments. Section II overviews the major
institutional differences across the G-7 countries, in section III, we undertake a comparative study of the
cross-sectional determinants of capital structure choices and attempt to find an explanation for the
observed regulariues. Section IV concludes.




    'Toy ci al. (1974) also conduct a survey on the objective of financial executives in different countries. Although
their limited sample prevents from wide generalization, it is interesting to mention some of their findings. In all the
counines managers think about capital structure targets in book value (and not in market value) terms. Furthermore,
their main goal appears to be guaranteeing the financial stability of their company and the availability of funds
needed rather than maximizing shareholders' value.


                                                          3
                                             I. Data Description.
   A. Dala.

           Previous studies that attempt to compare capita! structures in different countries have been
  hampered by the lack of consistent accounting and market information outside the United States. A
  recently compiled international tinancial database. Global Vantage, helps us. at least partially, address
  this problem. The database contains accounting data and monthly stock pric for approximately 8.000
  companies from 31 countries since i982 GIçbal Vantage started to collect the data only in 1987. From•
  that year onward it included all the companies present in the Morgan Stanley Capital International Index,
  in the Financial Times Actuaries World Index or in the local market index.4 Pre-1987 data were
  backfilled arid therefore suffer from a survivorship bias. For this reason we concen'ateourilysis—tjn
  the 1987-1991 period, using pre-1987 data only as a robustness check.

          We limit our attention to the largest economies where there are sufficient firms represented to
 make comparisons meaningful. In particular, we focus on non financial corporations of the G-7 countries
 (the USA, Japan. Germany, France, Italy, the UK, and Canada). In 1991, Global Vantage covers more

 than two thirds of the companies (representing more than 90% of the market capitalization) in countries
 with a small stock market (France, Germany and Italy). In the other major countries Global Vantage
 covers between one third and one half of the companies traded, representing more than 75% of the
 market capitalization. We eliminate banks and insurance companies from the sample because their
 Operations are very different and they are substantially affected by government regulation. The final
sample covers between 30% and 70% of the companies listed in every country, and represents more than
50% of the market capitalization in each country.

         There are a least two potential biases we should worry about. First, the sample selection criterion
utilized by Global Vantage biases the sample towards the largest listed companies in each country. Given
(he figures on coverage, this bias does not appear to be major. A potentially more severe selection bias



   'For the U.S., Japan, Germany, France, Italy,the U.K.. and Canada (the seven countries we consider) the local
market index is respectively S&P500, Nikkei 500. FAZ Share Index. CAC General Index. MIB Current Index. FT
Actuaries 500, TSE 300.


                                                      4
 anses from the tact that only listed companiesie reported. The fraction of listed firms differs widely
 across different countries, and so does the average size of companies listed. Edwards and Fischer (1993)

 estimate thai listed companies accounted for 30.5% of corporate turnover in the U.K. in 1986. while
 listed Aktiengesellschaft (the closest German equivalent to public limited liability firms) accounted for

just 10.6% in Germany. Pagano and Roell (1990) find that the market capitalization of the average

company traded in Frankfurt or Milan is approximately 60% larger than that of the average company
traded in London.
           It is important to understand why these differences arise, but this paper has more modest aims.
                                ..


The figures above suggest that while the companies followed by Global Vantage are fairly representative

of listed companies, these, in turn. may represent only a small (and varying) proportion of firms in a
country. While listed companies, the tip of the proverbial iceberg, are perhaps of greatest interest to the
financial communty, the interests of academicians are broader. Unfortunately, it is hard to establish
beyond doubt whether the tip of the iceberg is representative of the larger mass hidden below. But to
the extent that common institutions within a country influence both the tip and the mass below, the
information gathered from an analysis of tips will have broader implicaiions.5 We will attempt to check
for possible biases in the data throughout this paper. But ultimately, international data cannot be made
perfectly homogeneous. and the reader will have to interpret our results withj.J_th.c.& tsiamind.
           To explore the magnitude of these biases and the homogeneity of our sample across countries we
sort all the companies into deciles according to the market value of their assets (in U.S. dollars) at the

nd of 1991 .       As   Table I shows, the size distribution of companies within each country is fairly
homogeneous across countries with the exception of Japan. Anglo American countries (the USA, the UK

and Canada) have relatively more firms that are smaller than the overall median (respectively 59%, 57%



    3One   might be concerned that, given the different institutional environments, only the best firms have access
to the public equity market in Germany and haly. We do not think this is true. Very few firms went public in
Germany after World War II and therefore being public can be regarded as exogenous from our point of view. This
is true in Italy also, though to a lesser extent. Furthermore. The Economist (7124/1993) reports that a McKinsey
study finds unlisted firms in Italy perform twice 'as well' as listed ones.

    'More precisely the quasi-market value of assets, defined as book value of assets minus shareholders' equity
plus market value of equity plus book value of preferred stock. End-1991 exchange rates are used.

                                                         5
   and 56%). By contrast, in Germany, France and Italy the sample is slightly cihed towards larger

   companies (only respecuvely 35%, 34% and 46% are below the median). Only Japan has almost the
   entire sample (97%) of firms larger than the overall median. Given the wide differences in the industrial

  structure in the G-7 countries, the differing levels of the stock market, and the existing deviations from

  purchasing power panty that existed in 1991, the sample can be considered fairly homogeneous.
  However, in presenting the results we will attempt to correct for the possibility that difference in size
  influences the results.
  B. Balance sheets

           Considerable insight can be obtained simply by comparing the average balance sheets of the firms
  in our sample. In doing so, we note three major sources of differences in accounting practices. First, not

 all countries require firms to report consolidated balance sheets, although the majority of firms in each
 country do it (in 1991, the countries with the least proportion of finns reporting consolidated balance-

 sheets are Germany and Japan with 76%). Companies with unconsolidated balance sheets may
 (incorrectly) appear to be less leveraged than otherwise identical companies that report consolidated
 statements. These firms have the leeway to leave the most indebted associated firms off their balance

 sheets. Alternatively, in an attempt to window-dress their balance sheet, they may place the debt they take
 on in less visible affiliated companies and then borrow it back via interfirm credit.7 For ease of
 comparison, this paper focusses on firms reporting consolidated balance sheets, and Table II reports
average country balance sheets for all firms in the sample that reported consolidated balance sheets in
 1991.

          Second, the valuation of assets at historical cost or current value) may differ substantially across

countries. For instance, it is generally believed (Nobes and Parker, 1991, p25) that German accounting
p'aces greater emphasis on "conservatism' and less on "true and fair' considerations. Assets value of
German companies may therefore be understated relative to asset values in many other countries.



      This is not to say that consolidated firms themselves do not pose problems for a study such as ours.
Multinationals may consolidate foreign subsidiaries. We will incorrectly attribute all the leverage to the parent firm.
This will automatically diminish differences between countries. The increasing globalization of the operations of
large firms should reduce the differences between the capital structures of firms in different countries.

                                                          6
 Conversely, the Finance Acts of 1978 and 1979 made revaluaxion compulsory for French companies

 (Nobes and Parker, p17). There is rio easy way to correct for this, and our results on book values must
 be interpreted with the appropriate caution.
         The third difference relates to what is included and what is excluded from a balance sheet in
 different countries. Lease reporting varies substantially: financial leases appear on the balance sheet in

 the U.S., Canada and in the U.K. (especially in the latter half of the Eighties) but not regularly in Japan.
and Continental Europe. As the extent of leasing increases, however, more of these countries are forcing
companies to report them. Another difference is that in Germany, unlike the practice in the U.S.. both
the funded and unfunded portion of pension liabilities are reported on the balance sheet (as are the assets

held against pension liabilities). Furthermore, generally accepted German accounting practices allow firms
to set aside greater provisions for future potential Liability in profitable years. This reserve is then used
to smooth accounting income in lean years. Thus, in Germany, earnings may be less representative of
true earnings than those in the U.S.( see Afford et a!. . 1993). An indication of the importance of these
differences is that 29% of the liabilities of a German company are included in the category 'Liability
Other' (in no other country does this item represent more than 8%). Approximately 50% of 'Liability
Other' is represented by pension liabilities, the remaining 50% consists of special reserves for potential
liabilities. We will correct for some of these differences when we discuss leverage.
         Bearing the above caveats in mind, clear differences emerge between countries in Table II. Firms
in Anglo American economies have proportionately more fixed assets and less current assets in their




      Rutherford (1986) reports that leasing accounted for 17.1 % of gross capital formation in the U.S. corporate
sector in 1980. 8.7% in the U.K.. 4% in Japan. 3.2% in France. and 1% in Germany. Barclay and Smith (1993)
find that lease obligations represent 9% of the total debt for a large sample or U.S. firm drawn from Compustat.
This fiure probably represents an upper bound of the error produced by lease undereporting in other countries.
where leasing is less widespread. An error of this magnitude is not likely to affect our results in a major way.

      Anecdotal evidence on this issue reveals the magnitude of the problem. Nobes and Parker (1991, p. 27
report that AEG Telefunken succeeded in generating exactly zero earnings for three years in a row. More recently,
in 1994. Daiinler Benz revealed its earnings restated according to U.S. standards while seeking a listing on the New
York Stock Exchange. Daimler Benz had suffered substantial reverses in vanous markets, so one would expect its
smoothed earnings to be higher than true (U.S. restated) earnings. But the extent of the difference. DM3 billion
approxi.mately $2 billion), wa.s surprisingly large. All this suggests that the objective of smoothing income may
sometimes conflict with the objecuve of presenting a con.servauve picture.

                                                         7
        balance sheet: 40% versus approximately 30% for Germany, France, Italy and Japan.'° However, the

        composition of current assets differs greatly in this latter group. Japanese companies have a larger amount

        of cash and short term investments (18% of assets versus at most 11% for other countries), and this
        accounts for most of the difference in current assets with respect to the United States. In Contmental
        Europe. however, the larger size of current assets is because the level of inventories and accounts
        receivable is higher. We now turn to the liability side of the balance sheet.

        C. Leverage.
                Given the observed differences in the composition of liabilities, before undertaking any
        investigation of leverage it is appropriate to define what we mean by this term. Clearly, the extent of
        leverage — and the most relevant measure -- depends on the objective of analysis. For irist.ance. the

       agency problems associated with debt (Jensen and Meckling (1976), Myers (1977)) largely relate to how
       the firm has been financed in the past. and thus on the relative claims on firm value held by equity and
       debt. Here, the relevant measure is probably the stock of debt relative to firm value. Others (see Aghiori

       and Bolton (1992)) have focussed on leverage as a means of transferring control in bad times from the
       hands of shareholders (or their fiduciaries) to the hands of bondholders (or their fiduciaries). Here, the
       important question is whether the firm can meet its fixed payments, and consequently, a flow measure
       like the interest coverage ratio is more relevant. Rather than exploring all possible theories and their
       associated measures of leverage, we use the ones suggested by the discussion above as illustrative.
               The broadest definition of stock leverage is the ratio of total liabilities over to total assets. This
-I,   s a measure of what is left for shareholders in case of liquidation. However, it does not provide a good
      indication of whether the firm is at risk of default any time soon, neither does it provide art accurate

      picture of past financing choices, because it is greatly influenced by non financial factors. To the extent
      that much of trade credit is used for transactions purposes, and not as financing, including accounts
      payable may distort the level of leverage)1 Similarly, pension liabilities arising from labor market

          '° The
                 larger proportion of fixed assets in Canada may simply be because a disproportionately large fraction
      28%) of the Canadian companies in the sample are in Oil and Mining.

            However in countries, or speciric classes of firms who use trade credit as a means of financing, accounts
      pavables should be included in measures of leverage.

                                                             8
  contracts will influence this ratio.

          A more appropriate definition of financial leverage is provided by the ratio of debt (both short
  term and long term) to total assets. This measure, however, fails to incorporate the fact that there are
 some assets that are offset by specific non debt liabilities. For example, an increase in the gross amount
 of trade credit is reflected in a reduction of this measure of leverage. Given that the level of accounts

 payable and accounts receivable may jointly be influenced by industry considerations, it seems appropriate
 to use a measure of leverage unaffected by the gross level of trade credit.
         We thus define leverage as the ratio of total debt to net assets, where net assets are total assets
 less accounts payable and other liabilities. Although this measure abstracts from trade credit, it does not
 eliminate the influence of other non financial markets on the measure of leverage. For example, assets

 held against pension liabilities may decrease this measure of leverage. Therefore, the effects of past
 financing decisions is probably best represented by the ratio of otal debt to capital (defined as total debt

plus equity).
         A good measure of the risk that equity holders are not able to make fixed payments and have to
ive up control is the coverage ratio. i.e.. the ratio of EBIT to interest expense. Implicit in this ratio is
that investments equal in rnagn.iti.ide to depreciation are needed to keep the firm a going concern. If no
investments are needed, a better measure is to define coverage as the ratio of EBITDA to interest
expense. A common problem for both measures is that they assume that short term liabilities like accounts
payable and short term debt will be rolled over, which need not be true in times of distress. Furthermore.
as Jensen 1989) argues, an inability to make fixed payments at low levels of debt may have very
different implications for the control of the firm than an inability to make those payments at high levels
of debt. The former is more likely to lead to liquidation while the latter may lead to reorganization
.especiallv if the debt is closely held). Another problem is that these measures are very sensitive to
income fluctuations. With these caveats in mind, we report in Table III a the above mentioned definitions
of leverage for different countries. The stock measures are computed both at book value and quasi-market
values .— where the book value of equity is replaced by the market value of equity. At this stage. we do

riot attempt to adopt a more homogeneous standard for the balance sheets.



                                                    9
          According to the first definition (non-equity liabilities to totai assets) Anglo-American economies

  have considerably lower median leverage in 1991 (about 0.56) than the economies of Connnenral Europe

  and Japan (0.70). This is hardly surprising given the biases mentioned above. This figure, in a sense.
  offers an upper limit of the amount of leverage in different countries. If market values are used. Japan
  is not considerably more levered than the Anglo-American countries, while the countries of Continental

  Europe still seem to have higher leverage.

          Moving on to debt to total assets, our findings change considerably. Now Germany and the U.K.
 appear to have low levels of leverage, both as a fraction of book value and market value of assets. Of
 course, part of the Low leverage for Germany may be because of the way pension liabilities are treated.
 We will correct for this shortly. According to the debt to net assets ratio, Japan. Italy. France. and
 Canada appear substantially more levered than the other countries. Again, this result does not survive for
 Japan if we look at leverage in market value terms, but it is still true for the other three countries.
         If leverage is defined as debt over capital, the North-American countries and Germany have a
 similar leverage around 38%, UK appears substantially less Leveraged (28%), while France. Italy and

 Japan substantially more leverage (respectively 48%, 47%, and 52%). However, the figures for Japan
 may be mainly due to the potential undervaluation of assets. In fact, leverage appears a more normal 29%
 if it is measured at the 1991 market value (recall that at the end of fiscal year 1991. the Japanese sock
market had fallen approximately 50% from its peak, so the 'bubble' is not necessarily driving these
resuIts) Market value measures, however, confirm the higher level of stock leverage in France and Italy.
We also compute median interest coverage ratios. In the second last column of Table lila we report the
ratio of income before interest arid taxes to interest expense. In the last column, depreciation is added to

the numerator of the coverage definition. Despite the potential downward bias in German data, the
interest coverage figures corroborate our earlier findings that Germany and the U.K. have lower leverage
than the other countries in our sample.

        Although country rankings are somewhat a function of the measure used, one major fact emerges:

neither German nor Japanese companies are very highly levered by US standards. Germany, in particular.
comes across as a surprisingly low levered country. This result is contrasts sharply with the conclusions



                                                    10
 of previous researchers (for example, Berglof(1990), Borio (1990)). According to Berglof, Continental
 Europe and Japan with their so-called banking-based systems, are more highly levered than the Anglo-
 American countries with their market-based financial systems.

         Before drawing strong conclusions from this exercise, we have to check if these findings are

 robust to adjustments for differences in reporting standards. We list the minimal adjustments that may
 be desirable. First, consider cash balances. Although we do not know how much cash and short term
 investments are really needed to run a business, it is probably not a bad approximation to treat it as
excess liquidity, offset it by an equivalent amount of debt, and remove both from the balance sheet. There

are other items which assume special importance in some countries because of accounting differences.
 For instance, unlike U.S. firms. German companies do not net out pension assets and pension Iiabilirv
in their balance sheets. While we do not know the level of pension assets, a first approximation is to
assume that pensions are fully funded, and we subtract pension liabilities from assets in Germany.
        There are three additional adjustments that need to be made. First, deferred taxes should really

be considered a component of shareholders' equity. Given that the importance of this item varies across
countries, it seems appropriate to analyze the impact of adding it to the book value of equitY. Second.
the value of US assets may be exaggerated with respect to those of the other countries by the wave of
acquisitions of the l980s. This is because the premium paid in an acquisition is recorded as goodwill and
depreciated over thirty years. Evidence of this possible distortion can be found in the dramatic increase
rn intangibles in the U.S. over the 1980s (2.2% of assets in 1982 to 7.6% in 1991). and the much smaller
number in other countries texcept for France). To eliminate this potential bias we subtract the value of
intangibles from the book value of equity in all the countries (and reduce assets accordingly). Finally.
we argued that a big fraction of German liabilities is composed of dubious provisions for future liabilities.
which are really equity. Therefore. for the sake of comparison, we reclassify these liabilities as
shareholders' equity in all countries.
        The net effect of all these adjustments is in Table Ifib. The amount of leverage in every country

except Canada drops substantially. In particular the ratio of adjusted debt to capital in Japan drops from
53% to 37% and in Germany from 38% to 18%. But, if anything, the results seem to strengthen our


                                                    11
     claim that corporate leverage is fairly similar across the 0-7 countnes with the exception of the United
,)fingdornandGermariy, where firms are substantially less levered. In everything that follows, we use the

     adjusted measures of leverage.
                 There are a number of additional checks for robustness that can be performed. To check that our

     results on leverage are not special to the year chosen, we look at the interest coverage ratio and the debt

     to capitalization ratio in 1986, a year that for many countries represented the peak of the economic
     expansion2 As Table Ill c indicates. interest coverage is again high for Germany and the U.K., while
         is approximately equal for the other countries. The debt to book capitalization measure corroborates

     this.

                 It is also possible that across country differences in leverage may be simply due to differences
    in the industry composition of the 0-7 stock markets. For instance, 28% of Canadian firms are Mining
    and Oil companies (as compared to 6% in the overall sample). We therefore recompute the measures for

    a homogenous group of firms, those in food, tobacco, beverages, textiles, apparel, and leather products.
    Again, the United Kingdom is relatively unlevered while Italy appears most highly levered. The
    remaining countries have more or less equal leverage.
                 Differences in leverage can be attributed to the different size composition of the G-7 country
    sample. For this reason, we compare leverage of companies belonging in the smallest 20% and in the
    largest 20% of he distribution of firms sorted by the dollar market value of assets in 1991. Independent
    of the size of the firm, firms in the United Kingdom and Germany are less levered while all the other
    countries are approximately at the same level.
     -       -
                 Some countries   have a greater number of state owned firms than others. Firms in those countries
    may appear to have higher leverage because we do not account explicitly for state guarantees to
    debtholders. We identified the state owned companies in our sample for France and Italy, the countries
    with the largest state sector. There are 21 such companies in all. Median adjusted debt to capital for these


        2
          It would appear that the best measure of leverage for Germany is debt to capitalization, where capitalization
   is defined as the sum of debt, equity, and untaxed reserves. Interest coverage may understate the amount of leverage
   because income from the pension assets held on the balance sheet will also count as income, and it may overstate
   leverage because of the propensity to hide income (though the latter effect may be small when we average over
   firms and time periods).

                                                            12
 firms is 0.83 in France, which is much higher than the median for firms in the private sector, 0.33. But

 for Italy, the medians are closer together, at 0.42 and 0.38 respectively. Since state owned firms are such

 a small proportion of our sample. dropping them does not alter our conclusions. In the rest of the

 analysis, they are dropped from the sample.
          Another source of concern is that by restricting our attention to firms with consolidated balance

 sheets, we might have a significantly biased measure of leverage for some countries. This concern is
 particularly valid for Japan and Germany, where 24% of the sample is eliminated by the consolidation
 requirement (for all the other countries the loss is less than 10%). Including firms that do not present
 consolidated balance sheets in the sample does no change the overall picture, it actually further reduces
 leverage in Japan and Germany. However, this finding is hardly surprising if we think that firms may
choose not to consolidate in order to hide debt (though this effect will partially be offset by the fact that
the incentive to hide debt increases as a firm becomes more highiy levered).

         During the 1980s. firms were under an increasing pressure to present consolidated balance sheets.

both from local authorities and from financial markets. In 1989 alone. 109 Japanese firms in our sample
moved to consolidated accounts. An estimate of the impact of consolidation can be obtained by looking
at how the level of leverage changes when a firm starts to report consolidated balance sheets. We
estunate this difference country by countr           In all the countries except the U.K., we find that in the
'ear when a firm moves to consolidate accounts, its debt to capital ratio increases relative to the previous
'ear by about five percentage points. This difference is always statistically significant. In the U.K., the
difference is only two percentage points and is not statistically significant. This suggests that the absence
of consolidated accounts for all the companies may lead us to underestimate the amount of leverage in
Japan and Germany. Assuming that, on average, the finns that do not consolidate have 10 percentage

points more unreported leverage than they actually report (in other words, we assume twice the average
increase when firms change reporting status>, the adjusted debt to capital ratio in Japan would go up to




     310 Canada and the U.S. all firms report on a consolidated basis. Theretbre. our estimates are for the remaining
Live countries.


                                                         13
 0.395. and that in Germany to 0.205. This does not overturn our main results.14
          A fmal source of concern is that our findings are different from most of the previous literature
 because of differences in the samples used and not because of differences in the way leverage is
 computed. In the last column of Table IIlc. we present the liability to asset ratio calculated using
 O.E.C.D. data. Given that OECD statistics include both listed and unlisted finns, there is remarkably

 little difference between this measure and the unadjusted equivalent measure in our sample. Interestingly,
 the difference is largest for the United States where we have the most number of firms. This evidence
 suggests that the sample covered by Global Vantage is not unrepresentative of the whole universe of

 companies present in each country.
          What all this suggests is that leverage comparisons between countries are sensitive to what we
 include as debt and assets, and whether we value the assets at book or market value. It appears that
 previous studies based on O.E.C.D. data have over-emphasized the higher level of non-equity liabilities

 in Continental Europe and Japan. even though this may largely stem from differences in accounting and

 from the presence of long term non-debt liabilities (like pensions). Furthermore, these studies have not
accounted for possible misvaluation of assets — where a market leverage or coverage measure may be

better than a book leverage measure. Using different measures of leverage and correcting for major
differences in accounting, we can conclude that: (I) the U.K. and Germany have the lowest leverage
among the G-7 countries: ii) all other countries have approximately the same amount of leverage, with
some changes in ranking based on the specific measure.
D. The Flow of Financing at the Aggregate Level.
         Up to this point we have restricted our analysis mainly to stock-based measures of the existing

    '   We assume twice the average level because the decision to start reporting on a consolidated basis may not
be independent of the amount of hidden leverage that a company has. if this is the case, our estimate of 5 percent
will represent only a lower bound of the impact of consolidation. Another way to control for this possibility is the
following test: the worst case scenario for the results is that the firms that choose not to report on a consolidated
basis arc the most highly levered. Then to put Germany and Japan on an equal footing with the other countries we
truncate the samples for other countries at the 76 percentile of leverage. Even with this, Germany appears to be
less levered than all other countries except the United Kingdom (see Table HI c. column 9), and the other countries
are higher.

     '5OECD data are presented in an aggregate way, therefore it is not possible to compute leverage using some
of the definitions we use.

                                                        14
 capital structure. Now we analyze the choice of financing with flow ot funds data. Such an analysis is

 important for at least two reasons. First, the actual capital structure of a firm is just the outcome of a

 series of prior financing choices. Therefore, by comparing results based on flow of funds data with

 those obtained from the level of stock we can check the robustness of our findings. Second. data on

 capital structure do not distinguish between equity built through retained earnings and equity obtained

 through stock offerings. As Myers (1984) points out. the costs associated with these two forms of

 financing are very different. Also, the relative preference between the two can be very different in

 different institutional environments. In Figure 1, we plot the fraction of external financing (financing

 from sources other than retained earnings) for the four countries for which we have flow of funds data.

For the U.S., U.K.. and Canada. external financing is smaller than internal financing, with firms in the

United States raising the least from external sources. But firms in Japan consistently raise more money

externally than internally. Unfortunately, much of the period we have data for coincides with the
dramatic rise in the Japanese stock market, so we do not know if this observation is specific to the

period. In all the countries, external financing shoots up in 199O91. not so much because financing

requirements increase but because retained earnings drop dramatically in the recessionary period.

         In figure 2. we plot net debt issuances as a fraction of total financing. This shows that the
reason U.S. and Canadian firms are so highly levered despite using so little external finance is because

external finance has consisted largely of debt (throughout the 1980s for U.S. firms, and the latter half

of the I 9SOs for Canadian firms). The L1S figures are extreme, perhaps because of the intense activity

in the market for corporate control over this period. In Japan, the greater amount of external finance

has been offset by a lower amount of debt iii external finance, except in the early 1990s when the

plunge in the stock market led to a complete ban on equity issues.'6

         Finally, in figure 3, we plot the net equity issuances in each country) Firms in both the U.K.


      One has to be cautious in auributing all the net equity issues to new issuances. Some of the equity 'issuance'
may actually be conversion of debt into equity. Similarly, some of the net debt issuance may actually be the issuance
of quasi equity instruments like convertibles.

     'Note that in Germany and Japan. stock repurchases are forbidden by the law. In other countnes like the U.K.
and Italy. they may take place but only uswg retained earnings. Therefore, firms in some of these countries do no
have the flexibility US firms have in releveragng a company.

                                                        15
 and Canada (in the early 1980s) issue significant amounts of equity. The extremely low leverage for
 the U.K. despite substantial levels of external financing is a result of a conscious emphasis on equity
 issuances rather than debt as a source of external financing. At! this suggests that the_levels of leverage

 that we see in different countries do not arise randomly, but are a consequence of conscious financing

 choices made by firms.

                 II. Institutional differences and leverage.
         In the previous section we showed that differences in leverage across the G-7 countries are not

 as large as previously thought and that only the United Kin_gom and Germany appear to be
 ubstantiaIly less leveraged. These findings beg the question of why countries with such diverse
 institutions (like Japan and the United States) have a similar amount of leverage and why countries with
 similar capital markets and financial institutions (like the United Kingdom and the United States) have
 such different levels of debt. Much of the previous literature has focussed on a classification of
countries based on the size or power of the banking sector, hence the term 'bank oriented' (Japan,
Germany, France, and Italy) and 'marker oriented' countries (the U.S.. the U.K.. and Canada). In this
section. we argue that this is just one, and perhaps not the most important, institutional difference
between the G-7 countries. The tax code. bankruptcy laws, development of bond markets, and patterns
of ownership also may matter though these may not be independent of importance of the banking sector.
Far from settling the issue of whether institutions influence aggregate capital structure, we raise
questions that need to be addressed in future research.
A. The effect of taxes on aggregate leverage.
        We first examine the effect of the tax code on aggregate leverage. The existing empirical
literature on international capital structure differences (see, for example. Mayer (1990)) claims that taxes
have no explanatory power. However, the literature fails to consider personal taxes, and for a very good
reasom a precise computation of the effective tax rates, taking into account the income and wealth
levels of the population. and the marginal corporate tax rate for firms, would require an entire study like
the one undertaken by King and Fullerton (1984) for the 1970s. In this section, we finesse the issue of
calculating the effective tax rate by assuming, in Table IV. that the marginal investor pays the highest
personal tax rate and the marginal corporation issuing debt pays taxes at the statutory rate. Our modest


                                                   16
  goal here is to raise the possibility that the previous wisdom that taxes do not explain cross country
 differences in leverage may be reversed if personal taxes are considered.
           In some countries corporate income may be taxed differently depending on whether it is retained
 or distributed. Furthermore, different sources of personal income are taxed at different rates. Therefore.
 Table IV also reports the corporate tax on distributed profits, the highest tax rates on interest income.
 dividend income and capital gains, as well as the tax rebate on dividend income. From these, we
 calculate the after tax value of a dollar of pre-tax income as it flows to an investor through different
 routes. We compute this for each country in 1983 and 1990, first under the assumption that the effective
 marginal capital gain tax rate is the highest statutory one.
          The first three rows in Table V show how a dollar of pre-tax income is divided into the three
 streams in each country.'9 Japan and Italy have among the largest tax advantage of debt over retained
 earnings and dividends in 1990. These countries also have relatively high fractions of pre-tax earnings
 flowing to debt (43% and 62% respectively in the period 1989-91), and the lowest payments to
 dividends (18% and 27% respectively in 1989-91). The United States is an anomaly here, because it
has a high fraction flowing to dividends despite dividends being relatively tax disadvantaged.
Conversely, debt is actually tax disadvantaged relative to retained earnings and equity in Germany, and
was so in the U.K. until 1988. These countries have the lowest fractions flowing to debt (25% and 23%
respectively in the period 1989-91).
         A sharper test of the effects of taxes can be obtained by looking at how changes in the relative
tax advantage of debt, dividends, and retained earnings over the 1980s affect their share of the pre-tax
dollar. In Table V. we list the effect of changes in the tax code between 1982 and 1990 on the amount
of the pre-tax dollar that finally reaches the individual through the different routes. For instance, in the
L'S.. the 1986 tax reform was such that, for every dollar of pre-rax income paid out through the debt



     1Local and city taxes arc included in the computations. Whenever these differ inside a country we chose the
tax rate of the region where the major stock exchange is located. Data were collected from Coopers & Lybrand
(1984) and various issues of Price Waterhouse publication 'Doing Business in

      Total debt payments are obtained by summing interest expenses across companies. total dividends are similarly
obtained and then grossed up to a pre-tax rate by multiplying by the ratio o1 total pre-tax income to total after tax
income (This overstates true dividends if the tax on distributed profits is different from the tax on retained earnings.
Unfortunately, we have no way of systematically correcting for this). Total pre-tax retained earnings are obtained
by subtracting (pre-tax) dividends and debt payments front pre-tax earnings. All these are normalized by total pre-tax
earnings. We calculate these numbers over three year periods so as to minimize the noise from poor economic
conditions in any single year. The findings are nor qualitatively different if we restrict ourselves to the years 1982
and 1990.

                                                          17
  route. an investor would receive $0.20 more than he received before the reforms. The corresponding
  increase for the dividend and the capital gain routes are $0.15 and $0.03.
          If taxes matter, we should observe a shift in the allocation of the pretax dollar towards the route
 chat has increased its after tax value the most. At the same time the route that is most penalized (or least
 advantaged) by tax reform should experience a reduction in its flow. This is in fact what we see. and the
 results are reported in Table V. For instance, in the U.S. the debt route, which is the most tax advantaged
 by the 1986 reform, increases its share of the pre-tax dollar from $0.26 to S0.40 between 1982-84 and
 1989-9 1. By contrast, retained earnings are the least tax advantaged by the reforms in the U.S. and their
 share decreases from $0.35 to $0.21. The share of the pre-ta.x dollar going to the route that is most tax
 advantaged by tax reform between 1982 and 1990 increases in 5 of the 7 countries — with a mean
 increase in share of 6 cents (t 1.75). Conversely, the route least advantaged by tax reforms between
 1982 and 1991 saw a mean decrease in share of 12 cents (t=-3.6); with decreases in 6 of 7 countries.
 A T test for differences in means suggests that there is a significant effect of taxes at the 5% level.20
         All we have shown is the possibility that personal taxes may matter. If we change assumptions,
 for instance, by making the effective capital gains rate zero, the most tax advantaged and disadvantaged
 route change only for one country, Canada. But given our small sample size, this is enough to make the
 ests inconclusive. So this sub section shows that in order to reach any conclusion on the effect of taxes
on aggregate leverage, it is important that the researcher include both personal and corporate taxes.
Moreover, in order to reach the right conclusion, it is imperative that researchers obtain the right
effective race.
B. Bankruptcy Law.
        As Harris and Raviv (1992) suggest, bankruptcy law should be regarded as an integral aspect of
a debt contract. The G-7 countries vary considerably in their bankruptcy procedures and especially in
the amount of power they leave to creditors in bankruptcy (see for example. White. 1993 or Kaiser and
Kaiser. 1993). Therefore, the use of debt contracts in the G-7 countries should be affected by these
differences in bankruptcy proceedings.
        Bankruptcy law has at least two important effects. On an ex-ante basis, strict enforcement of
creditor rights enhances contractibility. Furthermore, it commits creditors to penalizing management and
equity holders if the firm gets into trouble, and this gives the latter the incentive to stay on the straight



    :o Because wo countries, Germany and the U.K.. have two routes which change by the same amount, we only
have 12 independent observations for this test.

                                                    18
  and narrow. On an ex-post basis, this is not necessarily true. Efficiency considerations will suggest that
  it is sometimes optimal for firms to renege on past promises to creditors. The optima! trade-off between
 ex-ante and ex-post efficiency is. therefore, really an empirical question.
          The countries with the strongest enforcement of creditors' rights are probably Germany.and the
 U.K.. In the U.K., creditors whose claims have not been paid appoint receivers, who can then sell the
 firm's assets to repay debt owed to the appointing creditor. Once a receiver is appointed, the firm cannot

- file for bankruptcy to effect a stay on her actions. This makes reorganization difficult, and infrequent.
 In Germany creditors have significant rights during reorganization so that few German firms are
 reorganized in bankmptcy.n In contrast to firms in Germany and the U.K.. finns in the U.S., France.
 and, to a less extent. in Japan. Italy and Canada are more easily reorganized, at the expense of the rights
 of the creditors.
          Therefore, countries where the cx ante contract is most strictly enforced are also ones where firms /
 have   the least debt. Is this coincidence or is it because firms are liquidated much too often, and
 consequently do not lever up? Or is it because managers fear losing their specific human capital1/
 investment, and inefficiently maintain very low leverage? The answers await future research.
                                                                                                                       I
 C. Bank versus market based countries.
         As discussed earlier, previous studies have emphasized differences in the importance of banks
 relative to public financial markets as explanations for differences in capita! structure. The two polar cases
 are probably represented by Germany and the United States. In Germany, banks are allowed to
 underwrite corporate securities and to own equity in industrial companies. In the United States, significant
 limits are placed on both activities (see Kroszner and Rajan (1994). James (1994)). Although recent
studies Ifor example. Franks and Mayer. 1994) have highlighted the relatively modest direct stockholdings
of banks in Germany, it is generally believed that banks are able to influence a large sector of the



    :: Reorganization plans must pay unsecured creditors at least 35% of the amount of their claims or 40% if
Davmeot is to te dela-ed by more than a year. Creditors vote on he plan. and it must be accepted by at least a
rnatorttv of creditors, and at least 50% of the firm's debt by value (see White. 1993).

     :: In the (iS., management has a signincant amount of time. and consequently bargaining power. to propose
a reorganization plan. Furthermore, cramdown procedures can be used to force reorganization through. In France.
the court-appointed bankruptcy official represents the interests of the state rather than that of creditors. Liquidation
cannot occur until a mandatory observation period of 18 months has passed. Furthermore, the court, and not
creditors, approves the reorganization plan. In Japan. the receiver is usually a bank or a trust who serves as a
 corporate angel' who will put the firm back on its feet. The receiver has one year in which to propose a plan.
Creditors rarely, if ever. propose plans. It should also be noted that much of the reorganization in Japan gets done
out of bankruptcy (Frankel and Montgomery, 1991).

                                                          19
 economy in that country, through the use of proxies and the vast network of cross-ownership (see, for
 instance, Cable (1985)). While space constraints prevent us from detailing banking powers in each
 country, banks in Japan, France. and Italy are believed to play a somewhax greater role in financing large
 lu-ins than banks in United States, U.K.. or Canada (see Dermirie (1990)),n
               While we do not fInd that aggregate differences in leverage can be explained solely by
 differences in perceived bank influence, it is a fact that countries with strong banking sectors have
 relatively underdeveloped public markets, where by this term we imply not only the stock market but also
 the corporate bond market. In Table VI. we present the total capitalization of each country's equity
 and bond market in 1991 normalized by the Gross Domestic Product in the same year (all figures are in
 U.S. dollars). Both Germany and Italy have minuscule bond markets while France has a relatively small
 stock market. The exception is Japan where much of the growth in equity markets and bond markets
 came in the 1980s when the strong hold of banks over corporate financing was relaxed (see Hoshi.
 Kashvap, and Scharfstein (1990)).
          In light of our evidence, it would appear that the difference between bank oriented countries and
 market ortented countries is really reflected in the choice between public (stocks and bonds) and private
financing (bank loans; rather than in the amount of leverage. This is not surprising even from a
theoretical point of view. While it might appear that the closer monitoring and control of firm
management provided by banks should enable firms to take on more debt in bank oriented countries.
recent work (Rajan (1992), and Sharpe (1990)) has emphasized the costs of excessive bank debt. So firms
in bank oriented' countries may not want to borrow beyond a point from banks, even though financing
is available. An alternative explanation is that banks in these countries have sufficient stakes in firms that
even equity becomes a viable instrument of control. So firms in bank oriented countries do obtain more
financing but some of this takes the form of privately placed equity and does not reflect in the leverage
ratio. Which of the explanations. if any. is correct, is a question for future research.
D. Ownership and Control.
         Another major institutional difference across the G-7 countries is the level of ownership



    Nore that the disunccion is made more on an cx post basis (i.e., looking ax the outcome) rather than on an cx
ante basis (i.e.. looking at the differences in rei.ilacion;. In fact, in France and Italy until recenny banks could not
own equity in indu.rjaj firms. By contrast, in the U.K. there is no restriction on stockholdings by banks, but these
generally abstain from holding equity.


    For a theory of why this miht be the case see Rajan (1994).

                                                          20
  concentration and the working of the market for corporate control (Berglof, 1990 and Franks and Mayer.
  1994). The U.S., the U.K. and to a much lesser extent, Canada are characterized by a diffuse ownership
  and by an active market for acquisitions. By contrast, in Continental Europe and Japan. ownership is
  highly concentrated, thanks to the use of inter-company cross-holdings, pyramiding of ownership and dual
 class stock. As a consequence. hostile acquisitions are almost unheard of. Franks and Mayer (1994' report
 only three attempts of hostile acquisitions in Germany in the entire post World War II period. The effect
 of ownership concentration on capital structure is far from obvious. On the one hand, the presence of
 large shareholders in the board of directors should reduce the extent of asymmetric information and
 facilitate equity issues. On the other hand, if some of these large shareholders are banks they might have
 a vested interest in reducing the amount of outside sourcing of their clients, forcing them into borrowing
 from them.
         Even abstracting from asymmetric information problems; it is not a priori clear what the
 difference between the capital structure preferred by a large shareholder and the capital structure preferred
 by managers should be. Novaes and Zingales (1994) show that self interested managers may sometimes
 prefer to underleverage and other times to overleverage a company with respect to what is optimal for
shareholders. In particular, the higher their quality as managers or the lower the pressure from the
corporate control market, the more likely it is that managers will underlever their company. By contrast,
the lower their quality or the higher the external pressure, the higher is the amount of debt managers will
use to defend themselves. An implication of this model is that countries with diffused ownership and
active markets for corporate control should have a more dispersed distribution of leverage and this
dispersion especiaIlv the higher tail) should increase when the external pressure increases. Figure 4
reports the distribution of leverage in the G-7 countries. The distribution of leverage in Anglo-American
countries appear to have much fatter tails. Furthermore, the right tail of the distribution did increase over
the 1980s. Therefore. institutional differences may well have an impact on the distribution rather than
on the mean of leverage.


                                  Ill. Cross Sectional Evidence.
        Thus far, we have examined aggregate differences in capital structure across countries. The major
difference appears to be that firms in the United Kingdom and Germany are less levered than firms in
the other G-7 countries. Differences in institutions do seem o have some explanatory power for the
differences in aggregate capital structure. but section II also suggests a broader interpretation of
institutions than the previous literature has focussed on. While a division of countries according to

                                                    21
 whether they are bank oriented' or 'market oriented' does not seem enough to explain differences in
 leverage, the bankrupwy code, the tax code, and the market for corporate control seem to be important
 components of future explanations of the differences.
            We have concentrated thus far on identifying and explaining beween-country differences in
 capital structure. We now shift our focus to exIaining cross-sectional differences within countries. To
 the extent that institutions are relatively similar within a country, the change in focus enables us to
 identify more primitive factors influencing leverage. The question we address is whether the same
 underlying factors determine capital structure in all the G-7 countries.
            In what follows, we update the major findings of previous studies on U.S. firms, using Global
 Vantage data on the U.S.. We then go on to examine if these stylized relationships hold in other
 countries. Finally, we attempt to establish why each factor has the relationship with leverage that we
 document. In other words, the use of international data has two purposes: the first is simply to document
 the relationships, the second - and more important one - is to try and explain the cross-country variation
 in these factors. If, for instance, a factor does not 'work' in the predicted way in another country
(conditional on no measurement or econometric problems), it must be either because the theoretical
rationale for the factor working in the U.S. is spurious, or because institutional differences alter how the
factor works.
A.   The Determinants of Leverage
           According to Harris and Raviv (1991). the consensus is that 'leverage increases with fixed
assets. noridebt tax shields, growth opportunities. and firm size and decreases with volatility, advertising
expenditure. bankrupcv probability, profitability and uniqueness of the product'
       Because of data limitations we focus on four of the above mentioned factors: tangibility of
assets (the ratio of fixed to total assets), the market to book ratio, firm size, and profitabi1ity. Clearly,
each of these factors will have different effects on the relative attractiveness to firms of debt vis a vis
equity (the demand side) and the price lenders vill charge for debt vis a vis equity (the supply side).
It is   hard to identify these equations without being more confidant about the relevance of the theories
we are trying to test. This is why we restrict our analysis to the simple correlations of these factors with
leverage.


    Unforrunaiely, Global Vantage is not as comprehensive as one might wish. For example, very few firms
abroad report R&D and advertising expenditures separately. Furthermore, stock prices are available only at a
monthly interval, making beta estimates very imprecise. These data limitations have an impact on the choice of our
regressors.
         If a large fraction of a firms    assets are   tangible. then assets should sex-ye as collateral.
 diminishing the risk of the lender suffering the agency costs of debt (like risk shifting). They should
 also retain more value in liquidation. Therefore. the greater the proportion of tangible assets on the
 balance sheet (fixed assets divided by total assets), the more willing should lenders be to supply loans,
 and leverage should be higher.

         Highly levered companies are more likely to pass up profitable investment opportunities (Myers
 (1977)). Therefore, firms expecting high future growth should use a greater amount of equity finance.
 As suggested by Myers, we use the ratio of the market value of assets to the book value of assets as

 a proxy for growth opportunities.
         The effect of size on equilibrium leverage is more ambiguous. Larger firms tend to be more
diversified and fail less often, so size (computed as the logarithm of net sales) may be an inverse proxy
 for the probability of bankruptcy. If so, size should have a positive impact on the supply of debt.
However, size may also be a proxy for the information outside investors have, which should increase
their preference for equity relative to debt. Also, the largest firms are more immune to takeover pressure
so they ax-c less likely to be forced to take on debt as a commitment to pay out cash or refrain from
negative NPV projects.
        Finally, there are conflicting predictions from the theory on the effects of profitability on
leverage. Myers and Majluf(1984) predict a negative relationship, because firms will prefer to finance
with internal funds rather than debt. Jensen (1986) predicts a positive one if the market for corporate
control is effective and forces firms to commit to paying out cash by levering up. If it is ineffective.
however, managers of profitable firms prefer to avoid the disciplinary role of debt. which would lead
o a negative correlation between profitability and debt. On the supply side, suppliers should be more
.illing to lend to tirrns with current cashtlows. We measure profitability as cash flow from operations
divided be book value of assets.


13. Cross-sectional determinants of leverage in the United States.
The basic regression we estimate is

  Leverage [Firm i I          a      17, Tangible assets          j7 Market to Book Ratio
                                     173 Log Sales + Il4 Return on Assets ,

       We use two measures of leverage based on the adjusted debt to capitalization ratio in 1991
When equity is measured at book value, we term the measure book leverage, when it is at market value.


                                                   23
 we call it market leverage. For consistency, only companies reporting a consolidated balance sheet are
 included in what follows.6 All the regressors are four year averages (1987-90) of the corresponding
 variables.l Table Vila reports the estimated coefficients for the U.S. obtained using a censored Tobit
         21
 model
         In column (i). we report the estimation when the dependent variable is book leverage, It is not
 surprising that all the coefficients have the sign found in previous work (see Harris and Raviv (1991)),
and are significant at the 1% level. A one standard deviation increase in tangibility, the market to book
                                                                                      -
ratio, log of sales, and profitability change book leverage by 23%, -37%. 23%, and 11% of its standard
deviation respectively.9 Column (ii) contains the estimates when the dependent variable is market
leverage. All the coefficients retain their expected sign.
          Before we examine why the partial correlations turn out as above, it is important that we check
whether the findings are robust. Rather than repeat this exercise with both measures of leverage, Table
VII b reports estimates when the dependent variables are a function of book leverage. It is possible that

some of the partial correlations may obtain because the explanatory variables are correlated with some
firm specific omitted variables. Given the parsimony of our specification,       it   is important that we test

for this. In Table VII b, column (i), the dependent variable is book leverage itt 1991 less book leverage
in 1986. The explanatory variables are also differenced (we subtract the 1982-85 average from the 1987-
90 average of the variable). Because the Ordinary Least Squares estimates are similar to the Tobit
estimates (and are more appropriate for first differences), this is what we report in the rest of the table.
All the coefficients have the same sign as in the levels regression. though the magnitudes of the
coefficients on market to book and log sales are substantially lower. Both tangibility and the market to
book ratio are likely to be highly autocorrelated. So by taking first differences, we largely obtain noise.
Therefore, it is not particularly surprising that the coefficient for the market to book ratio is small. In
fact, it is surpdsin that we obtain the expected coefficient size for tangibility, because we would expect




    6In a previous version we estimated the model including also companies reporting unconsolidated balance
sheets. The results were qualitatively similar.

     7We average the explanatory variables to reduce the noise and to account for slow adjustments. We lag the
explanatory variables one period to reduce the problem of endogeneity.

    11n some cases the adjustment generates a negative value of leverage. To eliminate outliers we truncate the
sample at -I. For this reason we compute Tobit regressions. The OLS results are very similar.

      We measure the effect of changes on the latent variable.

                                                      24
 a similar decree of autocorrelation in tha variable. The first difference of size is asset growth. so the
 size coefficient may pick up both the positive effect of size on leverage and the negative effect of
 growth on leverage. This could also explain the increase in the standard errors for the size coefficient.
 Profitability is strongly negative suggesting that it does not proxy for some omitted quality variable but
 directly influences leverage.
         Next.         check whether between industry variations or within industry variations are largely
driving the estimates. In column (ii) in Table VII b. we report between' estimates where the
observations are the average in the two-digit S.I.C. industry. In column (iii). we report 'within'
estimates   where the observations are differences from the industry means. What is apparent from the
magnitude of the coefficients in the two columns is that tangibility, the market to book ratio, and size
seem to be characteristics of both the industry the firm is in and of the firm itself. Interestingly, the
negative relationship between profitability and leverage appears to be specific to the within-industry
regression. For the between industry regression. the coefficient is positive.
        To summarize, Table VII a and VII b suggest that the positive relationship between tangibility
or size and leverage, as well as the negative relationship between the market to book or profitability and
leverage is robust across models and specifications of leverage.
C. Cross-sectional relationships in international data.
        We now move on to international data to see how many of these relationships hold up when
confronted with new data. In Table VIII. we present estimates for the G-7 countries other than the U.S..
Tables V Ill a. b follow Tables VII a, b in that we first present estimates when the dependent variable
is book leverage in Table VIII a. and then conduct robustness checks in Table Vilib. Rather than
examine each country separately, we outline broad patterns across countries, and then draw attention
to exceptions.
        In Table VIII a, tangibility is positively correlated with leverage in all countries. In the first
difference regression in Table VIII b (i), the relationship is never significant. suggesting, as we
anticipated. that tangibility is highly autocorrelated so that first differences are noise. Tangibility seems
to be important both between industries and within industries (see Table VIII b (ii) & (iii)) except in
C3naaa where it   is   important only in the between industry regression.
        In the level regression in Table VIII a, the market to book ratio enters with a negative
coefficient in all countries except Ital. Again the estimated coefficient in first differences ma not have
much meaning because of the high degree of autocorrelation. But market to book seems to both have
a between industry component and a within industry component. So the idiosyncratic market to book

                                                     25
 ratio fir a firm matters as much as the industry market to book. We will return to this finding shortly.
         Size is positively correlated with leverage in the levels regression, except in Germany where
 it is negatively correlated. Recall from Table 11 c that the largest quintile of fu-ms in Germany had much
 lower median leverage than the smallest quintile. so this correlation is not simply driven by outliers.
 The correlation continues to be negative for Germany even in first differences and within industry. But
 between industry the coefficient is insignificantly different from zero. So large lu-ms in Germany. in
 contrast to large firms in other countries, have lower leverage than small firms, and this is not simplY
 an industry effect.
         Profitability is negatively correlated with leverage in all countries except Germany. It is
 economically insignificant in France. As in the U.S.. profitability is negative in first differences and is
 important in the within industry regression but not in the between regression.
         Overall, the factors found to be important in determining capital structure of U.S firms seem
to work' in other countries as welt. Based on these factors alone we can explain between 7% and 44%
of the cross sectional variations of leverage in each country. Their "success" out of sample seem to
provide a confirmation of their validity. However, we know that the relationship between the theories
and the empirical proxies is at best weak. Therefore, before concluding that the existing theories have
significant explanatory power in explaining capital structure, we should probe deeper into the theoretical
underpinnings of these factors.
D. What is behind these factors?
        That all the factors work' with only a few exceptions may actually be a cause for concern about
our understanding of the theoretical underpinnings of those factors. For instance, an important
determinant of capital structure around the world seems to be the ratio of fixed to total assets (what
'e call 'taneibilitv'). The rationale underlying this factor is that tangible assets are easy to collateralize
and thus they reduce the agency costs of debt. Berger and Udell (1994) argue that firms with close
relationships with creditors need to provide less collateral because the relationship (and more informed
monitoring by creditors) substitutes for physical collateral. If so. we should find tangibility mattering
less in the bank oriented' countries. While cautioning the reader about the obvious caveats that
accompany comparisons of coefficient estimates across countries, it is interesting to note that a standard
deviation increase in tangibility increases leverage by about 20% in all countries except Japan where
it increases leverage by 55%. So tangibility is most important in Japan. a country with relatively weak

enforcement of creditor rights and relatively strong bank firm relationships.
       The market to book ratio is generally included as a proxy of the investment opportunities (see

                                                    26
  for example. Smith and Watts, 1992). An obvious test. then, is to replace market to book with the future

  growth rate in assets in the level regression, and check whether growth race is negatively correlated with
  leverage. We use the 1986 value of leverage and the growth rate in assets in the period 1986-1991. The
  other regressors are averages over the 1982-85 period (estimates not reported). In the U.S. and Japan,
  the future growth rate has the expected sign and it is statistically siificant. However, in no other
 country is it significant, and in two, the coefficient is positive. When both market to book and future
 growth are included, the former is generally significant while the latter is not. This suggests that while
 the market to book ratio may be related to growth, that cannot be the whole picture.3°
          There may be other potential reasons for why the market to book ratio is negatively correlated
 with leverage. For instance, the shares of finns in financial distress (high leverage) may be discounted
 at a higher rate because distress risk is priced (as suggested by Fama and French (1992)). If this is the
 dominant explanation, the negative correlation should be driven largely by firms with low market to
 book ratios. In Table VII!. column (i), we estimate a piecewise linear relationship between book
 leverage and the market to book ratio for firms in the United States. We estimate different slopes for
 the five different quintiles of the market to book ratio. constraining the functional relationship to be
 continuous. The results clearly indicate that the negative relationship is driven by firms with high market
 to book rather than firms with low market to book. In fact, for firms with low market to book, the
 relationship between leverage and market to book is weakly positive. This pattern holds in four of the
other six countries with the average slope of the top two deciles being lower than the slopes of the
bottom two deciles.' This suggests that it is improbable that financial distress is driving the
relationship.
          A second reason for the market to book ratio to be negatively correlated with book leverage
stems from the tendency for finns to issue stock when their stock price is high relative to earnings or
book value see the theory and references in Korajczk. Lucas, and McDonald (1991)). This would imply
that the correlation between the market to book ratio and leverage is driven by firms who issue lots of



     ° Interestingly, when we include past growth (asset growth between 1986 and 1991) as an explanatory variable
for 1991 leverage, past growth always enters positive and significant in all countries. A possible explanation is that
investment in the short run is financed with debt and in the long run, capital structure adjusts. This suggests another
explanation for the negative correlation between future growth and current leverage: because investment in the short
run is financed with debt, it is only the firms with low current debt who are able to sustain high future growth. So
the direction of causality is reversed.

       Because of space constraints, in what follows, we do not report the reresstons for countnes other than the
U.S. in a table, but they are available from the authors.

                                                          27
  equitY. We determine the amount of equity issued by a rirm (net of repurchases) in the penod 1985-91
  and divide firms into quartiles on this basis. \Ve then estimate the standard book leverage regression
  within each quartile. In Table VIII. column (ii), we report estimates for the quartile of U.S. firms who
  issue the least net equity over the period 1986-91 (less than -8% of their market value of equity in
  1985) and in column (iii) for those who issue the most (more than 16% of their market value of equity

  in 1985).
            The negative correlation of market-to-book with leverage seems to be driven mainly by large
 equity issuers. In the U.S. the magnitude of the coefficient on the market to book ratio is thrice as large
 in the quartile issuing the most (-30. t-7.90) as in the quartile issuing the least (13=-.09. t=-l.86).
 This result is not special to the United States. In Japan. U.K., and Canada. market to book is more
 negatively correlated with leverage for firms issuing the most (f3               = -0.74. t-4.8. 13, = -0.18. t=-
 1.S3,             -0.16. r=-l.28) than for firms issuing the least               -0.25, t = -1.48.       = -0.14. r=.-

 1.61. i3C=4. = -0.12. t=-0.49).32
          From a theoretical standpoint, this evidence is puzzling. If the market to book ratio proxies for
 the underinvestment costs associated with high leverage, then finns with high market to book ratios
 should have low debt, independent of whether they raise equity internally, via retained earnings, or
 externally. One possible explanation is that some firms that have high market to book ratios find
 prohibitively expensive to issue equity because of the 'lemons' cost or because of the associated loss
 in control). Therefore, they will finance their growth opportunities with a mixture of retained earnings
 and debt. As a result, they may end up being as leveraged as low market to book firms with no growth
opportunities.3 An alternative possibility is that the negative correlation has nothing to do with the
costs of underinvesrment. Instead, the firms that issue equity (but not all firms) attempt to time the



       It is interesting that we find these correlations because there is a mechanical reason why we should not. The
issue of equity moves the post-issue market to book ratio cowards one. So for firms issuing a lot, we will tend to
find bunching in the market to book ratios and less significant correlations. The absence of a stronger market to
book/leverage correlation (or the lowest quartile would be less surprising if the lowest quartile of issuers did not
have much stock activity. But the lowest quartile of issuers in the U.S. reduces the amount of equity outstanding
by at least 8%. suggesting a significant amount of buybacks or equity for debt swaps. The market to book ratio
should play a role here but it does not.

       A test of this is that for a firm with a high market to book ratio, equity issues will be foregone only if the
 firm has significant profits to finance with. For firms with low market to book ratios, since the cost of foregone
investments is not so high, there need be rio such relationship. This seems to be the case. A regression with
dependent variable equity issuance and explanatory variable profitability yields positive or insignificant negative
coefficients for firms in the lowest quartile of market to book (except in Japan), while it yields significant negative
coefficients for firms in the highest quartile of market to book.

                                                         28
  market by issuing more equity when the perceived stock price is •high'. Distinguishing between these
  explanations is a question for future research.
           The theoretical rationale for the use of size is very weak to start with. A standard argument is
  that size is a proxy for the probability of bankruptcy. So size should not influence leverage as much in
  countries with lower costs of bankruptcy. We know from Hoshi. Kashyap and Scharfstein (1990 and
  1991) that bankruptcy is less costly in Japan. Yet size is very important there with a standard deviation
  increase in size increasing book leverage by 40% of its standard deviation (compared to 23% in the
 U.S.). Another argument against the association of size with bankruptcy costs is that firms tend to be
 liquidated more easily in Germany. Under the assumption that liquidation is very costly, small firms
 should be especially wary of debt in Germany. However, large firms have substantially less debt than
 small firms in Germany. An alternative argument for size is that informational asvmmetres between
 insiders in a firm and the capital markets are lower for large firms. So large firms should be more
 capable of issuing informationally sensitive securities like equity, and should have lower debt.
 Unfortunately, this neither squares with the negative correlation between size and leverage observed for
 most countries, nor is it true that large firms issue more. In all four countries for which we have flow
 of funds data, net equity issuances by firms in the largest size quartile (as determined by the market
 value of assets in 1985) is significantly less ove' the period 1986-91 (as a fraction of the market value
of assets in 1985) than for firms in the smallest size quartile. A similar result is true when we consider
gross equity issues i.e.. without netting out repurchases). We have to conclude that we do nor really
understand shv size matters.
          Finally, profitability is negatively correlated with leverage. If. for some reason, dividends are
smoothed or very low, in general. even if firms do not target a specific debt ratio, changes in
proiitabilitv will affect retained earnings positively and, hence, debt ratio negatively. If this is so. the
effect of proritabilirv can be explained only when we have an adequate theorv of dividend poIic'.3
There are at least two other explanations. a closely related one based on asymmetric information and
another, based on agency costs. If asymmetric information prevents firms from raisino money from


     This suggests that the correlation between profitability and leverage should be driven by firms with low and
smooth dividends rather than by tirms with high and volatile dividends. While we ao not have enough data to
estimate the volatility of dividends accurately, we can divide firms in a country according to whether they have hiah
payout (highest quartile) or low payout (lowest quartile). In the U.S.. profitability is negatively correlated with
leverage for low payout firms, and the coefficient is significant and twice as large as for high payout ft.rm.s where
it is not significant. It is negative for low payout firms in 4 other countries, and significant in one, but it is negative
in on.ly 2 other counuies for high payout firms. While this is consistent with a 'mechanical' relationship, it is
obviously not conclusive.

                                                           29
  equity issues, dividends are sticky, and investment opportunities are fixed, an increase in profitability
  will reduce the amount of debt needed to undertake investments. If public investors know more about
 large companies. then external equity should be less costly for such firms than for small firms. Thus
 the correlation between profitability and leverage should be less for large finns than for small firms.
 There are also agency explanations that relate profitability, size and leverage. If firm managers value
 their independence from outside claimholders. and the market for corporate control loses effectiveness
 as firms grow larger, the negative influence of profitability on leverage should become stronger as firm
 size increases.
            In Table VIII, column (iv), we report interactions between size and profitability for firms in the
 U.S.. For firms in the smallest quintile (the omitted indicator) a unit increase in profitability decreases
 leverage by -0.26. For firms in the largest quintile. a unit increase in profitability decreases leverage
 by -1.09. over 4 times the effect as that for the smallest quintile. The relationship across quintiles is
 nearly monotonic: the negative effect of earnings on leverage is considerably more important for large
 firms.
          There are other explanations of this interaction between size, profitability and leverage. Perhaps
 U.S. firms finance uniquely through debt which is costlier than retained earnings. So large firms, who
 have fewer investment opportunities, reduce their reliance on costly external claims by paying down
debt.3 By contrast, profitability for small firms may proxy for both the amount of internally generated
 funds and the quality of investment opportunities, which have opposing effects on the demand for
external funds (debt). An interpretation more consistent with agency costs is that managers of large,
profitable firms are able to preserve their independence by financing with internal cash and paying down
debt. hile managers of small, profitable firms are forced to lever up more so as to commit to paying
out cash.

          Looking at other countries, the leverage of larger firms is considerably more negatively
correlated with profitability than for small firms in Japan, Italy, and Canada. while in the U.K. it is
more positively correlated. There is no relationship in Germany and France. One explanation for why
the U.K. differs so much from the U.S. may be that the dominant source of external finance in the U.K.
is equity. So firms that are profitable and have few investment opportunities (i.e.. large firms will
reduce equity issues drastically. These firms will have a more positive correlation between leverage and



      If the market to book ratio partially proxies for growth opportunities, that large firms have fewer opportunities
is suggested by the fact that firms in the highest size quartile have a market to book ratio of 1.23 while firms in the
lowest quartile have a market to book ratio of 1.38.

                                                         30
 protitabif ivy. By contrast, if profitability is also correlated with the investment opportunities small firms
 have, then an increase in profitability may lead to greater equity issuances, reducing the correlation
 between profitability and leverage.36


                                              IV. Conclusions
          We investigate the determinants of capital structure in the major industrialized countries. We
 find that, at an aggregate level, firm leverage is fairly similar across the G-7 countries and that factors
 identified by previous studies as important in determining the cross-section of capital structure in the
 U.S., affect firm leverage in other countries as well. However, a deeper examination of the U.S. and
 foreign evidence suggests that the theoretical underpinnings of the observed correlations are still largely
 unresolved.
          We believe that our work suggests two lines for future research. On the one hand, it is necessary
 to strengthen the relationship between theoretical models and empirical specifications of those models.
In other words, there is a need that for sharper tests able to identify why some factors "work'. On the
other hand, a deeper understanding of the effects of institutional differences is necessary. The similarity
of the aggregate level capital structures in the G-7 countries should not be taken as indication that these
differences are unimportant, but simply that they have more subtle effects than previously thought.
These two research issues are related. Only through a better understanding of the actual determinants
of capital structure decisions can we think of designing tests to uncover the possible impact of the
institutional environment. Conversely, a better understanding of the influence of institutions can provide
us enough inter-country variation so as to enable us to identify the fundamental determinants of capital
structure. This paper is just the beginning.




       Firms in the U.K. above the median in size are much more reluctant to issue equity if above the median in
?rotabilitv (median equttv issue from 1985-9 1 is 0.44 of equity value in l985 than if below (median equity issue
from 1985-91 is 0.73 of equity value in 1985). Conversely, firms below the median in size arc much more willing
(able) to issue equity if above the median in profitability (median equity issue from 1985-91 is 0.41 of equity value
in 1985) than if below (median equity issue from 1985-91 is 0.24 of equity value in 1985).

                                                         31
                              References


 Alford, Andrew, Jennifer Jones, Richard Leftwich and Mark Zmijewski. 1993, Relative
        lnformativiiiess of Accounting Disclosure in Different Countries, Journal of Accounting
        Research 31

Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton. 1992. An Incomplete Contract Approach to Financial
      Contracting, Review of Economic Studies 59: 473-494.

Barclay, M. and C. Smith, 1993, The maturity structure of corporate debt, Working Paper, University
        of Rochester.

Berglof, Erik, 1990. Capital structure as a mechanism of control: A comparison of financiai
        systems, in Masahiko Aoki, Bo Gustafsson and Oliver E. Williamson. eds.: The Firm as a
        .Vexus of Treaties (Sage Publications, London).

Berger A. and G.Udell. 1994, Lines of Credit. Collateral, and Relationship Lending in Small Firm
       Finance. Mimeo. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Bono, C.. 1990, Leverage and Financing of Non-Financial Companies: An International
      Perspective'. Economic Papers 27, Bank of International Settlements.

Bradley , Michael, Gregg Jarrell. and E. Han Kim, 1984. On the existence       of an optimal   capital
       structure: Theory and evidence. Journal of Finance 39, 857-878.

Cable. J.. 1985. Capital Market Information and Industrial Performance: The Role   of West German
        Banks, Economic Journal, 95, 118-132.

Coopers & Lybrand, 1984, International Tax Summaries. A Guide for Planning and Decisions
       (John Wiley & Sons. New York. N.Y.)

Dc Angelo, H. and R. Masulis, 1980. Optimal Capital Structure under Corporate and Personal
      Ta.'ation. Journal of Financial Economics. Vol 3.

Dermine. J., 1990. European Banking in the 1990s. (Basil Blackwell, Oxford).

Edwards. J. and K. Fischer (1993), Banks, Finance and Investment in Germany, Cambridge University
      Press. Cambridge.

Fama, E. and K. French. 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Returns. Journal of Finance. 46.
       427-466.

Frankel, Allen. and John Montgomery, 1991, Financial Structure: An international Perspective.
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activirv, Vol I.

Franks. Julien and Cohn Mayer. 1994. The Market for Corporate Control in Germany, LBS

                                               32
        Working Paper.

 Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, The theory of capital structure. Journal of Finance 46, 297- 355.

 Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv.1992, The Design Of Bankruptcy Procedures. C.R.S.P. Working
        Paper, University of Chicago..

 Hoshi. Takeo, Any! Kashvap, and David Scharfstein. 1990 , The Role of Banks in Reducing the
        Costs of Financial Distress in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics. 27: 67 - 88.

 Hoshi, Takeo, Any! Kashyap, and David Scharfstein,, 1991 , Corporate Structure. Liquidity, and
        Investment: Evidence from Japanes Panel Data". Quarter/v Journal of Economics. 27: 33 -60

James. Christopher. 1994, Whed Do Banks Take Equity? An Analysis of Bank Loan
       Restructurrngs and the Role of Public Debt. University of Florida Working Paper.

Kaiser , Kevin M.J. and Kristen L. Kaiser, 1993, An International View of Bankruptcy Laws:
       Summary and Implications for Corporations Facing Financial Distress. INSEAD Vorking
        Paper.

Kester, \V. Carl, 1986. Capital and ownership structure: A comparison of United States and
        Japanese manufacturing corporations. Financial Management 15. 5-16.

King, Mervin and Don Fullerton. 1984. The Taxation of Income from Capital. (The Universirv of
        Chicago Press. Chicago, H).

Korajczvk. Robert A. . Deborah J. Lucas and Robert L. McDonald. 1991, The Effects of Information
       Releases on the Pricing and Timing of Equity Issues. Review of Financial Studies, 4: 685-708.

Kroszner. R. and R. Rajan. 1994. "The Role of Firewalls in Universal Banks: Evidence from
       Commercial Bank Securities Activities before the Glass-Steagall Act ". mimeo. University of
       Chicago.

Jensen Michael C. and William Meckling, 1976. Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior. Agency
       Costs and Capita! Structure". Journal of Financial Economics. 3: 305-360.

Jensen. vlichael C.. 1986. Agency Costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers.
       American Economic Review 76. 323-339.

Jensen. Michael C.. 1989. The Eclipse of the Public Corporation. Harvard Business Review

Long, Malit.z S. and Ileen B. Malitz .    1985.     Investment patterns and Financial Leverage, in
       Benjamin M. Friedman. ed.: Corporate Capital Structure in the United States (The University
       of Chicago Press. Chicago, II).

Loughran. T. and J. Riner. 1993. The Timing and Subsequent Performance of IPOs: The U.S. and
       International Evidence. Mimeo. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.


                                                  33
 Nobes. Christopher and Robert Parker.           1991. Comparative International Accounting (Prentice
       Hall, New York, NY)

 Marsh, Paul,1982, The choice between euitv and debt: An empirical study, Journal of Finance
        37, 121-144.

 Mayer, Cohn, 1990. Financial Systems. Corporate Finance, and Economic Development, in R.
       Glenn Hubbard. ed.: Asymmetric Information. Corporate Finance and Invesonen:, (The
       University of Chicago Press, Chicago, II).

 Miller, Merton F!., Debt and Taxes, Journal of Finance 32, 261-275.

 Modigliani, Franco and Merton H. Miller. 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the
            theory   of investment, American Economic Review 48, 261-297.
 Nlyers.    Stewart C., 1977. Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics
            5. 147-175.

 Nivers, Stewart C., 1984, The Capital Structure Puzzle, Journal of Finance 39.575-592.

 Myers. Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majluf . 1984, Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions
           when Firms Have Information that investors Do Not Have, Journal of Financial
           Economics 13,187-221.

Novaes. Walter and Luigi Zingales, 1994. Optimal Debt and Taxes in a Managerial Economy,
       Working Paper. University of Chicago..

Pagano. Marco and Ailsa Roell. Trading Systems in European Stock Exchanges: Current
      Performance and Policy Options. Economic Policy, 10: 63-1 15.

Price Waterhouse. 1990.         individual   Taxes: A Worldwide Summary (Price Waterhouse. New
       York. NY)

Price Waterhouse. 1991, Corporate Taxes: A Worldwide Summary                (Price Waterhouse. New
           York. NY)
Price Waterhouse. various issues, Doing Business in..       (Price Waterhouse. New York. NY)

Rajan. R., 1992. Insiders and Outsiders: the Choice between Relationship and Arms-Length
           Debt, Journal a/Finance 47: 1367-1400.

Rajan, R., 1994. An Investigation into the Economics of Extending Bank Powers. Working
       Paper, University of Chicago.

Rajan. R. and H. Servaes. 1993, The Effect of Market Conditions on Initial Public Offerings.
           C.R.S.P. Working Paper. University of Chicago.



                                                    34
Remrners, Lee, Arthur Stonehill, Richard Wright and Theo Beekhuisen, 1974, Industry and Size
      Debt Ratio Determinants in Manufacturing Internationally, Financial Management,     3:24-32.

Rurterford, Janette ,1988, An International Perspective on The Capital Structure Puzzle, in Joel
       M. Stern and Donald H. Chew , eds: New Developments in international Finance.
        (Basil Blackwell, New York, NY).

Sharpe, S. (1990), "Asymmetric Information, Bank Lending and Implicit Contracts: A stylized Model
       of Customer Relationships", Journal of Finance, Vol 45, pp 1069-1088.

Smith, C.W., and R. Watts, 1992, The Investment Opportunity Set and Corporate Financing,
       Dividend, and Compensation Policies, Journal of Financial Economics, 32, 263-292.

Stonehill, , Arthur, Theo Beekhuisen, Richard Wright, Lee Remmers, Norman Toy, Antonio
      Pares, Alan Shapiro, Douglas Egan and Thonas bates, 1975, Financial Goals and Debt
       Ratio Determinants: A Survey of Practice in Five Countries, Financial Management.
       4:27-41.

Taggart, R, 1977, A model of financing decisions, Journal of Finance, 32, 1467-1484.

Titman, Sheridan and Roberto Wessels, 1988, The determinants of capital structure choice, Journal of
       Finance 43, 1-19.

Toy. Norman , Arthur Stonehill, Lee Remmers,   Richard Wright and Theo Beekhuisen, 1974, A
       Comparative International Study of Growth Profitability, And Risk As Determinants of
       Corporate Debt Ratios in the Manufaturing Sector, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
       Analysis, 9; 8 75-886.

White, Michelle J.. 1993, Corporate Bankruptcy: A U.S.-European Comparison. Working paper,
       University of Michigan.




                                               35
                                                 Table I
                     Distribution of firms followed by Global Vantage by size.
All consolidated firms in all G-7 countries are pooled and they are placed in size deciles according to the
market value of their assets in 1991.

   Decile,                                          Country.
                            Percentage of consolidated firms reporting in that counLry.
                 U.S.        Japan     Germany       France J       Italy         U.K.         Canada
  Smallest        15            0            1            9            3             4           8
    2             12            0            5            2            7            11           13
    3             ii            0            5            8            8            17     .     10
     4            11            0           13            4            14           13           13
     5            10            3           11           11            14           12           12
     6            [0            5           14           13            11           12           12
     7            8            16           13           17            15           10           11
     8            8            22           13           13            14            8            9
     9            8            25           13           13            10            7            9
  Largest         8            30           11           9             4             7            3


Columns may not sum to 100 because of rounding errors.




                                                  36
                                               Table H
                 Balance Sheets for Non-Financial Finns in the G7 countries -1991
 The value of each item is calculated as a fraction of the book value of total assets and then averaged
 across all firms reporting consolidated balance sheets in the country. Only balance sheets of non-
 financial firms are included.




                                      U.S.A     Japan Germany France         Italy    U.K Canada
 ASSETS
    Cash and Short-Term               0.112     0.184     0.088    0.103 0.105 0.114          0.082
   Investments
    Account Receivable/Debtors        0.178     0.225     0.269    0.289 0.290 0.221 0.130
    Inventories                       0.161     0.139     0.236    0.174 0,156 0.177 0.110
    Current Assets-Other              0.029     0.030     0.001    0.017 0.016 0.037 0.019
  Current Assets -Total               0.480     0.577     0.594    0.583 0.565 0.547 0.332
    Fixed Assets (Tangible)           0.363     0.287     0.327    0.244 0.324 0.413 0.516
    Investments and Advances -        0.014     0.014     0.014    0.034 0.019 0.015 0.048
    Equity
    Investment and Advances -         0.031     0.094     0.034    0.049 0.041       0.012    0.029
   Other
   Intangible Assets                  0.076     0.008    0.024     0.085 0.026 0.009          0.047
   Assets -Other                      0.058     0.029    0.007     0.007 0.033 0.005          0.037
 Assets-Total                         1.000     1.000    1.000     1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000
 LIABILITIES
    Debt in Current Liabilities      0.074     0.164     0.099     0.116 0.162 0.096         0.073
    Accounts Payable/Creditors       0.150     0.154     0.115     0.170 0.147 0.137         0.133
    Current Liabilities -Other       0.110     0.104     0.087     0.170 0.122 0.167         0.028
  Current Liabilities -Total         0.334     0.422     0.300     0.434 0.432 0.400         0.23 1
    Deferred Taxes                   0.032     0.001     0.008     0.013 0.015 0.009         0.044
    Long Term Debt                   0.233     0.189     0.098     0.157   0.121     0.124   0.281
    Minority Interest                0.006     0.009     0.016    0.039 0.034 0.011          0.020
    Reserves -Untaxed                0.000     0.000     0.017    0.000 0.000 0.000          0.000
    Liabilities -Other               0.058     0.048     0.287    0.063 0.078 0.034          0.026
Liabilities -Total                   0.661     0.668     0.720    0.688 0.674 0.578          0.603
Shareholders Equity                  0.341     0.332     0.280    0.312 0.326 0.422          0.397
Total Liabilities and Shareholders   1.000     1.000     1.000     1.000   1.000     1.000   1.000
Equity
Source: Global Vantage Data Base




                                                37
                                                                                    'Table III a
                                                                     lsteiit of leverage In diClcrviit coitsitrics.
                                                                                                                                                                         hook value. In the
leverage incasuses aic calculated[or all utoit-liutauctal C tuiluanies rcpnrtiiig consolidated balance sheets tn 1991. lii the hook' column, equity is measured at
'market' coluitun. equity is measured     at tutarket value. Fur instance. Oils alters  the value of  assets  as follows: the (quasi) market value of assets is ohtaincd by £uhtracttng the
book value iii eniutmuttin equity front hook assets and adding hack the market value of contritun equity. Noti equity liabilities to total assets is the sum of all liabilities divided by
the value of assets. I)ebt to total assets s the value of shtu,tt terni plus long term debt divided by total assets. Dclii to net assets is the book value ol debt divided by net assets
 whuete itet assets is assets minus accounts 1uayahks atid tither current liabilities. !)eht to capital is the book value of debt divided by the sum of the hook value of debt and equity.




                 Nunther        Non equity liabilities to          l)elit to   total assets.             l)eht to net assets.          Debt to Capital.             Interest coverage
   Country
                                      total assets,                                                                                                                            ratio.
                 of finns
                                                                                                                                                                           ttiediatts
                                    iitedians (iiteatm)              stiedijits (means)                   itiedtatt (means)            tttcdt.ttts (oteans)

                                 hook             uuiarket         book              market             hook           market         bouik           niasket       E131l'/         EBI'I 1)A
                                                                                                                                                                   ititerest        /snterest

                   2580                        0 44 (0.44)     0.27 (0.31)         0.20 (0.24)     0.34 (0.38)       0.24 (0.27)   0.37 (037)      0.28 (0.32)      2.41                4.05
    IJ.S.A.                   (1.58 (0.66)

                                               (1.45 (0.45)    0.35 (0.35)         0.22 (0.24)     0.48 (0.35)       0.27 (0.29)   0.53 (0.52)     0.29 (0.31)      2.40                4.66
     Japati          514      (1.69 (0.67)

                                                                0.16 (0.20)        0.12 (0.16)     0.21 (0.25)       0.15 (0.19)   0.38 (0.39)     0.23 (0.28)      3.20                6.81
                     191      0.73 (0.72)      0.60 (0.56)
   Gertitany
                                                                                   0.21 (0.23)        0.39 (0.39)    0.32 (0.33)   0.48 (0.46)     0.41 (0.41)      2.64                4.35
     France          225      0.71 (0.69)       0.64 (0.61)     0.25 (0.26)

                                                0.70 ((1.67)    0.27 (0.28)        0.29 (0.28)        0.38 (0.38)    0.38 (0.39)   0.47 (0.46)      0.46 (0.47)      1.81               3.24
      Italy          118      (1.70 (0.67)

                                                                0.18 (0.21)        0.14 (0.16)        0.26 (0.31)    0.18 (0.21)   0.28 (0.29)      0.19 (0.23)      4.79               6.44
      (1K.           608      0.54 (0.57)       0.40 (0.42)

                     318      (1.56 (0.61)      0.49 (0.47)     0.32 (0.36)        0.28 (0.27)        (1.37 (0.39)   0.32 (0.31)   0.39 (0.39)      0.35 ((1.36)     1.55               3.05
     Canada
                 —




                                                                                                 38
                                                                                        Table Ill   b
                                                                 Extent of adjusted leverage in different countries.
ivetage ineasuics are calculated lot all i rn-financial companies reporting consolidated balance sheets in 1991. In the 'hook' column, equity is measured at hook value. In tlte
'market' column, equity is measured at market value. For instance, this alters the valueof assets as follows: the (quasi) market value of assets is obtained by subtracting the
hook value of common equity front hook assets and adding back tIre market valueof common equity. Adjusted liabilities are rttal liabilities less pension liabilities (in Germany)
less cash. Adjusted debt is the hook valueof debt less the valueof cash and marketable securities. Adjusted assets are total assets less cash and short term securities, less pension
liabilities (in Germany), less intangibles.Adjusted book equity is book equity plus provisionsplus dekrrcd taxes less intangibles. Non equity liabilities to total assets is the sum
of all adjusted liabilities divided by the value of adjusted assets. l)eht to total assets is the value of short term pius long term adjusted debt divided by total adjusted assets. Debt
to net assets is the book value of adjusted debt divided by net adjusted assets where net adjusted assets is adjusted assets minus accounts payable and Other Current liabilities.
 Debt to capital is the book value of adjusted debt divided try tIre sum oh the book value of adjusted debt and adjusted equity.



                       Country         Non equity liabilities to          Debt to total assets.           Debt to net assets.               Debt to Capital.
                                            total assets.

                                                medians                          medians                         iriediaris                         medians

                                        hook              mar kct        hook              market        hook                 moat   ket   hot rk             market

                        U.S.A.          0.52              0.42            0.25             0.16          0.32                  0.20        0.33               0 23
                         Japan          0.62              0.37            0.21             0.12          0.33                  0.16        0.31               0.17

                       Germany          0.50              0.41            0.11             0.10          0.17                  0.13        0.18               0.15

                        France          0.69               0.59           0.18             0.13          0.32                  0.25        0.34               (128

                                        0.68               0.68           0.21             0.21          0.33                  0.31        0.39               0.36
                          Italy

                          IlK.          0.47               0.35           0.10             0.08          0.16                  OIl)        0.16               It II

                        Canada           0.48              0.49           0.32             0.26           0.36                 0.30        0.37               0.32




                                                                                             39
                                                                                     Table III c
                                                                   Ailjitstcd leverage for different subsaitiples.
Adjusted debt it the book value of debt less tite value iii cash and niarketalilesecurities. Adjusted assets arc total assets less cash and short terni securities,less pension liabilities
(in Geri,uny), less intangibles. Adjustedhook equity is hook equity plus provisionsplus deferredtaxes less intangibles.Debt to capitalis the book valueofadjusted debt divided
by the sum of the hook value of adjusted debt and adjusted equity. Interest coverage ratio is income before interest and taxes divided by interest expense.


   Country             Debt levels for              Debt levels  br cotisolidated firms in            Median debt to capital for           Variation of debt to          Non-equity
                 consolidated firms in 1986           food, tobacco, and beverages and              consolidated firms of similar             capital with               liabilities to
                                                  textiles, apparel, and leather products in            Size across CountrieS.                   consolidation,             assets
                              median                                 1991.                                                                          median                calculated
                                                                                                                                                                            using
                                                                                                                                                                          O.E.C.D.
                   Interest            1)eht to    Number         Median debt       Median          Consolidated      Consolidated        All firms         Reduced         data.4
                  coverage          capital        of fsrtns        to capital      interest        firms in the      firms in the        in   1991 b       sample.'
                                 (book value)                     (book value)     coverage          largest size     smallest size
                                                                                                      quitttilc.        quintile.
    (ISA.            3.61               0.27          171            (1.35            2.68              0.42              0.23                 0.33           0.20           0.45

                                                      59             0   18           3.49              0.48                 -                 0.31           0.37            0.7(1
     Japan           2.88               0.27

                     4.53               (1.05         27             (1.35            2.46              0.12              0.17                 0.13           (1.18           (1.60
    Germany

     France          2.85               0.26          21             (1.35            3.20              0.50               0.26                0.34           0.25            (1.72

                     2.67               0.18          20             0.37             1.94              0.37               0.39                0.37           0.32            0.68
      Italy
      (1K.           7.14                0.15         66             0.16             553               0.20               0.14                0.16           0.11            (1.55

     Caiiad          3.27                (1.30         IS             (1.36           3.56              0.41               (1.2(1              0.37               0.26        0.51


   ('umisolidated louts front all countries are pooled and size qttiutiks arc butted based on the market value of assets in (J.S. dollars in 1991.
   Includes firms that present unconsolidated balance sheets also.
   l)rops the most indebted consolidated firms such that the retnaitlitig sanipic containsconsolidated firms umwtthcriug 7b% of all reporting (cotisrilidated aitd unconsolidated)        lii ins
 in (lie couittry. For example, in the U.S. the 24% most indebted fit itts are dropped.
    I .iahihitics to asSets is computed hunt tIne 1990 edition of the O.E.C.l). Fiiiancial Statcmncmntsof Noti-hinancialLutcrprises.




                                                                                               40
                                                                                                  T'jhk IV
                                                        Tas Ire.,ti,,eii(of Inleresi, I)isideuds, and Retained Earnings in I)iliere,,(Cotuitries.

lire tax rates used are the sIatutoi'y ones, lIre 1983 and 199(1 data are culled hunt various editions      'I)rirtg (lusiness rn... Inublidiedby rear Man-wicL.
                                                                                                               if                                                                  The personal taxes    include state and city
taxes in the city in which the slack exchange is located. The itiveSlilt is assumed to be in the higincri personaltaS brackel.




                                                      USA                   Japan                 Gentnany                  France                     Italy                   U.K.                 Canada

                                               1983         199(1   (983            (990     1983       1990        1983             1990     1983             1990     1983           1990      1983         1990

  ('rirpinrate tax rate                        55.64    45.78       5644        51.64        56(8)      50(10       5(1(X)       42(8)        4(34             46.37    52(10         35 IX)     52.80        44 34



                                               55.64    45.78       44.37       51.64        36.00      36(X)       50.00        37.00        41.34            46.37    30(10         25(X)      52 80        44.34
   Corporatelax on distrib. prolas


                     ta rate                   55.6-I       35.76   80(11)      57.5(1       56(8)      53(8)       InS (8)      56.81)       65(8)            5(1(10   69(8)         4(1(8)     50 32        46,69
   Tri1i pcrs4iu1l


   Tax rile on interest income                 55 64        35.76   35(10       20(8)        56   IX)   53(8)       5(1.18)      5(1(8)       20,18)           12.50    69(8)         411 (Xl    50 32        46 69


   Tax rile on capital gains                   27.82        35.76   0.1$)           1(81     0(8)       0(X)        15.1$)           16.1$)   0.18)            0(8)     30(8)         411.1$)    25 16         35,02



   Tax rate on tlivkknd income                 55.64        35.76   35.110      20.110       56(10      53.00       65(X)            56.80    65 (8)           50.00    69   IX)      4(1.18)    5(1.32        46.69


   Tax rebate on dividends                     0(X)         ((.00   10.00           0.18)    56.25      56.25       50.00            50.00    42.85            56.25    42.86         33.33      5(1.00        25(10


   Valuc of SI of         Iklit                0.44         ((.64    1)65            0.81)    0.44       0.47         0.50            0.50      0.80            0.88     0 3%           (1.61)    0.5(1        ((.53
   pritlitapaid
                          l)ividends           0.20         1)35     0.36            ((.39    0.44       0.47         0,26            0.41      0.29            0.42     0.3)           0.60      0.35         0.37
   through the
                                                                                       ,
    following                  .       ,   .
                          Capital gains it      0.32        0.35     0.44            0.48     0.44       0.50         0.43            0.49      0.59            0.54     0 34           ((.39     0.35         0.36
    routes
                          taxed at
                          statutory tile.

                                                 0.44        0.54     0.44            0.48     0.44          0.50      (1   50         0.58     0.59             0.54        1)48        (1.65     0.47         0.56
                          Capital gains ii
                          not taxed.




                                                                                                             41
                                                                                                          Table V
                                                 ihe allucaliuiiu( the pre i.is dollar to aIious ruutCs and changes In the allocatioui over unit.
11w agglegaic ilucicsI espense, do ideish,  and carniligs lot an ecotiouiy Is ciinipuied by sulnnsiiig die individual Finn values across tunis. 1lie share iia puc las dollar paid In debt so the ccuniuusuy

s the inucrestii   (all rsahuk Sic agguegalest divided by Income betnue ineresl and lasts. The abate tu( a Nc-las dollar paid through dividends is dic dividendspaid grossed up to a pee-Us value
dividcd by inisinuchielore interest asia] uses. 11w dividetids are grossed up to a pre -tar value by multiplying by earningsa(icr interest and bc(ore uses and dividing by earningsalter ilitereSt and after
lasts. 11w abate ol a pretax doihir retaiiied us one minus the share pals) iii dclii minus the shaic paid in dividends.

                                                                 (IS A.            I       Japan                Genussny                                                                               Canada

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .9'

                                  Dclii                       0.26         0 40        0.46          0.43     0.33           0.25   0.57        0.39     0.68        0.62    (1.2   I         023    0.42          (I 52
   Shateof a pre-ias dollar
   paid ulursiugh die route                                                0.38        (I 16          (((8    0.37           0.32   0.32        (121     0.18        ((27    026              0.38   0.35          0.50
                                  1)ividends                  039

                                                              ((.35        (1.21       (1.38          (1.39   0.31)          0.42   0.11        (1.4(1   0.14        (1.11   11.53            (140   0 23          -((.02
                                  Capital Gasius

   Rouse roost tax advantagedby tax relonna between                   Debt                     Deb                  Retained           Equity               Equity           Dclii and Equity               Debt
   1983 and 199(1.1                                                                                                 Earnings

                                                                 Retained                 Kalsuicd                  l)ctut and             l)ctul           Rclaincd                Relasned           Retastied
   Route lcaO las advantagedby las relairnislietweeui
   1983 and 1990                                                 earnings                 earnings                   Equity                                 earnings                earnings           earnings

                        iii                                           0.14                     .0.1)3                 (112                 (1.11                (I ((9                  0.13                0.10
   Change iii share     pretax dollar flow between
    1982-84 and 1989-91 allocated by coisupallics
   totssiihsdatcd and reporting Uuouglioutto route
    most tax advantaged.

                                                                      -41.14                   0(11                   -0.12                0.18                 -003                    Ii   13             -0.25
    Change in share of pre-tax dollar flow between
    1982-84 and 1989-91 allocated by companies
    consolidated and reporting throughout to route least
    las advstiiageil.

 I Venus Talile IV under the assuniptionthat capital gains lax is paid at the statuloty rate.




                                                                                                              42
                                                              Table VI
                                        Size of Capital Markets in the C-7 Countries in 1991.

          Country                StockMarket                Stockmarket                 Bond market              Bond market
                            Capitalization ($ billion)    Capitalization as a     capital;zation (S billion)   capitalization as a
                                                          fraction of GDP.                                     fraction of GDP.

 U.S.A.                               3713                       67%                        1773                      32%

 Japan                                2989                       82%                         237                       7%

 Germany                               368                       22%                          2                        0%

 France                                347                       27%                         102                       8%

 Italy                                  154                      l2%                          4                        0%
 IlK.                                  994                       93%                          26                       2%

 Canada                                242                       42%                          53                       9%

Source: Stock Market, GDP, and Exchange Rate Data are from Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, while bond market dala arc
from Salomoit Brothers International Bond Market Analysis, 1992.




                                                                   43
                                                         Table VU a
                                Cross-sectional   dderminants of leverage in the United States.

The dependent variable in column (i) is book leverage which is adjusted debt to        adjusted debt plus book value of
adjusted equity in 1991, where debt is the sum of short term and long term debt. The dependent variable in column
(ii) is market leverage which is adjusted debt to adjusted debt plus the market value of adjusted equity in 1991.
Tangibility is the ratio of fixed assets to the book value of total assets. Market to book is the ratio of the book value
of assets less the       book   value of equity plus the market value of equity all divided by the book value of assets.
Logsale is the logarithm of net sales. Profitability is EBITDA divided by book value of assets. All the explanatory
variables are four year averages (1987-90) in columns (i) and (ii) and three year averages (1986-88) in column (in).
Standard errors are in parentheses. The regression includes an intercept whose coefficient is not reported. The
         is estimated using maximum likelihood and a censored Tobit model. The estimated model is
regression
Leverage,,
             = a 13 Tangibility + 3. Market to Book Ratio + (3 Log Sales1 + 3 Profitability, + ,


                                  Dependent            Book Leverage         Market Leverage
                                   Vanable



                                    Variable

                                  Tangibility             0.49                   0.32
                                                           (0.04)                (0.03)
                                Market to book            -0.17                 -0.09
                                                           (0.01)                (0.00)


                                    Logsale               0.06                   0.03
                                                           (0.00)                (0.00)
                                  Profitability           -0.36                 -0.47
                                                           (0.08)                (0.06)
                                  Number of                2046                   2173
                                 Observations
                                  Pseudo R2                0.21                   0.18


• Significant at   the   10% level
• Significant at the 5% level
    Significant at the 1 % level.




                                                              44
                                                       Table VU b
                            First   Diffences and Industry Regressions for U.S. firms.
   The dependent variable ui all three columns arc functions of book leverage, which is total debt to debt plus book
  value of equity. The dependent variables are; in column (1) changes in book leverage between 1991 and 1986; in
  column (ii) book leverage in 1991 averaged across all firms with the same two digit S.I.C. code; in column (iii)
  book leverage less book leverage in 1991 averaged across all fums with the same twodigitS.LC. code. Tangibility
  is the ratio of fixed a.ssets to the book value of total assets. Market to book is the ratio of the book value of assets
  less the book value of equity plus the market value of equity all divided by the book value of assets. Logsale is the
 logarithm of net sales. Profitability is EBITDA divided by book value of assets. The explanatory variables are; in
 column (i). differences between the four year average in 1987-90 and the four year average in 1982-85; in column
 (ii). 1987-90 averages further averaged across all firms with the same two digit S.LC. code; in column (iii), the
 difference between the 1987-90 average and the value calculated in column (ii). Standard errors are in parentheses.
 The regression includes an intercept whose coefficient is not reported. The regression is estimated using Ordinaiy
 Least Squares. The estimated model is: Leverage1 = a + j3 Tangibility, + Market to Book Ratio, + s33
 Log Sales, + $ Profitabiic + ,

       Estimated                 first differences             between estimates              within estimates
         model

       Dependent           book leverage (1991) -           average of 1991 book         book leverage in 1991 -
        Variable            book leverage (1986)           leverage across firms in        average of 1991 book
                                                            same two digit S.I.C.        leverage across firms in
                                                                       code             same two digit S.1.C. code
        Variable

      Tangibility                   0.51                             0.54                         0.52
                                     (0.20)                           (0.12)                       (0.06)
    Market to book                  -0.05                            -0.15                        -0.14
                                     (0.01)                            (0.06)                      (0.01)

        Logsaie                       0.01                             0.04                       0.05
                                     (0.03)                           (0.03)                       (0.01)
      Profitability                  -0.37                             0.49                      -0.41
                                     (0.20)                           (0.50)                      (0.08)


      Number of                       1656                              64                         2046
     Observations

     adjusted R3                      0.01                             0.42                        0.20

* Significant at the 10% level
   Significant at the 5% level        Significant at the 1% level.




                                                          45
                                                                            Table VIII
                              Cross-sectional determinants of leverage In the       G-7 countries other than   the United States.

The dependent variablc is book leverage which is adjusted debt to adjusted debt plus hook value of adjusted equity in 1991. Tangibility is the ratio of fixed assets
to the book value of total assets. Market to book is the ratio of ihc hook value of assets less the book value of equity plus the market value of equity all divided
                                                                                      EBI°[DA divided by book value of assets. All the explanatoryvariables are
by the book value of assets. Logsale is the logarithmof net sales. Profitability is
four year averages (l987-90) in (i)   and (ii) and three year averages(1986-88)  in (iii). Standard errors are in parentheses. The regression includes an intercept
whose   coefficient is not           The regression  is estimated using maximum   likelihood   and a censored Tohit model. The estimated model is l..everage11.,,.
                           reported.
      a + (3 Tangibility, + j3 Market to Book Ratio + j33 L.og Sales + (3 Profitability +      ,

                             Country             Japan          Germany           France           Italy          U.K.          Canada

                             Variable

                                                 1.91            0.58               0.46         0.75           0.34             0.23
                           Tangibility
                                                 (0.25)           (0.24)           (0.38)          (0.34)        (0.07)           (0.10)

                                                 -0.11           -(125             -0.19           0,07         -0.11           -0.10
                          Market to book
                                                  (0.06)           (0.11)          (0.13)          (0.30)        (0.04)          (0.05)

                                                 0.14            -0.06              0.04           0.02          0.02           0.07
                              Logsale
                                                  (0.02)          (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.04)        (0.01)          (0.01)

                                                 -3.76            I.36              0.02           -0.41          -0.41           -0.31
                            Profitability
                                                  (0.70)          (0.68)           (0.92)          (1.27)         (0.31)         (0.22)

                            Number of              183              124              87              66            492              249
                           Observations

                            Adjttstcd K2           0.44            0.15             0.08            0.07           0.17             0.17




                                                                                   46
                                                                               1at)IC   VIII   I)
                               First l)ilkreuces   iiuud   Industry Regrcssioiis for firms in C-7 countries oilier than the U.S..

The dependent variable in all three panels arc functions of hook leverage winch is debt to debt plus hook value of equity. Tue dependent variables arc; in (I)
changes in book leverage between 1991 and 1986; in (ii) book leverage in 1991 averaged across all firms with the sanic two digit S.1.C. code; in (iii) book
leverage less book leverage in 1991 averaged across all firms with the same two digit S.l.C. code. Tangibility is the ratio of fixed assets to the book value
of total assets. Market to book is the ratio of the book value of assets less the book value of equity plus the market value of equity all divided by the book value
of assets. Logsale is the logarithm of net sales. Profitability is EBITDA divided by book value of assets. The explanatory variables are; in (i), differences
between the four year average in 1987-90 and the four year average in 1982-85; in (ii), 1987-90 averages further averaged across all firms with the same two
digit S.I.C. code; in (iii), the difference between the 1987-90average and the value calculated in (ii). Standard errors are in parentheses. The regression includes
an intercept whose coefficient is not reported. The regression is estimated using Ordinary Least Squares. The estimated model is : Leverage1 = + (i
Tangibility, + 13 Market to Hook Ratio,   + fl Log Sales +       fl4   Profitability   +

(i) Estimated model: first differences with dependent variable book leverage (1991)             -   book leverage(1986)




                                                                                        47
(ii) Estimated model:   between estimates, dependent variable: average   of 1991   1)00k   kvcrage across firms in   same   Iwo digit S.1.C. code.




                                                 1.58            0.70                0.49            0.56            0.60            0.38
                                                 (0.37)          (0.37)             (0.47)            (0.30)          (0.18)         (0.20)

                                                  -0 19           0.11             -0.61              0.12            -0.16         -0.25
                                                  (0.15)         (0.29)             (0.22)           (0.22)           (0.13)         (0.11)

                                                 0.15             0.01               0.0L            -0.06            0.02            0.03
                                                  (0.05)         (0.07)             (0.04)           (0.07)           (0.03)         (0.03)
                                                   -2.13           1.16              0,92              1.09           -0.44           0.26
                                                  (1.36)          (1.33)            (0.64)           (1.58)           (1.04)         (0.61)




                                                                                   48
(iii) Estimated model: within estimates, dependent variahk: 1)00k leverage in   1991   -   average   of 1991   hook leverage across firms in same two digit SIC. code




*   Significant a the 10% level
     Significant at the 5% level
      Significant at the 1% level.




                                                                                 49
                                                            Table LX
                                          Robustn Checks for firms in the U.S.
The dependent varuble is book leverage which is adjusted debt to adjusted debt plus book value of adjusted equity in 1991.
Tangibility is the rauo of fixed assets to the book value of tots! assets. Market to book is the raxio of the book value of assets
less the book value of equity plus the market value of equity all divided by the book value of assets. Logsale is the logarithm
of net sales. Profiubility is EBffDA divided by book value of assets. MI the exp!aflaZOty variables ai four year averages (1987-
90). In column (i). we estimate the basic model allowing a piece-wise linear relationship between leverage and the market to
book ratio. The functional form is constrained to be continuous. In column (ii), the basic model is estimated only for firms that
are in the lowest quartile of equity issuers (as a fraction of 1985 market value of equity) over the period 1985-91. In column
(iii), the basic model is estimated only for firms that are in the highest quartile of equity issuers (as a fraction of 1985 market
value of equity) over the period 1985-91. In column (iv). an interaction between profitability and size is allowed for. Standard
errors are in parentheses. The regression includes an intercept whose coefficient is not reported. The regression is estimated
using ordinaiy least squares. The basic model is : Lcvcrage. a + j3 Tangibility1 + P2 Market to Book R.axio + , Lng
Sales. +   Profltability + e,

             Estimated model             Piecewise linear       firms in the          firms us the          interaction
                                         form for market     lowest quartile of    highest quartile          between
                                             to book           equity issuers      of equity issuers     profitability and
                                                                                                            firm size
                  Variable

                                             0.42                   0.54 —             0.36 *                0.47 —
                Tangibility
                                              (0.04)                (0.10)              (0.09)                (0.04)

                                                                    -0.09              -03() —               -0.13
              Market to book
                                                                    (0.05)              (0.04)                (0.01)
                                             0.47 —
       Market to book if in lowest
        market to book quintile               (0.18)

       MarkettobookifinSecotid               -0.62
         market to book quinWe                (0.29)

        Markettobookifinthird                  0.15
         market to book quintile              (0.20)

        Market to book if in fourth         .0.68
         market to book quintile             (0.08)
                                            -0.08 —
       Market to book if in highest
        market to book quinule                (0.01)

                                             0.05                   0.08               0.06                  0.08
                  Logsale
                                              (0.01)                (0.01)              (0.02)                (0.01)

                Profitability
                                             -0.2 —              -ill —                  022                 -0.26
                                             (0.08)                 (0.38)              (0.26)                (0.09)

       Profitability • indicator if in                                                                       -0.35
           second size quintile                                                                               (0.17)
                                                                                                             -0.48 —
       Profitability • indicator if in
            third size quinule                                                                                (0.18)
                                                                                                             .0.49 —
       Profitability * indicator if in
           fourth size quintile                                                                               (0.20)

       Profitability • indicator if in                                                                       -1.09
                                                                                                              (0.27)
           highest size quinule



                                                               50
     f Number of Observauons        2046        340    308    2046
                 adjus*ed R         0.28        0.26   0.33   0.27

• Signthca.ni at the 10% level
   Significant at the 5% level
     Significant ax the 1% level.




                                           51
            Figure 1: External Financing
                        as   a r_cn o tct ain•ig

0.I -

                                                           .




 0


             = Canaaa            Jasi          UK      USA



                   Figure 2: Net Debt Issues
                      as a h'sofl   c nit simit nar1g




                                                                      1991


                    Caraøa   i   Jaas1         UK   _ USA


                   Figure 3: Net Equity Issues
                      asitracXfl ot nit .LilT anw1g

0.9 —


06

 a




06                                                             1990   391
     1964   1916      1916       1917     1911      1911

                   Cara0a        Japan L....   UK — USA


                                    52
            Figure 4: Distribution of Leverage
            Total debt over total debt pius m&ket value of equity
                                                                        /

  L5
       21

      11

 0.5 -




-0.5


 —1

       1    5         10          25     50     75      90    95    99
_ USA           Jap        Germ        France   Italy    UK    Canada




                                          53
